                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  May it please the Court,
     Mrs. Ahrens, counsel.
          Good afternoon.
          This is really the last time I get to
     speak you with here in our special Saturday
     session.  This is the last verdict you will
     render in this case.  And it's going to be the
     same deal with me today as it was yesterday. 5738
     No slides, no fancy pyrotechnics, no videos,
     none of that.  Just us talking.
          Now, the fundamental question that you
     have to answer here is what amount, if any, in
     punitives to be awarded to punish the Reynolds
     of the 21st century for the activity of the
     Reynolds of the 20th century.
          And two words that were not highlighted on
     the instruction that Mr. Paige just had up
     there were "if any."  You determine punitive
     damages are appropriate, but you're not
     required, having done that, to award any.
     You've made your point.
          Now, since the verdict, you know, we
     haven't had an opportunity to speak with any of
     you, obviously.  You know the whole deal where
     we see you in the elevator, we let you go
     without us; if we pass you on the street, we
     don't talk.  And that obviously continues to
     carry on until right now.
          So we've had to sort of guess what it was
     that drove your verdict, what you did hear that
     you didn't like.  And so we brought in
     Dr. Garner yesterday, who is the head of the
     regulatory compliance with the FDA and other 5739
     government agencies for the -- for Reynolds and
     its sister companies, former head of their
     products stewardship program, and a Reynolds
     scientist.  And we tried to get him to address
     some of your concerns.
          Now, what the concerns might be, one
     concern might have been that in the
     20th century, Reynolds kept its documents
     secret, didn't share information with anybody.
          Well, in the 21st century, as you saw,
     there's an online website and it can be
     searched, and when you get released from your
     jury service here, you can go home on your
     computer and search it.
          You also heard here that documents are
     provided to the FDA as a matter of law,
     routinely, now and forever.  You know, maybe
     you were concerned about the secrecy about
     ingredients, that people didn't know what was
     in their cigarettes.
          Well, in the 21st century, in fact,
     actually, since 1986, they've disclosed, the
     company disclosed to the Department of Health
     and Human Services all their ingredients.  And
     now they disclose them to the FDA as well. 5740
          And for the garden variety citizens, they
     are on their website.  If a smoker wants to
     know what's in any brand of their cigarettes,
     they can go to the website and find out.
          And again, we heard a lot this morning
     about voluntary, involuntary, forced, not
     forced.  This was voluntary.  Entirely
     voluntary.
          Maybe you were concerned that the Reynolds
     of the 20th century was kind of a rogue
     industry; no FDA regulation, no regulation of
     any sort.  Well, if that was your concern, as
     you heard this morning from Dr. Lipowicz in
     great detail, FDA regulation existed at the
     tobacco companies, it has for about seven
     years, and that requires a tremendous amount of
     the companies:  disclosure of documents, plant
     inspections.  You heard from Dr. Garner that he
     has accompanied FDA inspectors on plant
     inspections.
          Disclosure of ingredients, and disclosure
     of the formula.  You know, Dr. Lipowicz used
     the example of the Marlboro formula.  Think
     about the Coke formula, what a closely held
     secret that is.  Think about the secret sauce 5741
     or the secret recipe for Kentucky Fried
     Chicken, what a closely held secret that is.
     Well, that's the kind of information that the
     FDA has on the cigarette companies.
          FDA has the ability to tell the companies
     to take something out of cigarettes.  They have
     the ability to tell them to pull cigarettes off
     the market.  And as you heard this morning, the
     companies can't change their cigarettes in any
     way without FDA approval.
          And Dr. Garner, who spoke to you
     yesterday, his job is to make sure that the
     companies comply with that.
          Maybe you were troubled by the activities
     of TI and CTR.  You know, that one press
     conference with the guy with the big hair
     criticizing the Surgeon General's Report.
          Well, TI is gone, CTR is gone, and they
     have both been gone since 1998.
          And instead of criticizing the Surgeon
     General, the company website makes it easier
     for smokers or anybody on the website to find
     out what the Surgeon General has to say about a
     particular subject because there are links
     right on the website. 5742
          It says public health organizations like
     the Surgeon General, like the Centers for
     Disease Control, like the National Cancer
     Institute.  And that's where you should look
     for your advice on smoking and health.
          Maybe you were troubled by documents that
     suggested the companies wanted to discourage
     people from quitting.  Today the website
     says -- you saw it yesterday -- if you are
     concerned about your health, the best course is
     to quit.
          Did you ever think you'd hear a cigarette
     company advising people who are worried about
     their health to quit?  The whole premise of the
     first part of the trial was they're trying to
     confuse, they're trying to reassure people,
     they're trying to get people not to quit.  Now
     the company says, if you have a concern, your
     best course is to quit.
          And you know what, you heard yesterday
     from Dr. Garner that Reynolds scientists are
     involved at a sister company with developing
     and selling ZONNIC, a nicotine gum, a nicotine
     replacement therapy.  It's sold in markets
     alongside cigarettes.  And Dr. Garner told you 5743
     when it's sold like that, where a person can
     walk into a store and look at the cigarettes,
     look at the ZONNIC, and maybe make a choice to
     reach for ZONNIC instead of a cigarette, in
     that kind of market it's a market leader.
          Did you ever think you'd see a cigarette
     company working on a product to get people to
     quit?  But that's what you see in the 21st
     century.
          If you thought that the nicotine research
     you saw had some sinister purpose and was kept
     secret, that's changed, too.  You saw yesterday
     the book I don't have -- the Biology of
     Nicotine.  It's in evidence.  As we heard, it
     was published in 1992.  If you take a look at
     it, it's based on a conference in Winston-Salem
     in 1990.
          It's got a lot of participants from
     R.J. Reynolds, 11 contributing authors to this
     book from R.J. Reynolds, including a chapter on
     use of nicotine to combat Alzheimer's disease.
          You heard about Targacept.  A group of
     nicotine researchers at Reynolds found out that
     nicotine might have some beneficial results in
     treating Alzheimer's, in treating Parkinson's. 5744
     So Reynolds spun that discrete area off into a
     separate company, and the scientists at
     Reynolds who have been working on that research
     followed that research to the discrete company,
     it's called Targacept, and it has exclusively
     worked on uses of nicotine for therapy.
          And I think you heard that that included
     scientists named Dr. Donald DeBethizy, a
     Reynolds scientist who ran that research who
     became the CEO of Targacept.
          Now, while we are talking about sort of
     outside-the-box research, you also heard from
     Dr. Garner that a number of Reynolds scientists
     are working with a sister company called
     Kentucky BioProcessing on something called
     ZMapp.  ZMapp.  Using the tobacco leaf,
     extracting from the tobacco leaf as a treatment
     for the Ebola virus.  That was big in the news
     last year when Americans came back from Africa
     with the Ebola virus and they were treated with
     ZMapp.  That's actually used to save lives.
          Now, if you thought the efforts for safer
     cigarettes were a little bit less than sincere,
     you heard about two products, Premier and
     Eclipse.  And even Dr. Proctor said that both 5745
     of these were safer cigarettes.
          To develop these two products, Premier and
     Eclipse, Reynolds spent a billion dollars.  A
     billion with a B.  They got up to 40 patents,
     meaning that everything they got a patent for
     was new and not foreseeable by old science.
     They built new plants.
          And it all centered around heat-not-burn
     technology, the idea being eliminate the
     carcinogens formed by burning tobacco.
          The results of all those tests were
     published for the world to see in a 700-page
     book.  It's in evidence.  When you go back to
     the jury room, flip through it, and you can see
     the nature and the quality and the importance
     of the findings of these tests on the Eclipse
     product -- on the Premier product.
          But Premier failed in the marketplace;
     consumers didn't like it.  So the public health
     authorities wanted it pulled off the market.
     And so they went on to Eclipse.
          Eclipse, on the market today, like
     Premier, heat-not-burn technology.  And
     Reynolds loses money on every pack of Eclipse.
          You heard about VUSE, Reynolds' 5746
     e-cigarette.  You also heard about VUSE
     something you've not heard about other
     cigarettes, that you can have a childproof lock
     on this.  One of the criticisms of tobacco in
     general is kids might smoke it.  Reynolds has
     affirmatively taken steps to ensure that nobody
     uses your e-cigarette that you don't want to by
     putting a childproof lock on it.
          You heard about Snus.  No inhaling.
     Tremendous decrease in lung cancer rates.  And
     even in mouth cancer, which can be caused by
     snuff and tobacco, loose tobacco, those rates
     are much lower with Snus than they were with
     cigarettes.
          Now, you know, you heard just a moment
     ago, yeah, yeah, yeah, all these things.  But
     aha, Reynolds still sells regular cigarettes;
     aha, Reynolds acquired Newport, a
     popular-selling menthol brand.
          Well, let's knock off Newport first.
     Newport is a menthol brand.  In the
     acquisition, you heard from Dr. Garner, the
     acquisition of Lorillard, Reynolds had to sell
     off its brand Salem that had been its forever,
     and Kool, which they got through their merger 5747
     with Brown & Williamson.  They had to sell off
     their two main menthol brands.  They acquired
     Newport to have a menthol brand.  Nothing
     sinister, nothing unusual there.
          And on the point of selling regular
     cigarettes, they are still a cigarette company.
     They still compete in the cigarette market.  As
     you heard, cigarettes are a lawful product, and
     Reynolds cannot be punished for simply selling
     a legal product.
          And what do they to with these dollars
     that they make?  Well, sure, they are a
     profitable company and money is returned to
     shareholders.  That's called capitalism, and
     that happens.
          But what else does it do?  Well, as you
     heard from Dr. Garner, it gives them money to
     invest on the lower-risk products, on the
     Eclipse, on the VUSE, on the Snus.  And there
     are bills to be paid.
          You heard about the MSA, the Master
     Settlement Agreement.  Since 1998 Reynolds has
     paid $52 billion to the states, including
     Florida, and it's going to go on forever.
          You heard about FDA.  They've had -- where 5748
     the companies have to pay to regulate
     themselves.  And they pay billions of dollars
     there to the Federal Government and will
     forever.
          And you heard about lawsuits like this
     one.  And they have paid millions in punitives,
     and they have thousands of cases to go.
          And again, there was a big distinction
     this morning about what was voluntary, what was
     involuntary, what was forced, what was not
     forced.
          Premier and Eclipse and the whole
     heat-not-burn technology in which they invested
     billions was voluntary.  E-cigarettes are
     voluntary.  R.J.R. scientists working at
     Targacept working on treatments for Alzheimer's
     and Parkinson's is voluntary.  R.J.R.
     scientists working on ZONNIC gum for people who
     want to quit smoking is voluntary.  R.J.R.
     scientists working at Kentucky BioProcessing on
     Ebola drugs is voluntary.
          Publishing The Biology of Nicotine was
     voluntary.  The Premier Monograph was
     voluntary.  The R.J.R. website, with its
     ingredient disclosures and links to the public 5749
     health community, is voluntary.
          Any award that you render here, of course,
     as you know, is simply more money for the
     Plaintiffs on top of the 9 million that you've
     already awarded.  As Mr. Paige was candid with
     you, it doesn't go to the Cancer Society; it
     don't go to cancer research; it doesn't go to
     the state of Florida.  The state of Florida
     already gets billions from Reynolds to spend as
     it wishes and will forever.
          The Federal Government already gets
     billions from Reynolds to regulate the tobacco
     industry and will forever.
          Folks, in the area of tobacco, based on
     the conduct in the 20th century, punishment has
     happened.  The Master Settlement Agreement
     payments have happened.  FDA regulation has
     happened.  And compensation to the Ahrens
     family in the first phase of this lawsuit has
     happened.
          You have the option, as I mentioned, of
     having decided that punitives are warranted, to
     choose not to award them, to put a zero on the
     verdict form, and I would urge you to do that.
          If you still feel additional award is 5750
     required, we are asking you to make it nominal,
     make it reasonable, and not make it anywhere in
     the neighborhood of $27 million.
          And whatever you decide, ladies and
     gentlemen, we'll respect that verdict.  Thank
     you.


                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MS. ARNOLD:  So, good afternoon again,
     everyone.  I want to thank you now for the
     final time for your service in this case.
     Regardless of the outcome yesterday and
     regardless of the outcome today, your work is
     what makes the jury service and our justice
     system work, and for that I truly am grateful.
          I want you to know again that I accept
     your verdict and Philip Morris accepts your
     verdict.  It wasn't the one that we had hoped
     for, but you heard the evidence and you made
     your decision and we respect that.
          In a case like this, you may feel a lot of
     different emotions throughout the trial.  You
     may feel sympathy for Mrs. Ahrens and her
     family, and you may feel very angry about some
     of the evidence you've seen during this case
     and that Mr. Paige talked about with you just a
     few minutes ago, and that's perfectly natural.
          But as Judge Day instructed you in the
     first phase of trial, and it applies here too,
     your decision here in the punitive damages 5752
     phase of trial cannot be based on sympathy, and
     it has to be based on the evidence that you've
     heard and the law that Judge Day will instruct
     you on.  And I would ask you to keep that in
     mind while you're deliberating.
          As you've heard, the purpose of this phase
     of trial is for you to decide how much
     additional money to award, not to compensate
     Mrs. Ahrens and her family, but to punish
     Philip Morris and other companies in the
     future.
          And with your verdict in Phase 1, you have
     now fully compensated Mrs. Ahrens and her son,
     Bryan, for their loss.
          As you've heard, any amount that you award
     in this phase will also go to Mrs. Ahrens and
     her family and will not go to any kind of stop
     smoking clinics, smoking cessation programs,
     cancer research, or the state.  It will go to
     Mrs. Ahrens.
          Please also understand that Judge Day has
     not and will not reduce the amount of damages
     that you awarded in the first phase of trial by
     the percent of fault that you allocated to
     Mr. Ahrens. 5753
          And that remains true for this punitive
     damages part, too.  Any amount of punitive
     damages that you award will not be reduced
     again by that 32 percent fault that you
     allocated to Mr. Ahrens in the first phase of
     trial.
          Now, if you find that the purposes of --
     that the purposes of punitive damages,
     punishing Philip Morris and deterring other
     companies, has been satisfied already by the
     compensatory award that you gave to
     Mrs. Ahrens, we would ask and respectfully
     suggest that you should not award any punitive
     damages in this phase of trial.
          And as Judge Day's instructed you and as
     you heard, you have that option.  You may
     decide not to award punitive damages against
     either or both Defendants.
          But if you do decide to award punitive
     damages, there's some instructions that Judge
     Day has given you and that I would like you to
     keep in mind during your deliberations because
     these are important, especially in light of the
     comments that we heard from Mr. Paige just a
     few minutes ago. 5754
          First -- and you heard this instruction in
     the first phase, but it still applies -- Philip
     Morris cannot be punished for selling,
     manufacturing, or advertising cigarettes.
          As you were instructed in Phase 1, they
     are a legal product, even though they are
     dangerous and addictive.  And in our society,
     we've decided that it should be a legal
     product, and Congress has made that decision.
     It's a legal product, and we've left the
     decision of whether to smoke or not to the
     individual, knowing that doing so could be
     dangerous to their health and addictive.
          So you may disagree with that.  You may be
     of the view that cigarettes should not be
     legal.  But when you're deciding this phase of
     the trial, just as you did during the first
     phase, it's important to set those feelings
     aside.
          As Dr. Lipowicz told you this morning,
     frankly, he said, we are in the business of
     selling tobacco products.  And even if you
     think that business shouldn't be allowed,
     neither you nor any other jury can punish
     Philip Morris or the other tobacco companies 5755
     for selling cigarettes, even though they are
     dangerous and even though they are addictive.
          The second instruction I'd like to bring
     your attention to is the one which says that
     any amount of money that you award as punitive
     damages must be based solely on harms caused to
     Mr. Ahrens.  And this still is Mr. Ahrens'
     case.  This is still Mr. Ahrens, who started
     smoking Merit Ultra Lights in 1981, for the
     last ten years of his smoking history, and when
     he was 40 years old or even a little bit older.
          And why is that instruction important?
     Because you've heard lots of evidence and lots
     of arguments about other people and other
     deaths or harms that have been caused by
     smoking.  And you may feel a tendency that you
     want to do something about that, but that's not
     the case to do that.
          And that makes sense because we don't
     really know anything about all of those other
     people.  We don't know when they started
     smoking or why they started or if they wanted
     to quit or if they wanted to try to quit or if
     they had any information from Philip Morris or
     any other tobacco company when they were making 5756
     their decisions.
          And we don't know whether for those
     people, whether the harm that they've suffered
     is simply a result of choosing to use a legal
     product, or if they really do have some sort of
     legal claim against Philip Morris.  We don't
     know that.
          THE COURT:  Ms. Arnold, excuse me, but
     could you and Plaintiff counsel come up for a
     second?
          (Sidebar discussion held:)
          THE COURT:  I feel sure that it's
     inadvertent, but you just told them that the
     Court's instructed them that they should award
     damages against a Defendant based solely on
     harms to Karl Ahrens, and that is not the
     instruction.  The instruction was based solely
     on harms caused to Karl, Ina, and Bryan Ahrens.
          And I think, if you're comfortable with
     this, I think it would be perfectly appropriate
     for you to say, I understand I misspoke.
          MS. ARNOLD:  I'd be happy to do that.
          THE COURT:  Okay.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          MS. ARNOLD:  So the judge reminded me I 5757
     inadvertently misspoke.  You're not permitted
     in this phase of trial to award punitive
     damages to harms caused to anyone besides
     Mrs. Ahrens, her son, and Mr. Ahrens.  So it's
     the Ahrens family.
          And as I mentioned, again, if you feel
     that other people have been harmed besides the
     Ahrens family, this is not the case for you to
     award damages again, because we don't know
     anything about those people.
          And as you heard throughout the trial,
     their opportunity to bring a lawsuit is not
     just theoretical.  You've heard about this
     Engle litigation, and you've heard about other
     lawsuits brought by other smokers.  And, in
     fact, Dr. Garner told us yesterday that there's
     over 3,000 lawsuits currently pending against
     Philip Morris and the other tobacco companies.
          MR. SALES:  Objection.  Williams/State
     Farm.
          THE COURT:  I'll overrule the objection if
     you will move off that topic.
          MS. ARNOLD:  Understood, Your Honor.
     Thank you.
          The third instruction that I would like to 5758
     address is the one that says you can only
     punish Philip Morris for conduct chargeable to
     Philip Morris that caused Mr. Ahrens' harm and
     harm to Mrs. Ahrens and Bryan.
          And in the first part of trial, you
     assigned a certain percentage of fault to
     Philip Morris.  And as with Mr. Kaczynski, I
     don't know what the basis of your finding was,
     but I can assume, based on the evidence, that
     it had something to do with the timing of
     Mr. Ahrens' use of Merit Ultra Lights, the fact
     that he started in 1981, and that he smoked
     Merit Ultra Lights for the last ten years of
     his smoking history.
          And based on those facts, we do not
     believe punitive damages are warranted against
     Philip Morris.  But when you are deciding that
     and when you are thinking about that in the
     deliberation room, we would ask you to keep in
     mind that percentage of fault that you
     attributed to Philip Morris specifically.
          Because again, you can only punish Philip
     Morris for conduct chargeable to Philip Morris
     that's a legal cause of his injuries.
          And then, finally, this last instruction 5759
     that talks about mitigation.  And the
     instructions say that you may consider in
     mitigation any changes in circumstances or
     changes in Defendant's conduct that you find
     relevant to determining an amount of punitive
     damages, if any.
          That is "any changes."  They can be
     voluntary, they can be involuntary.  And this
     instruction really goes to the heart of the
     matter.  Because you heard about that original
     Engle jury, and they heard a lot of the
     evidence that you heard in this case about
     Defendants' wrongful conduct in the past, but
     they didn't hear anything that you heard today.
          MR. SALES:  Excuse me, Your Honor.
     Objection.  Seventh Amendment.  Pretrial
     orders.
          THE COURT:  Approach.
          (Sidebar discussion held:)
          THE COURT:  Let me look at what you said
     here.
          I do not understand your objection.
          MR. SALES:  I was trying to -- you charged
     the jury pursuant to agreement that it's not to
     speculate as to what happened in Engle I. 5760
          THE COURT:  The basis for the findings.
          MR. SALES:  And that is a Seventh
     Amendment argument, actually.  That's where
     that comes from, because we are not allowed to
     retry that here.  The jury found class
     membership, and Your Honor told them they are
     not to speculate.  As to the basis of what
     counsel has just told them, they didn't hear
     the same evidence, and that actually is not
     true.
          MS. ARNOLD:  Your Honor, they couldn't
     have heard evidence of what's -- I'm moving on.
          THE COURT:  You know, I'll let you recover
     by making a very clear point that that was in
     such-and-such year, and things have happened in
     time since.  Well, I think --
          MR. SALES:  That wasn't the harm pursuant
     to the objection.
          THE COURT:  I understand.  I'm sustaining
     the objection, and I'm offering -- but I'm
     offering her a graceful way out.
          MS. ARNOLD:  I don't need it.  I'm moving
     on.
          THE COURT:  All right.
          MS. ARNOLD:  Thank you. 5761
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          MS. ARNOLD:  So why is it so important for
     you all to know what's happened over the past
     two decades?  Because the conduct that you
     heard about in Phase 1 of this trial cannot be
     repeated today, due to the regulations and the
     laws that the tobacco companies are working
     under, and cannot be repeated again in the
     future.
          And you don't have to award any punitive
     damages unless you find that it's necessary to
     do so against Philip Morris here, today, in
     2016, for things that happened a long time ago.
          Ladies and gentlemen, there's no dispute
     about it that $9 million is a lot of money.
     And if you conclude that the wrongful conduct
     that you heard about in Phase 1 of this trial
     has already been corrected and already been
     repeated, there no reason for you to award
     additional money above and beyond the amounts
     that you've already awarded to the Ahrens
     family.
          And so, what's on this mitigation
     instruction, that I want to focus on the rest
     of my time, because it's really most of the 5762
     evidence that you've heard about in this phase
     of the trial.
          And as you can imagine, the world that you
     all imagined Mr. Ahrens smoking his first
     cigarette in, the late 1950s, is long gone.
     And we brought you Dr. Lipowicz to talk about
     that.
          And we told you the world is even
     different today than it was when Mr. Ahrens
     smoked his first Merit Ultra Light cigarette in
     1981.
          You've heard about warning labels that
     came out in 1966, and restrictions on TV and
     radio advertisements that came out in 1971.
          But the first big change came with the
     Master Settlement Agreement in 1998; and then
     we had the websites in 1999; and then, of
     course, we had the passage of the Tobacco
     Control Act in 2009 by President Obama.  I want
     to spend just a minute with you on each of
     those topics.
          So on the website, Dr. Lipowicz told you
     that Philip Morris admits that smoking is
     addictive and causes disease.  And you've now
     heard from him about how Philip Morris is in 5763
     the position of cooperating with the public
     health community so they can have a seat at the
     table to discuss these issues and discuss ways,
     for example, to deter smoking by young people.
          Philip Morris is committed to ensuring
     that the public hears a single message from
     them and the public health community.
          You've heard that they created this
     company website on a voluntary basis and made
     those statements on a voluntary basis.  There
     was nothing about the Master Settlement
     Agreement that required Philip Morris or any
     other tobacco company to take those actions.
     This is what Philip Morris says today, and this
     is what Philip Morris has been saying to the
     public for 15 years.
          Philip Morris' website, as you heard, also
     provides links to the Surgeon General's Report
     and to the FDA website and to the CDC.
          And you heard Dr. Lipowicz say, We are in
     the business of selling cigarettes, so do we
     disagree with some of the things that the
     Surgeon General says?  Yes.  But we don't
     dispute that in public and we don't take
     positions in public that are contrary to the 5764
     statement of the public health community today.
     And that's been the case for the past 15 years.
          You've heard Dr. Lipowicz talked about the
     Master Settlement Agreement, and you know that
     was a result of lawsuits that had been brought
     by the attorneys generals of the 50 states.
     And you know the Master Settlement Agreement
     imposes a number of restrictions on advertising
     of cigarettes, and you know that it gives the
     state attorneys general the power to monitor
     the tobacco companies' compliance with those
     agreements and to enforce any violations of
     those agreements by the companies.
          And every year since the companies have
     entered into those agreements, they've been
     making payments to the states, and you've heard
     that Philip Morris has paid over $70 billion to
     the states in the past 18 years and will
     continue to make those payments in perpetuity.
     That requirement goes on forever.
          You also heard from Dr. Lipowicz again
     about this FDA law that was passed in 2009 that
     now gives the FDA regulatory authority over the
     design and the manufacture and the sale and
     marketing of cigarettes. 5765
          And you heard that Philip Morris supported
     that legislation, and they were supporting that
     legislation since 2000, and you saw the letter
     to President Obama that Philip Morris wrote
     setting forth its position.
          The bottom line, as Dr. Lipowicz explained
     to you, was that a process was needed, and a
     process was needed to weigh the various
     bodies -- the different studies and the
     different scientific principles that we have
     and the competing interests and come up with
     some final decision about how tobacco was going
     to be sold and marketed in the country.  And
     that's what this legislation does.
          The FDA now has authority of everything
     that goes into a cigarette, everything that
     comes out of a cigarette, and everything the
     tobacco companies can say about cigarettes.
          So what does all this mean?  It's clear
     from your verdict that you heard things --
     about things in the first phase of trial that
     caused you concern.  And if what caused you
     concern was advertising or marketing or
     marketing to users in particular, here is what
     you need to bear in mind. 5766
          Philip Morris is not permitted to and does
     not advertise on television or radio or
     billboards.  There's no signage in stadiums.
     You won't see tobacco advertising on buses or
     taxicabs.  It doesn't happen.
          Philip Morris is not permitted to and does
     not sponsor concerts or other sporting events,
     and they haven't done that for 18 years.
          Philip Morris would be permitted to, but
     voluntarily chooses not to advertise in
     magazines, and that was a voluntary action that
     Philip Morris took, starting in 2005, now
     11 years ago.
          Since 2005, the only place where Philip
     Morris does any advertising is at the point of
     purchase behind the counter where individuals
     purchase cigarettes, and it's perfectly legal
     to do that.
          Philip Morris has also taken steps to
     discourage youth smoking.  You heard about the
     participation by Philip Morris in the We Card
     Program that started back in 2005.
          If what concerned you was the use of
     ingredients or additives in cigarettes, like
     ammonia, we heard about a whole bunch of that 5767
     during the first phase of trial.  What's the
     evidence that you heard?
          Philip Morris provides its list of
     ingredients to the public on its website, on a
     voluntary basis.  It provides even more
     complete lists to the FDA.  And the FDA can
     tell Philip Morris, You need to take that
     additive out of your cigarette.  You need to
     take that other additive out of your cigarette.
     And the FDA can do that if they think that it's
     appropriate to do so.
          If what concerned you in the first phase
     of trial was that Philip Morris or other
     tobacco companies were making statements that
     were contrary to the positions taken by the
     public health community, that is no longer a
     concern.
          Philip Morris does not make those
     statements.  They state on their website that
     smoking is addictive, it causes lung cancer,
     and it no longer engages in any public debate
     with the Surgeon General or the public health
     community; and that's been true for over
     15 years.
          If what concerned you was the level of 5768
     nicotine in cigarettes, you have now heard that
     the FDA can regulate that, too, and can tell
     the companies to reduce the amount of nicotine
     to any particular level.
          And if what concerned you was filter or
     low-tar or light cigarettes, you heard about
     that, too.  You know that the FDA can tell the
     tobacco companies not to sell low-tar or light
     cigarettes, and you heard that the FDA has
     required Philip Morris and the other tobacco
     companies to stop using terms like lights or
     ultra lights if that's what caused your concern
     in the first part of trial.
          But even Dr. Lipowicz told you that even
     before the public health community came to its
     new consensus on light and low-tar cigarettes,
     Philip Morris had already talked its consumers
     on its website and told them not to assume that
     light cigarettes were safe or safer than any
     other brand, and they communicated that in the
     years going forward, in newspaper inserts, on
     package onserts and tear tape.  And you heard
     Dr. Lipowicz talk about all those things
     earlier today.
          The FDA has access to all of Philip 5769
     Morris' business information.  It has the right
     to inspect its facilities, and it's done so.
     You heard Dr. Lipowicz talk with you about
     that.
          You've heard that the FDA has the power to
     shut down facilities, to impose fines, and take
     other enforcement measures against Philip
     Morris.  And you heard that in the 18 years
     since -- excuse me, in the -- since the FDA
     legislation was enacted in 2009, the FDA has
     not taken any such enforcement authority
     against Philip Morris.
          And you've heard that in the 18 years
     since the Master Settlement Agreement was
     entered into, none of the 15 attorneys generals
     in the United States has taken any enforcement
     action against Philip Morris for violating the
     terms of those agreements.
          The conduct that you have heard about in
     the first phase of trial cannot be repeated
     under the new regulatory and legal framework in
     which these companies operate.
          Now, one thing we know is that people can
     change, and corporations can change, too.  And
     you heard from Dr. Lipowicz that a number of 5770
     these people who you learned about in Phase 1
     are no longer with the company.  Dr. Wakeham,
     Mr. Cullman, Mr. Dunn, they don't work there
     anymore, and they haven't worked there in a
     long time.
          But the point is this:  If you went to
     Philip Morris today, you would meet someone
     like Dr. Lipowicz, who was born in 1960.  He
     was four years old when the Surgeon General's
     Report came out, and he was six years old when
     the warnings first went on cigarettes.  He is a
     lifetime, a generation removed from all of
     those people that you learned about and heard
     about in the first phase of trial.
          So where does this leave us on the
     question of whether it's appropriate to award
     punitive damages to Philip Morris?
          Think about this:  If you had an
     18-year-old man today, he would have been born
     in 1998.  And if he was born in 1998, the same
     Philip Morris and the other companies would
     have entered into the settlement agreements in
     that very year.
          This person would never have seen a TV
     advertisement or a radio advertisement or a 5771
     stadium sign or any other kind of cigarette
     advertisement since 1998.
          He never would have heard any statement
     from The Tobacco Institute or the Council for
     Tobacco Research, because they never existed in
     his lifetime.
          He never would have heard any statement
     from Philip Morris that smoking is not
     addictive or it does not cause lung cancer,
     because Philip Morris has been saying that it
     is addictive and does cause lung cancer since
     1999.
          And during his lifetime, Philip Morris
     would have paid over $70 billion to the states,
     under the terms of the Master Settlement
     Agreement.
          So Mr. Paige has asked you to award
     $27 million in punitive damages, and I would
     like you to ask yourself if that's a reasonable
     number.
          Think about this:  If the family -- the
     average family in Florida is making $50,000 a
     year, it would take that family over 500 years
     to earn $27 million.  We would respectfully
     suggest that you can and should conclude that 5772
     you should not award punitive damages:  One,
     because the purpose of punitive damages has
     already been served with the $9 million award
     that you awarded to Mrs. Ahrens and to Bryan.
          The conduct that you are concerned about
     in the first phase of trial cannot be repeated
     today in the environment the tobacco companies
     are operating in.  And once again, Mr. Ahrens
     did not start smoking Merit Ultra Lights
     cigarettes, manufactured by Philip Morris,
     until 1981, the last ten years of his smoking
     history, when he was over 40 years old.
          But if you do find it necessary to award
     some amount of punitive damages, we would
     respectfully suggest a more reasonable number
     that's no greater than $500,000.
          Think about the message that a $27 million
     punitive damages award sends to other
     companies.  It says, if you enter into legally
     binding agreements, and you abide by the
     legislation that governs your business, and if
     you support regulation of your business, and if
     you agreed to pay substantial sums of money to
     the states under the terms of those agreements,
     you'll still be forced to pay significant 5773
     punitive damage awards.  So what's the
     incentive to those other companies to change?
          If you want to encourage other companies
     to change, that goal will not be served by a
     $27 million punitive damage award here, or any
     punitive damages at all.
          You'd be sending the message to other
     companies that, look, whether you change or
     not, you're still going to be awarded --
     punitive damages are still going to be awarded
     against you.
          Now, Mr. Paige has asked you to send a
     message with your punitive damages award, and I
     agree, I think you should send a message.  But
     respectfully, I would say the message you
     should send is, you know what, step up to the
     plate, comply with the law, change the way that
     you operate your company, and you will not have
     punitive damages awarded against you.
          Sure, you have to compensate for the
     damage that you caused in the past; that's only
     fair.  But you don't need to be punished and
     it's not appropriate to be punished for moving
     in the right direction.
          Awarding a large sum of money to 5774
     Mrs. Ahrens is not going to send a message to
     Philip Morris to change its behavior, because
     Philip Morris has already done that.
          Philip Morris of today, in 2016, is a
     different company, and it simply cannot engage
     in the conduct that you've heard about during
     this trial again.
          I appreciate your time and your patience
     and your attention here on a Saturday, and I
     have nothing further.
