         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Thank you Your Honor.
         Good evening.  We once started out saying good
    morning.
         Ladies and gentlemen, I want you to know first
    off that my client takes you very seriously.  That's
    a lot of money even to R.J. Reynolds.
         As you heard, there are two purposes for
    punitive damages.  One is punishment and one is
    deterrence.  Now, obviously we couldn't speak with
    you individually since your verdict to find out what 3174
    it is -- what part of the conduct you saw that
    troubled you the most, that caused you to think that
    punitive damages were appropriate.  What I can do is
    show you a few ways in which R.J. Reynolds is very
    much a different company from the company you saw
    that was portrayed in those documents that you saw
    over the last two weeks.
         It's literally a changed company beginning in
    the year 2004 when it merged with Brown &
    Williamson.  When it did that it acquired new
    management, it acquired a new philosophy, and it
    acquired a new website, portions of which I'm going
    to show you very briefly and were entered into
    evidence so you can look at in the jury room.
         When it says a changed company it's very much
    true.  The names you saw on the documents over the
    last two weeks, Claude Teague, Allen Rodgman, Ed
    Horrigan, the fellow who was talking about not
    marketing to kids and not knowing whether smoking
    caused emphysema, they're gone.  The gentleman you
    saw today, this morning, Edward Heimann from
    American Tobacco Company -- he didn't work for
    Reynolds then -- actually never did -- but he's
    gone.  Adison Yeoman, the fellow who wrote the memo
    saying cigarettes were addictive back in 1963.  He's 3175
    long gone.  TI, Tobacco Institute, has been gone
    since 1998.  Council for Tobacco Research has been
    gone since 1998.
         So whatever wrongs or failings you think those
    people or those organizations had cannot be repeated
    because they're gone and they haven't been replaced.
         If it's the concealment that you heard about
    that troubled you, that's gone too.
         I mentioned this a little bit in closing, you
    heard about it from Dr. Proctor, but Reynolds now
    has a website.  Litigation document archive.  Anyone
    with internet access, anyone with a computer can go
    online and find these documents you saw introduced
    in this trial and many, many tens of thousands more.
         As a matter of fact, every tobacco company has
    one of these.  So feel free once you're done with
    this trial, if the information you've heard over the
    last two weeks has piqued your interest in any
    particular area you can thoroughly investigate it on
    the website.
         If things were once in the dark, they're not in
    the dark anymore, and haven't been for over a
    decade.
         As I said, there's new management and new
    guiding principles.  Let's take a look at that.  And 3176
    this is all on their website.
         This is a tobacco company, a tobacco company
    that once denied relationships between smoking and
    anything who now says, and it has for a while,
    smoking is a leading cause of preventable deaths in
    the United States.  It increases the risk of lung
    cancer, heart disease, chronic bronchitis,
    emphysema, and other serious diseases and adverse
    health conditions.
         R.J. Reynolds saying no tobacco product, none,
    has been shown to be safe and without risks.  Health
    risks are more serious with cigarettes than with
    nicotine with smoke-free and nicotine product.
         Once upon a time you saw a Claude Teague memo
    that said if people quit we could go out of
    business.  R.J. Reynolds on its website for a
    decade:  Quitting smoking significantly reduces the
    risk for serious diseases.
         Denial of addiction.  Nicotine in tobacco
    products is addictive, but is not considered a
    significant threat to health.
         Again here's advice, advice not to keep
    smoking.  The best course for tobacco users
    concerned about their health is to quit.  Adults who
    continue to use tobacco should consider reduction of 3177
    risk for serious diseases associated with moving
    from cigarettes to the use of smoke-free tobacco or
    products.  Stop inhaling carcinogens.  That's the
    advice from R.J. Reynolds.
         Significant reductions in harm can be
    reduced -- can be achieved by providing accurate
    information about the comparative risks of tobacco
    products to adult users.  If people want to use
    tobacco, there are forms of it to use that are
    safer, less hazardous than cigarettes, and people
    should consider stop using cigarettes and migrate to
    those sort of products.
         And we should work together on this:
    Governments, public health officials, manufacturers,
    tobacco producers, and consumers should support the
    development of less hazardous products.
         This is one that I showed you before, I talked
    about before.  The days when you saw a Tobacco
    Institute memo saying, you know, we should even
    belittle or somehow try to undermine public health
    officials.  The advice has done a 180.  Reynolds
    Tobacco believes that individuals should rely on
    conclusions of the U.S. Surgeon General, Center For
    Disease Control, and other public health and medical
    officials when making decisions regarding smoking. 3178
         And there you have links to all those websites
    of all those public health authorities and
    government health authorities for anyone interested
    to conduct their research.
         There's no more evidence of a dramatic change
    in the company than this directing their smokers,
    directing their customers to public health
    authorities for advice on smoking and health.
         So now you have to decide what an appropriate
    amount is.  You heard a net worth read to you.
    That's not a pile of money sitting waiting to be
    awarded.  It's bricks, mortar, plants in fields, and
    land.  It's everything the company owns.  That's the
    value of it.
         Reynolds is asking for you to award a just
    amount, an amount -- you've already made her whole
    by your compensatory damage verdict.  The question
    is how much more should be awarded to punish and to
    deter?  As for the punishment, you'll have to be the
    judge of that, but as to deterrence I think I've
    shown you that there is a changed company, there has
    been for a while, and this company cannot -- it's
    structurally different than the company that engaged
    in the conduct that you saw for the last two week2.
         So an amount, what I suggest, well, I guess the 3179
    best place to where I start is what the plaintiff
    asked for, what Mrs. Alexander asked for this
    afternoon in your compensatory damage phase.  She
    asked for $3 million.  You gave her a little less.
    To punish Reynolds, Reynolds would suggest give her
    the difference.  Make her whole, give her what she
    asked for.  It's still an awful lot of money, even
    to R.J. Reynolds.  It's certainly a lot of money in
    the city of Gainesville.  Give her what she's asks
    for.  It will punish R.J. Reynolds, it will punish
    the old R.J. Reynolds and provide a bit of justice
    to the new R.J. Reynolds, which as you see is going
    forward in a very different way than the company you
    saw for the last two weeks.  Thank you.
