MR. CHEFFY: Thank you, Your Honor.
May it please the Court, counsel and good afternoon, Ladies and Gentlemen of the Jury.
THE JURY: (Collectively.) Good afternoon.
MR. CHEFFY: I want to begin by thanking you for your service. It's been a long haul already, I know, but we're almost at the end.
Our system, as you heard before, only works with jurors who are attentive, and nobody can have any concerns about your attentiveness.
This is a first for me, though. I think I've heard a juror ask for an extra notebook during a -- you've had excellent questions, very insightful questions, and I know you'll look at all the evidence very carefully and come to a conclusion that you believe is fair and just.
So on behalf of Mr. Woods and my client,
Lorillard, I thank you very much for your time and your service here.
The case has developed pretty much as anticipated, and, therefore, I'm going to use the same boards that I used in my opening statement, as you may recall.
And I want to try to bring focus to my closing by bringing up this board, what this case is about. This case is about one individual. And you may have been listening to some of the objections and Judge Lopez' comments
in response to an objection, "as it relates to Mr. Alexander, as it relates to Mr. Alexander."
This case is just about Mr. Alexander. It is not about the general public, not about all cigarette smokers, not about cigarettes in general.
It is about Coleman Alexander's decisions to smoke, to stop smoking in 1956, to resume as an adult, and to continue smoking.
You may recall in my opening, I mentioned three words. Awareness, control, and responsibility. And I asked you to think about these questions as you heard the evidence.
Awareness. Was he aware?
Control. Who was in control of his decisions?
And ultimately, who's responsible for his decisions?
I'm going to spend a fair amount of time reviewing the evidence on each one of these questions. But before I do that, I want to respond to a couple of things the plaintiff did in the plaintiff's closing.
Plaintiff has spent a lot of time talking about evidence that really doesn't relate to
Coleman Alexander. And you may recall in opening I said we'd seen all these documents,
The Frank Statement, and so many other things in the plaintiff's opening. And I said listen to the evidence and just consider what these documents have to do with Coleman Alexander.
Now, they brought Dr. Proctor into the courtroom to introduce a lot of these documents. And he introduced documents from various tobacco companies, including Lorillard, but also Philip Morris and RJR, even though they're no longer in the case.
But Dr. Proctor knew virtually nothing about Coleman Alexander. He made no attempt to relate any document that he was introducing to Coleman Alexander.
In fact, he admitted, you may recall, he doesn't know if Coleman Alexander saw any of these documents, relied upon anything.
So no other witness was brought to this courtroom by the plaintiff to relate any of those documents you saw to Coleman Alexander.
If you think about it, they only called one witness who knew Coleman Alexander during their case, and that was Mrs. Alexander.
And so you may recall that we asked her about these documents, and I specifically said we've seen in opening statement The Frank Statement and different things. Did you ever hear of that, talk to your husband, know anything about it? No. And I went through a number of different things.
And then I asked her in general questions.
Can we have the first slide?
After going through specific documents, we're asking Mrs. Alexander, your husband never suggested to you that he relied on some type of statement from a tobacco company he believed to be untrue; is that correct?
She said that's correct.
And then we said, did he ever -- your husband never suggested to you that any tobacco company in this case ever withheld any information from him, is that true?
She said correct.
In fact, before you filed this lawsuit, you don't know if your husband ever heard, read or saw any statement that he believed was untrue from Lorillard or any other tobacco company?
Correct.
And this is the only witness the plaintiff called who knows anything about Coleman Alexander.
And we submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that is a significant failure of proof in this case.
Now, in addition to showing you a lot of documents which we submit, we ask you to think about whether they had anything to do with Coleman Alexander, plaintiff spent a lot of time talking about how unsafe cigarettes are.
You may recall in opening statement -excuse me. Just about the first thing I did in opening statement is acknowledge that issue. There is no safe cigarette. We conceded that at the very beginning of this trial, you may recall.
All cigarettes have inherent health risks. There's no question about that.
Despite those risks, as we talked about in voir dire and in opening, our free society has made a decision, our free society has made a decision, people can choose, people can choose to ride on a motorcycle without a helmet.
People can choose to drink alcohol, which has
serious health risks of its own, and they can choose to smoke cigarettes.
Judge Lopez has already read you the instructions, but I do want to remind you in this context, this is one of the instructions that you will have: The manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a lawful activity. We can't be held liable merely for manufacturing, advertising and selling cigarettes.
Plaintiffs also spent some time during trial talking about chemicals in cigarettes, such as nicotine, for example. You heard a lot about nicotine.
Nicotine grows naturally in tobacco. It's not something Lorillard puts in a cigarette.
Mother nature puts nicotine in tobacco and, therefore, in cigarettes.
I mentioned during the opening that if someone went out in a tobacco field, chopped up some tobacco, rolled your own cigarette and smoked it, you'd be getting tar and nicotine not from any manufacturing process. The nicotine is there in the plant, and the tar comes from when you light the plant material.
And Dr. Proctor, plaintiff's expert,
acknowledged all of this. No safe cigarette. Nicotine occurs naturally in tobacco. And any cigarette, the one that doesn't go necessarily through a tobacco company, could cause lung cancer, could be addictive. That's an inherent risk of the product.
Plaintiff's attorneys mentioned a number of chemicals, some with scary-sounding names. Arsenic is one I heard. Boy, if Coleman Alexander had known there was arsenic in cigarettes, would he have smoked?
But -- and that is a scary word, and there are trace amounts of arsenic in cigarette smoke. But here's the evidence. It's not something tobacco companies purposely put in tobacco. The Surgeon General's report says it's unlikely that arsenic from unfiltered cigarettes presents a health hazard and noted that you'd have at least eight times more arsenic walking down a New York City street than from smoking 2.5 packs of cigarettes.
Plaintiff also -- and there's no way I have time to cover everything they mentioned, but they also mentioned, not only during the trial but in opening statement and in closing, DAP,
diammonium phosphate and a project at Lorillard called the Nicotine Augmentation Project.
But both plaintiff's expert, Dr. Proctor, and Lorillard's company scientist, Ed Robinson, explained that the Nicotine Augmentation Project and DAP were actually part of Lorillard's efforts to develop a safer cigarette.
Here is -- this was done through the tobacco working group sponsored by the National Cancer Institute. This is working with public health authorities, working with government, independent scientists.
And here's Dr. Proctor; again, a man who makes a fortune going around testifying against tobacco companies. But he acknowledged, when asked about this whole nicotine augmentation program, yeah, it was part of working on a safer cigarette, trying to actually reduce the tar, which is deemed to be one of the very hazardous parts of a cigarette.
And in any event, Lorillard, that project never led to any commercial product.
So again, what in the world does that have to do with Coleman Alexander?
And then as to the DAP -- Dr. Robinson's
testimony -- used in very low levels does not affect smoke pH, does not affect nicotine transfer, and it's there simply as a flavor.
And I'd also point out, you've heard this before, but I will just point out, there's no secret about ingredients in Lorillard's cigarettes. You can go on the website and they're all listed.
We have, as you've heard, since 1986, reported the ingredients to the federal government -- well, Department of Health and Human Services, which has a mandate to use those. And if there's anything that should come out, they've got to tell Congress. And you heard Dr. Proctor say that's never happened.
The important point is this. All cigarettes are inherently risky. It doesn't matter if the cigarette is filtered or unfiltered, whether made with or without ingredients.
No expert came here to tell you that additive-free cigarettes are somehow any safer with added ingredients, and the additive ingredients are typically where the companies are competing with flavor, trying to get a certain flavor.
So the point is I think all of this is a red herring. The references to arsenic and DAP is a diversion, and it really has no relevance to this case and certainly no relevance to Coleman Alexander.
All cigarettes are risky, and that is why all cigarettes have inherent health risks, and that is why every cigarette sold in America since 1966 has been sold with a warning. And as Judge Lopez said, part of the instruction that you have received already, and you will get the written copy, the warning labels placed on cigarette packs by Lorillard complied with federal law, and we had no obligation to place anything additional on our cigarette packages.
So with that, I wanted to address a few of those issues. Well, there's another one.
You've heard a lot about the findings. And you've seen this board before, but I just want to remind everybody that the findings have no applicability to this case unless plaintiff proves addiction was a legal cause -- and we talk about legal cause throughout my argument -of Mr. Alexander's death.
The jury heard no evidence about
Mr. Alexander, heard no evidence about his smoking decisions, and those findings do not establish liability on any of the plaintiff's claims in this case.
All right. Now, I want to turn my attention to Coleman Alexander. And another board you saw during opening -- let me get rid of this.
I think from the testimony of the experts who had read depositions and told you something about Coleman Alexander and from his wife, you probably got a good feel for who Coleman Alexander was.
And you may recall, I went through this chart with Mrs. Alexander, who confirmed virtually everything on here, if not everything.
A person who lived life on his own terms. A very strong-willed and independent person. His own man. When he put his mind to something, he did it. I think I asked Mrs. Alexander, is there anything he couldn't do?
She said, I never knew him to try anything and fail at it. Anything he tried, he did.
Captain of the football team. The different ways his friends would charge -- would refer to him. Interestingly, a man -- and if anything
shows his independent decision-making, he chose not to drink alcohol. A lot of -- some of his friends did, but he chose not to. And there was testimony he'd get teased about it. But he was making decisions for him, his life, his body.
He was making his decisions.
He was goal oriented, well-informed, we talked about, and understood risk and reward.
You heard about the investment in the real estate project called GUTS which Mrs.
Alexander's still involved in. You heard him about starting his own business and the good business sense that he had. So this gives you a flavor of who Mr. Alexander was and how he conducted his life, and I think it's consistent with all the testimony that you've heard.
Let me talk a little bit about, before we get into what the evidence showed on all of these questions, which is probably most important thing I want to talk to you about, I want to review just a few points on the timeline.
He started smoking, as you've heard, in around 1950. We had question marks here. We weren't sure how the evidence was going to come
in. The evidence has come in, it appears to be around 1950.
There's testimony about, well, everyone was smoking back then. But you heard -- there was argument everybody was smoking back then. But you heard the testimony, at least some of, if not all of his three brothers did not smoke; brought up in the same neighborhood, same time frame.
Dorothy Alexander didn't smoke. And you may recall we listed a number of his friends who had made the decision not to smoke.
A critical point on the timeline. 1956, he quit smoking as a 20-year-old. He was senior year in high school. He was 20 years old and had gone off to try to play football at South Carolina State. And you heard evidence that his good buddy, Albert Sands, recalled this in some detail, recalled that Coleman told him why he wasn't going to smoke. Albert Sands observed him. He had quit smoking, and Albert Sands said I was at South Carolina State myself with him, but he wouldn't smoke, and he said it was at least six months.
Now, some of the other friends, you heard
testimony, don't recall that, but of all the people who had information, it was Albert Sands who was with him in both the end of the senior year in high school and at South Carolina State; clearly, the best witness. And Mr. Sands recalled a fair amount of detail about that.
So at that point, Coleman Alexander had a motivation that was important to him to try to quit smoking. He was hoping to play some college football. Now, that didn't work out.
He didn't make the team. He left South Carolina State and started smoking again.
The first time that anyone claims that Mr. Alexander smoked a Lorillard product -- Kent is the only Lorillard product involved in this case, first time was sometime after returning from the Army in 1958, and you heard Mr. Alvarez talk about that testimony.
There's some conflicting evidence on that.
I'm going to review it real quickly. It's not that important, because the important point is this. There it is.
The important point is this. Even if we accept the 1958 year, which is the earliest anybody says he ever smoked a Lorillard product,
he was 22 years old. He was married. He was a parent. He had been honorably discharged from the Army. He made an adult decision.
Quit for at least six months is the testimony. Here is Dr. Dorce talking about -here are her credentials, you may recall. She just had phenomenal, phenomenal credentials; a very quick, engaging woman, a very impressive woman with quite a resume. And she gave this testimony that you heard about brain receptors and all of that. Two weeks to a month, they would be back to the way they were before.
This is significant, because Coleman Alexander quit, would have been through -nicotine's half life would have been through withdrawal symptoms, his brain receptors would have been back to normal. And then he made an adult choice to resume smoking when he was at least 22 years old.
Now -- and again, this is not a critical point. I'm going to go through this quickly.
You heard the evidence. Well, let me make one other point too.
1958 is also very significant. 1958 the earliest possible date he began smoking my
client's cigarette because in 1955, you may have heard the evidence, the FTC had prohibited the use of health claims in advertising.
Also by that time, we were pre-clearing all of our advertising with the FTC. So that start date of 1958 is important for a number of reasons, but mainly because it establishes he made an adult choice, after a six-month quit, to resume smoking.
Here's the evidence. This is not a critical point at all. I'm going to be very quick about it. Mrs. Alexander did testify a number of times in deposition it was 1958. At one time in her deposition, she said sometime a little later.
But other evidence indicated that might be -- that date might be way off, because she also said that she was having discussions with her husband about switching to filters, and she'd said pretty definitively that was sometime after 1968. And the point here is Kent only has filters. So if he switched to filters after 1968, or in 1968, he wasn't smoking Kent in 1958.
Also, interestingly, you may recall in her
deposition, we asked her about it when she was on the stand, she made the point pretty emphatically that when she saw the cadaver with the smoker's lung, she made the connection, he had not yet switched to filters.
And then you may recall she related that when she became an R.N. And I asked her when she became an R.N., and believe me, with these dates, I'm not picking on her, believe me.
Because if somebody asked me what I did 30 years ago or 40 years ago or a couple years ago, we would all have difficulty.
I would just point out she had in her mind she had become an R.N. in '62 or '63, when in reality she became an R.N. in '74. She had been an LPN, nursing assistant before. So she was ten years off. And also, when she listed her husband's employment, same thing.
So if, in fact, her recollection is accurate about the discussion about filters after '68 and seeing the cadaver when he was still smoking non-filtered, he would not have switched to Kent until late '60s, early '70s.
And then Diane -- and granted, she was born in 1961, so she was nine years old in 1970. But
as we get into the '70s, say '72, she's 11. I think we can all think back and remember certain things when they were 9, 10 or 11, and she was pretty adamant in her deposition that her father became a Kent smoker on a regular basis sometime there during the decade of the '70s. Prior to then, there was another brand.
You saw him regularly the first time in the '70s? Yes. And then I just know my mom purchased cigarettes other than Kent prior to the '70s.
The only other person who testified on this, Wallace Francis through Dr. Dorce.
Dr. Dorce confirmed there was conflicting evidence on this, admitted she was not an expert on brand history but noted that Wallace Francis, the best friend of Coleman Alexander. Said he didn't switch to Kents until the late 20s or 30s. Until the late 20s or early 30s, pardon me.
Interestingly, in the interrogatories signed by Mrs. Alexander, that's her signature there, this is sworn statement within the Court case, she's asked, name all the brands that you think caused Mr. Alexander's injuries or death.
And there are five other brands besides Kent; six altogether. Only one of them is a product made by Lorillard, only Kent. The others are Philip Morris and RJR, who are no longer parties to this case.
Now, after he switched to Kent, whenever that was, at some point then he switched to Kent 100s. And what is interesting about that, he did that, the testimony was, it was more for the money, we heard, longer cigarette, more for the money, but it wasn't a health issue, because the evidence has been Kent 100s actually have more tar and nicotine than regular Kents.
He continued smoking until 1994, and you've heard the evidence on this. The medical records show he did discontinue smoking in August of '94, and there are quite a few records from different people. So he apparently was telling a number of people, and even six months later saying he was no longer smoking, that he had quit, telling his doctors. And I don't know that there would be any reason, if you're terminally ill, not to be frank with your doctors about that.
Mrs. Alexander has said there were occasions
when he asked for a cigarette. And again, no surprise there. I think I mentioned in opening, it wouldn't be surprising if somebody's terminally ill that you'd want to do what gives you pleasure.
And you may recall when Dr. Villa testified, he said that he doesn't even insist that his terminally ill patients give up smoking. His thought is that they're terminally ill; that gives them pleasure, they should do it.
And Dr. Dorce said that asking for some cigarettes after being diagnosed would not be clinically significant, it just would not be terribly relevant to anything. All right.
Now, let me get into the first question on the verdict form. You've seen this with Mr. Alvarez. And it is a two-part question.
I've broken it out so we make it clear.
Was Coleman Alexander addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and if so, was such addiction a legal cause -- not a factual cause -- a legal cause. It's a two-part question. It's got to be addiction. And then if there's addiction, legal cause. I'm going to spend most my time on legal cause, very little
time on addiction.
I want to remind you, we talked in voir dire about the difference between factual and medical cause on one hand and legal cause on the other. We used the example of somebody steps into the street, gets hit by a truck. And getting hit by the truck is the factual and medical cause, we know that, but is it the legal cause?
And I think everybody during voir dire acknowledged you need a lot more information to determine if somebody's legally liable there, and so we're dealing with the issue of legal cause.
Let me spend just a quick moment on the first part, the addiction issue. Dr. Proctor, their expert, said whether something is addictive and whether somebody is addicted really depends on the definition you're going to use. And he noted that, you know, the definition had evolved dramatically from the Surgeon General from '64 to '88.
Dr. Drobes, plaintiff's addiction expert, concluded that the addiction began once he started escalating his smoking behavior in his mid or late teens. Is that fair to say?
I think that would be fair to say.
So there are a couple of important points there. If plaintiff's is correct, and only you can decide that and it would partly depend on what definition you use, if he's correct, then Coleman Alexander was addicted before he touched any cigarette from my client, before he started smoking Kent.
And also, he was addicted before he quit for six months when he was 20. All right?
And then Dr. Dorce said -- Dr. Dorce is a medical doctor. She simply said DSM-IV is the proper standard for medical diagnosis. Not enough information to be able to tell.
But again, in the end, our focus is on legal cause, not addiction.
All right. For there to be legal cause, and you'll see the definition in the jury instructions, there has got to be something directly substantially causing the injury.
Direct and substantial.
And we submit -- you heard Mr. Alvarez talk about what their interpretation of that. It's going to be your interpretation that matters.
We think the plaintiff must prove that addiction
directly prevented Coleman Alexander from quitting or substantially interfering -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Your Honor. Pretrial ruling.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. CHEFFY: Plaintiff must prove, to prove legal cause, that the addiction directly prevented Coleman Alexander from quitting or substantially interfered with a committed effort
to quit.
MR. ALVAREZ: Same objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. CHEFFY: Now, during opening statement,
I said when we're considering that issue, the legal cause, critical issue in this case, legal
cause, we want to look at the evidence on each of these questions.
I want to start with the awareness. Was Mr. Alexander aware of the risks.
We will go quickly to the timeline. The evidence is from the time he was in 6th grade, 6th grade, his teachers were telling him about the risks of smoking. In 9th grade, you may recall, he got caught smoking in the restroom, paraded around, learning that smoking has consequences. Violating the rules has consequences.
And then we heard a lot about Coach Traz Powell. His coaches were telling him about the dangers of smoking, the risks of smoking.
Where were his teachers, coaches and friends? His friends were also telling him about the risks. Where were they getting information? Well, I won't go through all of this that you've seen, but I will give you a quick summary.
Florida, as you may recall, actually banned cigarette smoking at the turn of the century.
We have a Florida health note from the Florida State Board of Health back in 1906 talking about
the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of addiction.
1912, cigarettes being referred to as coffin nails. Reader's Digest, you may recall Reader's Digest, the most popular magazine of the time, would not accept advertising from tobacco companies and ran article after article about the dangers of smoking, including the 1952 "Cancer By the Carton." You can't have a more direct title than that.
You've heard much about the Wynder and Graham study, the mouse painting. That was well publicized in 1953.
And Time, many other magazines also publicized it. But there's Time, and you can see "Beyond Any Doubt" as the title.
Now, here's an awareness poll. 1954, 90 percent had heard or read something recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be the cause cancer of the lung. So the dialogue was under way there.
But let's focus on Coleman Alexander. Do we know whether he was part of that 90 percent or not?
One of his friends, and you heard this
testimony through one of the experts who talked about Otis Winkfield, one of Coleman Alexander's good friends, said Otis Winkfield said he knew before 1955 that smoking causes lung cancer, and he said he talked to Mr. Alexander in high school about the risks of smoking.
Other friends said they called cigarettes back at this time cancer sticks.
Then moving forward on our timeline, of course, we have warnings from Mrs. Alexander. And these are critically important because, you may recall, some people may have had doubt. She did not.
Okay. And Mrs. Alexander, as of 1960 or '61, you were aware that cancer could be caused by smoking cigarettes?
Yes.
And more specifically, you were aware as of that time that lung cancer could be caused?
And then, critical points here, you began questioning your husband in the early '60s. And I think your quote was, and I'll ask you, is it fair to say you knew absolutely, one hundred percent certain -- no, let me get it right, you knew absolutely one hundred percent that
cigarettes were bad for your health?
Yes.
And you shared that information with your husband?
In 1964, the Surgeon General's report came out, and here's a poll. Do you think the report said that cigarette smoking is a cause of lung cancer? 81 percent of people were aware of that.
Was Mr. Coleman Alexander part of that 81 percent? Well, we can say with almost certainty he was. How can we say that? Every witness who testified said he was well-informed, read the Miami Herald, watched the evening news.
And here's what Coleman Alexander would have seen in 1964. Here's what he would have seen in the Miami news. We have a clip -- let's go ahead and play that clip. Here's what he might have seen on NBC.
(Video clip played as follows:)
VOICE: This book, containing 387 carefully-worded pages, is a federal government report. Its title, "Smoking and Health, the Report of the Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service."
It was released at noon today, and it says:
In view of the continuing and mounting evidence from many sources, it is the judgment of the committee that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from certain specific diseases and to the overall death rate.
But its key points are these. Item:
Cigarette smoking is causally related to cigarette smoking in men.
In comparison to nonsmokers, average male smokers of cigarettes have approximately a nine-to ten-fold risk of developing lung cancer and heavy smokers at least a 20-fold risk.
One of the first to point an accusing finger toward heavy cigarette smoking was a noted lung surgeon, Dr. Alton Ochsner. And that was back in 1936, after discovering a dramatic increase in the number of lung cancer cases among patients.
VOICE: We know that a man 50 years of age who has never smoked has eight and a half years longer life expectancy than a man the same age who smoked a pack of cigarettes a day since he was 21.
VOICE: Now, let's suppose at age 50, I, as
a smoker, decided to quit and do quit, are my prospects going to be better, or have I already condemned myself?
VOICE: No, your prospects are going to be very much better. It is the one thing that will keep you from developing cancer of the lung.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. CHEFFY: Then we know, looking at our timeline -- well, I guess we're onto the other -- no, at 1968, he was warning his own son. This is testimony from Mrs. Alexander, that Mr. Alexander clearly understanding the risks because he's telling somebody else about them. And there's testimony from his children he was calling his own cigarettes at this time, around this time, cancer sticks.
Now, this story about Mr. Paulk that you heard about during the examination of Mrs. Alexander is also revealing.
You remember the story that Mrs. Alexander's pointed to their friend, Mr. Paulk, who was on oxygen with a smoking-related illness.
MR. ALVAREZ: Excuse me, Judge. Objection this is not in evidence.
MR. CHEFFY: I'm sure it was in the trial
transcript.
THE COURT: Hang on.
MR. CHEFFY: I've got the cite.
THE COURT: Is it in -- what exhibit?
MR. CHEFFY: It's not an exhibit. It's from the trial transcript.
THE COURT: It's from the actual testimony of Mrs. Alexander.
MR. ALVAREZ: Okay.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: We'll find it. Please continue.
THE COURT: It's argument, let it go. Go ahead.
MR. CHEFFY: So Mrs. Alexander was saying, do you want to end up like that? And he said, but see there are other people, then he named other people that were still living at the time and did not have cancer, and they were still okay. So he said it could not be true. So he had a different question?
Right.
So he recognized that some smokers may end up with a smoking-related illness?
Yes.
And others might not?
Correct.
I don't know that there could be any clearer evidence that somebody understood the risk than as revealed by this.
So we think the evidence, ladies and gentlemen, is very clear on the first question, that he was well aware of the risks from any number of sources; teachers, coaches, friends, but especially his wife, who was a nurse.
All right. Next, control. Who was in control of his smoking decisions?
Again, Mrs. Alexander testified that he could do whatever he set his mind to. He never failed at anything. He was a very independent decision maker, as indicated by so many things throughout his life; starting his own business, the investments, not drinking alcohol, on and on and on.
And Dr. Dorce gave this testimony. And again, just incredible credentials. And here was her testimony on this issue.
Did Mr. Alexander ever lose control or lose his free will to decide to make an effort to quit smoking?
No, he did not.
Do you have an opinion as to whether Mr. Alexander was in control of decisions with regard to cigarette smoking?
Yes.
And what is that opinion?
That he had the capability to control in terms of his decision to smoke or not to smoke.
The next question, why did he smoke? We can answer that pretty quickly. Dr. Dorce talked generally about why people smoked, a multitude of reasons. There was other testimony about that.
And then Dr. Drobes gave reasons why people smoke, talked about why he decided to smoke for awhile, even though he was aware of the dangers, and that he enjoyed smoking.
But of more importance, he said that there were a number of folks who recognized that Coleman Alexander enjoyed smoking. And he mentioned Coleman Alexander's two sons and his friends, Albert Sands and his best friend Wallace Francis gave that testimony. All right.
Next, could he have quit?
No reason he could not have quit. Sixty
million people have quit smoking. You heard a lot of evidence and testimony about that. I know there's some questions on this, about whether the numbers included addicted smokers, and Dr. Dorce explained that the numbers did include addicted smokers.
Dr. Dorce, let's look at it generally. Can smokers quit smoking?
Yes, they can. Many smokers quit. Long term, short term, light, all of them, yes.
And so that was her testimony. And then keep in mind that there is an admission in this case -- and this is in evidence. This is a section of the complaint in this case that you'll have back in the jury room -- paragraph 59 of the second amended complaint: Plaintiff's decedent bears some measure of fault but less than one hundred percent of applicable fault for causing his or her respective smoking-related injuries.
Here's the important part. Plaintiff's decedent acts or omissions relating to the frequency of duration of his efforts to quit smoking were a partial proximate cause.
They were admitting that he, Coleman
Alexander, was a legal cause, a legal cause.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection. Excuse me -THE COURT: As it relates to comparative negligence, we talked about it, not as it related to the first question, counselor.
Sustained.
MR. ALVAREZ: Can I have a curative instruction, Judge, By the Court.
THE COURT: I just did as it related to comparative negligence, fault.
MR. CHEFFY: But logically, this must mean that he had the ability to quit. He had the ability to quit if that is a partial cause.
Dr. Dorce's testimony in terms of whether he was able to quit, had the ability to quit or quit earlier. Do you have an opinion on that?
Yes. He had the capability of quitting at any time.
And then regardless whether we assume he's addicted or not, could he have made the decision to and successfully carried out that decision to quit smoking permanently at any point in time?
Yes, he could, if he was sufficiently motivated.
Now, the next question, did he really want
to quit?
And Mrs. Alexander testified that she thought he had tried for about 20 years cold turkey, and I asked her did that go from '94 to '74, and she said roughly, yes.
So he didn't even try to quit before 1974.
But let's talk about what quit attempts there were when he supposedly did try.
Mrs. Alexander testified she would ask him to quit. In fact she used her word, nagging, and he would stop in her presence a day or two, but she said she could still smell smoke on him and she doubted he ever stopped for even a day or two; that he would just stop in her presence, but she suspected he was still smoking. And then after a day or two, he'd be even back smoking in her presence.
You may recall the -- her testimony about his best quit attempts. She was asked about his best quit attempt, and let me set this up by saying the evidence shows Surgeon General says to have a serious quit attempt, you've got to stop smoking for at least 24 hours to have a serious quit attempt.
And the best effort, when asked by -- when
we asked Mrs. Alexander to think about his best effort to quit smoking, here it was. When he was asked not to smoke around his granddaughter, who had been diagnosed with asthma, he didn't smoke around her, but he'd smoke outside or he'd have the cigarette smoking and he'd blow the smoke in another direction when she was in the room.
When she was in the room?
Yes.
Okay. And that's the situation you recall as his best effort to stop smoking?
He didn't stop.
Both Dr. Dorce and Dr. Drobes talked about the motivation that you've got to have to stop.
You may recall Dr. Dorce talking about the car and the key, and it's got to come from within if you're going to make a serious quit attempt.
Significantly, he never once, the testimony was, he never once threw away cigarettes, lighters and ashtrays. Never went to a cessation clinic. They never even looked into a cessation clinic. There were many -- you may recall the evidence, there were many around.
Never used any nicotine replacement therapies,
such as the nicotine gum. Never consulted a therapist or medical professional.
And this, the testimony was, close family, close to his sons, worked with one, played golf, lived in the area, saw them all the time. You can see the years there that the sons actually lived with Mr. Alexander. Neither one of them was aware of any quit attempt.
The most telling evidence may be, though, the story about when Mrs. Alexander, you may recall, asked him to stop smoking in the bedroom. And what was his response? Dot, I'm trying, you know I'm trying. And when he looked at me and smiled, I'd say do whatever.
He'd look at you and give you a smile?
Yes.
And you'd say do whatever?
Yes.
So he'd say, Dot, you know I'm trying, I'm trying, and then he'd smile at you?
Yes.
And then what did you gather from that?
He was going to do it anyway. He was going to make his own decisions; his body, his castle, his decision that he was going to make.
And then Mrs. Alexander ultimately came to accept his decision. And as she's asked, and as indicated earlier on a regular basis each week, you would actually buy the cigarettes for him?
And she testified she would even encourage him to smoke sometimes when he got grouchy.
And as I said in opening, when I mention those facts, I don't mean to be critical. I'm not being critical in any way at all. Spouses make accommodations with one another.
Mr. Alexander had every right to smoke, he had every right to make the decision to be a smoker, and Mrs. Alexander had every right to make her decisions to accommodate their relationship, which we all have to do.
But one thing you will need to consider, whether it makes sense to award money damages under these circumstances.
Now, let me talk about the next question:
Would quitting have made a difference?
And you'll remember Dr. Villa, a very engaging, highly-qualified witness, and he talked about what's called declining risk.
Once you quit smoking, your risk of developing lung cancer goes down progressively
over time. Is that fair?
That's correct. If you quit smoking, you're essentially adding years to your life.
That's the basic concept of declining risk.
And the importance of this question, would quitting have made a difference?
He talked about different studies. There was a doctor study and a nurse's study. The doctor's study said quitting smoking at age 30, reduce, reduce risk of shorter life by one hundred percent. You totally wipe out any increased risk from smoking if you quit by age 30.
That would have been 1966. The warnings were on the packs, the Surgeon General's report was out. He could have at that time eliminated all risks.
By age 40, reduce his risk by 90 percent; and by 50, reduce his risk by 60 percent.
The nurse's study noted that for every year that you quit smoking, your risk of small cell lung cancer drops by 17 percent.
And then you can see the different years for Mr. Alexander. Even if he had quit in 1989 -think about that. In 1989, he would have
reduced his risk by 60 percent, and more likely than not would not have contracted lung cancer.
And here, this is our last slide on this topic. But again, when the Surgeon General's report came out and the warnings went on, he could have reduced -- if he had quit then, he could have reduced his risk completely; his additional risk from smoking.
1979, 94 percent risk reduction.
1986, after the rotating warnings went on the pack, even then, he could have reduced his risk by 60 percent.
All right. Let me go to the responsibility question. Who was responsible for Mr. Alexander's smoking decisions?
It's important to note again that he quit for the six months at age 20, and here's the slide. Dr. Dorce's information again. Brain receptors back to normal, withdrawal symptoms gone, nicotine half life, body's eliminated nicotine.
And then he made the decision to start.
He's just as responsible for that decision as he was for his decision not to drink alcohol. Only he can make those personal lifestyle decisions
as to what he's going to do.
Now, there was a moment in this trial which the evidence wasn't surprising, but the emphatic nature of the evidence was surprising. And I submit to you that this evidence really does indicate that Mr. Alexander would have accepted full responsibility for his decisions.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection.
THE COURT: Let me hear the evidence.
MR. CHEFFY: It's argument.
THE COURT: What was your statement?
MR. CHEFFY: Evidence I'm going to talk about in a minute.
THE COURT: I'm waiting to hear what it is. Overruled.
MR. CHEFFY: Okay. You heard how he was well-informed, understood risk/reward. I mentioned during opening statement that there would be no evidence that after Mr. Alexander was diagnosed that he blamed the tobacco companies or talked about filing a lawsuit.
And then you heard Mr. Alvarez ask his client about that and phrase that -- let's just look.
Now, Mr. Cheffy told this jury in opening
statement the last few months of Coleman's life he never expressed a desire to file a lawsuit against the tobacco company.
Do you think that's how Coleman wanted to spend the last few days? And of course not. In opening statement I hadn't talked about him actually filing, just whether he blamed or talked about filing a lawsuit. Of course he wouldn't want to spend the last few months in a lawsuit.
But then the question was, to Mrs. Alexander from Mr. Alvarez, would he be proud and approve of what you're doing?
Answer: I'm not sure, no. No, no, no. No, he would not.
You don't think he would like for you to come to court today?
No.
You don't think so?
No.
Coleman Alexander was a man who took responsibility in everything he did in his life.
Now, it did go on. Mr. Alvarez continued asking, and then, do you think he would have been okay? In fact -- let me read the whole
thing.
Let me ask you, he wasn't a fighter, but now that you know he's passed away, why are you filing this lawsuit?
Because I saw there was a class action, I saw my husband fit right in that category.
Do you think he would have been okay with you doing what you're doing today?
And she gives him a yes.
Would he be proud of you, he asked, and who would not be proud of Mrs. Alexander? She is a very, very accomplished individual.
That covers those issues that we've talked about. The admission of partial responsibility, again, we submit, is an admission of partial legal cause, a legal cause.
I now want to -- so on question -- could we run this clip? I'm going to ask you, as you watch this, to think about how if -- this is from 1964. You've seen it before, a very short clip. I ask how you think, based on everything you've heard, how Mr. Alexander would react to this.
(Video clip played as follows:)
VOICE: In this kind of a country, it comes
down to you whether you like it or not. No one is going to forbid an adult to smoke. And it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it's good for him either. The decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. This is Harry Reasoner. Good night.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. CHEFFY: All right. So we would ask you to answer question number one with a "no."
And if you do that, then the case is over.
If you don't do that, you go to the next question, which is -- the next couple of questions; negligence, defective and unreasonably dangerous.
And again, you're going to have the instruction that merely manufacturing and selling cigarettes, that's a lawful activity.
We cannot be held liable for that. There was no evidence that the Kent cigarettes were any more harmful than any other cigarettes.
Plaintiff must link up some defect, some negligence to Coleman Alexander's injury, and that simply has not been done here.
The next question, the reliance question.
Did Coleman Alexander reasonably rely, to
his detriment, on any statement by Lorillard Tobacco Company that omitted material information about the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes or both. And if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his death?
Now, there was no evidence in this case, none at all, that he relied on a statement from Lorillard. We looked at this evidence at the beginning, but in this context -- this is a very important question, if you get to it, about reliance.
And the evidence is very clear. Mrs.
Alexander said she's not aware that he relied on some type of statement from a tobacco company that he believed to be untrue.
Direct evidence of no reliance.
Your husband never suggested to you that any tobacco company in this case ever withheld any information from him; is that true?
Correct.
More direct evidence of no reliance.
In fact, before you filed this lawsuit, you don't know if your husband ever heard, read or saw any statement he believed was untrue from
Lorillard or any other tobacco company, true?
Correct. True.
Now, that's the testimony that she's asked directly. She did say that the only message that she claimed Mr. Alexander accepted from the tobacco companies was that filtered cigarettes would be safer, but she could not -- and here's that testimony, and this is important because, under her claim, the only message she's saying that he said he got from the tobacco companies was if he smoked the filter cigarettes, he would have less danger of getting any type of disease, but she could not tie that statement to Lorillard.
And in fact, she said that information came from articles in the newspapers. Not from the tobacco companies at all, but from newspaper articles. And we looked at some of the articles.
When I was examining her, are these the type of articles? And yeah, these were the types of articles, in the Miami Herald. Not from any tobacco company, but from doctors, from scientists reporting the results of medical studies that filters cut risk.
So that was the NIDA statement, according to what she said. It was in the articles, and these -- there was no article submitted in evidence which said the tobacco companies said this or that.
The articles on filters, that filters would cut risk, those articles, as you can see, were from different doctors and scientists.
Where else was that message coming from?
The Surgeon General is repeatedly saying filters will lower the risk of lung cancer. But those same articles were also emphasizing the risk remains well above that of nonsmokers. So there was a dual message. You can reduce your risk, but there's still going to be risk with filters.
But again, this is coming from the Surgeon General.
And on the reliance question, how could we be held liable for a message that filters are safer when that message is coming from doctors, from scientists, from the Surgeon General of the United States? And especially when that message was combined with the statement that filtered cigarettes are still going to carry health risks.
So we ask you to answer that question on reliance with a "no."
On the -- if you get to this -- percentage of responsibility, you need to carefully consider the facts that we just talked about.
Did he really want to quit? Did he make really any effort to quit at all?
Let me go to -- and again, with the comparative fault, the knowledge that Mr. Alexander had, not throwing away cigarettes, not making a serious quit attempt, all of that should be considered.
All right. Let me get to the issue of compensatory damages, and we hope you never reach this issue. Respectfully, we don't think you should reach this issue. But it's my obligation, just in case you do, to talk about it.
I want to begin by talking about the type of damages the plaintiff is seeking and the type of damages she's not seeking.
She is not seeking what are called economic damages. There's no claim for economic damages so there will be no claim, for example, for lost wages, medical bills, funeral expenses.
What she is seeking are called non-economic damages for her pain and suffering, loss of companionship and protection. And as anybody who has lost a loved one knows, those are real.
How do you measure that, though, in terms of money?
As Judge Lopez tells you, there's no way -there's no standard, there's no formula, but the number must be fair and reasonable and just.
You may consider life expectancy. And as Mr. Alvarez said, Mr. Alexander's life expectancy was about 17 years. So according to the actuarial tables, he would in all likelihood have been deceased by now regardless of smoking.
And you should also consider Mrs.
Alexander's current circumstances, 17 years after losing her husband.
The testimony came out she leads a very full life. She's very active. She sees her sons, lives with her daughter, the granddaughter, travels.
After Mr. Alexander died, she went and got a license as a mortgage broker, a license to sell securities, and keeps an active lifestyle and says she's been able to maintain her lifestyle.
Again, we do not think damages are appropriate under all the facts and circumstances of this case. We hope you never get to this.
I will tell you I find the number that Mr. Alvarez mentioned absolutely shocking under the facts of this case. And I guess the question would be should Mrs. Alexander be made a millionaire based upon all the facts and circumstances relating to her husband's smoking? That's a decision only you folks can make.
If there is going to be an award, again, which we hope there is not, we submit that that number should not exceed $500,000. $500,000 is a very substantial amount of money. It's more than a typical family will ever have, and it's far more than Mr. Alexander would have earned during his remaining life expectancy.
There's an exhibit in evidence, Exhibit 4F, social security earnings, which show what he made in his last years when he was working. And the number I've mentioned not to exceed, if he had worked for an additional ten years, until he was 69, that number I mentioned would probably be three times what he would have earned.
So again, I want to emphasize, I've got a professional obligation to address all these issues. I don't want you to think that by addressing this issue I'm in any way implying that damages should be awarded in this case because we don't think they should, under all the facts and circumstances.
The last question on the verdict form deals with punitive damages, and it only asks if there is an entitlement to punitive damages, not for an amount. It just says should they be entitled to punitive damages.
If you were to answer yes, as the instructions say, then we all come back here for Phase II of this proceeding. You hear more evidence, more arguments another day.
And the other thing I want to make sure you're aware of, if you award punitive damages, which we do not think are warranted at all, they would go to Mrs. Alexander along with any compensatory damages. Punitive damages don't go to the state. They don't go to charity. They don't go to education programs. It's simply a plaintiff's way of requesting additional compensation.
First thing I want to mention with regard to punitive damages, and you'll see it in the instruction, you cannot consider the findings from another case. Those are completely irrelevant in deciding any issue about punitive damages. There's also a burden of proof. It's not just preponderance and clear and convincing.
There is a very high standard, intentional egregious conduct, and punitive damages can only be based on conduct shown by clear and convincing evidence in this case to have caused harm to Mr. Alexander.
You cannot consider harm to others. And again, in this regard, I would ask you to consider Mrs. Alexander's testimony when she was asked, did he rely upon anything from Lorillard in making his decisions? And she repeatedly said she didn't know of anything, no.
Now, the instruction you will see says that you may consider mitigating circumstances.
You've heard some negative things certainly about Lorillard and tobacco companies. I do want to remind you of some positive evidence.
Lorillard began pre-clearing ads with the FTC in 1958, Kristy Leung testified within full
compliance with the advertising code of 1964.
She talked about the policies and standards in place to avoid youth marketing.
Again, we've submitted a list of ingredients to the government since 1986. You heard Dr. Robinson testify that for the 14 years he's been at Lorillard, he's worked on trying to develop a safer cigarette. And you've heard evidence, and we've summarized some of it here, dating back to the '40s, Lorillard would cooperate with the public health communities to try to figure out what it is in cigarettes that is dangerous and to try to create a safer product.
And you can see, I won't read all those to you, you can just scan those and get an idea of some of the things we've done; working with the National Cancer Institute, Ohio State University, a number of other institutions.
We submit that, under all the facts, there's simply no need to punish Lorillard for its past conduct based upon the facts and circumstances in this case, and we don't think there's any reason for all of us to come back here for a Phase II.
So I'm going to ask you to answer the
question about punitive damages, if you even get there, which we hope you don't even get there, if you do, to answer that with a "no."
In conclusion, this is a case about one individual and his decisions. Coleman Alexander, the evidence has shown, was his own man, somebody who lived life on his own terms. He made his own decisions, as revealed by his decisions not to drink alcohol ever.
He quit smoking at age 20. He resumed smoking as an adult. He never smoked Lorillard's product until he was an adult.
According to all the evidence, he never relied on any statement of Lorillard in making his smoking decisions.
He never made any committed effort to quit from 1956 to 1994. It's clear he made a choice; a knowing, aware choice. He enjoyed smoking. He knew the risks. He made an adult choice.
And it's also clear he could have avoided the injury, pursuant to Dr. Villa's declining risk testimony. And it's also clear, based upon Mrs. Alexander's testimony, he would not approve of this lawsuit. He did not approve of it. She said that very emphatically -- that he would
not, he was a person who took full responsibility for his decisions.
So based on all these facts and circumstances, the question for you is should Mrs. Alexander receive money as a result of Mr. Alexander's smoking decisions? And only you folks can decide that.
That concludes my closing. I want to thank you again for your attention, not only just now but throughout the last three weeks. We appreciate your service.
Mr. Alvarez, I think, will get to speak to you again. I think instead of Mr. Paige, I think it will be Mr. Alvarez. I do not get to come back so this is my last time to talk to you.
Remember, I'd ask you to keep a couple things in mind. We talked about them in voir dire. They're in the jury instructions. Common sense has a big role in your deliberations. Sympathy does not.
And I would ask if anybody perceives sympathy entering into the deliberations, please don't give up your strongly-held beliefs simply to get the case over.
Again, you've been extremely attentive. I know you will study the evidence very carefully, and thank you very much for your attention.
THE COURT: All right. A few seconds. Take down boards, counselor.
MR. CHEFFY: Yes.
MR. WOODS: Can we approach just for a second?
THE COURT: With the reporter?
MR. WOODS: We don't need the court reporter. I do need Alex, though.
(Sidebar discussion held off the record.)
MR. ALVAREZ: I'm going to take Gary Paige's advice which he gave to me before I walked up, which is calm down.
If there's any case that there should be an entitlement to punitive damages, it's this case.
It's this case. Punitive damages -- this is exactly the type of case that the legislature had in mind when they crafted a law for punitive damages, this is the case.
Mr. Cheffy stood up here and said it was shocking, shocking, that we asked for 12.6 million dollars. He said it was shocking.
What is shocking is the lack of care, the
reprehensibility that his clients had on this community and on Mr. Coleman for 57 years. That is shocking.
So remember when I said -- I suggested a number, and I said 12.6. It could be lower. It could be higher. You could pick, you know, whatever number you want. Well, maybe it should be 12.7. $100,000 greater. And then they suggest $500,000. They're trying to buy this case for $500,000.
They played Harry Reasoner, but they didn't play the whole thing. Why don't you -- I'm not going to play the whole thing, but I'm going to play the part right before the part that you heard. Could you play that for us, please?
(Video clip played as follows:)
VOICE: There is no question but that smoking has meant a great deal to a great many people. An old smoker never forgets how he started. And through the lifetimes of a lot of us, cigarettes have been an intimate and reassuring companion; the familiar slogans, the familiar packages have been a part of our lives.
It's like being told that an old friend has all along been betraying him. In a case like
that, you give the old friend every possible chance before you finally decide to believe what you have been told. And then maybe even then, you give him a chance to reform.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. ALVAREZ: That's the part they left out. That's what happened in this case. That's what happened to millions of other Americans, people like Coleman Alexander -MR. WOODS: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: -- believed, believed in tobacco companies. Believed what they were saying. Believed that it was unproven.
Believed that filters could keep them safe. Believed that lower tar and nicotine was a healthier choice. Believed in all those things that they've been espousing for years and years and years so that they continue to make a profit.
Could you put the legal causation board up again, please, Mr. Philipson? Okay.
This is the definition of legal cause.
Nowhere in there does it say anything about the ability to quit or not quit. It's not there.
He would have quit, should have quit has nothing to do with that. Contributes substantially. Did the addiction play a role?
They said it's a legal cause.
Well, the legal cause meshes with the medical cause. What causes -- what they're asking is what caused this person's death. What caused this person's death? What caused this person's death is he was addicted to cigarettes, caused him to smoke, he got lung cancer and he died.
That's what that means. It doesn't mean -they're trying to twist it to make it mean that he could have quit. And if he could have quit, that's a legal cause. That's not what that says there.
Here's the other issue that I want to discuss with regards to Ms. Alexander. She was on the stand, I asked her, listen, would your husband have approved of this lawsuit? She says, no, no, no. You know, it was obvious by the next series of questions that she was confused. She was confused, because I asked her, then why did you sue?
Well, there was a class action. Would your
husband have been proud of you? Of course he would have been proud of me. She was obviously confused. What they do is they take, they take -MR. WOODS: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: They take a statement, they manipulate the statement to make it seem like something it's not.
They put out the testimony of Dr. Villa on declining risk, right? And they say, well, if he would have stopped at 30, it's zero. If he would have stopped at 40, it's 90. You know, the declining risk.
Guess what? Guess who knew about the declining risk all this time? They did. And guess what? What's more reprehensible about that, they know that people can stop, right, people can stop, and it's going to make their chances of survival higher. And they withheld that information by continuing and spewing their lies. That's what makes this reprehensible, that's why this case demands punitive damages, because this is the kind of conduct that can't go on and it can't go on unpunished.
Switch the Elmo on, please. While that's coming up, now, every time -- oh, okay, let me go to this real quick.
Mr. Cheffy showed you this, which is what we admitted to, and then they stopped. It says plaintiff's decedent acts or omissions related to the frequency and duration of his efforts to quit smoking were partially proximate cause.
Then he stopped there. And he said, you see, he's admitting responsibility, he's admitting.
But that's not what we admitted. It says in combination with the acts and omissions of the defendants. That's what we said. What we said is we're responsible with them. Both of us. A portion responsibility. Do it fairly. Mr.
Paige gave you a formula -- you know, gave you a suggestion. Do what you want. Do what you think is right, do what you think is fair, okay.
But that was taken out of context. When you read the whole sentence, now you what we admitted.
Now, they must have said, I don't know how many times, that Coleman should have known or Coleman knew. But you have to ask yourself a few questions. Every time they said that, I was
thinking to myself, well, Coleman knew. Why didn't Lorillard know?
And why would they spend a hundreds, hundreds of millions of dollars, why would they spend $450 million on a campaign of doubt if everybody knew that would be the biggest waste of money ever in American corporation history?
If everybody knew, why would you spend $450,000?
Being able to quit has nothing to do with whether a person's addicted, okay? Has nothing to do with that. Being able to quit has nothing to do with a person being addicted, okay?
Because if that were the case, if that were the case, then no one's addicted because millions of people quit. Does that means that they smoked and were never addicted? It doesn't make sense.
Their own experts say that a person who quits doesn't mean that they weren't addicted to begin with. In fact, in the DSM, in the DSM, it doesn't say that your ability to quit defines whether you were addicted or not. It doesn't say that.
You know, I have a lot of things to address, but I think -- I think you get it. I think you get it. And I'm going to tell you -- my last
thing I'm going to tell you is what I told you in opening statements with my last thing is all we care about is justice. And we think we got justice because we got our fair chance in front of a fair jury, and we'll accept whatever verdict you render. We will accept.
Thank you.
