MR. MITNIK: Okay. Folks, I am going to mov fast. I know everyone's worn out, but we're at an
important point.
Everything we've been doing, all of it, comes to this point in time for an opportunity based on the law and the evidence to truly make a difference here. And let me talk to you about how. Real quick. The instructions from the court.
It's to punish the defendant for the harm caused Andy Allen, Amber Allen, Patricia Allen, an to deter the defendants and others similarly situated from engaging in such misconduct. And th comes from the harm that was suffered by their wife and this family with the idea of deterring and preventing it from happening to others in the future. And she has met the criteria. She didn't make it here but the family did and met the criteria to bring this opportunity here and it is a unique opportunity to make a difference. We have the two largest cigarette companies in America here together.
We have passed through the harsh criteria to get here, the trial, and had it agreed by all of you unanimously that we belong here at this point under the law and the evidence. So now let me talk to you about it. And let me start with a couple things. There are two parts to this. There is the
punishment for what was done. That's a looking bac in time as to what was done. Then there is the looking forward because of what was done to Miss Allen to look forward into time to deter so it doesn't happen to others in future generations. And I need to talk about both of those separately because they sure played out separately in this case and in particularly in this phase of it.
You heard the judge talk about you're entitled to look at mitigation of damages or lessening of damages here because of their conduct. Let's talk about the mitigation first from the looking-forward perspective because it's not going to take me long to talk about any mitigation from looking back in time for the punishment part because you simply heard no evidence of any kind to indicate any mitigation. Nothing. Nothing. Through all of the testimony that we had throughout this trial about all the things that these two defendants were up to for 50 years, the things that caused harm to Miss Allen and her family, nothing. Not a bit of witness came in here and said, I want to talk to you about what we did.
I want to -- the starting point for someone to learn a lesson when they have acted that wrongly an
committed those kind of acts is acknowledgment. Yoi have got to acknowledge it to take the next step.
There has not been one bit of acknowledgment, nothing about the machines, nothing about the filter fraud, nothing about addicting and targeting teenagers and banking on addiction and intentionally convincing people when you knew you had a product that would kill, saying there's no reason to stop, no reason to stop. Keep smoking because we can mak more money and more money and more money. You remember the thing we put up about a bigger bag of money. More money, knowing the results were death. 440,000 people in America dying a year.
The only product that's consumable that as designed and used as designed kills and they put the addiction in on purpose through engineering, knowing the result, and then concealing it and conspiring to keep it a secret for all those years with the impact that it had on Miss Allen. Not one shred of evidence of, I acknowledge it, let's talk about it. Nothing. So there isn't any mitigation on those horrendous acts, nothing. Just a plow forward, we're not talking about it.
Now, let's talk about this evidence they've just presented here on supposedly mitigation, and
let's distill down hours of talking about Eclipses and whatever other products we had, Snus and the things, let me distill it back. There are two parts to what make this product deadly. Two parts. One of them is addiction which causes compulsive use. The other part is the carcinogens, the toxins in it that cause COPD and cancer and all these things.
You saw in the Surgeon General report all those metals and additives, all that stuff. You light it up -- the additives may be fine when you put them i flour, but when you torch them at a high rate, they get toxic. You heard the testimony, they become carcinogens. The last gentleman admitted it's the sugar. The one before wouldn't, no, they'll even burn and it doesn't cause anything. They put sugars and the sugars turn to carcinogens. They do.
Carcinogens and toxins is one problem. But the big problem at the heart of this is addiction, which drives compulsive use. These toxins don't cause cancer from using them over a short period of time moderately. It's chain smoking for decades and years that cause this damage and they know it better than anybody, they knew it in 1953 we know, at least. So you have addiction and you have carcinogens or toxins.
All of the testimony they gave was about all the things -- there was a little bit, we're going to talk about the little bit to bring down addiction, and we'll talk about that, the nicotine part. But the primary pool of all these efforts is to try to get the toxins out. Well, they want to make it sound admirable. It's a sales race. Whichever one could, if possible, get the carcinogens and toxins out, you saw it way back in the Hill & Knowlton forwarding memoranda from when they went to the Plaza Hotel. Can you imagine the first one if we could get a safe cigarette without all those things out. If we could do that, what it would do for marketing. Of course, if they could say, You could have all this addiction but not the disease, it would be a boon in sales. So, yeah, they spent a lot of money working hard to try to do it. They can't. They can't get the bad stuff out because when you light that stuff up and you burn it at those high temperatures, those additives and things turn into toxins and they end up causing disease.
So they keep trying and they won't quit trying and wonderful but that's about sales and money. Bi they won't take the addiction out because, you know what, if you can take the disease out, sales would
go up. So let's work on that hard. But will they take the addiction out really? No. Because, guess what, the addiction drive the compulsive sales.
Those huge -- remember from the Hill & Knowlton thing from the beginning, the man said, Gosh, if we lose one cigarette per smoker, it would be billion. They're not going to use that compulsion. One more one more, that's where the money comes. My goodness, the number when they took the 25 or $0.2 a pack and they said, Well, how were you reaching these kinds of numbers? 80 billion sticks he calls them, 4 billion packs. That's compulsive addictive smoking. They don't want that out because they'd lose -- they could run a business, nobody's saying, Shut your business down, just create something so if kids pick them up, they really can put them down when they grow up get a little more mature. You cai put them down because it's just now a matter of true free choice, I'm not struggling with a deep, nasty addiction. I can put them down and I won't smoke them fiendishly.
I can have one in the evening, we can go out with friends on the town, I'll have a couple. You don't have death and disease, you don't have big profits. They're not going to give up the profits.
They're not taking the nicotine and making them un addictive. Yeah, we got the no nick stuff, out of all that we got the no nick. They brought nicotine down, there's no question. Always at a level -- and you heard it from Dr. Henningfield, they always kee it at a level of addicting. They aren't bringing it down below the level and they know the levels. The study the levels. You saw how they bring it down for the beginning smoker, they bring it here. We can take it to any level we want. They keep it -they'll bring it on down, make it sound good, they'll keep it above the level for addiction because that's where their money lies, that's the heart of their business, and without you deterring them, it will continue.
All the things -- the low nick. You heard the truth. The one -- the first guy from Philip Morris, Oh, in just tastes bad, goodness gracious, you can make anything taste good today. Those people are ir the business of making that nasty cigarette taste good. It isn't about taste, it's about if you've got all these addicted smokers -- and the last gentleman admitted it. If you've got all these addicted smokers and we were the only ones that we: out and sold one that wasn't addictive, then all our
customers would run over across the street to Philip Morris. That's why we need you, because he also laid down the framework for change.
You heard reasons for lawsuits against them and things, creating taxes so less people smoke and all these other theories. There's one that really makes sense and Dr. Cummings gave it to us. They could have their business but take the addiction out so people really can put it down, those kids aren't addicted for life and we don't have all these people dying in America. Take the addiction out. They can. They admit they can. They can grow, they can grow it without nicotine in it. But it would take a concerted effort.
And the framework wasn't always in place. It's now in place. We now have FDA. After all these years finally the FDA has control. And he acknowledged, they can go to together -- we certainly know these people know how to get togethe and agree when they're motivated enough. They did it back in 1953 and kept it going for 50 years.
They can get together, they've got to be motivated. That's where you come in. Get together and have a deterrence, a financial reason, the only measuring stick they understand is money. Something that
says, you know what, from a cost-benefit analysis, we're going to have to take seriously this business of getting together. That's why having the two big ones here matter and why the deterrents to others matter. You get the attention of theirs and deter others to where maybe it doesn't happen tomorrow bi it's a beginning, it's a tipping point of something.
Now that the FDA's there, an opportunity to say, We're going to give you a really good reason in a language you understand, to get together and go so it is across the board, not just one little product in one little market that, of course, the addicted smokers say no to. And, yeah, are there going to be some smokers that may turn to a black market that are deeply addicted? They're probably are, but we're talking about generations of children coming down the pike. Starting with all the products out there are -- you can have them without the addiction. That's what we're here about.
Now, let me talk to you how about we get to there. We get to there. Because all their so-called efforts out here have to do with creating something to take the carcinogens out that just -they can't do it. They've got to help sales. Let's all get together and take the nicotine out, they can
take the addiction out, they won't because of sales. They will when the sales part of it staring down the barrel of punitive damages and say, I got a real deterrence, we've got to rethink things. Maybe we can make moderate sales, but allow our customers not to die at rate of 440,000 a year and not being addicted as teenagers.
Because one thing we didn't hear in any of this testimony, nobody came in and denied, you didn't hear any evidence of anyone rebutting that they're targeting teenagers. The numbers, the mass numbers today of teenagers -MR. MURPHY: Your Honor, I have an objection. Can we approach?
MR. MITNIK: No evidence. I'm sorry, on the record.
THE COURT: Yes.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, when you' considering these particular issues -- and I'm going to read from my instruction that I gave you a little earlier. If you decide to award punitive damages against the defendants, the award should be no greater than the amount that you find necessary to punish the defendant for the harm caused to Andy Allen, Amber Allen, and Patricia Allen, not anybody else.
And to determine the tobacco companies, the defendants here and others similarly situated, similar to them, from engaging in misconduct in the future. That's what the purpose is. Okay. I want to -- I want to make certain that that's absolutely clear.
You are not awarding damages for other people who may be damaged in the future. It's to deter the conduct of these defendants and others like them anc only the necessary -- to punish the defendants for the harm that they caused these people that are the plaintiffs in this case.
Thank you. And you may continue.
MR. MITNIK: Thank you, Judge. And as I talke to you from the beginning, the harm it caused to this family creates the opportunity to be here, to make a difference to deter these people for continuing this conduct into the future. The conduct being the conduct that happened with Miss Allen that caused all of this, which includes intentionally engineering for addiction and marketing to teenagers.
Now, let me talk to you about the plan to try to accomplish that so that there is some meaningful deterrence here. We know that Philip Morris's net
worth is about $9 billion. Not million, billion dollars. We know their net income is $3 billion.
$3 billion, which is about eight -- $8 million a day in net, net, net profit. You hear about all of these, Well, we're paying the state from a settlement where they got sued by attorney generals because of medical expenses to citizens. But all of that, we know, has not been enough to deter them, nothing that's happened up to today has been enoug to deter them because it's undisputed they're out selling right now at a -- with addiction in it, no one said they can't sell their product, but with addiction in it, to the tune of 4 billion packs a year.
R. J. Reynolds' net, net income, after whatever they're paying out up to this day, $1 billion in one year. That's about $2.7 million a day. In order to deter, you're not supposed to bankrupt, and no one is going to suggest a number that would. But the measuring stick they understand and they know is money. It's what we have here to deal with to try to accomplish this honorable goal, and to do so, I want to talk about an example to try to put some meaning on this other than just pulling numbers out of the air.
When you talk about deterrence and punishment -- because don't forget there's punishment, also. Total is separate from compensatory damages. There's punishment for wha they did to Ms. Allen and her family, for which we heard no evidence in this courtroom of any acknowledgment.
But if you combine both the looking-forward deterrence and the looking-back punishment, if you try to put it -- because these are hard numbers to get your head around. If you try to put it in a context that's more understandable and you take somebody that is -- that has got a speeding ticket,
2	or $400, whatever it is, if somebody's a single working mom, that could be a real deterrence. Somebody that's wealthy, it may not be so big a deal, a $200 ticket. So you have to put it in context.
If you took someone who you considered a lucky American that had an $80,000 net worth and you applied that -- let's take the net worth -- because we're talking about two defendants. Let's take the net worth in the middle, between around a 7 -- it's actually 7.5 billion or the 9 billion, but take something around the middle of $8 billion.
Could you give me that slide?
If you were to take a net worth and compare the meaning of $80,000 net worth of somebody, if the; were fortunate enough to have that net worth, and $8 billion net worth here, 10 percent, you see whal the numbers are, would be like $8,000 to the perso versus -- versus the person -- the company that has an $8 billion net worth. As you come down, 1 percent, half a percent, a quarter of a percent is equivalent to the $200 fine for that person because of the mass amount of money they're making off o this product to have the same equivalent effect as that $200 speeding ticket, it would take $20 million.
And I suggest to you that when you take the punishment side, which is so significant in and of itself, and the hugely important deterrence aspect of this, that between 20 and 40, in that range, if you took $30 million -- I'm not talking about each, I'm talking about totalled up to be divided by you as you see fit between these defendants, but a total of $30 million, what that does, it's not just money, it's deterrence. It's recognition of the -- what -how bad what was done before punishment.
But it is deterrence in a way that matters.
You have heard about other cases and other experts testifying in other cases. But here we are. Today deterrence hasn't worked but we do have framework available now through the FDA to get across-the-board changes that really could make a difference. But the starting point is we've got one smoker who was one of those people that got caught young and hooked young where they hid the bait, the hid that barbed hook of addiction, dangled the luring bait, set the hook, and reeled for years until it created a lethal disease and then an ugly, ugly end-stage addiction, all done purposefully, these defendants for profit.
One person went through that and passed through the vigors of a trial, met the criteria, and are here, not with anybody on the outside, we've heard about FDA and all these other and these other lawsuits with attorney generals. This is six citizens from a community coming together and we'r asking this community to come together and do something that hasn't been accomplished yet. Bring about the start of change under this new framework.
One -- just one person with a significant punitive damage. That rate of that number is the beginning of saying, You've got to change your ways
You've got to change your ways or there's a consequence that they understand.
Thank you, Judge, I'll save the rest of my time.



MR. MITNIK: Okay. Pick up where they left off. From the same defendant, R.J. Reynolds, just yesterday put for pain and suffering for this child and for this husband zero. Today it says on punitive damages we called back and talked to the people back at the office and they heard about your verdict and so a million dollars, because a million dollars is a lot of money to all of us. Except them. Except them.
$2.7 million a day. That million dollars they made on selling that product before lunch today. A product that is the only product in America that is consumed, that if used precisely as designed and intended, kills.
PM still, Philip Morris still have said their last word and one word that didn't come out of anybody's mouth on their side is any acknowledgmen of any fault of any kind that you've already
determined. Substantially contributed to her mother's death and to his wife and rose to the level of callous, reckless disregard to qualify for punitive damages and that that conduct substantially contributed in the context of the entitlement to punitive damages. Y'all have decided.
But Philip Morris, through their attorney, is still talking about there is no evidence that calls for anything we did in that little period of time when they addicted and laid down that hard wiring o this young girl that stayed with her for life and she ended up suffocating to death while they watched. Not a word from that client, from that defendant about any responsibility for accountability for their actions from a punishment perspective. Not a word. But it's a windfall.
No accountability is what it has been about from day one, period. That's why we have you.
They talk about the money goes to them for punitive. What they went through, of course it does. But it's none of their business and not the appropriate place to discuss their plans in memory of their mother. Who are they to talk about that? This is about punishment for them, but they use a word that's charged like windfall because in the end
it's about money. That's their measuring stick. In the end here, in memory of their mother carrying the baton on to you, it's about justice. And it didn't stop.
This image of trying to be portrayed of, Look at us now, there isn't any evidence disputing their marketing to kids today.
MR. MURPHY: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. WILLIAMS: May we approach, Your Hono
THE COURT: Yes.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, I'm going t
emphasize it again. The only purpose of punitive damages is to punish for the harm done to the plaintiffs or to deter the defendants and others from engaging in the misconduct in the future. I'm going to ask that you rely on your own memory but recall no comments about that -- I recall no evidence that the defendants have been marketing t the youth for the last 10 or 11 years, whatever that was. But you will rely on your own memory of thai but I recall no evidence of that.
The purpose again is to deter the plaintiffs -excuse me, deter the defendants from engaging in misconduct in the future that causes the type of damages that we have here and to punish for the damages that we have here and the result.
Thank you. And you may proceed.
MR. MITNIK: Thank you, Judge.
When you saw the issue -- when we talk about punishment and they have talked about all the thing they've done today about, gosh, we put on our website it's addictive. It's addictive. And it wasn't long before that that they were in front of congress in '96 where they all said it wasn't. But their website says now it's addictive. But listen to what they say because it's not just the word
addiction. It's getting the message out how powerful it is. How powerful the addiction. And when their witnesses were asked questions specifically about the power of nicotine addiction, it was uncomfortable watching them navigate.
One said, I can't talk about the -- I don't know how to quantitate that. That's what they were doing to Miss Allen back then. That -- denying it or downplaying it, trivializing it. Nothing like heroin, nothing like these serious drugs. The problem is it is. It is.
Yesterday the truth matters, today it still does. We ask you, please, based on the evidence and the law, this is important. Let's do the right thing. Thank you.