CLOSING ARGUMENT 
MR. BELASIC:  It's been a long trial, and this
is the last time I have a chance to address you
directly.  Obviously, we thank you for being here
such a long time.  I thank you for your verdict.
Again, I mean that sincerely.  I'm not going to
lie, I mean, you know, you're probably not
surprised I was disappointed in the verdict.  I
can't lie about that.
But your verdict is your verdict.  And you're
the judges of the facts.  You've reached the
determination that you did.  And that determination
is respected.  And nothing that I say or ever said
in the first trial should be construed as
disagreeing with your verdict.  
And if you think that I went too far or made
some arguments in Phase 1 that you didn't like, I
ask that you don't hold that against my client
  4891 here.  Because we're in a separate phase with a
completely separate purpose.  And with all due
respect, when I show you the instructions, it is a
different purpose and under different rules than
what you just heard when the lawyer asked for
$25 million for Mr. Allen.
Now, what did your verdict tell us?  You told
us very clearly that concealment of material
information harmed Mrs. Allen.  That's one thing
your verdict told us.  There was a second thing
your verdict told us and I think, judging from your
verdict, it was based on the fact that from the
beginning Mr. Allen admitted that his wife was a
cause of her own death.
The second thing you found, and the second
thing your verdict told us, is that you found
Mrs. Allen was 70 percent at fault in causing her
own injury.  So you found that R.J. Reynolds had
concealed material information and it had caused
her harm.  You found that the smoker, Mrs. Allen,
was 70 percent at fault.
Now, what does that mean for punitive damages?
Well, one of the things you weren't told as
specifically, I think it's on page 2 of the
instructions, and these instructions are very short
  4892 this time, they're not the laundry list.
On page 2 of the instructions Judge Wallace
will tell you that you may decline to assess
punitive damages at all.  And, in fact, right on
the verdict form, the verdict form that you filled
out it says specifically, that simply because you
found yes in Phase 1 doesn't mean that you have to
assess any punitive damages at all.
In fact, it says if you do so you should enter
a zero for that amount.  So you're not required to
do anything.  This isn't a solution -- remember
Mr. Mitnik said at the end of his Phase 1 closing,
the first closing, he would come back with a plan.
We didn't hear a plan.  What you heard was a
request for a lot of money.  And he was very blunt.
"Money is the only currency," he says.  If we write
a check for $25 million and we send that to check
to Mr. Allen, he says that less youth will smoke.
Well, that's not really what the jury
instructions and what the instructions that you
swore to follow require.  Your verdict doesn't
require you to award any punitive damages.  And
it's their burden to show that each dollar he asks
for, anything above zero from dollar one on, that
they met their burden of proof.  
  4893 Not just a request to give my client a lot of
money.  I mean, when are you surprised that the
lawyer for the plaintiff asked for a lot of money?
And he says, well, that's the only thing they
understand.  Well, that's --
MR. MITNIK:  Objection, Your Honor.  I want to
stop this train right now.  Can we approach?
THE COURT:  Okay, go to sidebar.
(A sidebar conference was held outside
the hearing of the jury.) 
MR. MITNIK:  That's exactly what happened to
me in another case where R.J. Reynolds was in
trouble and they came out after all the focus group
and watching TV and went after me.  And I'll show
you the transcript, this is identical.
MR. BELASIC:  He comes out -- he comes out and
says I've got a plan this is going to make the
kids -- for the kids every one of those statements
that you needs to take the nicotine out need to
stop the kids, it's contrary to the instructions.
Now, I could have moved for a mistrial.  I don't
need to move fore a mistrial.  I'm going through
the instructions.  He doesn't even get to tell the
jury that punitive damages are warranted.  Your
instructions say punitive damages can only be
  4894 awarded on fraudulent concealment.  And then he has
the nerve to pretend that we're going to take
nicotine out and we're going to save kids.  It
doesn't matter if you can take nicotine out.  He
couldn't even make this argument.  This argument is
about money, and I'm entitled to be as and zealous
as he was.  He tries to cloak this in a misguided
sense of people, he's claiming punitive damages to
take nicotine out.  I don't need to reveal this for
what it is.  It is a request for $25 million.  He's
the one that made that request.  Mr. Allen didn't
come up with the 25 million, the lawyer did.  He
told us himself I thought of an analogy the other
day.  I'm entitled to say that analogy doesn't work
here if he --
MR. MITNIK:  He flipped it.  I was attacking
them -- this here because their lawyers don't want
to pay --
THE COURT:  I think it out to couch in terms
of the plaintiff rather than you suggest it's the
lawyers, the lawyers are in this for the money.  It
sends up being attack on professionalism of
attorneys.  It should be focused on the plaintiff.
(The sidebar conference ended and
proceedings took place in open court as follows:)
  4895 MR. BELASIC:  You heard the argument that
there's some sort of plan that getting $25 million,
writing a huge check to Mr. Allen, is going to
somehow change public health.  When Judge Wallace
gives you the instructions they're going to be very
specific as to whether you can award punitive
damages and to what you can award them for.
And we're going to go through those
instructions.  Now, you didn't hear the jury
instructions in the speech you just saw.  Well, you
know, maybe there's going to be something about
reasonable relationship.  You didn't hear the
instructions and we're going to go through these.
The first thing is that these damages go only
to Mr. Allen.  We know that, it's a request for
money.  It's not going to go to a group that will
stop youth from smoking.  It's not going to go a
smoking cessation clinic.  It's a check that if you
find even one dollar in punitives will be written
to Mr. Allen, it's his request for money.  It's not
something to finance a program to prevent youth
from smoking.
Now, here's the punitive damage instruction
that you're going to get, and this is on page 2 or
3.  And it specifically says, and you should
  4896 consider this, any punitive damages you assess
would be in addition to the compensatory damages
that you've previously assessed.
And let's talk about the compensatory damages.
You know from the instructions that your job, which
you did, was to find out the amount damages if any,
that would fairly compensate Mr. Allen for his loss
and Amber Allen for her loss.  And you did that.
And you did that down to the exact dollar.
And you were charged with finding the amount that
would reasonably compensate Mr. Allen and Amber
Allen.  And you did, in your collective wisdom and
your collective guidance and decision making, you
reached that decision.
And under the law you were to find the amount
that would just -- that would provide justice.
That it would be fair compensation, it would be
reasonable compensation and it would be the
compensation that he deserved.  And that's the
figure you came up with, 2,204,000 for Mr. Allen,
890,000 for Amber Allen.  
Now, not one dollar less or one dollar more.
That is what you found and now it is a matter of
law.  Meaning that under the law, because you met
your duty that is the amount that is full
  4897 100 percent compensation.
So none of this has anything to do with
compensating Mr. Allen for his loss.  You've
already found 100 percent compensation.  Nothing
can bring his wife back.  But you found full
compensation under the law.  Every dollar from now
on is extra money for Mr. Allen.
Here's what the law actually tells you:
Punitive damages can only be based on the harm
suffered by Mrs. Allen.  You see, it says you may
not impose punitive damages -- you may not impose
punitive damages for harms caused to others who's
cases are not before you.
The hypothetical teenager, and all of us worry
about our kids.  And, you know, Mr. Mitnik talks
constantly about the children.  Their cases are not
before you.  A harmed caused to some teenager in
the future who may or may not decide to smoke, or
to drink, or to have sex is not before us.  That's
what you didn't hear.
Under the instructions you cannot punish, you
can't write the 25 million-dollar speeding ticket
for the fear that someone in else in the future.
And what does this have to do with Pattie Dawn
Allen?  She didn't start smoking as a youngster.
  4898 MR. MITNIK:  Your Honor, I need to object.
That's is misstatement of the law, the deterrents.
THE COURT:  Deterrence.  Okay, well, you'll be
able to state that on your own rebuttal.
MR. BELASIC:  This is exactly what the law is
and that's why Judge Wallace is giving it to you.
THE COURT:  And I'll instruct you on the law,
okay?  I think it will be apparent.  And both sides
have a -- have a right to -- they're advocates
here.  And each side has a very different point of
view in this.  And their take of the language of
the law and advocates.  And I will give you the
straight up, judicial explanation.  And it's up to
you to apply that law the best you can to the facts
as you find them.
MR. BELASIC:  Now, you just heard a speech
about youth smoking as if the writing $25 million
check to Mr. Allen will stop them smoking.  We now
know that you cannot impose punitive damages to
punish Reynolds to the harms caused to others.  It
has to be conduct that injured Patricia Dawn Allen.  
And I just ask you to think, this wasn't a
youth smoking case.  Mrs. Allen told her husband
that she started at 18.  She started because of
what her friends said about weight loss.  This was
  4899 never a youth smoking case.
There may have been people that started at 12
or 14, those can be other lawsuits but that's not
this lawsuit.  Mrs. Allen said herself she started
as an adult.  It's not a youth smoking case.  And
it's not an ad about Glamour magazine that we just
saw the final day, right before you're going to
deliberate.  It's not an ad about that.  
Mrs. Allen didn't say that some false
advertisement in the 1960s caused her to smoke.  We
know she didn't smoke as a youth.  And she never
even claimed that it was youth advertising, so
don't.  Don't let the plaintiffs cloak this case in
some, you know, understandably sympathetic plea to
help the children.  That's not what the request is
about.
Here's what Judge Wallace is going to tell
you.  And, again, this is on page 3.  You can
punish Reynolds or Philip Morris only for harm done
to Mrs. Allen by specific conduct that was either
fraudulent concealment or the conspiracy to
fraudulently conceal.
And that's something you simply didn't hear
about when the last lawyer got up here.  You didn't
hear about that.  You are limit by law.  You can
  4900 only impose punitive damages on whatever fraudulent
concealment or conspiracy to conceal you found
harmed Mrs. Allen.
What does that mean?  Well, it means that
punitive damages can be awarded only for fraudulent
concealment, that means not for nicotine.  You
can't impose punitive damages, not one dollar for a
failure to take it out.  The instruction is, you
can only impose it for whatever fraudulent
concealment.  Some fact that you found based on
your deliberations that had something to do with
concealment.
All this talk about let's make them take the
nicotine out by writing a check.  That is something
you can't do.  You can't do it for nicotine, you
cannot impose punitive damages for a defect in
cigarettes, you can't impose it for negligence.
The judge's instruction is that the only way you
can award punitive damages is for some fraudulent
concealment.
Now, in mitigation you're told you need to
examine any mitigating evidence.  The instructions
will say you should consider -- you should consider
the mitigating evidence.  And so that's why we put
it on.  Not just to make R.J. Reynolds look good, I
  4901 don't think R.J. Reynolds looks good.  I know what
you found.  You found against R.J. Reynolds.
But Judge Wallace will tell you, you should
consider the mitigating evidence.  And we know the
truth is that sales are plummeting, they're not
increasing.  It's not an epidemic of increasing
smoking.  The truth in the numbers say that sales
are plummeting.
And remember what Dr. Cummings said about
youth smoking?  He said youth smoking is at the
lowest level in history since they started
measuring it.  Youth smoking is at the lowest level
in history.  Now you know, again, under the judge's
instructions you cannot -- you cannot award even
one dollar for youth smoking.
The only claim you can base a punitive damages
award on is fraudulent concealment.  Each of you
promised that you would put aside sympathy and
emotions, but you also promised one thing, first
and foremost, is that you would follow the law.
Now, this is mitigation.  Remember what they
said the fraudulent concealment was?  They said a
lot of bad actors at these companies hid some
information.  Are they still around hiding that
information?  No, almost every one of them is dead
  4902 and buried.  They're not running the company,
they're gone.
The punishment would be for people that lived
in the '50s and '60s that have either died or have
long left the company.  You wouldn't be punishing
the right people.  Remember when they said the
concealment claim was, because you cannot awards
punitive damages for failing to take nicotine out.
It's a legal product, they can sell it with
nicotine.  The FDA controls the levels of nicotine
and they say they can sell those cigarettes.
This is what they said the concealment plan
was based on.  The Tobacco Institute, the CTR, the
TIRC.  None of them exist, they haven't existed for
16 years.  In 1998 they were torn down, abolished
and eliminated.  That's mitigation.  The people
they want you to punish are dead, are no longer
with the company and the organizations that they
ran have not existed for 16 years.
Now, that's change, that's true change.
That's deterrents.  The way you deter the future
tobacco company conduct is the people are gone, the
organizations are torn down, and the FDA fully
regulates every aspect from the moment they make
the cigarette to the moment they sell it.  That's
  4903 deterrents and that's already been accomplished.
Writing a 25 million-dollar check doesn't
deter, it makes Andy Allen an extremely wealthy
man.  And that's a very different thing than what
the law's purpose is.  
Now, they said the concealment was that the
companies didn't admit that smoking causes cancer
and it's addictive.  All of the companies admit
that, they've admitted to the 1990s.  The
concealment is over.  What they claim this case is
about is gone.
They said this case was about concealing all
these documents.  They told you you're going see
these for the first time.  None of those documents
are secret any more.  They're all on databases,
they're all searchable.
R.J. Reynolds has its own database so you can
look all those '50s and '60s documents, so does
Philip Morris.  The physical documents are stored
in a warehouse.  There are no such thing as a
secret tobacco company document today.
That's what the case is about.  And under the
law you can only punish for concealment.  The
concealment is over.  The companies admitted the
danger, the companies disclose the information, the
  4904 company organizations are torn down and destroyed.
Now, you look today in 2014, are you going to
punish the people in the '50s and '60s who are
dead?  Are you going to punish for the things that
Reynolds admits now and discloses?  I would suggest
not.
Now, you saw with Dr. Figlar, there's no
concealment of the harms of smoking anymore.  They
say right on their website, it's the leading cause
for preventable death, lung cancer, emphysema,
COPD.  They tell they are smokers they should quit.
They say no product is safe.  They actually tell
their customers to stop smoking.  If you're
concerned about health don't buy our cigarettes.
That was clear.  Right on the website it says,
if you're worried about health you should quit.
That's the claim that they made.  They claim the
companies concealed the dangers.  Ladies and
gentlemen, 60 years in the 1950s.  
Now, we know Mrs. Allen was warned from the
beginning and every pack had a warning, but they
said it was concealed.  It hasn't been concealed
for decades now.  It's a completely new era, with
warnings on every pack, with the companies
admitting the dangers.  
  4905 They said time and time again when they asked
questions of their experts, why were the companies
doing something that wouldn't make it easier for
people to quit?  Now, R.J. Reynolds specifically
tells its customers on the website, if you're
concerned about health you should quit, you should
stop buying our products.
R.J. Reynolds researches and helps make the
products that can help people quit.  Mr. Mitnik
says, Oh, that's a horrible idea, because they're
trying to make a profit coming and going.  That's
right.  It's a legal business.  But they're doing
what they said should have been done.  They're
financing the research and the ways and offering it
to people who want to quit.
And they're telling their own customers.  What
other company, what other company tells its own
customer they should quit if they're worried about
health?  And you saw the lower risk alternatives
they offer.  And I want to remind you what the
government saw, you saw twice the secret government
meeting in 1989.  And it said Reynolds came up with
a cigarette that didn't cause cancer, Philip Morris
came up with a cigarette next that was below the
addiction threshold.
  4906 Companies learned from that lesson.  And you
saw the secret meeting that the government tried to
ban both of them.  The government hired a boatload
of lawyers from the FDA, from the Federal Trade
Commission, they sent that Matt Myers lawyer to
come out on national TV and say a nonaddictive
cigarette was the most dangerous cigarette ever
made.  The companies learned.
But nonetheless the companies didn't give up.
Reynolds, to this day, still makes Eclipse with a
90 to 100 percent reduction in carcinogens.
They're coming out with a new version called the
NOVUM.  
Mr. Mitnik criticizes them and says, Well, you
didn't go bankrupt, you didn't go out of business,
you're still making profits.  Yes, it's a legal
business.  But the fact that they've shifted so
much, that is Dr. Figlar says 20 to 25 percent of
their profits are now from the low-risk
alternatives, or the products that help people
quit, is a major change.  It's a major change.  
And it wasn't done by writing checks to
individual smokers or to the survivors of smokers
like Mr. Allen.  It was done by a change over time,
in both the regulatory and the business
  4907 environment.  And it was done by a change by the
companies.
They're selling VUSE cigarettes now.  No one
in this case claimed that that isn't a step forward
in terms of a reduction of risk.  The smoke isn't
burnt anymore.  The carcinogens in the smoke, there
is no smoke, it's vapor.  And they say it's a bad
thing.
In fact, as Dr. Figlar showed, the levels of
carcinogens, the chemistry was too low to even be
measured by the current technology.  They're
selling smokeless tobacco, SNUS, that dramatically
reduces your risk of cancer.  No one is claiming
that that causes COPD.  And they're helping people
quit.
None of that was accomplished by writing a
check to a smoker or making someone like Mr. Allen
wealthy.
You want to talk about whether The Tobacco
Institute can be deterred.  Let's admit now that
the tobacco industry has been deterred.  They're
like a fully regulated utility.  When they make the
cigarette, the FDA controls it.  When they put
ingredients in, they have to disclose it, the FDA
has to know how much and the FDA has authority to
  4908 take them out.  The FDA has the authority to
control the nicotine.
This is beyond deterrents.  The government now
has control of the cigarette.  That was the dream
of these crusaders, like Dr. Cummings, for decades.
And for five years they've had it.  You can't deter
or force change that's already been made.
And we know the FDA -- this is the Surgeon
General's report, the FDA puts restrictions on
tobacco marketing sales to youth.  No one has
said -- no one has proven or even suggested that
they violated any FDA restriction.  The FDA
requires the disclosure of additives, of
ingredients of carcinogens.  The FDA regulates
manufacturing, design and marketing.
And that's what's so incredible.  There's only
about three or four aspects of making a product.
You make the thing, you design the thing, you
figure out to sell the thing, and you market the
thing.  Every single one of those aspects has been
turned over to the FDA.  
The companies no longer have a voluntary
ability to make it the way they want it, to design
it the way they want it, or to say what they want.
They're not just deterred, they're subject to being
  4909 shut down under the force of the United States
government and all of the lawyers at the FDA that
have come down on them.
None of that is accomplished by making Andy
Allen a wealth man.  They even have to pay for
their own regulation, one of the few industries in
the country that cannot makes it's product or say
what it wants to freely.  It's under the control of
the government and pays for that.
Well, you seen -- what's the response to take
it out?  The argument:  Take it out, take nicotine
out.  That doesn't have anything to do with Phase 2
right now.  Punitive damages cannot be imposed for
any claim in this case other than the concealment
of information.  Not for product design, not for
taking nicotine out.  That's what Judge Wallace
will instruct you.  But it's the FDA that gets to
decide whether to take it out or what the nicotine
yield is.
Now, there was a question to Dr. Figlar, you
know, what's the addiction threshold?  And you saw
that Dr. Henningfield got up here and said that he
had written articles about that.  So Dr.
Henningfield said he thought that next cigarette
was below the addiction threshold. 
  4910 You saw Dr. Henningfield say, Well, that was
still theoretical.  And then you saw
Dr. Henningfield even today the Food and Drug
Administration, FDA, is determining whether there
is a basis to order any reduction in nicotine in
these cigarettes.
And when the FDA -- if the FDA decides the
companies have to comply.  It's the FDA that is
determining should nicotine be reduced.  And we
spent days showing you evidence that for a long
time the government said jack up the nicotine.  The
higher the nicotine the less people will smoke, you
saw that high nicotine cigarettes were considered
safer by the United States government.  That's who
decides to take it out.
But writing a check to Andy Allen is not going
to cause nicotine to go down.  It's not going to
change some sort of youth decision to smoke.  And
it's not something that, according to Judge
Wallace's instructions, that you can order punitive
damages for.
Now, you'll be the judge of what Dr. Figlar is
doing, the different products they're doing, the
fact that a quarter -- or 20 to 25 percent of their
profits already are from either products that get
  4911 people to quit or are for low-risk products.
You'll judge whether that's a step in the right
direction.  But none of that was accomplished
through lawsuits or giving people money.
When they started they said that the main
concealment was they concealed it was addictive,
now the companies say that.  You concealed that it
caused disease.  Now the companies admit that and
tell everyone.  That's not a reason to punish.
Reynolds tries to manufacturer now less dangerous
products that's not a reason to punish.  
Reynolds is helping smokers quit smoking by
marketing and publicizing stop-smoking methods.
That's not a reason to publish.  You know, Reynolds
right now is the industry leader in developing
these reduced-risk products.  They're trying to
transform the tobacco industry.  That's not a
reason to punishment.
And at the end of the day, on page 2 and
page 3 of the instructions, you cannot punish for
something that relates to cigarette design or
nicotine.  The judge says it can only be fraudulent
concealment.
So the answer should be no, you can't punish
the people from the '50s and '60s who are dead.
  4912 You can't hundred I believe the companies for the
documents that have been disclosed.
The punishment has to have a purpose, I would
submit.  We punish our children and we punish our
children because we want them to act in ways that
are better and to act in the ways that we think
will be best for them.  But we don't, at least we
don't normally, punish without a reason.
And when the people are long gone for 50
years, and the industry is different, and the
industry is under the thumb and control of the FDA,
then that's not a reason to punishment, that's
punishment without a purpose.  They say you have to
deter.  The more money Mr. Allen gets in his bank
account, apparently, the less kids are going to
smoke in the future.  Does that make sense?  
You saw the Food and Drug Administration has
the statutory control it means the law-making power
over marketing to youth.  Over marketing that might
effect youth.  The government's in control now.  No
matter how many zeros Mr. Allen gets in his bank
account, that doesn't change that.  The deterrence
has already occurred.  The takeover of this
industry by the government has occurred.
Now, Mr. Mitnik alluded to this.  You're going
  4913 to see an instruction that says, that if you give
any amount -- if you decide to give an amount it
has to have a reasonable relationship to what?  It
has to have a reasonable relationship to the amount
awarded in compensatory damages.  For that reason,
an award of damages needs to be fair.
Well, here's what you're going to see on
page 2.  Right after the court tells you that you
can award zero, right after the verdict form says
that you can award zero, it will say on page 2 that
if you determine any amount above zero, if you
determine the amount of damages you should consider
the following:
And it says that you should consider the
mitigating evidence that we've presented.  But it
also says that you should consider the related
circumstances.  And in this case, that means the
circumstances of Pattie Dawn Allen.
And here's the circumstances:  This is what
you found -- you saw all the evidence, you weighed
whether the witnesses were credible, you weighed
the arguments of the lawyers, you weighed all the
evidence.  And this is what you found the
circumstances were:  You found that Mrs. Allen was
70 percent at fault or 70 percent responsible for
  4914
causing her COPD and death.  And you found that
R.J. Reynolds was 24 percent at fault.
So, right off the bat, this isn't one of these
cases where someone walked through the crosswalk
and someone just plows them over.  It's not a case
where the person who was injured had nothing to do,
was caught unaware, had no control.  You found that
Mrs. Allen was many times more at fault, many times
more responsible for her own injury than R.J.
Reynolds.
70 percent for Mrs. Allen, and only 25 percent
for R.J. Reynolds.  You found, in effect, that's
about three times more responsible than all of the
conduct and all of the evidence you saw about
Reynolds over the last 40 years.
Let's think about that crosswalk analogy
again.  From the very beginning you saw from the
lawyers this analogy.  You know, somebody walks
through the crosswalk and the light is green and it
says walk, they have every right to go across that
crosswalk.  And they get hit and it's no fault of
their own.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. BELASIC:  So we were talking about Judge
Wallace's instructions that say you have -- you
have to -- when you look at whether you should
aware even one dollar, you have to consider the
degree of misconduct and the circumstances.  And we
  4921 talked about the circumstances.  I know you saw all
of the evidence that Mrs. Allen was aware of the
risks from the beginning, that she started smoking
when there was a warning on the pack.  She was told
by her sister it would kill her.  And all of those
issues told by her husband that it would hurt her,
told by her sister it would hurt her lungs.  The
other sister said kill her.  Told that her own
father had breathing problems, told that
Mr. Allen's father had emphysema.
You have to consider all of that.  But under
this case, this isn't a bystander who had no
interest or no control or no awareness.  This isn't
something where somebody just mows over and hurts a
person that has no control or no knowledge about
the information.
Under these circumstances I submit that the
most fair outcome is you've already decided to give
more that $3 million to Mr. Allen and to Amber
Allen.  And that -- that amount cannot be reduced.
Under these circumstances, yes, compensatory
damages have been found by you to be warranted
under the law that's full and fair compensation.  
But under these circumstances with a smoker
who knew the risks from the very beginning, that's
  4922 not the type of smoker that you heard about in the
beginning of this case.  That's not the type of
smoker, the hypothetical smoker that you heard
about.
And under the circumstances of this case, the
$3 million in compensatory damages are fair and
full compensation, but punitive damages an extra
bonus amount, an extra check to Mr. Allen, that
shouldn't be warranted.
Now, what if you disagree?  I've made many
arguments in Phase 1.  I respect -- I respect your
verdict from Phase 1.  What if you disagree?  What
if you want to give punitive damages?  
Now, you know that the actual language is
going to be -- this is what Judge Wallace is going
to read:  Any punitive damages you assess would be
in addition to the total compensatory damages
you've previously assessed.
And punitive damages should bear a reasonable
relationship to your total compensatory award.  I
think you should award zero under these
circumstances.  With the changed company and a
smoker who knew the risks from the beginning.  If
you give zero, what's the reasonable relationship?
Now, Mr. Mitnik, he didn't talk about a
  4923 reasonable relationship to the compensatory award.
He talked about whether it was reasonable for a big
company to pay what he called a 25 million-dollar
speeding ticket, which is really a
25 million-dollar check and payment to Mr. Allen.
Here's what you awarded -- I'm going to put
comp. damages, compensatory damages.  Here's what
you awarded.  $2,204 million to Andy Allen.  Right.
And Amber Allen you awarded $890,000.  That's
$3,094,000.00.  
Now you know and you were instructed that the
comparative fault, this 70 percent of this
24 percent, it does not apply to a claim for fraud.
So for that reason, this $3 million is not going to
be reduced.  They're going to get this
$3,094,000.00.
Under the law, as Judge Wallace instructed
you, that 24 percent, that's not going to be taken
off.  They're going to get the full amount.  Well,
if you want to award punitive damages and have a
reasonable relationship to the compensatory
damages, then what I suggest is that you give them
an extra amount.  The extra amount that you
couldn't take off.  The extra amount that wouldn't
be.  And that 24 percent of 3 million would be
  4924 $742,500.
That bears a reasonable relationship to the
compensatory damages.  And it is extra amount --
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. BELASIC:  Let me finish by saying, thanks
for spending 30 days watching us.  This is serious
business as Mr. Mitnik said.  I hope at least
through some of the 30 days, that it wasn't a
miserable and boring experience.
When we started there were more than hundred
jurors and you six were six jurors that said you
could put aside not just personal experience,
however bad with smoking, not just sympathy, but
also you can put aside emotions like anger.  And
  4930 the plaintiff's lawyers are skilled.  They've at
various times whipped up anger --
MR. MITNIK:  Objection, Your Honor.  Again, I
ask for a curative.
MR. BELASIC:  Absolutely allowed to say this,
Your Honor.
THE COURT:  Again, there's a lot of emotion
and feeling.  You're talking about reprehensible
conduct.
MR. MITNIK:  He's talking about me, Your
Honor.
THE COURT:  There should not be any reference
to counsel.  I don't think it's intended.
Obviously they are strong advocates, spent a lot of
time on a lot of motions.  But my experience, these
lawyers are very professional to each other and
respect each other.  I think that's the way you
should view the behavior here.  The argument here
is not directed to counsel but to their positions.
MR. BELASIC:  The point is whether or not
you're angry at R.J. Reynolds or Philip Morris or
some other tobacco company, whether you're angry
about smoking or whether you're concerned about
youth smoking in the future.  Those aren't the
grounds of which you can base punitive damages, and
  4931 those are the kinds of emotions that you said you
could put aside.  This is Mr. Allen's claim for
money based on one smoker, Mrs. Allen.
Under the circumstances of this case, with the
company that no longer does conceal and no longer
can conceal, with a company that does warn on every
pack and every ad, with a company that tells people
on its website, it can kill you, you should quit if
you want, here are some products to quit, and they
help make the products to quit.
When a case based on concealment comes and the
concealment ended 15, 20 years ago, we know from
the evidence that the smoker was warned from the
beginning that every pack had a warning, she was
told it would kill her, she was told by her family
it could cause the very disease, a zero amount is
warranted.  And the instructions say that you have
the discretion to award zero.
For the reasons I've explained, if you do give
any amount of money, it shouldn't be $25 million on
top of the 3 million that you've already found to
be just and reasonable.  There's no relationship
there.  There was no argument or facts that show
that.  25 million to 3 does not make any sense.
If you do find -- obviously, it should be
  4932 somewhere then between the zero and the $742,000
that we talked about.
I thank you for your attention and focus.


  4933 CLOSING ARGUMENT 
MR. KELLY:  Thank you.
Counsel.
Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.  And let
me start by thanking you for your service for the
time you put in, for all of your questions.  I feel
like through those questions I know a little bit
more about.  If I were really brave I would ask you
to give me questions and I just respond to them,
but I'm not that brave and that's not our
procedure.
So I looked at the verdict, studied it
carefully, studied it in the context of the
instructions that framed that verdict and the
evidence that led to you that verdict as best as I
could, and your verdict and the information that we
could glean from that verdict frames some of my
arguments at this stage of the case.
But you haven't heard the law yet on Phase 2
and all of the rules and limitations and
requirements that await you in the jury room.  And
I want to keep in mind -- or ask you to keep in
mind and to show you right now some of the
instructions that you're going to get that I'll be
talking about.
  4934 And one of the things I'll be talking about is
mitigating evidence.  I'll be talking a little bit
about what I think the circumstance of the wrongful
conduct wherein you found for Philip Morris under
the evidence that came in Phase 1.  You're entitled
to take Phase 1 evidence into consideration in
Phase 2 as well as the Phase 2 evidence.
Mitigating evidence is evidence that may
demonstrate a reduced amount of punitive damages
should be imposed against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
Company and Philip Morris.
Now, you may in your discretion decline to
assess punitive damages at all.  And that's a huge
point to keep in mind throughout your
deliberations.  You may also assess punitive
damages against one defendant and not the other.
Punitive damages may be assessed against
different defendants in different amounts.  In
deciding an amount of punitive damages to be
awarded, if any, the award should be no greater
than the amount you find necessary to punish and
deter.  Necessary to punish and deter.
I'm going to come back to that later in my
discussions, but right now I want to move to that
portion of conduct that, from your verdict, it
  4935 appears was the conduct you found that harmed
Mrs. Allen, the conduct by Philip Morris that you
found harmed Mrs. Allen.  
That's your focus on the punitive phase.
That's your focus in the jury room soon.  The
conduct of PM that harmed Mrs. Allen is in that
period of time in the late '60s and early '70s when
Mrs. Allen smoked Philip Morris' Benson & Hedges
menthol.
The concealment claim is the only claim you're
taking back with you into the jury room to assess
punitive damages concerning a product defect, a
negligence claims, stay out here in the courtroom,
don't go back with you.  So it's the concealment
claim that I'm going to address to begin the
assessment of the circumstances and the evidence
back in the 1960s and 1970s with respect to Philip
Morris.
At that time -- we're going back a long ways.
We're going back 45 years in time.  At that time
the Surgeon General had found cigarettes caused
lung cancer, remedial action needs to be taken.  If
you -- Congress determined if you want to continue
selling cigarettes in the United States, you have
to have a label on them.
  4936 All the cigarettes that Mrs. Allen bought that
were made by Philip Morris, Benson & Hedges
menthols, had that label on them.  There's no claim
in the case that whatever federal regulation was in
place over time, Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds
ever violated or failed to comply with those
regulations.
When that warning label became stronger in
1970, which is also that time period Mrs. Allen was
smoking Benson & Hedges menthol, you found, all the
packs had the stronger language on it.  At that
time also in 1971 was the time when all advertising
on television and radio went off the air.
So all those communication devices were in
place at the time.  Labels on the cigarettes, ads
off the TV.  In 1972 the ads went on print -- the
warnings went on print advertising, as you'll see
in some of the materials that you have in exhibit.  
You'll note that none of the Benson & Hedges
ads for the cigarettes from PM that Mrs. Allen
smoked had any promotional statement about safety
or about filters at all.  Take a look at those ads.
They're in evidence.  None of them are addressing
youth or teenage smoking.  They're all ads
addressed at the length of the cigarette running
  4937 into things in normal usage.
At that time, in the late '60s, the public
health community, including the Surgeon General,
was promoting the use of filters and encouraging
cooperation between the industry and the
government.  And, in fact, there was cooperation
for a period of time, you heard in the evidence,
1968 to 1978, with a Tobacco Working Group right in
this time period that Philip Morris was making
cigarettes Mrs. Allen was smoking.  And it was also
that time period when Philip Morris was doing
research into nicotine and the effect of nicotine
in cigarette smoke.  
And you heard the evidence from when
Dr. Cummings was here coordinated with academics
and public health scientists to share the nicotine
research, to share the work that Philip Morris was
doing.  And eventually went in a book.  It's still
available today in libraries, including the
University of North Florida, for example.
So those are all circumstances surrounding the
claim of concealment during the time period that
Mrs. Allen was smoking Benson & Hedges menthol '69
to '71 from the evidence.  At that time also the
Surgeon General was describing cigarette smoking as
  4938 a habituating behavior and not an addiction.
So as you hear the change over time of
definitions, when you assess this time, recall that
the Surgeon General was saying it was habituating,
it was not addicting, and there was no controversy
or conflict about that at all at that time.  Those
are all circumstances surrounding the wrongful
death conduct that you found PM engaged in.
But notwithstanding all those circumstances,
you found liability on Philip Morris.  You can
still take all those circumstances into your
consideration in this phase of the case.
But those aren't the only circumstances.  Now
you're in -- we're in 2014.  Part of this case up
until's now has all been looking backwards and
looking back all the way back to the 1960s to
assess conduct over time during the 50-year-period
since then that, part of which Mrs. Allen smoked
and was relevant to your considerations.
And you've made those findings, and we're
bound by them.  But now your responsibility is to
look at the current situation and looking forward
to see whether or not it's necessary, under the
evidence you've been provided, to punish today a
company for something that happened a while before.
  4939 Now, could be 45 years before, it could be 40 years
before.  I'm not sure exactly where that took place
in time, but it happened a long time ago.
And the question is because of that length of
time, is it necessary today to punish a company for
something that happened a long time ago?  And those
are the circumstances you'll be assessing in the
jury room that include evidence of:  Is the company
the same company today, when generations of
employees have turned over since the '60s to the
present time; when the company today has
restrictions and regulations that were never in
place before that are fairly recent over the last
15 years.
So let me go over some of that evidence.  If
you could go back in time, 40, 45 years, and ask
questions of Dr. Dunn or Dr. Wakeham or Mr. Cullman
about things they said back then and ask them to
defend themselves over some of the things they said
at that time, that would be a great thing to be
able to do.  We can't go back in time.  And we
can't literally bring them into the courtroom to
answer questions you would have about things they
said 30, 40, or 45 years ago.
The current company in 2014, there is no
  4940 evidence in the record of any individual with the
company today responsible for any of the conduct
that harmed Mrs. Allen.  You weren't shown any
document from the company today indicating a basis
to claim they were involved with the harm to
Mrs. Allen.
The information you were shown was the company
website where public statements are laid out that
are consistent with the Surgeon General, not in
conflict with the Surgeon General.  The statements
made today about the dangers of smoking and the
addictive quality of cigarettes in nicotine aren't
in conflict with the Surgeon General.  There's no
creating doubt today that is in the evidence, is in
the record at all.
The claim was that the reason punitive damages
are needed is because there's targeting of kids
today.  That's what the argument was.  Not too long
ago.  There's no evidence in the record of Philip
Morris targeting kids today or --
MR. MITNIK:  Objection, Your Honor.  There
most certainly is.
MR. KELLY:  Your Honor, I'm entitled to argue
the evidence.
THE COURT:  And that's the thing.  Both sides
  4941 have different views of the evidence -- 
MR. KELLY:  He had his chance; I get mine.
THE COURT:  The evidence has been received,
and this is argument of counsel.  So it is up to
you to decide what the evidence shows.
MR. KELLY:  So there is in the record
statement that in 2002, even though smoking numbers
are down, the chart above shows that in 2002 nearly
11 percent of eighth graders, nearly 18th percent
of nearly tenth graders, and nearly 27 percent of
12th graders had smoked a cigarette in the past 30
days.  And that's too many.  
We hope you will agree that the time is now to
talk to your kids to help prevent them from smoking
cigarettes.  You think that that might be the
Surgeon General talking.  
In 2003 that is the statement from plaintiff's
exhibit entitled "Raising Kids Won't Do Smoke:
Talk to Your Kids About Not Smoking, They Will
Listen," that he put in -- that counsel put in with
Dr. Burns a long time ago.  This is a publication
sponsored by Philip Morris USA.  You'll see it on
the last page, in 2003.
I'm sure there's something in there that
counsel will criticize Philip Morris for.  But the
  4942 fact is that in 2003 Philip Morris was putting out
pamphlets addressing underage smoking prevention.  
It's been 15 years since Philip Morris came
out and publically stated and continued to put on
their website up to the present time the statements
consistent with the Surgeon General's view on
smoking and addiction.
It's been since the Master Settlement
Agreement restrictions came into place since there
was any advertising that could be on billboards or
on transit buses.  It's been 15 years since there's
been any conflicting statements to the public on
issues that related to the claim of concealment in
this case.
You've already heard the De-Nic story.  That's
the Philip Morris story that I'm not going to go
into now.  I don't have time.  It was covered
extensively to demonstrate what happens when a
company attempts to do something consistent with
public health's demands and how they're treated and
how the product is treated.
Regulation and restrictions have steadily
increased over the last 50 years.  That's the
evidence.  Company hasn't always agreed with it,
but always complied.  The punishment you're being
  4943 asked to make in this phase has no purpose if the
wrongful conduct has already changed.  It has to be
necessary.  There has to be a purpose.  
Punishment without purpose is just revenge.
There's no place in a court of law for punishment
without purpose.  It must be necessary.  That's the
law.  Unnecessary under the current restrictions
imposed by the MSA and the FDA.  And you may in
your discretion decline to assess punitive damages
at all.
With respect to Philip Morris, based upon the
evidence of what the current company is doing and
has been doing for the last 15 years, there's no
need to punish today for what happened a long time
ago.
Now, counsel might argue when he gets up on
behalf of Mr. Allen that the companies just don't
get it.  The companies, particularly Philip Morris
and RJR, have been getting it from 50 state
attorney generals, getting it from the federal
government from the FDA Act, getting it from juries
in these types of cases for years and years and
years.
It's just not right that we don't get it.
We've been getting it for a long time.  It's not
  4944 necessary, which is the requirement under the
instructions you're going to get, for any further
damages to be awarded to Mr. Allen in this case.
He will be compensated by your finding for
100 percent of his loss that you determined it to
be in Phase 1.
My time is up.  I won't have any more time
with you.  Thank you for your attention.  Thank you
for your service.  Thank you for following the law
and applying the evidence.
Thank you, Your Honor.