MR. WEBB: We're ready, Your Honor, just need couple minutes to set up.
THE COURT: Okay. Fine. Thank you.
Are y'all splitting it?
MR. WEBB: Yes, we're trying to go fast but we're trying to -THE COURT: Just asking.
MR. WEBB: Ladies and gentlemen, I have put on the screen from the instructions, that you just were given by the court, the two issues that the instructions say you need to analyze evidence and come to some decision on punitive damages. I put them right here on this -- first of all, you're going to have to analyze the evidence to determine whether or not, based on the evidence and what you've heard today, there's something that you need to do to deter Philip Morris in the future based on things that you've heard about in this case.
Number two, you're supposed to limit the amount of punitive damages based only on the harm to
Mrs. Allen. Counsel ignored both of those issues, talked about no evidence that you've heard today.
MR. MITNIK: I object to counsel ignored.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, this is argument and please consider it as such.
MR. WEBB: Counsel talked about none of the evidence you heard today that relate to those two issues, none whatsoever, and made the outrageous suggestion, outrageous suggestion that you award $30 million in punitive damages, which would be thi huge financial windfall because these two companies are financially stable. If every jury in America that heard these cases did that, of course, these companies would be bankrupt.
MR. MITNIK: Objection, Your Honor.
And I move for a cure.
THE COURT: Please approach the sidebar.
(Sidebar conference outside the hearing of the jury.)
THE COURT: Can hear me? Okay. Let me first do something. A while ago you moved for a mistrial and I didn't -- as you were leaving and I didn't get my reason. I don't think that there was any prejudice and I find there was no prejudice, I find the comments to the extent that there was any
prejudice, I cured them with my comments.
Additionally, there was nothing that was being argued that had not been evidence in the case and seen by the jury so it wasn't anything new or something of that nature. I just wanted to get that done because that was the last time you moved for a mistrial.
What is the difference between what you just did and the golden rule argument?
MR. WEBB: I don't know what you mean, Your Honor.
THE COURT: If every juror did this, if you did this, I mean -MR. WEBB: I'm talking about in tobacco cases, Your Honor. In these kind of cases that's a -- for him to -- that's a perfectly proper argument.
There's nothing -THE COURT: You made the objection. You wa to go ahead and make the objection?
MR. MITNIK: You're on to it. It's golden rule. You cannot be telling the jury if every jury did this.
MR. WEBB: I'm talking about tobacco cases. That's what I'm talking about. I'm talking about tobacco cases and it would bankrupt these defendant
if that happened in every case and that's a perfectly proper argument to make.
THE COURT: Well, I don't think it is proper argument to make. I don't think -- I think that you can argue -- I don't think that you can ask them to be put in the shoes of other situations. I just don't see how that's feasible and I'm going to sustain the objection.
I think that you can work it but I don't think you can work it as directly as you did.
MR. WEBB: I'll try to work it indirectly then.
MR. MITNIK: I'm going to ask for a curative that that was not a proper consideration.
MR. WEBB: Your Honor, there's no basis for a curative instruction based on this.
THE COURT: Just give me a second. I'm goin to just -- I will say in front of the jury that I sustain your objection and that's what I'm going to do.
(Following sidebar.)
THE COURT: The objection is sustained.
MR. MITNIK: Thank you.
MR. WEBB: The plaintiff is seeking a huge financial windfall in this case. Huge based on wha I just heard --
MR. MITNIK: Objection, Your Honor. Windfall is totally inappropriate.
MR. WEBB: Your Honor, this is argument.
MR. MITNIK: Can we approach?
THE COURT: Yeah, we'll have another approach
(Sidebar conference outside the hearing of the jury.)
THE COURT: Let me just ask you a question. I'm always surprised about these things. I try to keep up with them and, you know, conscience of the community is no longer allowed. It was allowed whe I was younger. A smoke screen is no longer allowed at least not in criminal cases. Is windfall not allowed? Because -- are you telling me -MR. MITNIK: Absolutely.
THE COURT: -- there's cases that say you can't say windfall?
MR. MITNIK: Absolutely. It's a mistrial. Absolutely.
MR. WEBB: When you ask for $30 million -THE COURT: Hold on. Hold on. You're talking to him and not me.
MR. MITNIK: Absolutely. I don't have that on my hand but absolutely you can't say this is a windfall, number one. Number two, I'm going to ask
for a curative out of the instructions. This is not punitive damages.
MR. WEBB: You've already been compensated fi compensatory and this is a windfall, it's totally inappropriate. These are separate and apart from compensatory damages.
THE COURT: I know they're separate and apart from compensatory damages. And I'm asking sincerely. I just heard the term windfall plenty of times when I was doing this stuff and I'm just trying to say, has there been a case now that says you can't use that?
MR. MITNIK: You can't -THE COURT: Do you know of any case that says that?
MR. MITNIK: I don't have it -THE COURT: You didn't bring anything with yoi I'm just asking, is there now a case on that?
MR. MITNIK: I believe there is a case directly saying windfall, but I can't cite you to it. But my point -- can I make the point -THE COURT: Sure.
MR. MITNIK: We have -- to say windfall is to say you've already been compensated, you shouldn't get -- that's only thing windfall means, you've been
paid, you don't need any more. That is defiance of the law in this case, that you don't mix compensatory damages with punitive. You start fres and you start over and you don't mix them. And he's lumping them together. How else do you qualify thi windfall without lumping them together?
MR. WEBB: Can I respond?
THE COURT: Yes.
MR. WEBB: Counsel interrupted me before I could complete my sentence.
THE COURT: Well, let me say -- so far there's only been one minute charged against your 20.
MR. WEBB: Thank God.
THE COURT: By the way, you have 19 minutes left. That's the hardest part of my job.
MR. WEBB: I was interrupted in the middle of a sentence. I wasn't going to say to the jury it's a windfall because he's already been compensated. I was going to say it's a huge financial windfall without counsel talking about the evidence that relates to punitive damages. He's asked -- what would you call $30 million, if you didn't call it a huge financial windfall? There's nothing -THE COURT: Frankly, if you can't tell me the -- and it may be, Mr. Mitnik. I don't know how to
tell you, if you want, I'll take a recess while you do some research on the word windfall.
MR. MITNIK: I want him to not use the word windfall.
THE COURT: Well, let me tell you, I do know that appellate courts do things that I sometimes think, well, that's what they do so I follow them.
I used to love the conscience of the community argument. I understand that they do that. I totally understand that. I just haven't heard it on this one. If you want, I'll take a recess while we research the windfall, otherwise, I'm going to allow him to argue -- I hope you don't just stay on it.
MR. WEBB: I'm going to complete my sentenc and I'm moving on.
THE COURT: Okay. Do you want me to take recess?
MR. MITNIK: I don't want a recess because th< jury's tired. I stand by my objection.
THE COURT: I understand.
MR. WEBB: May I proceed, Your Honor?
THE COURT: You may.
MR. WEBB: Let me pick up where I left off. What I was explaining to you is that when counsel just asked you for $30 million to be awarded again
these companies, that is seeking a huge financial windfall for these plaintiffs without even talking about the evidence that relates to the two issues that we're supposed to be here talking about today and I'm going to do it. I'm going to walk through the evidence, hopefully in the next 18 or 19 minutes, which is all I'm given, I'm going to walk through -- do the best I can to walk through the evidence and to show you this is an unfair, huge windfall, not justified by the evidence that's been presented in this case.
The amount of punitive damages, if any, that's what the instructions say, if any, you're going to have to determine -- you need to do that to deter Philip Morris from engaging in misconduct in the future such as what we say about causation, what w say about addiction, what we say about quitting, what we do about advertising, you need to award $30 million so that Philip Morris doesn't do those things in the future, and the answer is -- that's why I brought the witness in here today because the witness addressed what we do today and have been doing for the last 11 or 12 years, because if we haven't done any of those things for 12 years and we're under the type of regulation we're under
today, there's no evidence whatsoever to suggest that we need to be deterred in the future.
We also need to address the second issue, which we can only deal with harm to Mrs. Allen. That's all. Not harm to other people. So can I just talk about those two issues right now because as far as punishing or deterring, that's why I called Dr. Lipowitz today and walked him through in some deta evidence you'd never heard before and you had no wa to know. The allegations of what we did wrong in the past was that we didn't admit causation, we didn't admit addiction, our advertisement was too visible, we should have encouraged people to quit and we didn't take develop -- we didn't addiction out of cigarettes.
Let me talk about those issues as far as what we've been doing for the past 12 years and you're entitled to take this evidence into consideration because you don't need to deter Philip Morris in the future and if this case were 12 years ago, we would have a different case, but that's not 12 years ago and mitigating evidence is evidence that can demonstrate there's no need for punitive damages.
So I talk today about two topics. I tried to keep it simple. I tried not to get complicated and
I	talked about what do we say today about these critical issues and what is the regulation of our company today? And so responsible communication What I explained to you is that we have for the last 12 years had on our website and have communicated the public about causation and addiction and quitting, exactly what the public health community asked us to do. And we've said on our website, we're going to have a consistent message, and we said it 12 years ago, and this is what we say about causation and addiction. And everyone has agreed, you couldn't say it any more clearly, you can't say it any more clearly, this is what they said they wanted us to do and we agreed with the public health community: That cigarette smoking causes all these diseases and we don't debate it, we don't talk about it, and we basically set it forth in as clear a language as we possibly can and they've not even suggested that it could ever be said any more clearly.
The other thing we're supposed to have done, they want us to do, is talk about addiction and say that cigarette smoking is addictive. So we've done that starting 12 years ago, that cigarette smoking -- we agree with the overwhelming medical and
scientific consensus that cigarette smoking is addictive, it can be hard to quit. And we showed you that -- we went on to explain there's websites you can go to, we did exactly what they told us to do, asked us to do, and what they say we should hav( done, and we've already done it 12 years ago.
We we've done the same thing with quitting smoking. We not only told them it can reduce the health effects if they quit but we then actually provided assistance to people that want to quit. If adult smokers want to quit smoking, we provide them with resources to try to accomplish that. That's what a responsible company should be doing. And s all I'm respectfully suggesting to you is that what they told -- if we -- if we had been doing this for
11	years, then what would be the reason to somehow discourage us or deter us in the future.
I don't want to repeat myself but if we were here 11 or 12 years ago, and we were still taking the same positions we had in the past, you as jurors could say, Wait a minute, we're going to deter you from doing that in the future. But this is 11 or
12	years later and this has been on the website since that time.
Secondly, I wanted you to understand because
you had no way to know this, the regulation.
There's no industry in America that's even remotely close to the regulation that governs the conduct of tobacco companies. So the idea that somehow you need to deter tobacco companies because they're going to go out and do something wrong in the future is just ridiculous based on the evidence. And so I walk through basically two different things that you did not know about until today, which is the Master Settlement Agreement with the State and FDA regulation.
And the Master Settlement Agreement is critically important because basically this is what it does. The other complaint about us is that we advertised in visible areas and, therefore, we shouldn't be -- every other consumer product can adver— but they said you should not be advertising cigarettes.
I'm sorry. Thank you very much. I'll stay right over here.
The point I was making with this morning is that Philip Morris and so is R.J. Reynolds, but we have now -- we don't -- there's no public -- there's just no place publicly that you see advertised. We agreed in the agreement, no stadium ads, billboards,
transit, sponsored concerts, branded merchandise, it's all gone, these type of stadium ads gone, billboards gone. Transit advertising gone. Branded merchandise gone. And Philip Morris even took it to the next level. Even though you can have magazine ads that kids read, we took it one step further because we said kids probably could pick up any magazine, even if it's low readership, it's not a kids' magazine that they might pick it up, so we have now voluntarily taken ads out of every magazin in America.
So you can't see -- you can't see a Marlboro ad anywhere accept for small signs at point of sale where consumers have a right to buy the product. And so all I'm respectfully suggesting to you is that as far as the things they said we did wrong, that we didn't acknowledge causation, addiction, quitting, advertising, it's all done today and it's been done for years. This has been done for
13	years.
Public disclosure of internal company documents, we make them available on a website. T1 payments we've made to the states, we've paid -Philip Morris has paid $55 billion under the MSA to the states which they can use, as you heard today,
for whatever health programs they want to use them for today in America. We paid $4 billion to the State of Florida for the same purpose over the last several years. And so the idea that -- and, by the way, this MSA has teeth to it. If we don't adhere to what they want, they can enforce it. Now, there's never been an enforcement action against Philip Morris in 13 years since it started. So if you want to understand why you don't need to deter us, we have not ever violated this MSA once ever. And the MSA is here forever. It's not going anywhere. It's -- by its terms it lasts forever.
I also wanted you to know about FDA regulation. I thought that was important that you understand that because what you found out is that my client, Philip Morris, actually for nine years we lobbied and worked for the FDA to get regulatory authority over the tobacco companies. And I walk through wh we've done. This is nine years of effort. And who have we been working with? It's the public health community. They wanted FDA regulation in this country of the tobacco companies and we, Philip Morris, worked with them for the last nine years and it came into being in June of 2009, when President Obama signed the law.
But we're not trying to -- that conduct on our part to help get FDA regulation in this country is -- obviously shows we don't need to be deterred in the future. And this is a letter we sent to the president, you heard about it, and so the fact that the FDA regulates advertising, marketing, and labeling, what Mr. Lipowicz told you today, no one doubts, anything that goes into a cigarette, anything that comes out of a cigarette, anything that can be said about a cigarette is all governed by the FDA today and they control everything. They control it. And so we don't need -- what deterrence. By the way, there is no other industry that has this kind of regulation and control to make sure that things don't go wrong.
And so -- and, by the way, these new labels that are going to come on the cigarette packages, that are going to come out next year, my client supported the legislation to put those labels and give them -- the authority to the FDA to implement these labels on warning packages. That's not the conduct of a company that we need some $30 millioi to deter. And we we've also -- we've provided the FDA access to our internal business information and also right now we disclose all ingredients. If
there's any concerns about additives and materials to cigarettes, Philip Morris has been disclosing to HHS for years what's in inn cigarettes. So if there's anything added to cigarettes that could be harmful, the government can stop it and they never have because there is nothing we add to the cigarettes that makes them more harmful.
We now also disclose it to the FDA so the FDA can monitor anything we possibly add to cigarettes, the FDA has control over. We have to disclose all research. They know what we're researching. We have to open up our manufacturing plants to them. We have to respond to anything they want, which is fine. We're not complaining about it, but the idea that somehow -- counsel ignored all of this when he argues that somehow we should have some big puniti damage award to deter future misconduct.
And, also, I want to talk about regulating cigarette design, because that's one reason why my client strongly supported getting the FDA regulation and it's because -- it's actually the last point on this chart here. By getting FDA regulation to regulate cigarette design after nine years we finally got it through, you've already -- you've been brought inside -- you learned a lot that most
people don't know. These tobacco companies have truly been trying to develop products that remove tar, that remove nicotine, but then they fight with the public health community about what they can sa about it. They argue about it, they fight about it. That's over, that's done with. The FDA now has got skin in the game and that's a good thing for this country because if one of these companies does develop something that's better for people, you ought to be able to tell people about it. And it hasn't happened in this country. And so hopefully one reason why my client fought for the FDA regulation is so that now we've got a regulator that's got skin in the game, but they're going to have to decide, do they want safer product and if one develops, are they going to -- what can we say to the public about it? They now get to decide that. We're not going to be arguing and fussing about it anymore, they can decide that.
And the FDA can completely enforce all of the regulations they have. If we don't comply with their regulations, they can shut our plants down, seize our products, stop product sales, fine us penalties, so the idea that we need to be deterred because of something that was done years ago, whic
has changed 12 years ago, is just not supported by the evidence in this case.
And as far as counsel just -- counsel just acted as if we've done nothing over the years to try to develop less hazardous cigarettes. That's not fair. That's not supported by the evidence in this case. My client and the other companies, we clearly have developed cigarettes that deliver -- that are lower in tar and nicotine. They keep talking about this tricking the machine. That's not true. That machine -- we told the government, the machine can measure what it is that a smoker smokes because smokers will puff harder, take more puffs, we told the government that, but at the same time today you heard from the witness stand these products are safer.
If today -- if people would smoke that Merit cigarette right there, if they would -- are you giving me a time limit?
If people smoked that Merit bronze pack with one milligram of tar and point one-tenth of a milligram of nicotine, that is a safer product. We have put into in the marketplace conventional cigarettes because of these techniques that we wouldn't -- by the way, these techniques here, the
government asked us. A group called the Tobacco Working Group said, Would you guys do these things, develop these different design techniques and the Tobacco Working Group has position papers on these issues and we said, Fine, we'll do it. And we did.
And those products are in the market today and so the idea that we haven't removed any of the tar, that's just not true.
And, by the way, that low tar cigarette, if people -- and people do smoke it and if more people smoked it -- but that's their choice. People have a choice and maybe someday this product should be ma illegal, but that's not -- by the way, you heard about the taxes that we pay to the federal government and the state government for -- on our product, 50 percent of every pack of cigarettes we pay taxes on. But we have lowered the tar levels and we we've also lowered the nicotine levels.
Counsel just said that we always keep nicotine above the level of threshold addiction, he just said that. That's not true. That's just not true.
You've heard the evidence about this product that Mr. -- Dr. Henningfield, their witness, told you Philip Morris did it, they took this down to so low a level even the public health community says, It's
not addictive. People didn't want it. But don't say we didn't do it. Even Jack Henningfield said,
I'm not suggesting that Philip Morris somehow did this as a sham, we tried. We did it. We spent the money. People didn't smoke it. And, by the way, now the FDA -- this is another reason why the FDA is good in regulating this industry, maybe that product should go back on the market, maybe it should, and maybe we should be able to advertise it as a safer product but, you know what, the FDA's got to decide that. I can't do -- Philip Morris can't do that.
The FDA's got do that and maybe there's ideas in the past. For example, this product here, this product here which I talked about during the trial, this product here would save lives. And people would -this product only heats the tobacco and doesn't burn it and we invented this after years of research and maybe this should come back on the market and mayt we should go out and have an advertising campaign t( tell people, if they'll smoke this product, that will save lives.
The FDA is going to have to decide whether they want do that or not. They've got to make a public policy decision, but my client has done it. We have spent the money and the products are there. So the
idea -- by the way, what if we had done nothing ove the last 25 years? What if we just ignored it and said, We're just going to have one brand of cigarette in the marketplace and it's going to be a high tar, high nicotine cigarette?
So let me go to the second issue I want to talk about, which is, you're only supposed to award damages based on the harm suffered by the plaintiff in this case. Not third parties, not 440,000 people. What -- the harm suffered by Andy Allen, Amber Allen, and Patricia Allen. And so I put back up -- we had -- Mrs. Allen smoked our cigarettes foi two years according to the evidence. That's what the evidence is, two years. I want to know what evidence -- what did Philip Morris do during those two years to harm Mrs. Allen? This is all they put in. They put up these ads and said -- I don't know whether they're suggesting that she smoked because of these ads, which there's nothing wrong with whatsoever, but they had to come up and give you evidence of what is it we did to harm the plaintiffs in this case during that two years.
And you're going to have to ask that question because the instruction says you've got to ask what we did to harm Mrs. Allen before you award punitiv
damages, and I walked through this with you before. I'm not going to spent a lot of time doing it now.
But there is no evidence that Philip Morris ever said or did anything that caused Mrs. Allen to start smoking -MR. MITNIK: Objection, Your Honor. This has been determined.
MR. WEBB: I'm talking about the amount of punitive damages.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WEBB: As far as the amount of punitive damages and whether we did anything to harm Mrs. Allen. The fact that there's no evidence that we somehow did something to get her to smoke or w did anything to cause her to continue to smoke, there's not one speck of evidence of that. And so as far -- the plaintiff has failed in their burden of proof here.
They -- the only thing they offered today is that we are financially stable and we make money. That's not grounds to award punitive damages. They've ignored these two issues. They've ignored that -- what are they -- they they've ignored whether there's any reason to deter us in the future and I just walked through all the evidence that
there is none. They've ignored that we did -there's no evidence that we did anything in that two years to harm Mrs. Allen, which is why, on behalf of Philip Morris, I'm respectfully suggesting to you, based on the evidence, that there should not be punitive damages awarded in this case. Thank you.



MR. MURPHY: Ladies and gentlemen, this is no the last time you'll hear from me in this case. Let me start out by telling you -- comment on your verdict from yesterday. R.J. Reynolds takes your verdict very seriously. We are not here to dispute that verdict in any way. We take it seriously, which is why we brought Dr. Figlar here today to talk to you from Reynolds.
Make no mistake, Reynolds knows about your verdict, Dr. Figlar knew and the executives at Reynolds know. So we take that seriously. I don't have much time with you today, and maybe that's good. The luxury for me is Mr. Webb went and mentioned some of the things I might say and you just heard from Dr. Figlar. So I'm not going to go back through all of Dr. Figlar's slides but I would like to talk to you about some of that and suggest how to take what Dr. Figlar told you and put it into the context of punitive damages.
Just from the jury instructions -- and I won't put them up because the judge just read them to you but as he said, it's your discretion and you may in your discretion decline to assess punitive damages. So you're not required to award anything. It's up to you whether or not to award anything. I want to talk about some of the issues regarding punitive damages.
First of all, who can punitive damages be awarded to? I want to talk to you about what the purpose of punitive damages is and talk to you abou the legal standards for awarding punitive damages. So the first question, Who can punitive damages be awarded to in this case? Only the Allens. That's
it. Your award of any punitive damages will go to them. It won't go to any -- anywhere else. It won't go to anywhere like public health agencies, it won't go to antismoking organizations, it won't go to smoking cessation clinics, it won't go to other smokers, it won't go to anyone but the Allens.
Also, in the judge's instruction you've heard that the amount of punitive damages would be in addition to your compensatory damages award. So it's not one or the other and this doesn't come out of compensatories. This would be additional money
Another thing from the instructions. As the judge said, If you determine that punitive damages should be awarded, the amount of damages must be based only on the harm suffered by the Allens. You may not award punitive damages against Reynolds ( Philip Morris for harm suffered by anyone else. So just like I told you the very first day of trial, this case, this punitive damages award is about Mrs. Allen and no one else. R.J. Reynolds can only be punished for its fault in harming Mrs. Allen.
We get to the purpose of punitive damages. And you've heard that there are two. Punishment and deterrence. I'm going to talk to you about both of those. And the question for you is should R.J.
Reynolds be forced to pay money today to punish th past or deter what's going on in the future. And one question on punishment is who will be punished if you award punitive damages against Reynolds?
You've heard from Dr. Figlar that R.J. Reynolds is a different company. It's got new ownership.
It's the merger of the old Brown & Williamson and the old R.J. Reynolds. There's new executives, he put those up for you. New scientists, you heard that those names from the past, the people who plaintiff showed you on the screen, they're gone.
The Ed Horrigans, the Jim Johnstons who you saw testify, they won't have to pay this money. It's the new company that would pay this money. So that's who you're punishing.
Then there's the issue of ate punitive damages needed to change Reynolds' behavior here in 2011? On that issue I want to start about those denials of the past. And those denials from the past are over. You saw the websites. You saw Philip Morris's website.
I	don't want to put a lot on the screen but maybe, Chris, can we get some screen shots up?
Just to remember this is what -- this is the consistent message which the companies are telling
smokers today. The past and those denials, all that video, all those documents that's over. We tell the public cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable deaths in the United States and it significantly increases risk of developing those diseases.
Go to the next one, Chris.
No tobacco product has been shown to be safe and without risk.
Just one more, just so we can see.
Nicotine in tobacco products is addictive. We say that up front on our website. There's no denial.
We also tell smokers that the best thing to do, if you want to avoid risk, is to quit. Another thing we do today and you heard about it in the trial is about additives and ingredients and we disclose those to the government, you heard about that. Reynolds also puts them on a website.
Do we have that, Chris?
And you saw first we had the general list and then on the Reynolds website, if you're a smoker an you want to know what additives, what ingredients are in the brand of cigarettes you smoke, you can go to that website, you can look at it, and you can
find the list. You saw that today. So that's a change from the past.
You also saw today, we don't have to put this up, the documents you saw in this case and all those documents that have been produced and are required to be produced, are publicly available on a Reynolds website. No, you can't do it until the trial's over but when this trial is over, if you want to look at any of those documents in detail, you want to look at all of those documents that Dr. Cummings talked about, you can do it. You can do it. You can tell people you know who are smokers to do it, you can c that today. There is nothing hidden. The company is required to do that, Reynolds has produced those.
So another question about punitive damages is are punitive damages needed to force R.J. Reynolds to develop safer products. What we know is, as we saw on the website, that cigarettes are risky and inherently dangerous. We saw that and there's been universal agreement here that there's no such thing as a safe cigarette. But what Reynolds has tried to do and what Dr. Figlar tried to explain is we've tried to take a responsible approach to cigarette design. He talked to you about Reynolds' product storage-ship. He talked to you about the testing
that Reynolds' products go through, whenever there's a change, whenever there's a different ingredient, goes through that level, the literature review, the chemistry analysis. We talked about the in vitro testing, the short term, the in vivo testing, the longer term, and talked about smoking behavior studies.
New products go through all that testing. Dr. Figlar also talked to you about what Reynolds has done in the past years to try to make smoking safer. Remember, he talked about the low nitrosamine tobacco, how flue curing was leading to these higher nitrosamines and Reynolds developed a way -- found way to deal with that, shared it with the other companies, with farmers, so that that's less of a problem. Dr. Figlar talked about Now. When you talk about reducing nicotine, Now is a product that reduced nicotine, again, almost to the level of next and Now is still on the market as you heard him say. Smokers can go out and if they want an ultra low, lowest nicotine product you can find, they can go buy, Now, that's there. It's not selling much but if smokers want it, they can get it.
Dr. Figlar walked you through Premiere. It didn't take deterrence for Reynolds to try and
develop Premiere. You saw the shadowbox, you saw how it was engineered. Reynolds did that without any deterrence. Reynolds is still working on that product with Eclipse, we went back to the drawing board, it changed it. It's more acceptable. It's still not acceptable to enough people and Reynolds is still working on it, but you can buy it, and you can buy it here in Florida.
Dr. Figlar talked to you about Snus. And it's another way for smokers who want to stop smoking bi still want nicotine, it's something they can do that's safer. And he showed you the studies why he thinks it's safer. And it may not be the answer for everyone. We may not eliminate smoking with something like Snus, but there may be people who decide to choose to do that instead of smoke. Even if just for some of the time, like you saw in this study, and that may have an effect. That's why Reynolds is doing it. And we don't need deterrence to do that, we're already doing it.
Dr. Figlar talked to you about Nico-Nova, a nicotine replacement product. And Reynolds is now in that business and working with Dr. Fagerstrom.
In terms of nicotine in cigarettes and whether Reynolds needs deterrence for that or punishment,
the facts are in this case, there's no dispute, Reynolds doesn't add nicotine to its cigarettes, simply no dispute. More nicotine in tobacco grown in field than in tobacco in the cigarettes. The nicotine in Reynolds' cigarettes has been going dow consistently since the 1950's. He talked to you about Now. Again, Now cigarettes contain 1 to
2	percent of the nicotine in the average cigarette.
So that's a product that's on the market now.
And, finally, to the idea of taking all the nicotine out of cigarettes, if Reynolds did that, smokers -- they simply wouldn't smoke Reynolds products. It wouldn't do any good. They'd smoke someone else's product or there would be a black market. There are international tobacco companies that could sell their products. Reynolds is trying to make a difference by developing products here, not -- going out of business isn't going to help them make a difference because they're selling products that nobody wants to buy.
Just on Eclipse. It's a 30-year effort, over a billion dollars. You saw up there the smoke from Eclipse cigarettes has 90 percent fewer carcinogens. The animal studies. Fewer tumors are developed. Eclipse is sold in about a thousand stores here in
Florida.
We talked -- and I won't go through it all, but Mr. Webb talked to you about FDA regulation and the MSA. Of course, all that applies to Reynolds. It is regulated. The cigarette industry is the most heavily regulated industry there is in this country.
That will continue. We don't need to do anything in this trial to continue that. That's started. We have to disclose additives and ingredients, not only on the website, voluntarily, but to the government and we've done that.
We have to disclose research documents. Again, we have a website and the government gets that. We have to open up our manufacturing plants to the FDA Those new warning requirements are coming out, Reynolds has always complied with warning requirements, and it will comply with those.
There's additional advertising restrictions.
My point is the Reynolds -- the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company of 2011 is a very different compar than what you saw from the '60's, '70's, '80's and even early '90's. Reynolds agrees smoking causes deadly diseases and is addictive. We advise smokers to obtain information on smoking from the public health community, and we set up ways for them to get
that information. The documents are publicly available. We go through product storage-ship.
We're working to develop and market safer product and we believe we have developed and marketed a safer product and we're going to stick to it and try to make a difference. We're marketing also those nicotine replacement products that'll help smokers quit or give them another way to get nicotine.
Chris, can I switch over to the Elmo?
You know, I said we take this verdict -- your verdict serious and I do. And I don't think the judge read through the verdict form yet but when you get it, the first question is about Reynolds and you'll be asked, What is the total amount of punitive damages, if any -- remember, you don't have to award any -- which you find by the greater weight of the evidence should be assessed against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company? And it out says, If you elect not to assess punitive damages against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, you should enter a zero a amount of damages. So, again, even on the verdict form there's acknowledgment that you don't need to award punitive damages.
But you have awarded compensatory damages. We're well aware of that. And I think Mr. Mitnik,
when he got up, I think he said he was surprised that we didn't acknowledge that. Well, I don't particularly agree with that. And as a way of acknowledging your verdict, I'm going to suggest that for Reynolds you award punitive damages. I'll suggest a figure of a million dollars. Why do I suggest that? I think there are two reasons.
The first reason is one of the most difficult things to do at this point in the case is try and figure out why, exactly why you guys awarded tha verdict yesterday and try to figure out, you know, what it is we can do to fulfill the instructions and come up with a number that's appropriate and not extreme. So this is -- this is the first reason why I put a million. And this is one attempt to do that.
By my calculation Mr. Mitnik yesterday asked you to award roughly $8.4 million, and then your award, you had 3 million each, it was 6 million. Si there was 2.2 million that you didn't award. Of the 6 million you held Reynolds 45 percent responsibl My suggestion on the million is that you give the give the Allens the Reynolds portion of that 2.2 million that you didn't award. And that's roughly a million. I think there's some change
there. And I'm not trying to short-change, but a million dollars is an easy figure to write.
Second reason why I suggest a million dollars is because a million dollars is a lot of money.
It's a lot of money to any of us. We've heard about these cases -MR. MITNIK: Objection Your Honor.
MR. MURPHY: -- the number of cases.
MR. MITNIK: Objection. Golden rule.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. MURPHY: Thank you, Your Honor.
You've heard about all these cases and the fact is if we start awarding, you know, $5 million per plaintiff, there simply isn't enough money to go around. So I ask you to take that into consideration. And those are the reasons that that's what I suggest.
Somehow I finished up with a minute to spare,
I'm not going to take that. I am going to thank you again for your service, you've been attentive, you've been fair, and Reynolds understands that you will be just, but we ask when you go back to deliberate on this, that you continue to be fair.
Thank you.
