CLOSING ARGUMENT 
MR. BELASIC:  Thank you, Your Honor.
You know when we started, we had a roomful of
more than 150 people, and every juror had a chance
to plead hardship and tried to get out of serving.
None of you did.  All of you stepped up.  You
committed a great act of public citizenship and
civic responsibility.  For that, you have the
gratitude of everyone in the room.
Now, next week when you're celebrating
Thanksgiving, maybe one of the things you'll be
thankful for is that this trial will be over.  And
I'm going to talk to you why under the evidence
this trial should be over today.  
But just knowing you're celebrating
Thanksgiving, on behalf of Reynolds and
Philip Morris, Mr. Mitnik and everyone else, we
thank you for your attention and for your focus
today.
Now, there wasn't a lot of things that the
various experts or Dr. Abramson and the other 4334
experts agree on, but one of the things that they
did agree on, the two Jacks, Jack Henningfield and
Jack Abramson agreed that everyone is different.
And what they meant is every smoker is different.
And the reason that's important here is that
this case is about Mrs. Allen and the specific
facts that relate to Mrs. Allen.  It's not about
whether there are any other class members in the
Engle cases.  It's not about other smokers in
Florida.
Maybe smokers who in the 1950s actually were
listening to and relied upon statements, maybe
smokers who really did start smoking because of
advertising or who had no idea that smoking was
dangerous.  But it's not about those smokers.
And just as importantly, it's not about any of
our personal experiences.  And we learned a lot
about you from the questionnaire and from your
answers during the voir dire process.  
And we know some of you started smoking and
quit fairly easily.  And we know that others of you
smoked for a long time and had a much more
difficult time.  We know a lot of you have
different ideas and came in with different opinions
about smoking. 4335
But each of you -- and the reason you were
selected by the attorneys and approved by the
judge, each of you said you could set aside those
personal experiences and could judge it only on the
evidence that relates to Mrs. Allen.
We put in the evidence that relates to
Mrs. Allen through a variety of ways.  First,
through cross-examination of their three experts;
Dr. Burns, Dr. Cummings, Dr. Henningfield.  Each of
them in a row admitted a wide variety of things
about Mrs. Allen.
We cross-examined Mr. Allen and Amber Allen,
and they gave us further testimony and information
about Mrs. Allen's smoking.  And, of course, we
presented the evidence from her doctor, Dr. Kirley.
You heard the sworn testimony from her family
members that was read.
What we have is a wealth of information about
Mrs. Allen.  And what we know is that she was
warned from the start.  Contrary to what Mr. Mitnik
says, she was not a black-and-white photo in the
1940s and the 1950s of a lot of guys smoking that
had no idea.
We know that from the very beginning, the
warning was there on the pack even as far back as 4336
when she was 17.  We know that she was warned it
would kill her from the time she started by her
sister.  Her sister is in the same environment as
her, she knew smoking was dangerous.  So we know
that she was warned.
And we know that she knew the risks throughout
her life.  How do we know that?  We know that she
was warned when she started at 66, and we know that
from the time she lived with Mr. Allen she knew the
risks.
Because I asked him that exact question, and
in his own words he said, "Yes, she knew the
risks."  And he admitted that that was one of the
reasons that they agree that she was a cause of her
own injury.  Mr. Allen admitted his wife knew the
risks.
She wasn't forced to smoke.  At no time in the
'60s or the '70s or the '80s or the '90s did they
ever present this evidence that somehow she was
forced to smoke.
And as you know, she never even tried to quit.
She made no effort to quit until she got COPD.  She
didn't try.  That was a choice.  Just like it was
her choice to start, it was her choice to never try
to quit until she got sick. 4337
We know that she was responsible for her
smoking behavior because, first of all, the Surgeon
General reports say so.  And I'll review some of
that evidence.  
Dr. Burns himself said that even addicted
smokers are responsible for their own smoking
behavior, and because Mr. Allen has taken the
position in this lawsuit that his wife was
responsible for her behavior and that she was a
cause of her own injury.
But we also know it from our own commonsense
when we see the evidence.  Here's what we know:  As
far back in the 1950s, let's talk about her
information environment.  The family.
Her sister; same environment, same parents,
same advertising, same black-and-white photos of
some 1950s guys from those Tobacco Institutes.  Her
sister knew that smoking was dangerous, knew that
smoking was bad for her.  That's the environment
that she grew up in.  She made a different choice
than one of her sisters.  She chose to smoke.
We know in the 1950s and the 1960s her parents
always warned her not to smoke.  And, yes, we know
that this was not the most specific warning, but
one thing she knew is that the two people that were 4338
raising her and loved her didn't want her to smoke.  
And that's why the children, not just
Patricia, not just Pattie Dawn Allen, not just
Barbara Henk, not just Rosemarie Nielson, the kids
in that family knew that smoking was dangerous.
We know that the Surgeon General's reports
came out on lung cancer before she even started.
And we know, again, from her family environment,
her own sister, her own sister remembers the '64
report and her own sister already knew that smoking
was bad for her health.  That's the environment she
grew up in.
She told everyone that she started smoking at
age 18 in 1966.  We heard that someone remembers
she smoked a few cigarettes in cars that year.
Regardless, she didn't start smoking as a
12-year-old or a 14-year-old.  She started smoking,
she said, became a smoker at age 18 when she was an
adult and was ready to leave home and start a new
life in St. Louis.
She said, not something that Mr. Mitnik said,
not something that I said, not something even that
Mr. Allen said, she said why she started smoking.
She told her husband why she started smoking.  She
told her daughter why she started smoking. 4339
It wasn't because of advertising.  In her own
words, it was not because of advertising.  It
wasn't because of some statement that the
plaintiffs never could prove that she heard.
She said she started smoking because her
friends said smoking was useful for weight control.
Now, they're not suing her friends because it was
her choice.  But she didn't start smoking for
advertising.
We could not get more direct evidence unless
Mrs. Allen was alive and was here to tell us
herself.  She told the people she loved, her
husband and her daughter, and they confirmed.
Mrs. Allen, in her own words, says that's why she
smoked.  It wasn't because of fraud.
We know that every pack she bought January
1st, 1966, when she was only 17, every pack of
cigarettes that she bought had a warning.  And it
was the legally-required warning.  The companies
didn't break the law.  The companies followed the
law.  The companies put that warning on every
single pack that she bought.  She wasn't duped.
In what other -- Mr. Mitnik wants to talk
about analogies.  But in what other product would
we say that someone that knew it was dangerous and 4340
received the pack and had every product she brought
had the legally-required warning, what other
product, what other case would we say that that
person had been deceived?  It's not commonsense.
We know that the same year, the very year she
started smoking, the same year that the warning was
on every pack telling her she knew from the
warnings this isn't a safe thing to do.  Her sister
said smoking would kill you.
And I ask you to consider two things.
Obviously, she was told -- nobody disputes it.
Their experts agree.  Dr. Burns said, "Well, that's
not surprising at that time."  Well, that's the
opposite of their fraud case.
She didn't smoke in those black-and-white
movies from the '40s and '50s.  She started in the
technicolor world of 1966 when her own sisters knew
that smoking was dangerous and deadly, when she
herself was warned and when every pack had a
warning.  The rest of that is a distraction.
She didn't smoke in the '40s and '50s.  How
did her sister know if there was such a great
conspiracy and fraud?  Her sister knew; Mrs. Allen
knew.
And her other sister told her that smoking was 4341
bad for her lungs.  So she knew it had a warning,
it wasn't safe.  She was told it would kill her.
She was told it would hurt her lungs.  And she knew
that 30 years, 30 years before she ever got COPD.
In 1970, she was warned again on every pack
that she bought.  More importantly, the most
personalized warning she could get, she knew that
her own father who smoked had the same type of lung
problems that she eventually would get.  He stopped
because he couldn't breathe normally.  She knew
that.  He told her to quit.  She knew that.
Now, each time these people told her to quit,
she had a choice to make.  Mr. Mitnik said there's
no choice at all.  Nicotine has just hijacked her
brain.  60 million other people quit, but she
couldn't.  There's no evidence of that.  Not one of
their experts said that she could not quit in the
'60s, '70s or '80s.
You know what their experts did admit?
Dr. Burns said, well, the reason he can't say that
is because she never even tried.  And that's a
choice.  When you were told this is dangerous,
don't do it, this is dangerous, it could kill her,
you have a choice.  You have a choice to make an
effort to quit and to stop. 4342
And even Dr. Cummings and Dr. Henningfield
admitted nothing about nicotine stops a person from
trying.  But she didn't even try.  She didn't want
to quit until she already had the disease.
So in 1977, she goes on smoking.  In 1978, we
know that when she met Mr. Allen, shortly
thereafter he asked her to quit.  And, again, the
most personalized warning:  He told her about his
own father.
We heard two days ago that his father had died
in 1971, and, again, from a form of COPD,
emphysema.  So she knew, once again, in the most
personalized warning possible what could happen.
And this is 13 years after she's told that
smoking could kill her.  This is two years after
she finds out that her own father has had lung
injury and he quit.  Now she gets yet another
warning.
She chose not to even try.  She didn't say,
"I'm going to go out and I'm going to make an
effort.  I'm going to set a quit date."  She chose
not to try.
Throughout the '80s, her husband repeatedly
warned her.  By '85, the pack warning was even more
specific.  And, again, there's no evidence that 4343
even what it said on the pack, "It will cause
emphysema," that she put it down for a minute.
There's no evidence that she even tried to quit
during the entire 1980s.
By 1990, her children were warning her.  First
her son, her husband, and then her daughter Amber.
And, again, throughout the 1990s until she got sick
in 1996, she responded to these warnings saying,
"Leave me alone," and she chose not to try.
Now, there's no evidence that if she had
tried, if she had set a quit date, if she had made
a serious effort that she couldn't have quit.  And
the only time we know that she made a serious quit
effort was 1998.  By that time, she already had the
disease and she quit for five months, and she went
back because she was gaining weight.  
Her own medical records shows that.  She
didn't go back for nicotine.  Her own medical
records said she went back because she was gaining
weight.  We know Dr. Kirley told her to quit.
Now, did she -- was she completely ignorant of
nicotine.  No, she called her own smoking, her own
smoking behavior she described as a nicotine fit.
She called the cigarettes that she smoked cancer
sticks.  The family called cigarettes coffin nails. 4344
That's the environment she grew up in.  Not a
1940s black-and-white movie where no one knows.
The evidence in this case is about Mrs. Allen.
It's not about personal experience and it's not
about some hypothetical smoker.  She knew from the
beginning, and her husband confirms, she knew the
risks.
Now, we know she never relied on statements
from tobacco companies because throughout her life
when she told people why she smoked, she said it
was because of her friends and weight control.
She never once said, you know, it was because
of an ad or because somebody said something on TV.
And, in fact, she was alive when this lawsuit was
filed, and we know from Mr. Allen's testimony that
they discussed her smoking after that and he
never -- she never once told him, "I was defrauded
by something they said.  There was an
advertisement." 
That's direct evidence.  Mr. Mitnik wants to
say, "Well, if I put as many boards about
advertisements, that will prove that there's some
sort of fraud."  None of his experts said that.  It
would have been the easiest thing in the world for
one of them to say, "We actually have evidence that 4345
Mrs. Allen relied on something a company said to
continue smoking."
Now, could she have quit?  Their first expert
or their second expert, Dr. Cummings, had to admit
that anyone can quit.  Now, he fought it.  We
understand that he's been in more than 50 trials.
He's made over a million dollars.  He's paid to
come in and look at records and tell people that
the plaintiff is addicted and can't quit.
Dennis had to play the video to show that just
a few years ago he testified under oath in yet
another one of these cases that anyone can quit
smoking if they make up their mind.  That's their
expert.
He then admitted, and he had to admit he had
said this in the past as well, that the success
rate for quitting among people who really want to
quit and stick to it is 100 percent.
And that's the plaintiff's own expert.  He
didn't say, you know, if she had tried to quit in
the '60s, '70s or '80s, she couldn't have quit.  He
didn't say that.  This is what he said.  
Dr. Burns said, "I can't say."  He couldn't
say that nicotine addiction somehow stopped her
from quitting.  And remember what you heard 4346
yesterday, her own doctors said if she quits by
'75, she never gets COPD.  Her own doctor said if
she quits by '85, she doesn't get COPD.  But she
made a choice not to quit.  She made a choice not
to try.
And even her own experts don't say that
nicotine addiction stopped her from quitting.  As
Dr. Burns said, she never tried until she got the
disease.
That's what Dr. Burns told us.  He says
addiction doesn't prevent them from making the
choice to quit.  She never made a choice to quit,
ladies and gentlemen -- we went through the
records -- until December 1997.  Thirty-one years
of smoking, the first time she was motivated to
quit, Dr. Kirley wrote it down and she quit for
five months and then went back because she gained
weight.
The Surgeon General tells us that the majority
of people, actually more than 90 percent would quit
during the time she was smoking, who quit during
the years before she got the disease, they quit on
their own.  It wasn't something that was
impossible.
And Dr. Burns own public health service, own 4347
public health service says that the studies suggest
that everyone can quit smoking.
You know, we heard a lot about this number:
50 million to 60 million people smoke.  From the
beginning, Dr. Burns explained it.  Those are
people who are alive today.  It's not taking people
in the '50s and '60S who quit for a while and then
died.
We have about 300 million Americans and 50 to
60 million of those people who are alive today are
former smokers who successfully quit, and each of
their experts agreed to that.  It's not something
that's impossible.  
And, in fact, as I asked Dr. Burns, it's one
of the most common health behavior changes that
people can make.  Does it mean it's easy?  No.
Does it mean that people can prevent their own
disease by making a choice?  Yes.  That's why the
Surgeon General calls it the most preventable --
the highest preventable cause of death, because
people can prevent their own disease.
And we know that her own doctor said she
prevents her disease if she quits in '75.  She
prevents her disease if she quits at '85.  He said
that she would more than likely be alive today even 4348
if she had waited until 1996 to quit.  But during
none of those times did she even make an effort.
We know that Dr. Cummings said whether its
filters, menthols, two packs a day, even
highly-addicted smokers can and do quit.
And so now I'm going to talk about Question 1,
and Question 1 is was the plaintiff addicted to
cigarettes -- it's two parts.  Was the plaintiff
addicted to cigarettes and was addiction a legal
cause of her death?  
And the first thing when you look at that
question, it doesn't ask did addiction have
something to do with her smoking.  It doesn't ask
chart up the reasons that she smoked and see if
addiction is one of them.  That's not what you're
being asked.  That's not what the instructions say.
The question is whether addiction was a legal
cause of her death.  You know from the judge's
instructions, and you can read them, that whether
smoking caused it is something different.
No one disputes that the years of smoking were
what caused her disease.  That's the medical cause.
The legal cause is what you're being asked.  And
it's the legal cause of her death, not why she
smoked. 4349
So let's look at the evidence.  First of all,
we brought Dr. Abramson.  They criticized
Dr. Abramson.  The reason we brought Dr. Abramson
is right off the bat, their first expert, Dr. Burns
said that there were different definitions of
addiction.
I showed him a 1915 public health services
report that says smoking was addictive and he said,
"Well, we don't know what definition they're using.
There's a difference between lay definitions,
that -- colloquialisms that lay people use and
scientific definitions.  And then he gave a
definition, and then Dr. Cummings used a different
one.
We brought Dr. Abramson because he was the
only witness that actually uses the medical
definition.  The definition that addiction trained
and psychiatrists who make addiction diagnoses use.
And that's why we brought him in.
He uses the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
that has the tobacco use disorder diagnosis.  And
we know it's used by addiction specialists around
the world.
And of their three experts, only one of them
was even a medical doctor.  Dr. Cummings is not a 4350
doctor.  He has a Ph.D. in public health.
Dr. Henningfield is not a medical doctor.  He's a
researcher who is trained in psychiatry.  He's not
a doctor. 
The only doctor they brought was Dr. Burns.
And Dr. Burns told us he hasn't seen patients for
many years.  He retired in the 2000s.  And he told
us that as far back as the 1990s, he spent most of
his time on two things; these lawsuits and writing
articles for various Surgeon General reports.  He
said he spent only 5 percent of his time seeing
patients.
And that's why we brought Dr. Abramson,
someone who is the only addiction-certified, the
only board-certified psychiatrist and has seen
thousands of drug-addicted smokers.  
And that's why the only diagnostic opinion in
this case on the medical definition that is
actually used by specialists is that she had a
moderate tobacco use disorder but she was not
addicted.
Now, did she have withdrawal?  The description
was, well, first, she only quit once for five
months before she got too sick to smoke.  And that
really isn't disputed.  In 1998, she'd already had 4351
COPD for several years, she quit for five months.
You all saw the medical records.
Her family says she was irritable and antsy.
You heard what serious withdrawal is, whether it's
barbiturates, whether it's heroin, cocaine,
alcohol, it's a lot more than being irritable and
antsy.  It leads to people being hospitalized.  It
leads to people having to medicated to put up with
the withdrawal.
And even though she was irritable or antsy,
she was able to quit.  She quit for five months.
It didn't interfere with her work and it didn't
stop her from her daily activities.  Not like
serious drug withdrawal.
So whether or not you decide that under some
definition of addiction she was addicted, the most
important part of the Question 1 is taking that
addiction, was addiction a cause of her death?  
And you're going to be told that it has to be
a cause in a direct and natural and continuous
sequence.  Now, was it a direct or continuous
cause?  Well, we know that her choice not to quit
before 1996 is what led to her disease.  
We know from her own doctor that if she had
quit from 1966 when she started in '96, that she 4352
avoids her disease.  We know that she'd be alive
today and not disabled.  That's what Dr. Kirley
said.
That's why we had to read his deposition in
our case.  Plaintiffs didn't read that to you.  Her
own doctor said that.  Well, she had 30 years in
which if she quit she would not have developed the
disease.
Did addiction stop her from doing that?  No.
Even Dr. Burns doesn't claim that.  Even
Dr. Cummings doesn't claim that.  In fact,
Dr. Burns kept shooting back at me, "Mr. Belasic,
we don't know, she never even tried."  And that's
the point.  She made a choice not to try to quit
during a 30-year period when her own doctor says if
she quits, she doesn't get the disease.
And but for that choice, she doesn't get COPD.
But for her decision to make no effort to quit
because she didn't want to, until she got sick, she
won't get COPD.  That's the but for cause.  That's
the legal cause.
It's obvious you have to want to quit.  That's
what their experts said.  That's what Dr. Cummings
said.  From '66 to '96, she never wanted to quit so
she never tried. 4353
Dr. Burns -- these are their experts -- said
the smoker has to make the decision.  She didn't
make 20 percent of the decision, as Mr. Mitnik
suggests.  
She didn't take 20 percent of the
responsibility.  She didn't assume 20 percent of
the health risks.  She was the only one who could
make the decision.  She had 100 percent of the
decision.  She had 100 percent of the choice.
And like her family members who quit and the
60 million others who quit, that choice is uniquely
personal.  It wasn't 80/20, this is addiction, this
is a choice.  It was 100 percent.  When she made
the choice to continue, she increased her risk.
Had she made the choice to stop, her own doctor
says she won't get COPD.
The Surgeon General says the same thing, no
one can make you quit, no one can do it for you.
Dr. Koop -- this is after that video.  Remember, he
had a video saying these are the choices.  This is
years after the video.  This is Dr. Koop, the
Surgeon General.  
The choice to light up is always yours.
You're the one that has control over your behavior.
The cigarette is not going to light itself and jump 4354
into your mouth.
And that choice was 100 percent hers.  No one
from R.J. Reynolds or Philip Morris could come to
her house and pull the cigarette out of her hand.
No one could make that decision for her.  And not
even her family members.
Dr. Burns is asked specifically:  Does
addiction mean that the smoker is not responsible?
And he says no, the smoker is responsible and he
says you don't lose control over your behavior.
And that's why when I presses Dr. Burns,
that's why he had to admit that he couldn't say
that addiction stopped her from quitting from 1966
when she started until 1996 when she got the
disease.  He had to say I can't say that because
she never tried.  
Now, when she started in 1966, women were
quitting in droves.  It wasn't a steamroller or a
conspiracy like you've heard in the opening.
People were quitting in droves.
From 1966 when she started to 1970, 13 million
people chose to quit and successfully quit.  She
chose not to.  She chose to make no effort.  She
never tried to quit until after, 30 years later,
after she got the disease. 4355
And that's why Dr. Burns again had to admit
that addiction didn't prevent her from quitting in
order to avoid her COPD because we don't have any
evidence of that.
The only time, ladies and gentlemen, that we
know that she quit and we can look and see, well,
why did she go back, why did she relapse as all of
their experts say, is that 1998 time period.  
We know she was able to stop.  We know she
stopped for the first month, the second month, the
third month.  We know she stopped for five months.  
And then the medical records tell us why she
went back.  It's not nicotine addiction because
Dr. Kirley, the entire time that he saw her, never
found that she was addicted, never diagnosed her as
addicted.  Said years later when we took his
deposition, said I'm not an expert on that but as a
lay -- as giving a regular opinion, he said, yeah,
she could be considered that.
But what his medical records say is not that
she went back because of nicotine but that she was
so concerned about her weight that when she started
gaining weight, she went back.
You remember this.  We went through it with
Dr. Abramson, some with Dr. Burns.  These are her 4356
own medical records.  Starting in '94, she's told
to quit.  By '95, she's told to use the patch.  She
doesn't go and get the patch.  She doesn't try.
Again in '59, the doctor prescribes a patch
for her.  She doesn't use it.  In '96, he suggests
the patch for her.  She doesn't use it.  In '97, he
again raises the patch.  She tells him, "I'll get
the patch," but she doesn't.  But she doesn't,
ladies and gentlemen.  And in '97, he says, "You
need to stop now."  And, again, she doesn't try to
quit.
And you saw what I went through in
Dr. Abramson, three, four, five, six times this was
raised.  She had a choice.  Nicotine wasn't
stopping her from going on the patch.  Nicotine
wasn't stopping her from making an effort.  But she
didn't try.
When she did quit, January '98, first time,
first time she has tried to quit in her life, she
already has the disease.  Those 30 years where her
own doctors says if she quit, she doesn't get COPD.
She made no effort.  Now she's trying to quit, and
we know what happened.
After 12 days, she ate better.  She gained six
pounds.  After six weeks, she was eating even 4357
better and she gained six more pounds.  And then
five months later she started cheating.  And why
did she cheat?  She had a frantic work schedule,
the stress from her job.  
We're not making this up, ladies and
gentlemen.  This is what her own doctor said.  She
cheated because of a frantic work schedule, not
nicotine.  And when she went back to smoking, her
weight went down two pounds.
Mr. Mitnik keeps bringing it back to the
environment, that 1940s black-and-white world where
no one knows.  That wasn't Mrs. Allen's world.  The
people in her environment were people -- the people
that chose not to smoke.  Like her sister, Rose
Nielson.  Her own husband, Mr. Allen, told us
yesterday or told us two days ago that he knew as
far back as his junior high classes that it was
bad.  
When he met his wife, he believed smoking
could kill her because of what he had seen with his
father.  They weren't duped by some conspiracy, and
either was Mrs. Allen.
And the people in her environment who did
smoke, what happened to them?  Were they all slaves
to nicotine?  No.  Her mother quit.  Her father 4358
quit.  Her sister Barbara Henk smoked and quit.
Her sister-in-law Sandra Walker you heard about
quit.  Her cousin quit.  And Phyllis Norgaard, her
roommate that we heard so much.  They all quit.
They made different choices than Mrs. Allen.
They smoked the same types of cigarettes.
They saw the same types of advertisements that
Mr. Mitnik had up here.  They heard the same
information.  They only had three TV stations, as
they kept making a point, but they quit.  What was
the difference?  The difference was them.  They
made a different choice than she did.
As Dr. Burns says, you can't say that
addiction stopped her or prevented her from
avoiding her disease because she never tried.  And
but for that choice, she doesn't get COPD.  That's
what her own doctor says.
Now, plaintiffs made a big deal in opening and
they have asked some of their experts.  They say,
"We admit that she was a cause of her own injury."
And they're always very careful to say it was a
partial cause.  
But let's think:  That's a big admission.  You
don't have a lot of lawsuits where the plaintiff
comes in and says that one of his loved ones caused 4359
their own death.
So what does it mean under the evidence here?
Well, we know at a minimum that what the plaintiffs
are admitting is that Mrs. Allen knew that smoking
was dangerous and continued to smoke.  And
Mr. Allen says so.  He says she knew the risks.
And we know from her family that she knew the risks
as far back as 1966.
We know that when the plaintiffs admit she
caused her own injury, that she had the ability to
quit.  Because think about it:  If she didn't have
the ability to quit in the '60s, '70s, and '80s
when she would have avoided her disease, would the
plaintiffs admit that she was a cause of her own
death?  Of course not.
The only reason the plaintiffs admit that she
and her choices about not quitting were a cause of
her injury has to be because they know she had the
ability to quit smoking.  That's why Dr. Burns had
to testify the way that he did.
And we know she had the ability to quit
smoking at a time that would have avoided her COPD
and her death because her doctor very carefully
went through the years in which if she quit, she
would never have gotten COPD. 4360
Now, if she is addicted, they have to prove
that it is a substantial contributing cause that
but for that addiction, she wouldn't have died.  Is
it substantial?  Is nicotine dependence substantial
in the sense that makes a difference according to
the Surgeon General?  No tobacco company evidence
here.  Let's see what the Surgeon General says.
And if you look, look at that tobacco smoke
causes disease, that's the same Surgeon General's
report that Mr. Nation held up yesterday.  Look at
what they say about what tobacco company dependence
does to relapse?  Do they say it's substantial?  
"Measures of tobacco dependence account for
only modest variations, modest amounts of variation
in the risk of relapse."
Instead, look, what do they say relapse is
caused by?  A function of multiple personal
factors.  People are different.
So what was different for Mrs. Allen between
all the smokers that quit and everyone that quit?
She had the same information environment.  They've
established that she saw the same ads, same
schools, same media.  
She didn't smoke some unusual brand that no
one else smoked.  Dr. Cummings said these were 4361
popular brands that millions of other people
smoked.  Millions of other people smoked filtered,
menthols.
It wasn't her cigarettes and it wasn't
nicotine and it wasn't her brain.  It was her
choices.  Her sister Rose chose to quit and did.
Her parents chose to quit and did.  Her
sister-in-law chose to quit and did.
She made a different choice.  She chose to not
even try to quit until she had the disease.  And
then she chose to quit for five months and then she
chose to go back, unfortunately because of her own
views and her own condition about her weight.  And
we know that from the medical records.
Here's what Dr. Kirley said and what
Dr. Kirley -- what we read to you yesterday.  She
started in '66 and she got the disease in '96.
It's a 30-year period of smoking.  And it is
undisputed, everyone in this case agrees she never
made a quit attempt for those 30 years.
That's her choice.  It's not a question of
blaming.  In America, cigarettes are a legal
product.  And in America, people can choose to
start.  They can choose to quit.  And no one is
going to make you, but more importantly, no one can 4362
make that decision for you.
She never tried.  Her own doctor says in '75,
she quits, she doesn't get COPD.  By '75, she had
known that smoking could kill her for ten years.
If she quits in '85, she avoids her injury.  
By '85, she knew what had happened to her
father.  She knew what had happened to Mr. Allen's
father.  She had been warned repeatedly.  And in
1985, ladies and gentlemen, it said right on the
pack that she could get COPD.  It said, "Smoking
causes emphysema."  She never tried to quit.
And Dr. Kirley said even if she had quit in
'96 when she got the disease, she'd still have COPD
if she quit in '96 because that's when she got it.
But he said if she had quit then, it was more
likely that she would be alive today than she would
pass away and she would not be disabled.
That's what would have happened if she had
chosen to quit.  And there's no evidence that she
could not have quit before 1996.  They didn't even
attempt to elicit that from their experts.  
Now, what -- why didn't she quit?  We know why
she smoked.  She told everyone.  Friends told her
for weight control.  We know she was under a lot of
stress.  We know their own experts admit people 4363
smoke to reduce stress.  We certainly know she
smoked for weight control.  We know she had a long
history of injuries.  We know that she was in
continuous, severe pain.
Now, think about the version of Pattie Dawn
Allen that was presented to you in opening.  You
didn't hear about any of this.  And think about the
version that was presented when Mr. Allen testified
on direct.  He was specifically asked by
Mr. Prysock, apart from COPD, how was her health.
He said it was fine, didn't tell us about any
problems.
Now, when I asked him about this, about
medical records, these things that clearly related
to her smoking, he told me repeatedly, "I didn't
know that.  I didn't notice that.  I didn't know
when she went to the doctor, she was private, she
didn't tell me."
That's fine.  Nobody is criticizing him for
that.  But the image and the difference in the
facts that were presented when you actually got to
see the whole truth is radically different.
Mrs. Allen had continuous, severe pain.  She
could not sleep normally.  She would wake up and
when she would wake up at night, one of the things 4364
she would do in her pain is smoke cigarettes.
She had to take a lot of medications.  She
said without the medications she's not crying
around the clock.  And everyone agrees, none of
this was caused by smoking.  None of this was
caused by nicotine.  It's definitely the reason
that she's smoking.
Here's all the narcotic pain medications that
she was taking.  Remember, Mr. Nation was trying to
say that, well, she -- he was showing off all these
tests that he knew.  She didn't take a PCV or an
MRI, trying to imply that she wasn't in severe
pain.
This is what she said.  She told her doctors
that she was in continuous, severe pain.  She said
she could never sleep normally.  She said, "I'm
crying around the clock if I don't take these
medications for my pain."  She took all of these
pain medications.  
We know that she had an anorexia.  Her husband
did not, but she had anorexia.  Her doctors
diagnosed her with it.  And we know that she had
body image distortions.  Everyone agrees that
that's not caused by nicotine.  It's not caused by
smoking. 4365
So when you look at the story, there's no
question that she was a successful, determined
women.  We know how successful she was in business.
And we know, obviously, and everyone in this room
has sympathy, that she died and she left a husband
and a daughter behind and a son, Andy.  We never
heard from Andy, Jr. or what he thinks, but she
also left a son.
And some of you may be thinking, okay, this is
a woman who was depressed, who was in continuous
pain.  This is someone who had anorexia.  And we
would feel sorry for that person and think that
person should be helped.
But that's not the law in this case and that's
not the claim.  Under the law, you can't award
money or write a check to Mr. Allen because his
wife had these problems.  These problems weren't
caused by smoking.
We know from the deposition of one of the fact
witnesses that she herself said, she told her,
Mrs. Allen said she was also bulimic.  She was
very, very obsessed with weight.
Now, how bad was this pain that caused the
stress and the depression that led her to smoke?
How bad was it?  Well, she says it's continuous. 4366
Can't push a vacuum since 1990.
Do you remember when I was cross-examining
Mr. Allen and he said that her pain problems would,
quote, flare up occasionally.  I asked him, isn't
it true that her back was so bad she couldn't even
push a vacuum since 1990.  He denied it.  This is
what she was telling her doctor.  
Now, he probably didn't know because he said
he never discussed these issues with his wife.  He
didn't even know when she went to the doctor.  He
didn't know her doctors' names during the six years
they were down in Cape Coral.  This is information
that we had to bring to you.
I asked him, "Did she have problems putting
the dishes up?"  He said no.  This is what she
said, she couldn't even reach to put the dishes up,
couldn't bend to get a dishwasher.  
We know her back pain was so bad she couldn't
carry her laptop.  I asked those questions.
Mr. Allen denied it, said he didn't know that.
That's what her own records say.
This is this important record from 1991.  Now,
this is five years -- think about this, this is
five years before she has COPD.  There's no
smoking-related disease.  She's never tried to 4367
quit.  She's never tried to quit, all the experts
agree.
She has a lot of pain and stress from back
pain, from shoulder pain, from her neck pain, from
her job.  Unfortunately, she gets depressed.  She
says it's so bad she has a hopeless outlook on
life.
Look what she's worried about?  She's very,
very worried about work.  She's the primary
breadwinner.  Mr. Mitnik said she's the one holding
the family together.  She is very worried about her
work.  She appears to have major depression.
Now, we had to bring you these records.  When
I asked Mr. Allen about this, didn't know anything
about it.  Said they didn't discuss it.  This is
the evidence.  That's what she was worried about.
And their experts agreed that people smoke to
reduce stress.  There's no question she did.  Their
experts agree that people smoke for weight control.
We know she did.  Her own doctors say it.
They put up a chart, Mr. Nation did, and it
was a series of boxes and it had addiction on one
side and disease on the other.  And then it had
something in the middle.
And I put this up because there was one thing 4368
that Mr. Nation's chart left out.  It's not just
addiction on one side and disease in the middle.
It isn't a direct cause.  Addiction isn't some
direct cause of COPD.  Nicotine doesn't cause
cancer or COPD.
What's in the middle?  What's in the middle is
a human being.  A different person, as
Dr. Henningfield says.  Everyone is different.
What's in the middle is Mrs. Allen.
And what comes in between this claim of
addiction, however -- whatever definition you use,
and the result is Mrs. Allen's choices.
And we know from her own doctors and her own
experts that if she had chosen to quit smoking in
the 1960s, but for her choice, she doesn't get
COPD.
We know that if she had acted on -- acted on
the advice that she continued to get, we know she
could quit.  She quit for five months and went back
because of weight, not nicotine.  We know that but
for those choices, she would not have gotten the
disease.
And that's the big difference.  Addiction has
to be a legal cause.  Maybe it's a weird thing to
all of us, but that's the way the law of Florida 4369
applies in these cases.  It's not about why you
smoked.  It's whether addiction is a legal cause.
It's not about whether smoking caused her
COPD.  That's been decided.  We agree with that.
Addiction isn't a legal cause when her own doctors
admit that but for her choice, her choice to
continue, she wouldn't have gotten the disease.
For all those reasons, I suggest that the
evidence requires that you vote no.  Even if you
find that she was addicted, was the addiction the
legal cause, not the medical cause, was it a legal
cause so that but for she would have avoided her
injury?  The evidence is no from her own doctor and
from their own experts.
Now, Questions 3 and 4 on the verdict form
deal with whether or not any concealment or
statement by these companies caused her death.  And
it's the same legal cause standard.  The questions
are whether a concealment of a fact caused her
death.  The questions are whether there was an
agreement to conceal and did that cause her death.
Well, the first thing you want to look at is,
well, what did she know when she started?  She knew
it had a warning.  That the product was so
dangerous, one of the few products at the time that 4370
actually had a health warning.  She knew the
government required that and she had that warning
on every pack.  
And she knew that smoking could kill her and
could hurt her lungs because those were the exact
words that her own sisters told her.  So she knew
from the very beginning dangerous, my family thinks
it could kill me.  She continued to smoke.
There's no evidence that if R.J. Reynolds had
said something and it was in the newspaper that she
would have stopped smoking.  We know what happened
when she responded to warnings.  There isn't any
evidence that it was a concealment of a fact that
caused her omission.
If somebody tells you, hey, there's no mold in
the house, you might buy it.  If somebody comes up
and says there is mold in the house, you're not
going to buy it.
Her sister told her the smoking would killer,
the pack warning told her that smoking was
hazardous and it was dangerous, and it told her
that smoking could cause emphysema in '85, and she
still did it.  It wasn't something hidden.
The issue is did something these companies say
or didn't say cause her death?  No.  It was her 4371
smoking and her decision to smoke when she was
warned, when her own husband says on the stand,
quote, "She knew the risks." 
When you look at the jury instruction -- and
I'm going to get to it in a moment.  The jury
instruction says that the way you have to decide
Questions 3 and 4, the fraud claims, are that she
has to rely on the company for something they said.
There's no evidence she ever heard anything the
company said.  There's not a shred of evidence that
she saw a false statement and decided to smoke.
They had three experts.  They had a full week
for one of them to say that Mrs. Allen saw some
statement and relied on it.  But that's not why she
smoked.  She knew it could kill her for 30 years.
But what the instructions say are you have to
see whether but for that statement, if somebody
hadn't said it, she wouldn't get COPD, or that but
for that omission, instead of omitting they had
told her, she wouldn't have gotten COPD.
Now, do we have to guess, well, what would
have happened if somebody had said smoking could
kill her?  Well, we know, she was told smoking
could kill her.  She continued to smoke.  She was
told smoking could hurt her lungs, that's what her 4372
sister told her.  And she responded identically to
all of these personal warnings:  "Leave me alone.
Get off my back.  It's my business.  I don't want
to talk about it.  Let's not discuss it."
Not once, not once did any of her family
members or any of the experts claim that she ever
said, "I don't think it's dangerous.  I don't
understand the risks."  
Just the opposite and in her own words, this
is what her son said.  She told him, "I
understand."  And the plaintiffs in this case
aren't even making the claim.  Mr. Mitnik can say,
just as I can, he can make whatever argument he
wants.  
But evidence needed to come in.  There wasn't
a shred of evidence that she thought smoking was
safe in the '60s or the '70s or that she didn't
think it would kill her.  We know what she was
told.
That's why they admitted that she caused her
own injury, and that's why Mr. Allen on the stand
said she was responsible because she knew the
risks.  And she doesn't learn them in '96.  She
knew it from 1966 on.  Every pack had a warning.
So here's the instruction.  There has to be 4373
reliance.  And reliance means you see something and
you rely on it.  I tell you that house has mold,
don't buy it.  You go and buy it, you didn't rely
on fraud, you were informed.  She was told smoking
could kill her and every time she picked up a pack,
she had a warning there.  
And that's all the law required, and the
companies complied with the law.  And now Mr. Allen
is asking to be paid millions of dollars because
his wife made a choice that he disagrees with.
And, of course, every single one of us has a
loved who died and we can look back and we wish
they had done something different.  We all wish we
had taken better care of ourselves or we had
exercised or we had eaten better.  And of course -- 
MR. MITNIK:  So long as I can put the jury in
the shoes similarly and ask them to put them in the
shoes like he is, I'm okay with this.  Otherwise, I
object as the golden rule as he full well knows.
MR. BELASIC:  It's not golden rule.
THE COURT:  Okay, okay.  Just avoid the
appearance of the golden rule then.
MR. MITNIK:  Great.
MR. BELASIC:  All right. 
But that's sympathy, for the results of her 4374
choices can't govern your decision.  You were
selected because you all promised you could put
that sympathy aside.
There's no second-guessing Mrs. Allen's
choices in this courtroom, not with the mountain of
clear evidence that we have as to what she knew and
why she acted.  She said she smoked for weight
gain.  And in 30 years, she never once suggested
that she didn't know the risks or that she had been
misled.
Even when, even when the lawyers filed the
lawsuit and her husband discussed with her, her
smoking, she never suggested that.
MR. MITNIK:  Objection, Your Honor.  That
misstates material facts in this case.  The court
is aware of it.  Can I approach?
THE COURT:  If need be.  Bear with us for a
moment.
(A sidebar conference was held outside the
hearing of the jury.)
MR. MITNIK:  He keeps saying she's never
announced that there was any fraud, any
disagreement, anything as if this was a complaint
being brought by a husband after she died.  The
complaint is record evidence to Your Honor. 4375
It is -- the court is fully aware -- and that
he is, that when she was alive, she sued these
companies for fraud, conspiracy --
MR. MURPHY:  -- this is not a substantial
complaint.  This was something you -- you can stand
up there and, oh, yeah, she did.
MR. BELASIC:  When she discussed the lawsuit,
her husband asked her why she started smoking and
she didn't say, "Well, I had a claim for fraud."
THE COURT:  That's just both sides of the
argument --
MR. MITNIK:  As long as I can go into it.
THE COURT:  You can.
(The sidebar conference concluded and
proceedings took place in open court as follows:)
MR. BELASIC:  So when she filed this lawsuit,
she was alive.  And the lawsuit was drafted up by
her lawyers, but then she discussed it with her
husband.  And I asked Mr. Allen what they had
discussed.  And they discussed why she smoked.  
And, of course, for the 20 years from 1978 on
until the time she got disease, they had discussed
smoking many, many times, and we know that he had
asked her why she smoked.
And in all those times before the lawsuit was 4376
filed and after the lawsuit was filed, she never
said that she smoked because of something that a
tobacco company said.  And you know if she did,
Mr. Mitnik would show us the evidence.  He doesn't
have it.
And if he knows she continued smoking because
of some false statement in an ad, they would show
you the evidence but they don't have any.  They put
three experts up and not one of them, not one of
them, even Dr. Cummings said that Mrs. Allen was
defrauded and that if something had been said
differently, Mrs. Allen doesn't get COPD.
She believed it could kill her.  She was
warned that it could kill her in 1966.  But she
liked smoking and she made her own choices.  It's
not a crazy choice.  Millions and millions of
people chose to smoke and 60 million chose to quit,
including almost her entire family.  She made a
different choice than her family.
For those reasons, the plaintiffs have not met
their burden of proof.  And, of course, it's their
burden to present evidence, not just argument.
When Mr. Mitnik gets up, I won't be able to
respond.  Look and see what the evidence is.  Was
there testimony?  Was there a document?  Or is it 4377
just a very skilled lawyer making an argument?  
Because there's no evidence in this record
that shows us that concealment caused her death,
that it was a legal cause.  And there's certainly
no evidence that some agreement to conceal, that
some meeting in 1953 was a legal cause of her
death.  She was warned from the very beginning.
Question 5, one of the things that you have if
you answer no, the verdict form will say we're done
and your duty is over.  If you answer no on
Questions 3 and 4, then you'll go forward.
One of the things that Mr. Mitnik said is that
this admission of responsibility doesn't apply to
your answers on Questions 3 and 4, and I want to
talk more about that.  
Question 3 and Question 4 ask you was
concealment, was some sort of fraud a legal cause
of her death?  And when you get the verdict form
from the judge, on Page 3, it's going to tell you
what happens.  If you vote yes that some sort of
concealment was the actual legal cause of her
death, then there's no percentage of
responsibility.  Then whatever percentage you
assign will not apply.  That's what Mr. Mitnik
said.   4378
So think about that.  If you vote yes on fraud
on Questions 3 and 4, she's not responsible.  All
of the responsibility that they've taken, it's
going to be zero percent.
Now, it should be an easy decision because
there isn't any evidence that this was a woman who
didn't know the risks and if she had only been told
it was bad for her she would have quit.  There's no
evidence of that.
So when it comes time to turn the percentage,
if you even get that far, think about this, their
lead expert, Dr. Burns, says that does addiction
mean that the companies are responsible and not the
smoker, no.  He says that even addicted smokers are
responsible, and he uses that word, "responsible,"
for their own behavior.
The Surgeon General says that even though it's
addictive, it's the smoker that has to decide
whether or not to continue.
And we know that she made a choice with a
family and her sisters that knew it was dangerous.
With the parents' warnings, with the
Surgeon General's report, with the knowledge in her
family, with the starting as an adult, smoking for
weight control, being warned on every pack, being 4379
told it would kill her 30 years before she got the
disease, told it was bad for her lungs, warned
again.  
Warned by her own father that smoking would
damage her lungs because it had happened to him.
Warned by her husband.  Warned by her husband about
her father who got the same type of disease.
Warned by Mr. Allen year after year in the '80s.
Warned that it would cause emphysema in 1985.
Warned repeatedly by her husband in the '90s
and by her daughter and by her doctors knowing that
smoking was affected by nicotine, knowing that it
was a cancer stick.  
But the one thing she didn't rely on was some
statement from a tobacco company.  There isn't any
evidence that she would have quit smoking if
someone hadn't put it out an advertisement.  
You know, they say late in her life after --
after she got the disease, she switched to these
skinny cigarettes.  There's no evidence she ever
smoked them before she got the disease, they say
she switched to them?  
And there was some evidence, there was some
claim that she said, well, the white ones are safer
or the brown ones were safer.  Contradictory 4380
evidence.  There isn't any evidence that she saw
some statement by a company.
They didn't even present evidence that there
was an advertisement for her brand that said it was
safer.  We saw the pictures of More ads that had
good looking men for a few years and then good
looking women.  And then Mr. Mitnik put up, I don't
know, ten boards of skinny women.
But what he didn't do is present any evidence
that the companies ever told her that smoking these
skinny cigarettes was safer.  And there's no
evidence that she ever even smoked those skinny
cigarettes until after she got the disease.
It shouldn't be that hard when you have a
woman who had as many discussions about smoking, it
shouldn't be that hard for plaintiffs to prove the
fraud case.
And they have three highly-paid experts who
have made millions of dollars and not one of them
claimed, yeah, she smoked because of an ad.  If
that ad hadn't been run, she would be alive today.
And if that sounds harsh, it's because the law
is strict and because your obligation is severe.
Your obligation is significant.  You all swore that
you would apply that law, to hold them to evidence, 4381
not to lawyer argument or sympathy for Mr. Allen.
So if you find a percentage of fault, put
100 percent down.  She didn't make 20 percent of
the choice.  If she had made a different choice,
would she have avoided 20 percent of the COPD?  No,
her doctor says she doesn't get COPD.
And the only thing that changed or affected
whether she could quit in '75, that's her decision.
The only thing that affected whether she could quit
in '85 was her decision.  And why do I say that?
It's because the evidence is that she didn't even
try.
It might be different if you had a smoker who
tried to quit in the '60s and '70s and they could
present evidence, you know, she tried to quit but
nicotine pushed back, nicotine controlled her.
That's not the case we have.  She made no effort to
quit whatsoever before she got sick.
And that's why Dr. Burns had to admit he can't
say that it stopped her from avoiding her COPD.
The but for cause of her death was that choice.
And she was the only one who could make it.  She
made 100 percent of the choice.
Your Honor, this is a good stopping point.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
MR. BELASIC:
Thank you, Your Honor.
Welcome back, ladies and gentlemen.
I'm just going to talk with you a little while
longer.
Obviously I went over a great deal of the
evidence, and I think an overwhelming mountain of
evidence that shows that Mrs. Allen was aware from
the start of the dangers of smoking, was not
deceived and chose not to even try to quit for 30
years until she got her disease.
And then the
evidence very clearly from the doctors show that she
was able to quit and but for her obsession with
weight, which is sad but not something that was
caused by a tobacco company, she would have quit.
She quit five months and because of her
obsession with weight, she went back to it.
We saw
the record.
She was frantic with work and she
started to gain weight so she smoked again.
But for
that, she is still alive today and is not disabled,
according to her doctor.
But for her decision not
to try to quit in the '60s '70s and '80s, she
doesn't get COPD at all and that's her doctor.
What I want to talk to you with my remaining
time is the issue of damages that Mr. Mitnik brought
up, and I want to remind you first that if you reach
this issue -- and, frankly, I think you should
not -- under the facts and under the evidence that
have been charged, vote no on the first questions
and you wouldn't reach it.
But if you do, I want to
remind you that if you have already found yes on
Questions 3 and 4 -- Questions 3 and 4 are those 4392
issues of concealment.
Was concealment a legal
cause of her death?
If you vote yes, then it
doesn't matter what percentage you assign to
Patricia Dawn Allen.
If you vote yes, all of the
plaintiff's arguments about taking responsibility
are mooted because she's going to get 0 percent.
There will be no way to hold her accountable for
her decisions.
Now, I don't think you should vote
yes.
As we discussed, concealment was not a cause,
she was well aware of the risks, and when she was
warned, we know what happened.
She didn't take
warnings to heart and change her behavior.
She
ignored them.
She was told right on the pack in
'85, smoking causes emphysema and had no interest.
She was told that her father father-in-law had died
of emphysema from smoking and took no interest.
She
was told by her own father that his breathing
problems had caused him to quit.
She saw him
successfully quit.
She didn't try to emulate.
If you vote yes on 3 and 4, there won't be any
responsibility for Patricia Dawn Allen.
That's just
not fair.
Now, Mr. Mitnik said he would talk a little
about punitive damages.
Before we get there, let me 4393
say a few things about compensatory damages.
Mr. Mitnik obviously made his case for why damages
should be awarded, and as you know, it's his burden
of proof to prove that there -- that we're liable in
the first place.
It's his burden of proof to prove
that any damages should be awarded, and you have the
ability to -- and if you decide to award damages, to
award anything from zero on up.
But it's also the plaintiff's burden to show
the amount of damages.
And you'll have a very
specific instruction that you can read in your jury
instructions.
Judge Wallace will tell you the law,
the rules for damages.
And basically it comes down to this, that it
has to be a reasonable and just amount that is
supported by the facts and circumstances.
Now, did
Mr. Mitnik give you an amount?
Well, sort of.
He
gave -- started talking about our expert was paid
$600 an hour.
That's right.
We have to pay experts
for their time, just like they pay their experts.
Remember, Dr. Burns said he made $3.5 million
testifying in these cases.
Now, he writes articles
for the Surgeon General, but he makes three and a
half million giving testimony in these cases and
saying that people are addicted and that the people 4394
who sue companies should get big money.
That's what
he does.
Dr. Cummings made over a million dollars.
But you know what?
None of that and certainly
not the amount that was paid per hour, none of that
has anything to do with Mr. Allen's damages.
They
have to show that it's supported by the facts and
the -- and the circumstances.
And Mr. Mitnik says, well, you know, y'all pay
your experts 600 an hour, and then two sentences
later, he says, well, I suggest $600 a day for
the -- the 21 years or the 23 years for the life
expectancy.
Where did he get $600 a day?
What
evidence shows that you should measure damages at
$600 a day?
What criteria, what fact?
You know, I'd represent to you, he pulled that
number out of thin air.
There's no basis or
evidence.
He's asking you to speculate.
He hasn't
met his burden of proof to show a reasonable amount
of damages, even if you get there.
Now, the final question you're going to ask is
Question 8, if you reach it.
And I suggest again,
under the facts, you won't even be there.
This case
will be over, we'll go home.
But if you get to Question 8, the issue is is
Mr. Allen entitled to punitive damages?
Are 4395
punitive damages warranted?
And the purpose of
punitive damages is supposed to be punishment and
deterrence.
"And."
Remember, Mr. Mitnik read it
and said "or."
I had to correct it.
Look at the
instructions.
It has to be punishment and
deterrence, and those two are very different things.
And I would suggest that they cannot meet both of
those criteria under these circumstances.
We talked a little bit about this in voir dire,
and you're going to see the jury instructions, but
let's be very clear about what punitive damages are
and where they go.
This is an additional request,
an additional claim for money by Mr. Allen, and any
amount, from $1 up, if you choose to award punitive
damages, can be awarded only to the plaintiff.
Any
punitive damages award goes to Mr. Allen.
It's his
claim for more money.
Doesn't go to the State.
Doesn't go to anyone else.
Plaintiffs are asking
for more money.
So apparently they want $600 a day for 23 days,
which is millions of dollars for both Mr. Allen and
Amber Allen.
So they want to be paid millions and
millions of dollars for the choices that their wife
and mother made that they now regret, choices they
now second-guess and say she shouldn't have made. 4396
They want to be paid millions of dollars for that.
And apparently Mr. Allen is going to request
some additional amount of punitive damages.
I don't
know whether it's going to be big or millions of
dollars more, but that's what this request is.
And
it can only be given to Mr. Allen, not to any public
health agency, not to people who help people quit.
It's not going to charity or anti-smoking groups.
Check written out to Mr. Allen.
Now, here's some of the instructions that
Judge Wallace has given you.
You'll have these in
writing.
And as Mr. Mitnik said, there is a
different burden of proof, a much higher standard
for punitive damages.
It's no longer just this
preponderance of the evidence; what is the greater
weight of the evidence?
Instead it has to be clear
and convincing.
It has to be precise, explicit,
lacking in confusion, that it produces a firm belief
or conviction about the matter in issue.
Look at the next instruction we highlighted in
17.
When you consider whether -- whether to award
any punitives, you may consider the harm that the
defendants' conduct caused to the plaintiff.
You
cannot -- you cannot punish a defendant for any
harms suffered by any persons other than plaintiff. 4397
So if you're thinking about punishing, it cannot be
for any harm to other smokers.
It can only be for
the harm that the conduct caused to the plaintiff.
And that's what I want to talk about in my last
few moments here.
They've made a lot of charges
against the tobacco companies.
And they've made a
lot of claims.
They put up a lot of documents.
And
I'm going to explain some of the context of that in
evidence that you saw during the trial, but I'm also
going to talk about how that evidence doesn't show
conduct that actually caused harm to Patricia Dawn
Allen.
So these are the plaintiff's charges against
R. J. Reynolds, and they're against Philip Morris as
well.
And the evidence here applies to both of
these companies.
They said that there was this
concealment.
They talked about the finding.
The question here that I'd ask you to look at
is what was the evidence in this case on whether the
information was really secret?
I mean, we know that
the fact that nicotine was in cigarettes wasn't a
secret and that it was a critical reason.
That
wasn't a secret.
Dr. Burns admitted that.
And it's
true.
A century ago, they were calling the
cigarette an addiction. 4398
But more importantly, look, they were saying it
is so generally inhaled.
Plaintiffs made a big
deal.
They tried to pretend that cigarettes weren't
inhalable before R. J. Reynolds came along.
Right
when Dr. Burns was on the stand, I showed him this.
He said cigarettes were always generally inhalable,
contradicts Mr. Mitnik's argument that he made in
opening.
And I followed up and asked Dr. Burns, well,
were they lightly inhalable, moderately inhalable,
deeply inhalable?
He answered yes to each.
It's
not like people couldn't deeply inhale cigarettes.
In fact, 100 years ago, it's an addiction and it's
so generally inhaled.
And we know that well before Mrs. Allen started
smoking, there were warnings in the popular press,
the most popular magazine of the day.
It wasn't a
secret.
We know it was in Newsweek.
It was in
Time, LIFE, Time magazine again, about smoking
causing cancer and death.
And it's true that the tobacco companies didn't
jump up and say absolutely everything in those
studies is something we agree with.
It is true that
they show you a variety of statements.
And we look
back on hindsight 60 years ago at those black and 4399
white photos, and you think they made some stupid
statements.
And they're right.
They probably hung
their hat too long on scientific debates and
scientific controversies.
But there isn't any evidence that these 1950s
TV shows had any effect on Mrs. Allen.
She wasn't
even smoking then.
And when she did smoke in the
modern 1960s, her family already believed that
smoking was dangerous.
Her sister knew it would
kill her and told her.
Mrs. Allen's suing -- or Mr. Allen's suing
because his wife got a lung injury that caused her
death.
Her sisters Rose and Barbara told her in
1966 that smoking would harm her lungs and could
kill her, the exact same injury.
And we know that the Surgeon General said that
the public was well-informed even in 1957.
He
didn't say that the tobacco companies had deceived
the nation.
He said they were well-informed.
The
idea -- they show you some documents.
Well,
nicotine is the source of habituation.
30 years later, Reader's Digest, the article
written by the boxer is saying that nicotine is the
source of all pleasure.
That wasn't a secret.
And
it wasn't a secret to Mrs. Allen either because she 4400
referred to her own smoking as nicotine fits.
When -- when she'd go without smoking, she would
describe herself as having a nicotine fit.
She knew
nicotine.
She knew that it was in the cigarette.
And the companies did provide the list of
constituents, the compounds and the carcinogens that
were in smoke to the Surgeon General, and the
Surgeon General's Report was widely viewed.
In
fact, here's another Florida Health Note, and, no,
no one's saying they read the Florida Health Notes.
But look at what it says.
It says:
"Nearly all
Floridians have heard about the Surgeon General's
Report on smoking and health which was released in
'64."
And we know that Mrs. Allen's own sisters have
heard it.
We've heard that evidence and that's why
her sisters told her that smoking could harm her
lungs and could kill her, right when she started.
Look what sister Rose Marie Nielson said, and
this answers Mr. Mitnik's smoking environment.
This
is the environment that our smoker, Mrs. Allen, was
raised in.
Her sister says, back then, everyone
knew that smoking was not good for you, and nobody
is that stupid to think that smoking is ever good
for you. 4401
And you'll remember, that deposition was read
to you a few days ago.
That was -- that was the one
that Ms. Massa read, and the testimony from the
sister is emphatic.
That family knew smoking was
bad.
She warned her sister it could hurt her lungs
and kill her.
And by '64, the vast majority -- if we ever had
an election that could get 81 percent of people to
agree on anything, it would be an incredible
landslide.
By '64, before Mrs. Allen had ever
smoked, 81 percent thought smoking was harmful to
health.
And later, it was 90 percent.
The warnings
were on the entire time.
Dr. Burns himself said in '75 -- Mrs. Allen had
only been smoking for a few years.
In '75, he said
more people know smoking causes lung cancer than
knew the name of the president.
And by '81 is when he said that.
He said 95
percent of smokers are thoroughly aware of the
health dangers and that includes Mrs. Allen.
She
knew and believed then that smoking was dangerous.
We know she smoked for weight control and stress,
and we know from her doctors and from her own
husband and from the testimony of the fact
witnesses that she never made an effort to quit 4402
smoking until she got a disease, until it was too
late to reverse.
Well, look, there were a lot of statements
where the tobacco companies are saying things that
you look back and you think it's pretty stupid now.
Were people saying, oh, my God, the tobacco company
says they don't agree; it's safe; I better run out?
Here's the survey that asks people, do you even
listen to or rely on what tobacco companies are
saying?
3 percent, 3 percent said they would be
most apt to believe the tobacco industry.
The
American Cancer Society, the AMA, the
U.S. Department of Health.
And it's not that
surprising.
I mean, if we want to find out if a diet of
cheeseburgers and french fries can cause a heart
disease risk, we don't call up Ronald McDonald, and
that doesn't make any excuse for the companies.
But
the evidence is people weren't looking to tobacco
companies as a source of health information.
They
weren't gullable.
In 1959, only 3 percent were even listening.
And, of course, Mrs. Allen wasn't listening.
Their
experts don't dispute that when she heard it could
kill her, that when she heard it was dangerous that 4403
she never said, oh, no, I don't think so.
And,
again, in 1970, again, only 3 percent even trust the
tobacco companies.
Now, there's no evidence in this case from any
of the plaintiff's experts that any survey, any
data, any poll that said, well, smokers saw, you
know, some TV show when a tobacco guy came on
60 Minutes or something or 20/20 and they went out
and smoked.
There's certainly no evidence that it
affected Mrs. Allen.
But the evidence is -- the
evidence even from the tobacco companies is people
didn't consider them reliable.
They listened to the
public health community.
They made a big deal out of psychological
crutch, and I think this was Mr. Kelly that pointed
out, actually the term "psychological crutch" was in
the Surgeon General's Report.
It's not some dark
idea that's made up by a tobacco company.
It was
the Surgeon General that said there are some
beneficial aspects of smoking, including reducing
stress, like Mrs. Allen used, and it was the Surgeon
General that it referred to as a psychological
crutch.
Okay.
I want to talk a little about
advertising.
The advertising of brands that 4404
Mrs. Allen smoked, they weren't on TV.
They didn't
have celebrities.
And we know that she didn't claim
that she smoked because of that.
She smoked because
of weight control.
And, yeah, she filed a lawsuit.
The lawsuit's
not evidence.
It's Mr. Mitnik's job and the
lawyers' job to actually bring the evidence.
And
there's no one in this case that said she smoked
because of an advertisement.
A few years after she
got the disease, she switched to these skinny
cigarettes, and the two people who were -- who were
asking for millions of dollars say that she said,
well, I thought the white cigarettes were safer, and
then one says, I thought the brown cigarettes were
safer.
She doesn't say that she believed any
statement from a company, and they didn't --
certainly didn't put a single advertisement out that
says that Mores or Capris were safer.
Mr. Mitnik says that this -- that by paying
Mr. Allen millions and millions of dollars that this
lawsuit will somehow protect you in the future.
Well, youth smoking is already at the lowest level
ever studied.
That's Dr. Henningfield and
Dr. Cummings.
Giving millions of dollars to
Mr. Allen isn't going to do anything. 4405
On filters, they keep saying that there was
filter fraud, yet they don't show a single
advertisement that said, hey, filters are safer.
But here's what the Surgeon General said.
They
looked at the statistics for real people, not -- not
something a tobacco company did.
And it said that
real people had lower amounts of tar and nicotine
and it decreased their mortality rate.
So they
looked at actual smokers, and the rates of lung
cancer were less.
And in '81 again, lower rates of lung cancer.
They're not relying on anything a tobacco company
said.
In 1989, filtered lower-tar cigarettes reduce
the risk of lung cancer.
1990, again, a lower risk
of lung cancer.
And, of course, there's no evidence that
Mrs. Allen wouldn't have started smoking if
everything was an unfiltered cigarette.
Her friends
told her, start smoking because it's good for weight
control.
They didn't say good for filters and
there's no evidence.
Dr. Henningfield talked about design and he
admitted, it's impossible to make a safe cigarette;
it's very complicated.
But he admitted something
more important.
Over the years, he said the tobacco 4406
companies have made efforts to try to remove harmful
compounds from tobacco smoke.
You look at the punitive damages standard.
It
has to be an entire lack of care, something that's
the equivalent of -- of willfully disregarding any
duty or an intentional causing of harm.
The
companies, their own expert admit, made serious
efforts to try to take these harmful compounds out
and they reduced these chemicals.
It decreased the
tumorigenicity.
The Surgeon General themselves say
that the companies worked with the government to try
to make safer cigarettes.
We know that Reynolds' president, in fact,
wrote this letter in '68, saying, cooperate as much
as possible to foster a relationship with the
government and gain the cooperation and proper
research.
If there's a safer cigarette, let's do
it, he says.
He doesn't say we want to kill our --
why would they want to kill their customers?
He
says, internal document, if there's a safer
cigarette, let's work on it.
And the Surgeon General said that what they did
with reconstituted tobacco actually did reduce
tumors, less tumorigenic.
They decreased the pH
levels.
They decreased the carcinogenic activity. 4407
That's the Surgeon General measuring the actual
cigarettes that were made when Mrs. Allen was
smoking.
I don't -- I'm not going to talk that much
about pH because after Dr. Henningfield testified,
there really wasn't much left.
He agreed he didn't
know what the pH levels were for the cigarettes she
smoked.
He agreed that the pH level of cigarettes
was actually lower than milk.
He agreed that the
Surgeon General had said that at the regular pH of
these cigarettes, there was almost no -- almost no
free nicotine.
So even the Surgeon General rejected
it.
And we talked a little bit about ingredients.
Everyone agrees the ingredients were disclosed to
the government 30 years ago.
Dr. Henningfield said
that wasn't good enough.
He then agreed -- and you
can see the list; it's in evidence -- that in '94,
the companies released a list of all the ingredients
to the public, 20 years ago, and that for the last
five years, the FDA's been regulating ingredients.
Yet in all that time of turning over the
ingredients list, 20 years to the public, 5 years to
the FDA, 30 years to Health and Human Services, the
government's never said, take an ingredient out, and 4408
they've never said, if you do take an ingredient
out, it would be safer.
Okay.
In fact, when we did make these
additive-free cigarettes, the public health
community attacked us.
Now, here's one of the issues.
I just asked
Dr. Henningfield straight out.
If you make a
cigarette without additives, is it safer?
No.
You
make a cigarette without additives, is it less
addictive?
He admitted no.
So I want to talk a little about nicotine in
these last few minutes.
The government at one time
said increase nicotine.
It'll make cigarettes safer
because people will smoke less and get less tar.
Then the plaintiffs here are suing the companies for
not taking it out.
Contradictory.
We know that experimental and alternative
cigarettes were brought that were safer.
R. J. Reynolds made a cigarette that reduced cancer
risk by enormous amounts that we're going to see.
Philip Morris produced a cigarette, Next, that
wasn't addictive.
And look what happened.
The government held the secret meeting and said
they were worried that Premier -- this is Reynolds'
cigarette -- doesn't cause cancer.
It's actually 4409
safer than current cigarettes.
The cancer risk
associated with smoking Premier was lowered
significantly, but not the risk of heart disease.
They didn't help the companies.
They went to attack
it.
And they said that we should work on negative
publicity to kill Premier and that they should set
up a committee to attack the problems of these
products.
Same thing.
We saw the meeting.
We went
step by step with Dr. Henningfield.
Philip Morris
made a nonaddictive cigarette and the response of
the publishing health community and the government
was to attempt to kill it.
They held the secret
meeting.
They invited, you saw, half a dozen
lawyers to figure out ways to attack it.
They --
they got the American Medical Association to attack
it, even though the Surgeon General said that it
wasn't addictive.
Companies made a nonaddictive
cigarette and here's what happened.
(Video clip was played as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:
Next cigarettes may be
the most dangerous product put on the market in the
last ten years."
(Video clip was stopped.)
MR. BELASIC:
Dr. Henningfield said that the 4410
Next cigarette wasn't addictive.
The Surgeon
General, in 2010, said that the Next cigarette was
not addictive.
The government invited this guy and
five or six other lawyers and Dr. Henningfield to
the secret meeting, and they went out and attacked
it.
And they went out and attacked it and tried to
get the FTC and the FDA to ban it.
And they won.
They killed it.
Philip Morris was not going to be
able to market a cigarette when the public health
community is saying that it's the most dangerous
cigarette.
Now, if I hadn't told you about this, you would
have thought if somebody made a safe cigarette and
tried to kill, it would be the evil tobacco
companies.
Instead, it's Philip Morris making the
nonaddictive cigarette; Reynolds making the
cigarette that decreases the risk of cancer, and
it's the government trying to kill those.
And
Dr. Henningfield discour- -- says, hey, that wasn't
my opinion.
But he was there at the meeting, and he
agreed every step of the way that's what these
people did.
Punitive damages shouldn't be awarded to
companies that have spent decades trying to reduce
the risk of their cigarettes that actually did what 4411
the plaintiffs are suing for, to reduce the risk of
cancer, to make nonaddictive products and then have
the government try to ban them.
Bottom line, after all of these design changes,
after all of these design changes, does that mean
that the cigarette was more dangerous to Mrs. Allen?
I asked Dr. Henningfield, if you took a
roll-your-own, natural tobacco out of the ground
here in Florida, rolled it up and smoked it, is that
safe?
Is it safer?
No.
He said roll-your-owns
were more addictive.
A factory made cigarette is
not more addictive.
It's not more dangerous.
I had to show him, after he agreed, but I had
to show him Dr. Cummings' article, their other
expert.
Dr. Cummings himself wrote an article that
said roll-your-owns are more addictive than these
modern cigarettes.
That's their two experts
contradicting these claims.
Companies made a lot of misstatements.
Companies went out on a limb and had an argument
with the public health community.
But in the end,
the companies spent a great amount of money trying
to research and make these cigarettes that their own
experts reveal are safer.
None of this -- none of
this caused Mrs. Allen's injury and under these 4412
circumstances, giving extra millions of dollars to
Mr. Allen is not warranted.
If you find that he's
entitled to damages, you will have found whatever is
just and reasonable, and he will have been fully
compensated, but there's no reason to give millions
more under these circumstances.
Now, again, you have someone who was told about
a product that was dangerous and could kill her and
used it for many years, and then years later, her
husband brings a lawsuit and says, it's your fault
because she couldn't stop smoking; nicotine hooked
her.
But when the evidence comes out, we find out
that she never tried to stop during those 30 years,
that she never even made an attempt.
And when the
evidence comes out, her own experts say, I can't say
that nicotine stopped her because she didn't try.
And when the evidence comes out, we find the
only time she tried to quit and made a serious
attempt is in 1998, two years after she got sick.
And the medical records, not some tobacco company
witness, not some lawyer, the medical records say
she went back because she was frantic at work and
she was starting to gain weight.
And there is no doubt that it is a sad story, 4413
that we can have sympathy for her, but they haven't
met their burden of proof.
But for her obsession
with weight, she quit smoking in 1998, and but for
her decision to never even try to quit, she could
quit smoking before '96, when her own doctor says
that she would avoid it.
However they label
addiction, however they label her behavior, that
choice was the cause of her injury.
And for those reasons, ladies and gentlemen, I
think the evidence warrants a finding in favor of
the defendants, and Mr. Kelly is going to talk to
you about Philip Morris.


MR. KELLY:
Yes.
Thank you very much,
Your Honor.
How time do I have?
THE COURT:
It's in here.
MR. BELASIC:
20 minutes.
MR. KELLY:
Doing a little math?
THE COURT:
Yeah.
Yeah.
You have -- let's
see.
I'm sorry.
MR. BELASIC:
Your Honor, I had 59 minutes plus
26 and a half for myself.
THE COURT:
That's right.
MR. BELASIC:
He has 20 minutes, I think. 4414
THE COURT:
Yeah, that's about right, just
about 19 or 20 minutes.
MR. KELLY:
Thank you, Your Honor.
May it please the Court?
THE COURT:
Yes, sir.
MR. KELLY:
Counsel, Mr. Allen, Ms. Allen.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
I'm going to try not to cover too many of the
areas that Mr. Belasic already covered, but I do
want top focus in on the claim as it relates to
Philip Morris specifically.
It's -- it's been laid
out for you by Mr. Mitnik on behalf of Mr. Allen.
The first issue I want to address, though, is
the one that is the very first you're going to
address, the first question on the verdict form.
And if I could have the ELMO, please?
Okay.
Was Patricia Dawn Allen addicted to
cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was such
addiction a legal cause?
Now, you're going to see,
back in the jury room, those instructions and those
terms are all going to be defined for you, and
you'll get a chance to apply those instructions --
I'm sorry I'm talking so fast -- those instructions
to the evidence that you've heard.
But I've listened to the plaintiff's 4415
presentation on this question, and I have these
observations to share with you to suggest to you
that there seems to be quite a bit of evidence that
is undisputed that there's agreement on.
There are
30 years of smoking, from '66 to '96, for Ms. Allen
to become diagnosed with COPD.
Not much dispute
about that.
Over the first 20 years of that smoking, had
Mrs. Allen stopped smoking, she would not have
gotten COPD.
No dispute as to that.
Had she stopped when she was diagnosed, she
would still be alive and not be disabled.
No
dispute about that.
The question is then, no matter how you decide
to define addiction -- and certainly there are
plenty of definitions to choose from in the record.
However you define that, that doesn't answer the
question that's in the -- the verdict form because
it's not do you find that she was addicted and then
move on, but it's connecting that to her illness as
a causal factor under the law such that it's a legal
cause.
And over that 20 or 30 years of smoking, a
condition that she had, however you define it, could
be a potential hurdle to stopping.
Certainly 4416
possible, as we know from the evidence of what
addiction is, that it can be a hurdle to stopping.
But we also know, on the other hand, that millions
of people who are addicted have stopped but then
others haven't.
So you get these statistics delivered to you
concerning an addictive smoker, and you wonder, I
would guess, where does Ms. Allen fit in?
Is she
among the millions of people who, had she tried, she
would have quit, or is she among the other group
who, being addicted and trying, had a hard time and
could not for a long time quit or possibly at all?
Where does Mrs. Allen fall among all these
statistics you've been given?
People are different.
I -- I latched onto that
and as soon as Dr. Henningfield said it.
That's
right.
All these statistics don't tell you anything
about Ms. Allen.
The plaintiff has the burden of
establishing the burden under the law that Ms. Allen
was so substantially affected that she continued to
smoke over that time.
And what do we know about that time?
We know
that she never was motivated to quit, never decided
to quit.
Motivation and a decision to quit,
according to the plaintiff's experts, are necessary 4417
to a successful quit attempt.
She never
demonstrated that over the first 30 years of her
smoking.
The effect of her addiction, however you
characterize that, on her smoking is not apparent in
the first 30 years because she never tried to quit,
never attempted to quit.
The plaintiffs are
suggesting to you that you can insert into the
question a kind of generic or hypothetical smoker
and assume that that smoker would have had a
difficult time and been unable to quit had that
smoker tried.
All that hypothetical analysis and assumptions
are not sufficient under the law to prove the case.
In the end, the question is would Ms. Allen have
been able to quit had she attempted?
If your
initial reaction to that is we don't know because we
don't know anything about Ms. Allen during that
period of time, plaintiff has failed to meet his
burden of proof.
You have no information about Ms. Allen
virtually of what her daily activities were,
what her goals and objectives were, what her
stresses were, what her joys were through the '60s
and into the '70s.
Mr. Allen didn't meet her until 4418
'78, and then into the '80s, you know a little bit
about her.
But it wasn't until the defense got up and told
you a whole lot more about her from medical records
that you got a sense of who Ms. Allen really was as
a person.
And it's that person that you have to
make a decision about, not a generic or hypothetical
smoker, not a statistical person, but the real
person.
And I'd submit to you that as I'm listening to
what the plaintiffs are arguing, they're not arguing
with you at all or to you at all about the person,
Mrs. Allen.
They're arguing to you about a
hypothetical smoker.
And it's the person who's the
subject of this case.
That's why we have these
individual cases because we focused on the person.
And for Ms. Allen, there is essentially no evidence
at all in the '60s and '70s, even through most of
the '80s to explain what would have happened had she
been motivated and attempted to quit.
We do know
that when she was motivated and attempted to quit,
she did.
And plaintiffs have not addressed that at
all.
All right.
Let me turn to Philip Morris and
the claim that has been made against Philip Morris. 4419
If I could have the slide, please, Tammy.
All right.
There's a burden of proof in the
case.
There's two actually.
The burden of proof in
the case, except when you get down the road in the
jury verdict form, is greater weight of the
evidence.
And the way that I like to think about it
as we go through the evidence that we're going to
talk about is it's like a high jump.
And if you get
over the bar with your evidence, considering all the
evidence in the case, then you've made it to the
greater weight of the evidence, your burden of
proof.
Got a note that's popped up on my screen there
telling me -- all right.
It didn't pop up on yours.
Excuse me.
Okay.
So as you go through the evidence and
you're discussing it among yourselves and you come
upon terms like, well, it's unknown; it's kind of
uncertain; yeah, that's really speculation; well,
those are assumptions; it might be; it could be,
possibly -- and you're going to have lots of
discussions in there about what the evidence really
proves and what the truth is.
And you're going to be talking about, well,
possibly it's this; maybe it's that; there's maybe; 4420
could be this; those are just assumptions, those are
indications to you that the evidence hasn't made it
over the burden of proof.
Please bear that in mind
as you work your way through the evidence.
Mr. Mitnik gave his opening statement to you.
He said that the claim against Philip Morris was
based on these facts which he planned to prove to
you.
Number 1, Mrs. Allen started smoking with
Benson & Hedges menthol cigarettes.
Number 2,
Mrs. Allen's addiction began with Benson & Hedges
menthol.
And 1 and 2 added up to 3, that smoking
Benson & Hedges menthol was a legal cause of her
COPD because the claim was she started with Benson &
Hedges menthol and that's what initiated her
addiction.
Did Mrs. Allen start smoking with Benson &
Hedges menthol?
Here's the evidence.
Mrs. Allen
started smoking in 1966.
Not much dispute about
that.
Benson & Hedges menthol first came on the
market in 1968.
Undisputed that Mrs. Allen did
not start smoking with Benson & Hedges menthol.
That's Dr. Cummings' testimony.
It's undisputed in
the case.
At the time Mrs. Allen began smoking in
1966, Benson & Hedges menthol had yet to be on the
market. 4421
And here is -- you'll remember, Ms. Norgaard
testified by deposition that in 1969, when she lived
with Ms. Allen, she recalled that the brand of
cigarette Ms. Allen was smoking at that time, '69 to
'71, was Benson & Hedges menthol.
Well, that's all
they are is menthol.
We'll talk about that in a
minute.
And the claim was -- and the plaintiffs
presented this.
The claim was through their experts
that beginning smokers are brand-loyal so that if
you know the cigarette they were smoking three years
into their smoking history, you can assume or
conclude because they're brand-loyal, that's what
they started with.
And that was the basis of the
claim until Dr. Cummings showed up and said, they
weren't even available until 1968.
Second point of the plaintiff's claim against
Philip Morris, after striking out on the first claim
that Ms. Allen started smoking with Benson & Hedges
menthol, did Mrs. Allen's addiction start with
Benson & Hedges menthol?
Well, she started smoking
in 1966.
And the plaintiff's witnesses claim that
she was addicted to the cigarettes she started
smoking with, whatever they were, within -- either
immediately or within several months. 4422
There's no claim that Benson & Hedges were
smoked until 1969, when Ms. Allen was 20 or 21 years
old and she lived with Ms. Norgaard until she was
about 23.
Dr. Henningfield was here and testified on
direct and cross examination and then -- let me get
this right -- on -- not direct or cross examination
or even redirect examination, but in response to a
juror question, which was to Dr. Henningfield.
At
what age is the human brain, male and female, fully
developed, thus reducing the risk of addiction?
He
said going into the 20s.
Relatively few people,
even today, get addicted to tobacco after they hit
their 20s.
But according to all the experts in the case,
Mrs. Allen was addicted to cigarettes containing
nicotine before she even began smoking Benson &
Hedges menthol.
So the first two components of the plaintiff's
claim they made against Philip Morris in opening
statement fall away in the evidence.
And that
leaves us with the argument concerning the claim
that Benson & Hedges smoking caused COPD.
Remember our time line from opening statement.
This is the period of time when she was smoking 4423
Benson & Hedges menthol, allegedly by Ms. Norgaard.
Ms. Norgaard described the cigarette Benson & Hedges
menthol, well, that's all they are is menthol.
That
is not Benson & Hedges menthol.
Benson & Hedges is
not a menthol-only cigarette.
So Dr. Burns agreed
to it.
There's no dispute about it.
Take a look at
the ads.
They're both regular and menthol.
This is
not a Benson & Hedges cigarette that is a
menthol-only cigarette.
Now, is it unreasonable to suggest that a
41-year-old memory from Ms. Norgaard taken in a
deposition in 2010 might have got that detail wrong?
Use your common sense.
A 40-year-old memory of that
kind of detail is more likely to be wrong than
right.
And the way that she describes the
cigarettes isn't Benson & Hedges menthol.
The causation instruction that you've already
seen a couple of times has substantial factor and
but for.
In -- in our testimony with Dr. Burns,
Dr. Burns was asked if the two-year smoking period
for Benson & Hedges menthol, '69 to '71, was removed
from her 30-year smoking history, would she still
have gotten COPD?
Dr. Burns says, I'm not
suggesting that if you remove those two years, she
would not have gotten COPD.
What I'm suggest is 4424
that it -- it contributes somewhat.
Well, it has to contribute as a substantial
amount, and he can't say what that amount is.
It's
not possible because, as he said, he doesn't have
any clear testimony of the amount Mrs. Allen smoked
until 1979.
So to make the proportional assessment that
Dr. Burns described in his examination, to try and
tie Benson & Hedges cigarettes, if that's what she
smoked for those two years into the 30-year smoking
history, you have to know what that amount is and he
doesn't know that amount.
So the plaintiff has the burden of establishing
that.
They have the burden of establishing that
substantial factor.
And Dr. Burns can't do it, and
there isn't sufficient evidence in the record to
allow anyone to do it.
On the claim of concealment.
During the years
1969 to 1971, all of the facts in evidence that
Mr. Belasic mentioned were in place.
All of the
warnings were in place by '69.
A new one came in in
'70.
So the question to -- to ask, I would think,
as a practical matter is did Mrs. Allen smoke
Benson & Hedges menthol in 1969 to 1971 because
important information was kept from her?
And for 4425
all the reasons that you've already been -- that are
laid out for you, the answer is no.
Do I have a little bit of time left,
Your Honor?
I think --
THE COURT:
Yeah, I have you till 53.
I may
have mixed it up.
You've got about another ten
minutes.
MR. KELLY:
Oh, all right.
Well, I'll go back.
No, I won't.
I won't.
That's the claim against Benson & Hedges
menthol.
It's questionable, I'd submit to you,
under the evidence whether, in fact, it ever was
Benson & Hedges menthol, but there's no evidence
that Benson & Hedges menthol was the cigarette that
she started smoking with or was the cigarette that
initiated her addiction.
And there's no testimony
at all as to the level of addictions during those
two years of smoking.
You'll recall that both Dr. Cummings and
Dr. Burns described a power of addiction, a
heaviness of addiction that is dependent upon the
characteristics of the smoking.
Dr. Cummings had a
whole list of those first time, the first cigarette,
time of last cigarette, chain smoking, withdrawal
symptoms, time between cigarettes, all sorts of 4426
details he looks at, none of which are present
during this time period.
Dr. Cummings isn't able to
say what level of addiction there might have been
during that time period.
And there's absolutely no way, short of rank
speculation, to say Mrs. Allen couldn't have quit
had she wanted to as a 21- or 23-year-old in that
period of time.
No suggestion she ever wanted to
or tried to.
There's no indication at all that she
had a level of addiction that would have impacted
that decision in any way at all during those early
years.
From the evidence you have in the record -- and
I -- and I would say this, that the evidence
available before the '78 and '79 period when
Mr. Allen met his wife is -- is very thin with
respect to Mrs. Allen's daily activities or her --
or her life and the decisions she's making and the
pressures she's feeling and what she's doing.
And it's just, I think, a real temptation to
fill a void in the evidence with assumptions or
speculation.
It's just, I think, natural.
It's
something I suggest you need to resist when you're
in the jury room because there are these huge gaps
in the evidence that plaintiffs haven't tried to 4427
fill.
And you can't substitute evidence in or make
assumptions.
Where there's no evidence, plaintiff
hasn't met the burden of proof, and that's certainly
true for all those early years, '69 to '71.
Well, on the claim that Mr. Allen wants more
money in punitive damages, remember, there is that
higher burden of proof.
And -- and if we're here in
Phase II, there will be additional evidence to
consider.
But right now the question is whether or
not anything that -- and you'll look at the
companies separately for this and together, that
what harm Mrs. Allen -- what about '69 to '71 for
Philip Morris harmed Mrs. Allen?
We know it's not
the cigarette smoking because there's no evidence of
that being a substantial factor.
We know it didn't
cause her addiction.
But that's the first question
you have to ask.
And then you look to see whether that -- that
conduct of selling cigarettes that had filters on
them in '69 and '71 -- that was the time period when
the government and the industry was working together
with the Tobacco Working Group, when they were
identifying ways to make less hazardous cigarettes,
'68 to '78.
That was the time when the public
health community was saying, you know, if you're 4428
going to have to smoke, filters are the way -- way
to go.
Take a look at the ads that went with Benson &
Hedges menthol.
They're just -- these are longer.
You get more puffs.
There's nothing safety-related
in those ads except for the Surgeon General's
warning.
THE COURT:
Did you -- the timing may have been
a little bit off.
A couple more minutes.
MR. KELLY:
All right, Your Honor.
THE COURT:
I'm sorry.
MR. KELLY:
Let me close.
And thank you for
your patience over the course of this case.
I know
it -- it -- it's hard to sit there and listen to
somebody talk at you for so long and especially to
see some -- another attorney stand up and talk with
you for even longer.
But I appreciate your
patience.
I appreciate your service and your
dedication to your service over these two weeks.
Your hard job is about to start.
I don't get a chance to stand up again and
question whether or not the plaintiffs met their
burden of proof.
That is for you to determine when
you go in the jury room.
Mr. Mitnik has a chance to stand up because 4429
he -- Mr. Allen has the burden of proof.
He has the
high burden of proof on punitive liability as well.
The final say on whether or not he's met his burden
of proof is not lawyer argument.
It's the evidence
that's been put in front of you and the evidence
that's missing.
You make those determinations when
you go in the jury room.
Thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you, Your Honor.
