MR. DENNEY: Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the Court.
Good morning. Probably seems like forever and a day ago that you first heard me get up and
start talking and that was during the jury selection. And of the 100 or so people that were in the room, I'm sure you guys weren't thinking that you were going to be one of the ones chosen to sit on this jury, but you were. And I want to start out by thanking each and every one of you for your service. We do appreciate it. And on behalf of Mr. Bass and Mrs. Allen and our whole team, we thank you.
The fact that you've been paying attention has not gone unnoticed. You guys have been filling out notebooks and listening intently, and that's important because without attentive jurors our system doesn't work. It's not enough just to show up. You have to listen and you've done that. So thank you for your jury service.
And what you've seen today, really, other than the fact that Betty Faye Allen is sharing a courtroom with R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris, they couldn't be any different kinds of people.
And as you know in the jury instructions, you are to treat them like a person. And, really, they couldn't have different -- more different sets of values, morals and ethics.
You heard about -- we're going to be looking
at some more slides. You heard about Herman Allen and Betty Allen, the kind of person he was, what was important to him. I think it's fair to say, based on the evidence, family was important to him and Betty, service was important to him, and hard work. These are values that -- which our society holds up as being important.
And, really, it started when Mr. Allen went down to the recruiter's office when he was just 17, when the Korean war was going on and his parents went with him and he signed up to go serve his country in the Korean war. And you heard from his Navy buddies, they loved him, and you heard that he served honorably and proudly and bravely until he was honorably discharged.
Of course after that, he went to a church picnic and he met Betty, his wife. They basically fell in love shortly thereafter and got married and remained married for 41-and-a-half years. The evidence is pretty clear on this, they had the kind of marriage that most people dream about, really. It was old fashioned and innocent in a way, and they loved each other for every year of their life. They did everything together, whether they were raising kids together, grandchildren
together, working out on their land or just sitting out in tne field under the cabbage palm trees like you heard about, throwing pellets out, watching their cows. They had something very special.
Put up the next slide.
But to these defendants, R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris, these guys, Herman Allen was just a number, a statistic. A member of the 80 percent of his generation that smoked their product. They didn't know who he was although they came into court, and they're going to do it again and try to tell you the kind of man he was or wasn't, they didn't know him. They just knew him as a number; another addicted smoker.
And why did Herman Allen smoke? He smoked because of nicotine; a drug that the Surgeon General has compared to drugs like heroin and cocaine. And he wasn't some statistical freak, it was way different back then. Eighty percent of the people who were born in 1930 were smoking by the time they were 30 years old. Compare ana contrast that to today where 80 percent of people don't smoke and you can imagine how different the world was. Believe me, we wouldn't be here if he
had started smoking today. There's a clear message now, everybody knows it's bad. They've admitted it's bad because they had to. We wouldn't be here if that was the case.
You can go to the next one, Ron.
So why did people smoke? You've heard the defense tell you it was for things like taste and to take breaks from responsibility. That's not who Herman Allen was, you know that, they smoked because of nicotine. Every time you inhale that
smoke in your lungs, you get nicotine that fires those receptors in the brain within seconds. Everybody admitted that. There's no secret to that. That's why it's such an efficient delivery device, and they know it.
Next one, Ron.
And, again, this is the chart, remember more than 78 percent of his generation were smokers.
And you recall that 80 percent of these folks became addicted.
You can go to the next one, Ron.
So why do people smoke? Look at what they say about it in 1972, secretly. Remember, they didn't tell the public until they had to in late 1999. They talk about the tobacco industry as
being a specialized, highly originalized and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry. And they deliver uniquely, nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects.
They say a cigarette that does not deliver nicotine cannot satisfy the habituated smoker and cannot lead to habituation and would, therefore, almost certainly fail. And we know that when they tried to put cigarettes on the market that didn't have nicotine, they sat there on the shelves all by themselves. Because why would anybody inhale smoke in their lungs unless it did something for them, unless it had that nicotine kick.
This is how they talked about their customers; people like Herman Allen. If we sell a product that is bought often and is used from 10 to 60 times a day, day in and day out, over and over and over again, we provide a product that's the essential commodity and a habitual act. Put a hungry rat in a cage, put a lever in the cage, make it so that a push on the lever delivers a pellet of food. In its random movements, the rat will push the lever, he'll get the pellet. This is how they talk about people like Herman Allen. Like rats in a cage. And they come in here and
say oh, he smoked because he wanted to take a break from his responsibilities. That's baloney.
Go to the next one.
Why do people smoke? Why do people smoke?
1959.	Addiction. That's why people smoke.
That's why Herman Allen smoked, that's why 80 percent of his generation smoked and continued to smoke for years and years and years.
The cigarette is the perfect type of perfect pleasure. It is exquisite and it leaves one unsatisfied. What more can one want? By the way, you didn't see this but this is in evidence, PT 02412. We didn't have time to show you every single document. Let us provide the exquisiteness and hope that they, our consumers, continue to remain unsatisfied. What a great product. All we would want, then, is a larger bag to carry the money to the bank. This is the way they talked about their customers. Let's keep them unsatisfied. In Herman Allen's case, coming back over and over and over and over, between 20 and 40
cigarettes a day, every day. That s about 240 doses of nicotine every day for 49 years. That's the perfect product. Kept him unsatisfied, that's why he kept picking up that next cigarette, not
because he wanted to take a break from his work or family.
You can go to the next one, Ron.
So Herman Allen, he had millions of doses of nicotine. You heard the math. At least five million.
He smoked the first thing in the morning. Remember Betty, when she would wake up, the smoke would be wafting into the room, and then she'd go out and see three or four, five, whatever, cigarettes in the ashtray.
He smoked the last thing at night before he went to bed. He smoked everywhere. He smoked outside, in the tractor, in the car, in the house, everywhere. He smoked every day with the exception of those two months.
He smoked 20 to 40 cigarettes a day, which equals, if you use 30 as a number at eight puffs a day, 240 doses of nicotine every single day for
49	years. That's a long, long time. He smoked all the time.
And what happened when he tried to quit? He went through the classic signs of withdrawal. He would shake. Remember Betty talking about how he was holding the coffee in his hand and the coffee
would spill over? He would get angry and irritable. He was impossible to be around. He was moody. He was not himself.
Remember in the 1970s when he -- when he tried, and he put them down for two months until he had a relapse. And you heard about what that means. You don't just stop craving something that you've been dosing yourself with 240 times a day for decades.
When he -- after he had the relapse, he came home and Betty said, what are you doing with those cigarettes after everything we did? We -- we supported you. We put up with the way you were. Life was hell with you. Why are you doing this again?
And did he say, it's because I want to take breaks, blow smoke in her face? Of course not.
Did he say, because I love the way this tastes?
No. He just hung his head. Why? Probably because he was ashamed of the power that nicotine had on him.
And also he was smoking after he was diagnosed with terminal cancer after the doctor said, sir, you're going to die from cancer caused from smoking. It's in the records, although they
dispute it. And he kept right on smoking.
Remember how he had to quit? They drove hundreds of miles to Georgia and met with his lifelong friend -- or a former friend, a preacher in the Navy. And what did he do? He prayed with him, and they gathered people around and prayed
over him, and he finally was able to quit.
But was it easy? No. His hands were shaking. He had to take his Xanax. This was a guy who didn't go to the doctor ever. He was a member of a different generation than this one when we all go off every time we get a sniffle. That was a big deal for him.
And so question one on the verdict form, like the judge just read to you, is was Herman Allen addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death.
And I want to take this kind of -- there's really two parts to this question, and I want to handle the first part first. Really there's no dispute in this case anymore as to whether Herman Allen was addicted. Because remember when Dr. Nace got on the stand, he admitted it. So there's really no dispute. But since they denied
it before trial and at the beginning of trial and during trial, up until the time he testified, we brought you the evidence.
And the standard that you're to apply, as the judge just told you, is the greater weight of the evidence. And what does that mean? We talked about it in jury selection, remember? It's really just the most convincing force and effect of all the evidence in the case. So if you imagine two scales, if one side tips even ever so slightly one way, that's the side you go with. All right?
You can go to the next one.
So how do we say that Herman Allen was addicted? Did he meet the characteristics of people who have become addicted? He met every single one of them.
Remember this from Philip Morris' own document in 2003 after they were forced to admit nicotine was addictive? Says, "The younger people are when they start smoking, the more likely they are to become strongly addicted to nicotine."
We know that. Why? Because when you're young, your brain is not fully developed. And you inject an addictive drug like nicotine into it over and over and over and over, the brain
changes. Symptoms of addiction can appear in teens and preteens within weeks or only days after they've become occasional smokers. And we know Herman Allen started when he was 15.
And by the way, it says the younger they smoke, the more likely they are to become strongly addicted to nicotine. You need to ask yourself, someone who continues to dose himself -- that's really what you're doing -- with nicotine 240 times a day for 49 years, whether that's a mild addiction -- not that it really matters for what you're deciding here -- or whether that's a strong addiction, just like they say it is.
So we brought the evidence. Dr. David Burns, I think it's fair to say he was the -- by far the most qualified witness in the whole case.
Dr. Burns is a board-certified pulmonologist.
He's been an author, auditor, and senior reviewer for 19 Surgeon General reports since 1975.
Of course, Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds don't like him. Why would they? Because he lectures all around the world about how dangerous their products are, and he tries to help kids get off their product. And we know that's their target market.
He's been a consultant for the Environmental Protection Agency, the World Health Organization. He wrote the chapter on addiction in Harrison's Internal Medicine used at Harvard Medical School. That's what the best doctors in the country are reading to become trained on -- trained doctors.
And he wrote the chapter on addiction in Cecil's used at Harvard. He's published on it, written on it, spoken on it. This guy knows his stuff, and that's why we brought him to you.
You can go to the next one, please.
And he said a lot about this. I'm not going to just get up here and regurgitate all of it, but he said what we've already talked about. That nicotine creates changes in the brain. The vast majority of people who use it the way he did become addicted, that is over and over and over and over again every day for 49 years.
Look at the pattern of use. Every day pack, a pack and a half, two packs of cigarettes every today -- every day. Averages out somewhere between 30 to 40 minutes a day.
And, of course, the first thing when he got up in the morning, what did he do? He reached for another cigarette. And before he went to bed at
night, what did he do? He reached for another cigarette.
On those occasions when he tried to quit, he wasn't successful. He couldn't do it. When he quit during the 1970s, his wife described it as him going through hell. Couldn't quit after his terminal lung cancer diagnosis right away. He couldn't quit even when his wife wanted him to and pleaded with him, even when it was clear that the cigarettes were killing him.
We brought you Dr. Lewis Auerbach. Who's he? Remember, he was the one who actually tried to save Herman Allen's life. This is the man who treated his lung cancer. He's board certified in internal medicine and he's a board-certified oncologist. He's got hospital privileges at virtually every hospital in the area.
He's the co chairperson of Brandon Hospital cancer committee, chief oncologist at Tampa General, right around the corner. And he's the one who actually treated Herman Allen's lung cancer. And his -- in his expert opinion, Herman Allen was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes.
Dr. Tonia Werner. We brought you a psychiatrist. Since they had one, we brought you
one. She's a director of the forensic institute at the University of Florida. She screened
thousands of patients for nicotine addiction.
And she walked you through the DSM-IV, the Fagerstrom test, all these different screening tools that they have to tell whether or not someone is addicted. And she said what makes sense. You don't use these in a cookbook fashion. You use your clinical judgment when you're making these determinations.
She determined he was addicted in his early twenties. The cravings occur even when the drug is out of the system. Why is that important? Because the defense makes it sound like once he quit in the 1970s that he was out of the woods.
You know, forget it.
And then when he smelled that smoke, you know, he made a free choice to just go ahead and pick them up again for -- I don t know why. He wanted to take breaks or he liked the way it tasted. No. Everybody knows that when you dose yourself with something like that day in and day out, day in and day out every day, every day, every day, you start to crave it. Some people who smoke have cravings their whole life. Herman
Allen was no different.
She explained to you how 90 to 95 percent of smokers who try to quit fail. That the wide availability of cigarettes directly impacts relapse rates. Ana that just makes common sense if you think about it. It's not like heroin or cocaine where you got to go into an alley somewhere and slip some guy a 20 behind a dumpster to get it. It's all around you, especially back then.
It's not like today where you can't smoke in court, can't smoke on airplanes. Back in the '70s we lived in a much, much different world.
Even with the Chantix quit drug, which was not available for -- when Herman Allen was alive, the failure rate equals 75 to 85 percent. And 80 percent of people who are nicotine addicted started before age 18.
She also explained to you how addiction impacts people differently. That's really important because there's no question that Herman Allen was a stand-up guy. There's no question that he was strong willed. There's no question that he was a hard worker. But that doesn't mean he was immune to the addictive power of nicotine.
They know it, everybody knows it.
Dr. Burns testified to it. Even Dr. Nace, their guy, said, yeah, it affects everybody differently. Doesn't matter if you're strong, weak, you can still get addicted.
Go to the next one.
Dr. Nace, he got on the stand and he told you that Herman Allen was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. So there's really not a dispute anymore in this case about that.
So what are their defenses? You've heard a lot of interesting things about Mr. Allen from them, and you've also heard the truth about
Mr. Allen from Mrs. Allen and the people who really knew him.
So during their case, remember, they played you the video, remember, of his buddies that he served with in the Navy when they were taking fire from the Communists. So he brought an alligator that fit in a shoebox on the ship.
Why would they -- why would they play that for you? To try and suggest to you that he's a risk taker, you know, bringing a little alligator in a shoebox. He was from Florida. He was an outdoorsman. There's nothing risky about that.
They thought it was funny.
Because he had a couple of beers when he was on shore leave after they were -- after they'd been at sea for how long in a war.
And there was a crane. Remember that?
And -- and he got up on the crane as a joke. And I think the gentleman who was being deposed said, yeah, it was about this high. Who cares?
The steer, remember that? And they've got pictures in evidence, by the way, that they have in their case you'll be able to look at. A picture of like the cows, the steer, things like that.
This is a guy who was an outdoorsman, okay?
He wasn't sitting around the Plaza Hotel drinking appletinis. This guy was a man's man.
And his wife was an outdoors woman herself. And they raised hell. She explained to you what a steer was. A steer -- pardon being blunt -- it's a castrated bull. There's no more testosterone in this steer. They don't get to be 2,000 pounds.
You'll see in this picture the whole family is standing around the steer. And what are they trying to say, that all these people have a death wish?
Remember, they played for you the video where he whipped someone's tail 40 years ago in San Francisco when he was in the Navy. He was probably what, 19 or 20. And he's on the tram, and somebody starts running his mouth to his -- to his buddies that he was just fighting in war with. And he said, hey, knock it off. And he whipped the guy's tail in a good old-fashioned fistfight. So what?
This guy was a stand-up guy. And now, they're going to come in here and try and turn that around and say that he was a risk taker and he wanted to leave his family. It's ridiculous.
He didn't go to the doctor. Okay. So what? This guy was part of the greatest generation. So what if he didn't go to the doctor every time he stubbed his toe or -- or cut his arm?
Take a look at the photographs. Ask yourself why would they introduce these into evidence?
What are they trying to suggest to you?
Here's a photo. It's hard to see. But Herman's outside, where he loved to be, and there's a coconut down here. They grow on palm trees in Florida, as you all know. And he's
cutting it open.
Anybody who's ever lived in this state knows when you cut open a coconut, you get to the meat and to the juice of the coconut. So what? What are they trying to do with this? Suggest to you that he was going to impale himself? He's a risk taker? He wanted to die? It's silly. Just silly. And -- and really, that's what -- that's what they're suggesting to you.
If you believe that Herman Allen smoked cigarettes for any reason other than the fact that he was addicted, then you've got to believe that he didn't care about his family, that he -- that he believed her -- if you -- if you really think that he believed, okay, this is really going to kill me, I'm going to die, forget all the billions of dollars they're spending to convince him otherwise, I'm going to die. I don't care. I don't care. I'm just going to keep smoking because I want to. Who cares?
If you believe that he wanted to leave Betty alone, his wife of 41-and-a-half years, then pin the blue ribbon on them and send us home.
So the first part of question one -- you can go to the next one, Ron -- was Herman Allen addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. And
if so, was such addiction the legal cause of his lung cancer and death? Yes.
Let's go to the second part. If so, was the addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. And this is important. This is the one that they've kind of hitched their -- the defense, they've hitched their wagon to in this case.
And the judge read for you the jury instructions just a moment ago. And what he said was, and what the law is, is that in order to be regarded as a legal cause of a disease or medical condition, an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause, okay?
A decision to smoke cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause if the addiction to nicotine contributes substantially to producing such injury.
Why is that important? Because they've come in here into court and they started out denying he was addicted, and now they're trying to blame his service on his lung cancer. And they want you to ignore the 49 years and millions of exposures to many carcinogens as being a substantial producing
cause of his lung cancer.
So let's talk about that. And we had to bring you the evidence on that as well. And, again, this -- this is another one of these -this part of the question that you're to determine by the greater weight of the evidence.
Smoking is by far the number one cause of lung cancer. Nine out of ten lung cancer cases are caused not from asbestos, but from smoking
cigarettes. Small cell, wnich is the exact kind of lung cancer that Herman Allen had, is the most common lung cancer that's caused by smoking. Millions and millions of deaths, over 18 million, have occurred since 1945 from smoking.
The greater the exposures to carcinogens, the greater tne cancer risk. That makes sense when you think about it. If he had just smoked one cigarette a day, two, three a day, yeah, maybe they're on to something here. But this guy had 5 million or more exposures, day in and day out.
It's hard to picture sitting here. Forty-nine years is a long time. Forty-nine years. And they want to say just ignore that. Just ignore that.
And, of course, every time a person inhales to get nicotine, their lungs are exposed to potent
carcinogens. And we all knew that. You knew that before you even came in here.
And here are some of them. You remember Dr. Burns discussed these. Nobody came into court, not even their guy, Andrews, which I'll talk about in a minute. Nobody came into court and tried to suggest to you that when you inhale smoke on a cigarette into your lungs to get that nicotine to the brain, that all of these other things hit you right along with it. Because they do. That's why it's such a dangerous product.
And so let's look at the statistics. Back before -- and remember this, these are the level of consumption of cigarettes in the country, over here. And then this red line is the lung cancer death rate. Not just to have lung cancer and survive, but die from it.
And you can tell the relationship -- and here's the years down here. In 1930 there really wasn't a whole lot of lung cancer in this country at all. Remember, Dr. Burns, who lived through a lot of this, explained that to you. And nobody -nobody in their right mind in this courtroom is going to suggest to you otherwise. They won't even do that.
And then as people started smoking more and more and more in the '30s and '40s and '50s, even after the Surgeon General report -- remember, everybody -- remember, they're going to tell you everybody knew, everybody knew.
Meanwhile, they're pumping billions of dollars to confuse and attack -- really attack viciously -- and I'll show you the slides in a minute -- the Surgeon General.
Despite that, it still kept going up, up, up, up, up because they were -- they were aiming the message not at people like Mrs. Allen, who were not addicted, but people who were addicted to nicotine. Gave them a psychological crutch to keep right on using their product.
In any event, as the smoking rates went up, lung cancer rates went way up. And we're right here in 1990 -- 1994. Look at that. Same year that Herman Allen passed away, lung cancer deaths are at their peak.
And so what they re doing in this trial is they're trying to convince you that he was part of this small minority down here, and that all this had nothing to do with him. He's a statistical freak. Set aside the fact that he smoked for
49	years every day.
You don't have to check your common sense at that door when you go back there.
Since they denied it, we had to bring you the evidence.
Thank you, Ron.
Dr. David Burns, again, he's been in the public health sector his whole life. He dedicated his entire life to the issues of smoking and health. He was trying to save lives while they were trying to make money. He ran a special function studies unit. He was the medical director of respiratory therapy. He's treated many, many patients over the course of his medical career with lung cancer in determining what the cause of that lung cancer was. And he consults with foreign governments on these topics. He's published on it, he talks on it.
Next one.
He testified asbestos did not cause Herman Allen's small cell lung cancer. The millions of exposures from Herman Allen's 49 years of smoking did. But did he come into court and say no, he had no asbestos exposure, no way, no how? No, he didn't do that. He said look, even with asbestos
exposure if you assume that the pleural plaquing that you guys heard so much about, even if you assume that was there, it is not the cause of the lung cancer. Even if it contributed to it, it certainly was not the substantial producing cause, which is the legal standard in this case. All of the smoking was. Remember he gave an example, the ten-ton cement truck example. He said, "To say that asbestos was the cause of Herman Allen's lung cancer in the face of 49 years of millions of exposures to carcinogens, is to say that if you were driving -- someone was driving a ten-ton cement truck over a bridge and the bridge collapsed, that the driver who weighed 150 pounds was the cause of the bridge collapsing, not the huge cement truck." That's what we're dealing with here, folks. And he said yeah -- he said there's no doubt that the substantial smoking history caused his lung cancer.
Can you go back to that graph again -- chart?
Why can he say that? He can say that because that's what the statistics show. He's not just pulling something out of thin air.
Dr. Auerbach. Dr. Auerbach was Herman Allen's treating doctor. He treated Herman
Allen's lung cancer, the very disease that caused his death. And as we talked about, he's board-certified oncology. And his testimony was Herman Allen's lung cancer was caused by his significant smoking history. That's what he
testified to. This is not a paid witness by either side, this is his treating doctor, the guy who was trying to save his life.
Go to the next one.
Then you've got Richard Six. Dr. Richard Six
Can you go to the slide just before that,
Ron?
Dr. Richard Six was a board-certified radiologist. He's a licensed doctor in Florida, in North Carolina, West Virginia, Virginia, all over the country. He's the only witness in the case, the only one who actually looked at the films and interpreted them. And he generated the reports. He's the one who actually saw the films. Their guy didn't even look at the films. And, again, he's an independent witness. He's not being paid by either side to be here, we just read his sworn testimony.
Go to the next one.
He testified that the lung cancer was not related to pleural plaquing. How does he know? He's the one who read the film. His lung cancer was not pleural based. How does he know? He read the film. Herman Allen's lung cancer is not related to asbestos. Those are the things he testified to, and he would know, because he's the guy who treated him.
You can go to the next one.
So they brought you Dr. Andrews. Who is Dr. Andrews? Well, we know that every time that Dr. Andrews walks through the doors of a courtroom, he testifies for these guys every single time. He's been paid $400,000 over the past several years to come into court and testify that the cause of someone's death isn't cigarette smoking. He was still in medical school when Dr. Six and Dr. Auerbach were trying to save Herman Allen's life. He's never been asked by any medical group to speak on the issues in this case; lung cancer, cigarette smoking and health, asbestos, lung scarring. He's never even published a paper on any of these issues.
And remember they didn't go over it on direct but I asked him about it. He said, really, what
he is is a sleep medicine doctor. He said that 30 to 40 percent of his patients are sleep apnea patients. There's no issues of sleep apnea in this case.
You can go to the next one.
But what did he talk about? What did he admit? He did admit that all of his small cell cancer patients, all of them, their cancer was caused by cigarette smoking, every one of them.
He admitted he didn't review the films, he was just looking at reports, just looking at pieces of paper. He's going to come in here and try to convince you that Mr. Allen's 49 years of smoking had nothing to do with it.
He admits, and this was important -remember, I was asking him about the synergistic
effect of asbestos and cigarette smoking. He says -- he admitted -- these were one of the last questions I asked him, that a nonsmoker -- set the smoking aside for a moment which is what they want you to do, plus asbestos equals five times the risk of getting lung cancer than someone who's never had asbestos exposure. Now, bringing the smoking back into it, okay, plus asbestos, a 50-times risk of lung cancer. Whether it's from
the pleura or not. This is the evidence in the case.
In order to believe Dr. Andrews, you have to believe that Herman Allen was a statistical anomaly, a statistical freak, and the 49 years of smoking had nothing to do with his lung cancer.
And so based on the greater weight of the evidence -- well, there's one more thing he talked about.
Remember when he was -- did something called impeaching where you read the sworn testimony of what they talked about before they come into court. Before he came into court he was unable to say what one specific cause of Herman Allen's lung cancer was. That's before he walked in here. He also couldn't state what caused his lung cancer; couldn't state with certainty. But once he gets in here, like he does every time, he's able to draw pictures for you and try to convince you that our client, Mr. Allen, was a statistical freak.
So the greater weight of the evidence, if you stack all of those -You can go to the next one.
If you stack all those things up, the greater weight of the evidence in this case, the 49 years of smoking, the 240 exposures to carcinogens each
day, millions of exposures, Dr. Six, the treating doctor, Dr. Lewis Auerbach, the treating doctor, Dr. David Burns, smoking plus asbestos 50-times risk, I mean, there's an avalanche of evidence, members of the jury, on our side. And on his side, he didn't review the films and he's trying to convince you that our client -- that Herman Allen was a statistical anomaly. And why does he do that? Well, it might have something to do with the fact that he's paid $400,000 by them.
Remember, I asked him if it was a lot of money and he didn't know what to say. It is a lot of money.
So question one, was Herman Allen addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? Yes. The evidence in the case is overwhelming to support that.
Question number two, as to each defendant was smoking cigarettes manufactured by that defendant a legal cause of Herman Allen's death? Philip Morris, yes. Remember, Herman Allen smoked Marlboros and Marlboro Lights, starting at age 30 years old, and he smoked those for the rest of his life. R.J. Reynolds, he started when he was 15 and smoked R.J. Reynolds' cigarettes up to the
time he was 30.
So the next issue for your determination, then, is damages. And we talked about this on jury selection and the judge just told you about it. There's really no exact standard on how to determine damages for pain and suffering in a case like this. It's not like a medical bill where it has a price tag already hanging off of it, this is different. You have to use your common sense and
Can we go to the ELMO, Ron.
So by answering question one, yes, you'll then be required to determine damages. And we'll get to these other questions in a minute.
So what was the total amount of damages sustained by Betty Faye Allen for the loss of her husband's companionship and protection and for her pain and suffering as a result of Herman Allen's death? To determine that you've got to think about the kind of life they had together. You've
?ot to think about the fact that they were married or 41-and-a-half years, that she looked up to Herman, respected him, he did everything for her around the house. She would follow him out fishing just to be with him. She would follow him
anywhere he went. They had something that most people really dream about.
There's no exact standard on how to figure this out. But one way some people do it, I ll suggest it to you, is that if someone had approached Betty in 1994 and said, "I've got a deal for you, Betty. We're going to give your husband lung cancer, you're going to watch him suffer through it, you're going to watch him die, you're going to watch the last breath go out of his lungs as you're kneeling, praying over him.
And then you're going to spend the next 17 years of your life, your golden years, without your husband -- without him. You're going to be alone." And I would suggest to you that if someone approached her with that and offered her an amount of money to take that deal, that hundreds of millions of dollars would not be enough.
So we suggest that $500,000 a year for what this lady has had to go through in the past for the past 17 years is a reasonable amount. And that is -- totals up to $8,500,000. And then to be sustained in the future, the mortality tables in the case, you're supposed to consider the joint
life expectancies. And the mortality tables say that Herman Allen probably would have lived to right around now, maybe even -- maybe he would have even passed away before we came into court within a year. They're not -- the tables aren't binding on you, but you can consider them. So I would suggest as a future, because of that, 500.
The next thing for your determination is the total amount of damages sustained by Betty Allen for the loss of Herman Allen's support and services resulting from Herman Allen's death. And Betty told you about that. She told you about how
after he died the pastures grew up almost head high, she had to go live with her daughter for some time, her son had to take care of the cows. She was alone. She was afraid. She had to build a fence around her property because she was scared. This is a lot for somebody of her age to go through.
One way to look at this is if you were to pay someone a fair wage to live with her and do the things that Herman Allen did for the past 70 -I'm sorry, 17 years, what would that number be? Well, I suggest to you that for the things he did, $50,000 a year would be fair. And that totals
over 17 years, $850,000. And applying that same analysis as before, 50,000 in future.
And there's no exact standard. You can award whatever you feel like awarding for this.
Let's go to the next slide. Thank you.
Next, please state the percentage of any fault that has a legal cause of the death of Herman Allen that you charge to Herman Allen, Defendant Philip Morris ana Defendant R.J. Reynolds. I told you on jury selection from the very beginning, and we pled this case, that is and we filed our complaint with the courthouse, we pled that Herman Allen has fault here. We're not coming in here telling you otherwise. But Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds deny any responsibility at all for their part in this. So I told you on jury selection we would have to shine a flashlight on them and that's what we did.
So before we figure that out, let's look at some of the things they did.
You can go to the next one, Ron.
First of all, they went after the two most vulnerable groups in our society; children and people who are addicted to their product. They talked in their internal documents proudly about
younger adults' importance as replacement smokers. They're tracking the two-thirds of male smokers start by age 18. They're tracking all the way as early as 12 years old.
Here's another one, 12 years old. They're studying how price affects whether 12-year-olds will buy their products. Remember this from R.J. Reynolds, from 1958 -- 28, summer school is starting. Most all high schools, prep schools, colleges, and universities have finished the spring term. And summer schools are now getting underway. Get this started at once. Get your men intentionally interested in lining up these students for our brands, both as consumers and boosters.
Here's one from 1984, from R.J. Reynolds. Younger adult smokers have been the critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand and company over the last 50 years. They will continue to be just as important to our brands/companies in the future.
Here's R.J. Reynolds again, this time in 1974. First let's look at the growing importance
of the young adult in the cigarette market. In
1960,	this young adult market, the 14 to 24 age
group, represented 21 percent of the population. Here's where R.J. Reynolds is tracking their market share among 14 to 17-year-olds. R.J. Reynolds' share of teenage smokers have stabilized. This is in 1980, when they were spending billions of dollars to keep people smoking. With a share of 20.2 percent in the spring 1980, 19.9 in the fall 1979, and 21.3 in spring 1979.
They spent billions of dollars sending their message to the American public, and this was from an FTC report that's also in evidence.
And insight into the extent of cigarette advertising is gained, the audience reached during one week, by one segment, of one of several media employed -- and they employed every single kind of media, is numbered cumulatively in excess of one billion. Cigarette advertising reaches virtually all Americans who can either read or understand the spoken word. And we know that Herman Allen was one of those.
And did we come into court and try to insult your intelligence and tell you that on this day at this time when Herman Allen was sitting on his couch he heard this ad or that ad? Of course not.
We don't know. But what we do know is every American who could read or understand the spoken word heard it and it had a tremendous effect. So pervasive is cigarette advertising that it's virtually impossible for Americans of almost any age to avoid it.
And, of course, cigarette commercials continue to appeal to youth and continue to blot out any consciousness of the health hazards. And we talked about that. We talked about, you've got to hear about the TIRC and who that was aimed at. Remember, they showed you all these different slides of these grown men and Winston magazines, but remember on redirect we flipped it over and it showed they were targeting 14-year-olds. They need to increase their share of 14-year-olds.
High school students. Sixty-three percent of high school students smoke. This was from 1958. And then, of course, Philip Morris. Philip Morris has offset this trend with a tremendous gain, handsome gain among young people. From a long-term point of view, this gain among young people is probably more valuable for the habits of young people as compared with older people tend to be indicative of a trend. It would seem
increasingly important from the point of view of Philip Morris regular-sized cigarettes to do everything possible to increase its trend among young people toward Philip Morris.
That's what they did. Remember the Marlboro man? The Marlboro man was the most successful ad campaign in the history of this country. Who was it directed to? Kids. What happened as a result?
Kids -- children became the number one user of Marlboros. That Marlboro man was not directed at people like Betty Allen, it was directed for kids.
R.J. Reynolds, 1973. Realistically, if our company is to survive and prosper over the long term, we must get our share of the youth market. Hook 'em when they're young, just like Herman Allen, keep them smoking for life.
Remember this one from 1990, where these fifth grade students are writing R.J. Reynolds saying hey, you know, what about these candy cigarettes? This is what these great guys did. They sent a letter to the middle school of fifth graders. And they said, "Despite all the research going on, the simple and unfortunate fact is that scientists do not know the cause or causes of the chronic diseases reported to be associated with
cigarette smoking." Just lying to them. "We would appreciate you passing this information along to your students." Tnat's what they said. It's disgusting.
Go to the next one.
What else did they do? Well, they were faced with the choice in the early 1950s. You've heard a lot about choice in the case. And we told you that we would be shining on some of the choices they made based on what they knew and what they told the public. This is a memo from 1982. And this pretty much sums up the choice they had in the early '50s.
We cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. That is to say if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open we could be out of business almost overnight. So in the early 1950s, as you've heard, what happened is everybody was smoking. But the medical community said wait a minute, there might be a link here between smoking cigarettes and lung cancer. And there were articles published about it in media, they showed them to you. It's a fact. It seems hard to believe today, but the jury was still out
in the early '50s.
So what did these guys do? They determined they had two options. They could go out of business and save lives, or number two, they could find a way to eliminate the desire of smokers to stop smoking. Seems like a pretty clearcut right or wrong ethical choice that they had to make.
But we know the choice they made, unfortunately.
You can go to the next one.
And so this is when the Engle -- the Engle findings apply if you answer question one yes.
And as the Court read for you, the defendants, Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds, were negligent. They concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false and misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning or proving the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking
cigarettes. That s the law in this case.
Defendants agreed with other cigarette manufacturers to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes with the intention -- with the intention that smokers
and members of the public would rely to their detriment. That's the law in this case.
And so in -- in the early '50s you heard the evidence that they met at the Plaza Hotel in New York City in 1953. Representatives from Philip Morris, R.J. Reynolds, all the major giants of the tobacco industry got together for the first time.
And they had a choice. They could link arms with the medical community and eliminate smoking and lung cancer and save millions of lives or they could make bags of money. It was a pretty simple choice they had to make.
And so they released the Frank Statement in 1954. It was in every -- published in every major newspaper in this country. And they -- they told the public that they accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. And we believe the products we make are not injurious to health. And we always have and always will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public. That's what they told the people of this country. What they told them -- what they knew and what they did were two very different things.
And they -- they went around the country giving speeches about it. They said, believe me,
I know this is your position as well as ours, if any one of us believed that the product we were making and selling was in any way harmful to our customers' health, we would voluntarily go out of business. We'd go out of business, everybody. Remember, we played you the videos where they said the very same thing.
Go to the next one.
But what did they know? They knew in their internal secret documents -- I say secret because they weren't released until 1999. They didn't just go publishing these. Cigarette smoke should contain as little as possible, preferably at zero level -- zero level, sorry, of the polycyclic hydrocarbons.
What are those? Those are cancer causing.
And they knew that. And they knew that the zero level was impossible to achieve as long as the combustion temperature of the cigarette was greater than 700 degrees Celsius. They knew that there was cancer causing agents in there, and they knew it was impossible for them to take out, but they continued to lie over and over again.
They talk about carcinogens. This is R.J. Reynolds, 1959, internal memos. Carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke. Present technology does not permit
selective filtration of particulate smoke.
So what kind of job were they doing? They were doing a great job, and they were patting themselves on the back and congratulating themselves at how well they were doing.
Remember this letter, you take a bold and courageous action in December of 1953 -- and I'm paraphrasing -- when you got us all together as a means of presenting a united front against the claims that were being made that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer.
And the Tobacco Industry Research Committee was a result. Of course, that organization stayed together. They linked arms together until 1999,
50 years.
There's absolutely no question in my mind that if this committee had not been formed, the cigarette industry by now would have been in a deplorable position. Why is that? Because the message they were getting to the public was working. The message to create doubt in the minds
not of people like Betty Allen, but of addicted smokers to give them a psychological crutch to say, you know, I want this cigarette really bad. The jury is still out on this. Keep right on smoking.
Go to the next one.
Here's where they talk about the purpose.
The truth about our program is to find out the truth about smoking and health. What is truth to one is false to another. CTR and the industry have publicly and frequently denied what others find as truth.
Let's face it, we are interested in evidence which we believe denies the allegation that cigarette smoking causes disease. Our basic position in the cigarette controversy -- a term they coined -- is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes.
And, remember, this was from 1972. For nearly 20 years this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on major -- two major fronts, politics and public opinion.
While the strategy was brilliantly conceived
and executed, it is only fair to say that it is not, nor was it intended to be, a vehicle for victory. On the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it.
A holding strategy. Who are they trying to hold? They're trying to hold addicted smokers in the cycle of addiction to keep right on smoking. And they would have been in a deplorable position had they not formed this group.
And they spent lots and lots of money that they earned from these people smoking who purchased their cigarettes an a massive advertising campaign.
This is from the 1981 FTC report. It says that cigarettes are the most heavily advertised product in America. Hard to imagine that today, but that was true at the time. And that the tobacco industry spent more on advertising cigarettes in one day than the National Clearing House on Smoking and Health, the government's primary agency working in this area, spent in one year.
Go to the next one
Why did they do it? Again, because just like they talked about in their internal memos -- this was Philip Morris, 1964. We must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self rationale to continue smoking.
You can go to the next one.
Doubt is our product since it is the best means of competing with the body of fact that exists in the mind of the general public. Of course, they instituted the cigarette controversy. And we brought you the evidence on the papers they would publish.
They'd go on T.V. Remember the guy in 1971 who walked down the -- walked down the steps of the capital of Washington, D.C., after they knew all about the fact that cigarettes cause lung cancer. When they weren't allowed to advertise anymore, he got on TV and he said, you know, you'd be surprised what people are saying up here. Cigarettes cause lung -- or that cigarettes cause lung cancer. Some of the people who testified said it doesn't. Get the facts. And they called their campaign the truth or something like that.
And remember, this campaign of doubt -sewing the seeds of doubt want on for a long, long time. Remember, these are the giants of the tobacco industry here, of the Tobacco Institute and the things they said. And we'll play that for you right now.
(Clip played.)
Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. It may not be, we just don't know.
I don't know. Frankly, I think that smoking may be hazardous, it may not be.
Smoking may be hazardous, it may not be. No one, including TV 7, knows for certain.
It may or it may not be. We don't know.
I don't know if cigarettes are bad or they're not bad.
We don't know what causes the elements that have been attributed to cigarette smoking.
I'm saying that the science to date and over a hundred million dollars of our industry indicates that there is no causal link.
I am not denying the fact that cigarette smoking could be a risk factor involved with some people.
You know, we know that if a rabbit runs through the briar patch, it's pretty hard for it
to look back and see wnich briar stuck it.
(End of clip.)
MR. DENNEY: This was their message over and over and over again for over 50 years until they were forced to shut it down. Remember, they -remember in the Frank Statement where they said that they would cooperate with those whose task it was to safeguard the public health?
If you d go to the next one there, Ron.
These are the kinds of things they said about the Surgeon General, people like Dr. Burns who was trying to get the truth out. This is in 1972.
The report on Congress to smoking and health insults the scientific community.
Then they were so bold as to say the number one health problem is not cigarette smoking, but is the extent to which public health officials may knowingly mislead the American public.
You can go to the next one.
After the 1988 Surgeon General report, you saw the video of Koop wnere he said finally we're -- we're holding these people to task and we're -- we're getting the message out that cigarette smoking is a drug addiction similar to cocaine or heroin. Remember that?
The cigarette companies released this: The claim that cigarette smoking is a drug addiction similar to cocaine, heroin, or alcohol use is irresponsible. The message to the American public, and in particular American youth -- how ironic -- is that using illegal drugs such as crack or heroin or alcohol has the same risk of addiction is smoking -- that's a typo.
To convey this message is to invite disaster and trivialize the serious drug problem faced by society.
Changing the argument, switch -- confusion, sewing the seeds of doubt.
What they didn't tell you -- what they didn't tell the public is that cigarette smoking, by killing 400,000 people a year in this country, killed far more than drugs do, automobile accidents do, AIDS, homicides combined.
Next one.
Here's 1968. The Surgeon General report is a shockingly intemperate defamation of an industry which has led the way in medical research to seek answers in the cigarette controversy. Remember that research you heard about, the -- the green monster, blue monster, whatever they were called,
those big books.
And they say look what great guys we are. We paid these people to research. And, you know, we gave them money to figure out whether it was bad. And what would happen when they would say, hey, wait a minute, smoking is bad? They'd come out and pooh-pooh it. They'd say no, it's not. What these guys are doing is insulting the scientific community. And they were patting themselves on a -- on the back with how well they were doing with this.
Here s a speech by Horace Kornegay. And he talks about the Surgeon General's media event was preempted by an institute first strike news conference. For the first time in the history of the cigarette controversy, a secretary of HEW had to share the spotlight. In fact, we won top billing that night on all networks. They were so proud of what they were doing and how well it was working.
Of course, that leads us up to 1994 when they stood before Congress, before the elected representatives of this country, of this county, of this state, all over the nation, and they were asked direct questions.
This is the CEO of Philip Morris, William Campbell. Remember, he was asked something like do you believe that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer? And he says we don't know what causes lung cancer. Just lied.
And remember these guys. They were asked a very direct question. There was no question about what it was. Do you think nicotine in cigarettes is addictive or not, guys? I swear to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help me God. I believe nicotine is not addictive. This was the year that Herman Allen died.
And why did they do that? Well, in part, September 9th, 1980, I'm told the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. We can't defend continued smoking as, quote, free choice if the person was addicted. They knew it.
You can go to the next one.
And so then you're to answer please state the percentage of any fault that is the legal cause of the death of Herman Allen that you charge to Herman Allen, defendant Philip Morris, and defendant R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
Do you mind putting the ELMO on.
And you can do whatever you want here. I suggest, though, that Herman Allen, we told you from the very beginning, had a part to play in this. He wasn't able to quit. He just wasn't.
His part playing in this I suggest is 20 percent, Philip Morris 40 percent, R.J. Reynolds 40 percent.
And why do I say that? Because they knew the message was working. They knew it.
What happened -- remember Dr. Burns? They don't like him because he worked for the Surgeon General. They've -- they've -- they've always been at odds. Dr. Burns said what would have happened -- I asked him what would have happened if it -- like the aspirin manufacturers, because not all corporations are bad. Nobody's in here saying that.
If just like the aspirin manufacturers, if they'd have linked arms with you, Dr. Burns, and the public health community, what would have happened in 1953 instead of linking arms together,
if they tried to help the public?
He said right now today we'd be wrapping up our last cases of lung cancer in this country and
smoking would be virtually eradicated.
MS. CHUANG: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. DENNEY: That's what he testified to.
And why does he know that? Because he was on the front lines of this battle for decades. It's hard to imagine. But if you think about it, you know, they want you to treat them like a person, a good corporate citizen. That's what they would have done, just like many corporations in this country would nave done.
But instead they stood idly by -- not idly by. They stood by and watched and congratulated themselves as 400,000 or more people in this country died every year and got addicted to their product. And they marketed to kids, to children. Disgusting.
Can you go back up.
Next question was, did Herman Allen -- is, did Herman Allen reasonably rely to his detriment on the concealment or omission by Philip Morris of material information not otherwise known or available or its failure to disclose material facts concerning the health effect and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes.
Herman Allen was normal. He was part of the 80 percent of his group that smoked cigarettes. That's what he did. He gets out of the Navy. He had just gotten done fighting for his country to fend off Communism in the Korean War.
And his wife tells him -- his girlfriend, what are you smoking for? Don't -- you shouldn't do that. That's bad.
Meanwhile, everywhere he went the market was saturated with pictures of healthy, beautiful people puffing on cigarettes, people in movies, actors, doctors.
They had ads of doctors on television saying, boy, this is -- I choose this cigarette over all the others.
I mean, this is a guy who -- who had just got done -- the Navy ruled the waves, you know. And they want you to say he should have listened to Betty, his wife. She knew.
If she knew, why didn't they know? What -what would have happened if they just would have came clean? Ask yourself that question when they get up here and start making excuses for it.
We know what would have happened. Twenty percent now in this country -- 20 percent of
people now smoke. Eighty percent back then smoked. What's the reason for that? Because now they're muzzled. The health message got out through the Surgeon General despite their efforts to stop them and despite their vicious attacks. There's no other way to say it. The message got through. The message got through.
Another thing to think about is, do you really think these companies who care really only about money, do you think they would have spent all these billions of dollars on this campaign if they thought it wasn't working? Why would they just throw away money on a hapless campaign?
That's what they want you to believe.
So	I suggest that on four and five the answer to those questions is yes.
On -- the next question in the case is, under the circumstances of this case state whether punitive damages are warranted by clear and convincing evidence against Philip Morris USA and R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
You can go to the next one.
And like the judge told you, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight
that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue.
And we accept that burden, and we believe that punitive damages are warranted in this case.
And when you consider whether to award punitive damages, you may assess the reprehensibility or wrongfulness of the acts of defendants Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds, and you may consider actual and potential harm suffered by persons other than the persons -other than the parties of this lawsuit, and actual and potential harm suffered by persons outside the state of Florida.
And we talked about the -- the millions of deaths that occurred since 1945. I believe it was over 18 million that could have been prevented had they just come clean and cooperated with the Surgeon General like they promised to do. There's no gray area.
They're going to get up here and say we sold a legal product. We were allowed to do this.
Does that mean it's right? Is that the moral and right thing to do, to lie?
They want to be treated like a person. What do we do to people -- to children when they lie?
Some people bend them over their legs and give them a good -- good paddling. You can't do that with these guys. You can't throw them in jail.
But you can hit them where it hurts the most, their pocketbook. And punish them because that's all they care about, that's it. They're not going to say they're sorry.
So	what's the clear and convincing evidence? It's -- it's overwhelming. On the one side you've got them saying don't believe us, don't believe us, don't believe us. On the other side, you've got all of these different things that they said: It's fortunate for us cigarettes are a habit they can't break; meet the TIRC; must increase the share penetration among 14- to 24-year-olds. Anyway, a lot of this stuff is hard to read. I'm not going to regurgitate it all. But you've got all these people on the right-hand side that
contributed to this message. If you look at
You can go to the next slide.
There's more. I mean these are all the exhibit numbers on the left. Feel free to go back and read every word of them if you want to.
They're all in evidence. "Cigarettes are scare
tactics." "A cigarette that does not deliver nicotine does not satisfy." "Our organization is a front, a shield." "We are making false and misleading statements in the illusion of filtration." That's one thing they did. I didn't talk about that. That's another thing they did.
They would put ads out there when the message started getting out, Oh, let's add filters. Why do you think they did that? They knew it couldn't filter out anything cancer causes. It was to reassure the public, It's okay, we got filters now. It's okay, it's good for your T-zone in the throat. Remember those ads?
Anyway, you can take that down.
We've talked about the scales of justice, and I'm sure is you-all have seen a picture of Lady Justice. She's got a blindfold on. She's holding scales, and in the other hand she has a sword, and the sword is to punish. The sword is for defendants like this. When they get up here making all the excuses for all of this bad behavior, you're supposed to treat them like a person, make excuses for it. Just ask yourself, what kind of world would we live in if we let them get away with that?
That's all I have, Your Honor.



MR. BASS: May it please the Court, counsel for RJR, counsel for Philip Morris.
Members of the jury, as Ms. Chuang said, this is the last -- the last word, so to speak, last chance for anybody lawyer-wise to address you in this part of the trial.
You've heard all the evidence. We saw you attentively listening, attentively paying attention and taking notes. We know you heard it
all. I'm not going to rehash everything that's been said. I'm going to take what little remaining time I have just to highlight a couple of things.
Before I get into it, though, a word about this here demonstrative that Dr. Andrews used to draw and Ms. Chuang just used to try and drive home the point that it was asbestos and not Mr. Allen's 49 years of smoking every day and all day, not his millions upon millions upon millions of exposures to the carcinogens that you see listed numerous times up here on the demonstrative from Dr. Burns and even referenced in their own internal documents.
That's really what they're saying. They're saying that this case, cigarette smoking, that extensive, significant history -- Mr. Allen lived 64 years. He smoked 49 of them. That's 76 percent of his life that he smoked cigarettes. They're saying that that played no role. And one of the ways they're trying to show it to you is by this here drawing.
What do we know about this drawing?
Dr. Andrews had zero films to review before he came up with this -- with this drawing. This is
an interpretation of the CT scan that Dr. Six did that Dr. Six testified about.
Want to talk about speculation? That is exactly what this drawing is, pure speculation.
What is not speculation? Mr. Allen's exposure to 49 years, millions upon millions upon millions upon millions of exposures to carcinogens.
Like I said, that was a bit of a digression.
I have limited time, so I'm going to hit what I -I like to refer to as kind of big picture issues. There's no secret about what the big picture issues are. Those are the issues that you have to decide on your verdict form.
I stood up here in opening statements, what seems like ages ago, two weeks ago, almost two weeks ago, and told you that -- one of the first things I said is that on the verdict form that you get in deliberation are going to be the issues for your determination, and only those issues.
First issue, as you've seen numerous times, addiction, and did addiction cause the lung cancer. Let me say a word about this. There's no definition of addiction, none, that includes within it that someone is not addicted if they're
able to quit. We spent a lot of time talking about that. There's no definition of addiction that views it in the context of ability to quit.
However, defense counsel, Mr. Beach, stood up here and the majority of the first half of his closing argument was all about Mr. Allen and his ability to quit, and he lacked motivation, and his personality. That is not an addiction analysis. That's -- I'm going to talk about that later, but that's a separate analysis.
We've heard all about addiction being individual, not caring about someone's personality. A strong-willed person not having an advantage, none of that deals with addiction.
So let's not confuse ability to quit, motivation to quit, the fact that Mr. Allen quit and relapsed, the fact that when his granddaughter, Kelly Ware, asked him to quit that he hung his head in shame, when she wrote the little book that Ms. Betty Faye Allen talked about where she suggested Mr. Allen buy a Ford truck, go to church and quit smoking, he hung his head and cried, tears came to his eyes.
Let's not consider with -- talking about ability to quit, the fact that Mr. Allen smoked
after a diagnosis of terminal lung cancer, which is a hallmark of addiction. And let's think about also on the ability to quit -- and I'm going to get to it in a little bit, the fact -- the fact that did he even really quit?
We heard Patricia Allen, their daughter, say, I saw him on occasions sneaking behind the barn. Relapse, a hallmark of addiction. The first
question, though, is addiction.
The first question, though, is addiction.
Like I say, we're going to get to the motivation and the ability to quit and all of the -- the changes that go on physiologically and psychologically in the brain.
Addiction, that's not really in dispute.
Dr. Nace, all plaintiff's witnesses talked about it, Dr. Nace talked about it. I need to start my timer -- Dr. Nace talked about it and conceded it, and -- and Mr. Beach virtually conceded it during his closing remarks here.
So what then is the issue? Mr. Beach said well, it's -- it's -- addiction can't be the cause of the disease. But it is. We -- we -- we talked about that with Dr. Burns. We talked about it in opening statement.
It's not a novel concept that addiction is dangerous. It's not a novel concept that cigarette smoking is dangerous. How does addiction then cause disease? How does addiction in this case then -- how did addiction lead to Mr. Allen's lung cancer?
Because addiction compels use of the product. It compels repeated -- every time Mr. Allen smoked to fulfill the addiction, every time he took in a puff of nicotine, a puff of cigarette, along with it came exposures to many, many, many carcinogens. That is how addiction causes disease.
Because you smoke for the nicotine. And along for the ride a dangerous partner, a dangerous person in the passenger's seat, if you will, of nicotine are all these carcinogens found in smoke.
And just to reorient you -- Ron, at the top of the -- Dr. Burns' list of carcinogens that -that we've already seen.
Remember this? This is important. Why is it important? Because these, members of the jury, are the carcinogens that come along for the ride every single puff of nicotine. We spent a long time talking about exposures to nicotine and
dosing the brain.
We talked about let's say if someone smokes 30 cigarettes a day, that's a pack and a half. Eight puffs on a cigarette, that's 240 exposures to nicotine. Multiply that by how many carcinogens there are, and that's how many daily exposures to carcinogens there are. That is how addiction causes disease.
Compelled smoking, repetitive continued exposure to carcinogens, changes in the cellular levels of the lungs that Dr. Burns explained, lung cancer. Addiction caused -- addiction to nicotine in cigarettes caused Mr. Allen's lung cancer.
Second big picture item: The Defense has said in this case that it was asbestos and not cigarettes that caused disease. What they're really saying is this: If you recall, we played a montage of videos up there that were representative samples of public statements by
tobacco industry representatives. There were six of them.
And the first one, just to reorient you was, it was blank because it was a radio spot. The last one was made by a fellow named Horace Kornegay. And what he said was, he said, when the
rabbit runs through the briar patch, it's hard to know what briar stuck him, something like that, right? That is the defense in this case. Doubt was their product then, and doubt is their product now. That's exactly what they're saying, okay? That's one of the things they're saying.
The other thing that they're really saying, though, if you dig beneath the surface is this: There is no contribution at all from Herman Allen's cigarette smoking. Ask yourselves -because that's what they're saying, to prevail -for us to not prevail and meet our burden of proof on causation, that's what you have to find, that there was no contribution at all. Ask yourselves, though, does that make sense? Does that make any common sense when we know how much Mr. Allen smoked, when we know that he smoked all day every day? That we know he smoked at 5:00 a.m. in the morning? We know he smoked last thing at night.
We know he exposed himself to millions upon millions upon millions upon millions upon millions of carcinogens throughout his life. Does that make any sense that smoking cigarettes played no role? No, it doesn't.
Important and critical for you-all to
understand here -- strike that.
Before I get into the jury instructions on that critical point, because it's very important, and I'm going to spend some time on that, understand this about their defense as well. They're saying that Mr. Allen was a statistical anomaly. Remember the document, Raising Kids That Don't Smoke?
If you could pop that up, please, Ron? Next page, please. Down here, yes, sir.
Long-term effects. Almost nine out of ten lung cancer deaths are caused by smoking cigarettes. They're saying by this defense that Mr. Allen was a statistical anomaly. Ask yourselves if that makes any sense. Smoking is the number one cause of lung cancer. Ask yourselves if there's any evidence to suggest that Mr. Allen falls outside of these statistical certainties, okay?
The jury instructions are important.
If you could pop up the -- Ron, please, the addition causation instructions?
Okay. You've seen this slide before.
Verdict form, question one. What I want to focus on is this, are these two jury instructions.
Because these are the two avenues that take plaintiff -- that allows plaintiff to meet her burden of proof, our burden of proof in this case. Okay? So I want to spend a little bit of time.
The Judge already read these to you. You re going to get a copy of this in the back, so if you want to look at them you can study them and see what it means, but here is what I submit to you that they mean.
First one: An addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of injury if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such injury -- critical language here -- so that it can reasonably be said that but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the injury would not nave been suffered.
So the first way plaintiff meets her burden of proof is proving that smoking cigarettes was the -- the substantial contributing cause, okay? Smoking cigarettes to the exclusion of other things.
Dr. Burns told you about that. He -- we know who he is. We know, of course, why the tobacco companies don't like him, because he spent his
whole life in public health. They hate those people. They hate anybody affiliated with the Surgeon General, okay? And that's Dr. Burns. So that's why they come up here and they say he's being less than candid. That's why they come up here and say those things about him, because they hate him. All right.
But what did he say? He is someone who has contributed meaningfully to 19 Surgeon General's reports, a board-certified pulmonologist. And he said, reviewing the evidence -- because he reviewed the evidence, he reviewed the medical record, he reviewed depositions. Reviewing the evidence, it's his opinion smoking cigarettes was a substantial contributing cause -- the substantial contributing cause. Why? Because there are knowns and there are unknowns.
What do we know? Forty-nine years of smoking, exposures to millions upon millions upon millions of carcinogens versus the unknown. We know that there was probably some asbestos exposure -- some, we don't know how much. We don't know how much Herman Allen was exposed to, okay? So we know there was some, but we don't know how much.
We also know that it was only a small portion of his life, up to four years, and he wasn't on the ship every day. We heard about repairs and dry dock, okay? We heard about he was in the Navy for four years and the initial monster and basic training, Right?
So he's not really on the ship for four years, but let's use that for argument sake right now, okay? Four years. How much of that he was actually exposed to it, we don't know. So there are knowns and there are unknowns, and that's what he based his opinion on, okay? Because we're talking about the greater weight of the evidence, okay? That's what we're talking about.
The other jury instruction that's important
in this regard is what we lawyers refer to as the concurrent -- a concurring cause instruction, or the concurring cause instruction, okay? This first one talks -- and plaintiff's first way to meet the burden of proof is to prove that smoking cigarettes was the substantial contributing cause.
This one defines what a concurring cause is. In order to be regarded as a legal cause of a disease or a medical condition, an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the
only cause, okay? The addiction to smoking need not be the only cause, okay? An addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause of injury even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause if the addiction to nicotine contributes substantially to producing such injury.
That is critical, okay? That is critical in this case if you are to believe what the defense is selling, okay? Because even if you believe what they're selling, this instruction is plaintiff's path to victory, even if you believe there's exposure to asbestos.
And why is that? Because this talks about addiction, cigarettes being "a," not "the," but "a" substantial contributing cause. So even if you believe what the defense is selling, that there was significant asbestos exposure, okay, that's fine. Because there's nothing to refute the fact that smoking cigarettes wasn't also -wasn't also a substantial contributing cause. So the focus, it shouldn't, then, be on asbestos, it still remains in this -- under this causation instruction, the focus remains on cigarettes.
So the question that you need to answer is
this: Was cigarettes a substantial contributing cause, okay? Even if there was asbestos exposure and even if asbestos did contribute in some way and maybe, then, in some meaningful way, that's okay. Because the analysis and the question that needs to be answered is: Did smoking cigarettes, not to the exclusion of anything else, did smoking cigarettes contribute in a significant way?
The evidence is, on that question, an overwhelming yes. And why? I've said it numerous times in these ten minutes, I'm going to say it one more time before I move on: Because there are knowns and there are unknowns. And what we know is Herman Allen smoked for 49 years.
Seventy-six percent of his life was spent smoking all day and every day.
Everyone knows now about the carcinogens in smoke, and everyone knows how those carcinogens get to the lung, and everyone knows that if you smoke for that long you're exposed to millions upon millions upon millions of carcinogens.
Smoking cigarettes was a substantial contributing cause to Mr. Allen's small cell lung cancer and death.
The only person that said otherwise is
Dr. Andrews. And we know all about Dr. Andrews, he's tobacco's $400,000 man. He's testified for them. He's their go-to guy when it's time to create doubt in the courtroom. The only time he's never seen a smoking-caused small cell cancer is when he testified in this case -- the only time. Does that ring true? Ask yourselves why he said that.
Another big picture issue: Damages.
Mr. Beach said to you, in response to the suggestion of a reasonable amount of damages in this case, based upon the totality of evidence, that he suggested mere thousands of dollars. That is what the life of Herman Allen is worth to the tobacco companies, thousands of dollars. But that rings true with how they treated people, doesn't it? It shouldn't surprise you to hear that from him. That should not surprise you. That is what they thought of people. Hook 'em early, sell them, keep selling them, keep them coming back to a product that's going to kill them. That is how much value they place on a human life -- a young life at that. So it shouldn't surprise you or shock you that that was his suggestion, all right?
Remember replacement smokers? When Herman
Allen died, they were done with him. They had replacement smokers ready and lined up to take his place. And the industry just kept on going and going and going. So that shouldn't surprise you.
I stood up here in opening statement, and I told you that this case is about Herman Allen.
It's about the death of a fine man. And you did not hear any other evidence to contradict the fact that he was a fine man. You got a glimpse of some of him through the depositions, but you got a major glimpse of him through Betty Faye Allen and Patricia Allen.
You heard all about Mrs. Allen's loss. Her golden years with Mr. Allen, her husband of 41 years were stolen from her -- stolen from her. She's lived the last 17 years alone without the love of her life. That's what this case is about. It's about living in the same house that she's lived in since tney moved into it in 1968, and waking up by herself for the past 17 years and however many more years she is going to live.
That's what this case is about. This case is about Mr. Allen not being around to see his kids who live -- Patricia Allen lives a quarter mile, half a mile away, and she's always lived that
close. It's about seeing some of those pictures of Mr. Allen with his grandchildren.
And you ask yourselves, is this a man who enjoyed smoking, who every time he picked it up said to himself, You know what? I'm aware of these risks here, and I just don't give a darn. I don't care. No. To believe that is to believe that he didn't want to live. To believe that is to believe that he had nothing to live for.
On the contrary, he had everything to live for. He had a loving marriage. He had a farm, an
acreage that they had struggled to acquire and had built up, never living beyond their means. When they could pay off the land they had then, they were able to get more and so on. They did things the right way. Mrs. Allen's golden years with Mr. Allen were stolen from her, and that's what this case is about.
Another big picture issue: Ability to quit, motivation to quit. The defense wants you to believe that quitting smoking or an addiction to nicotine is akin to texting. They started talking about that in jury selection; texting, buying a car, eating a salad, eating a milkshake or ordering a milkshake or something like that, video
games. They want you to believe that beating an addiction or overcoming an addiction is as simple as not answering that cell phone that's next to you or not going to your Blackberry or ordering the milkshake or not ordering the milkshake.
We know that addiction is complex. We heard all about it. We spent a lot of time talking about it, because it's important, okay? We know it affects everybody differently. We know that the brain's chemistry, the physiologically -- the physiological aspects of the brain and psychological aspects are involved. We know that repeated dosing of nicotine causes receptors -causes changes in the brain. We know all those things. We've heard all those things, and that's why they're important, because quitting cigarettes isn't easy.
Should Mr. Allen have been able to? I don't know. That's part of what we talked about in talking about, you know, he's partially at fault, okay? Maybe he could have tried more often, okay? That's part of admitting fault. We brought you the evidence and the power of addiction, and that's what the case is all about. So to suggest now that he should have quit earlier or when he
was motivated he could quit, well, he didn't even really quit, did he? To suggest that since he showed the ability for two months in 1970, it means he could have quit anytime. Well, he didn't quit, he relapsed. He relapsed. Just because he abstained for two months doesn't mean he was quit or doesn't mean he was never going to smoke again, he relapsed, which is the hallmark of addiction.
Every witness told you that addiction was highly individual, highly complex. We don't know why certain people can successfully quit, others can't. What we do know is it's a struggle. What we do know is, statistically, that 80 percent report they want to quit and only 5 percent are successful in unaided attempts.
We know about the physiologic changes, and we know about the psychological changes. We know about relapse, rationalization, and denial. So to suggest it's simply a question of motivation, well, that's just not giving it the credit that it deserves. In fact, that's an insult to all people everywhere that struggle daily with addiction.
We know that how much someone smokes is a predictor of their ability to quit. We know that Mr. Allen smoked a lot. We know how long till the
first cigarette of the morning is an indicator of ability to quit. Mr. Allen smoked right away. So to suggest that he wasn't properly motivated before 1994, isn't true, okay? Addiction is individual. The ability to quit is individual.
The Defense counsel talked about a brain receptor sideshow, but it's not a sideshow. It's important to understand, okay? We spent a lot of time talking about it. It's an artificial stimulation of dopamine. We talked about the change of receptors. It's not a sideshow, it's a fact.
And the other fact, there are physiological changes and psychological changes. He didn't want to quit? Of course, he did. He tried in 1970; he tried the nicotine patch. We already talked to you about hanging his head in shame when his grandchildren, especially Kelly Ware, brought him the Little Book of Life. With tears in his eyes, he drove 700 miles to Georgia. Of course he wanted to quit. And it was a struggle, and he never fully quit.
Another argument is that it -- kind of an overarching argument is our conduct doesn't matter. Tnat's what the defense is telling you,
their conduct in this case. And we took you through and showed you plenty of examples, and you're going to have -- you're going to have this evidence back with you there. You see those boxes? You're going to take them back, and you're going to be able to look for yourselves, although you've seen a lot of them throughout the course of the case. You're going to be able to see for yourselves what the defendants did, what they said publicly, and what they knew internally.
Except for they suggest that their conduct doesn't matter. In fact, it wasn't until about an hour into Mr. Beach's closing that he mentioned one public statement of the tobacco industry.
Why? Because what they did -- what they did is really indefensible. What they did is indefensible. And if ever there was a case where punitive damages was warranted, if ever there was a case where punitive damages is warranted, it's this case right here.
Targeting the youth, the innocent among us, the people who can't make informed decision, the people whose brains aren't fully formed; targeting those people and hooking them because they knew they would. Taking advantage of everything they
knew about the psychology of an addicted smoker and speaking only to them. That is but a small fraction of the things that they did. It's but a small fraction of the things that you heard. Look for yourselves when you get the evidence.
One thing that they point to to say that their conduct doesn't matter is they say, Well,
you know what? Our conduct doesn t matter.
Excuse it, because Herman Allen always knew about the risks of smoking.
To believe that, and what they're really saying is, then, if Herman Allen really knew about the risks of smoking, it means that he knew at some point in his life he was going to develop small cell lung cancer, terminal lung cancer that was going to be inoperable and incurable, and he was going to be dead within seven months of contracting it. That's what they're saying. Do you think as a 15-year-old he really knew that?
The other thing they're saying is this: That he was fully aware of the dangers. That he was fully aware of -- they're saying that he knew then, as a 15-year-old, that he was going to -once he became addicted, he was going to struggle the rest of his life to battle with that
addiction. Do you -- does that make sense? Do you think a 15-year-old really, really knows that?
And if this type of thing was such common knowledge back then, why, then -- why, then, did they sink so much money into their advertising campaign? Why did they have doctors in their ads if everybody knew? Why did they come out and tell people that it hadn't been proven if everybody, including Herman Allen, knew? Why did they continue to create doubt if everybody really knew?
So to suggest that a 15-year-old Herman Allen in 1945 in Brandon, Florida, knew and was fully aware of everything, that's just not reasonable. That's just not reasonable. There's a big difference between hearing something from someone and believing it.
Defense counsel says, Well, we know he knew because he acknowledged it, okay? And they took liberty with what they said. He didn't say when -- he didn't say when smoking hurts me I'll quit, he said "if." A small distinction word-wise, but the most important distinction in the case. "If" is not an acknowledgement that something is going to happen to you. "If" is saying I don't know, I can't be sure. Two small
words that make all the difference in this case.
So if they're going to hang their hat on that statement to show that he knew, he didn't say "when it hurts me," he said "if it hurts me."
What's the other evidence to suggest that he didn't know? He continued to smoke. Like 80 other -- like 80 percent of people born in his generation, he continued to smoke.
To believe that he was fully aware is to believe that he wanted to kill himself. To believe he was fully aware is to believe that every time he lit up a cigarette he was saying to himself, I can't wait for the day that I'm no longer here. I can't wait for the day that I die prematurely.
The other thing they say generally with respect to our conduct doesn't matter is, okay, fine. We said these things even though you didn't
see any mention of these things in their closing argument. Okay. Maybe we said these things. But you know what, there's no evidence that Herman Allen relied on anything, okay? While it's true that we can't stand up here and say, Here, look, Herman Allen, he saw this, we don't know that.
What we do know, though, is that this message
was everywhere. We heard about the advertising budget, for example, compared to the advertising budget of the National Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health, right? The tobacco companies spent more in a day than the National Clearinghouse spent in a year on advertising. The message was everywhere. You saw the government reports about that, everyone who can read, everyone who can write.
The message got to Herman Allen, and there's no more evidence than the fact that he continued to smoke. There's no more evidence that the message got to people than the fact that smoking rates continued to increase.
And then when the Surgeon General's report came out -- and, oh, by the way, when the Surgeon General's report came out in 1964, there was a new face for the tobacco industry to attack. We'll talk about that in a minute. The smoking rates didn't dramatically decline and disappear, they remained about steady -- or there was a steady decline over the years, but they didn't drop off.
And what does that suggest? It suggests that their strategy of doubt was still working. They were communicating to addicted smokers for the
purpose of keeping them smoking. If people didn't rely and hear about what they said, smoking at that point would have taken a precipitous decline and drop, and it would be down to the rates that they are now.
So I suggest to you that the best evidence of reliance is the fact that Mr. Allen continued to smoke. He continued to battle his addiction. That's the best evidence of reliance. He was of the 80 percent of his generation that smoked, and of the 80 percent of those 80 percent that became addicted. That's the best evidence that the conduct of the defendants affected him.
And it caused his death. What better evidence of there is relying on something to your detriment than doing something, being lied to about it, and then dying because of it?
So when thinking about reliance, think about this: It's one of two things. Either the millions upon millions of people that have died since Herman Allen took up smoking, and the 400,000 or so people that die every year smoke because they want to and they want to kill themselves, or the message of doubt got to them. It's really one of two things, and it really is
that simple when considering reliance.
Ms. Chuang told you the brand history was unclear. The brand history is not unclear. We
heard about Lucky Strikes before -- from J.E.
Allen before Mr. Allen went into the Navy. We heard about Lucky Strikes and Camel when he was in the Nay. We heard about Lucky Strikes from the time he came out of the Navy until 19 -- 1960, all those -- those -- I say "all those brands," those two brands R.J. Reynolds has responsibility for today.
And then Ms. Allen got on the stand, and although she couldn't tell you exact time periods down to the minute about the other brand he smoked, she did list for you the other brands that were smoked: Pall Mall, Winston, Salem -- R.J. Reynolds brands; Marlboro, Marlboro Lights -Philip Morris brands.
So the brand history isn't unclear. In fact, it's the reason why these two defendants are in the courtroom today. He smoked their brands.
Patricia Allen told you with respect to Marlboro that when she was a teenager -- she was born in 1955, so she was a teenager in the late '60s, early '70s up to the mid '70s, okay? That's
a pretty good time period that you're given there. Marlboro Lights followed. There's a picture of Mr. Allen with a packet of Marlboro Lights that you have in evidence, okay? So we know the brands that he smoked, we know who manufactured them, and we know generally when he smoked them. So the brand history is not unclear.
By the way, a small point -- well, no, it's not a small point. Mr. Beach told you it was no secret, this awareness of the risk. If it was no secret, why then are you going to see for yourselves so many internal documents marked "secret" or marked "confidential," talking about the health risks of smoking? Ask yourselves that. If it was no secret, why did they feel the need to spend so much money to come out and say there's nothing wrong with it if there was no secret? Ask yourselves tnat.
The small point I was going to talk about, but that's not really a small point, Ms. Chuang told you Mr. Allen was raised in a Holiness church. He wasn't. He was raised Baptist. We know that from Louise Sheffield.
Later on his family went to Holiness Church when they were here in Hillsborough County. His
sister went to the Holiness church, Mrs. Allen went to the Holiness church, but Herman Allen was raised Baptist.
So this notion that he had all these sources of information, that's not necessarily so. Did his wife suggest to him what she knew? Yes.
That's undisputed. We're not running from that fact. Is it disputed or in dispute if he truly believed that? Yeah. Why? Because he kept on smoking. Did he eventually believe it? I'm sure he did. I'm sure he did. Did he believe it when he started? There's no evidence of that.
The defense stood up here and told you that this is a case only about Herman Allen. We know
that s not true. We know that this is a case about the tobacco industry as well -- as well. We know it's a case about choices.
And they want to highlight the choices that Herman Allen made without discussing any of the choices that they made. They want to tell you it's a case about personal responsibility, and all the personal responsibility lies in this case with Herman Allen.
It is a case about personal responsibility. The Judge already told you that you are to treat
corporations just like individuals. This is a case about choices, and it's a case about personal responsibilities.
If you could put up that Frank Statement, please?
You've heard about the Frank Statement to Cigarette Smokers. You know that that was as a result of the meeting in the beginning of -- of the conduct. We know who was all there. They signed off on it. The American Tobacco Company, Incorporated, Paul Hahn, president; Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corporation, Timothy V. Hartnett, president; Philip Morris and Company Limited, O. Parker McComas, president;
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, E. A. Darr, president.
The high ranking officials that you have to look to when talking about punitive damages, they are right here from the very beginning. It was this gentleman's idea, Paul Hahn. R.J. Reynolds has a responsibility for their conduct.
Even so, R.J. Reynolds is there in the same room with them signing off on the very same document, so is the president of Philip Morris.
It doesn't get any more high ranking than that,
all right?
If you could go to other portions of it, please.
Now, I want to look at what they said here, and I want -- I want you to ask yourselves about choices. Here's what they told the public. We accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. We believe the products we make are not injurious to health. We always have and always will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health.
What if that was true? What if that -- what if they really believed that? Imagine what the world would be like today.
Dr. Burns told you what it would be like today. At that point if there was an uninterrupted message, a message of continuity about the health effects of smoking, cigarette-related lung cancer would be gone today, okay?
They made the choice in 1954 to lie to the public. That's a choice that they made.
What if -- if you can put up 2268, please,
Ron.
This is a document that talks about the Center for Tobacco Research, which began as the Tobacco Industry Research, TIRC, which is referenced in the Frank Statement as being this committee they created, okay? Their own documents describe what this was. It was set up as an industry shield in 1954.
What if they hadn't made the choice to set up the TIRC as an industry shield in 1954? Imagine how things different -- imagine how different things would be today. What if they, rather than setting up this shield or front, they would have said, Members of the public, we take an interest in your health, and here's what you need to know about our product? They chose not to do that.
What if instead of telling the public at every turn that the jury is still out, what if they had told the public that the jury is in, and we know that it causes damage? They chose not to do that.
What if, when the Surgeon General's 1964 report came out, rather than attacking the Surgeon General, from that point on they would have linked arms with the Surgeon General? What then?
Imagine how things would be different today.
What if, rather than going back to the drawing board -- if you could put up 1817, please, Ron?
What if rather than going back to the drawing board as a result of that and trying to -- we're going to show you the date. This is -- this is shortly after the Surgeon General's report.
What if rather than deciding to come up with in the near future information that provides some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and the self-rationale to continue smoking? These answers must also point out the weakness in the report and the path of future research.
What if they would have just let the Surgeon General say what the Surgeon General needed to say to the public, and rather than trying to come up with the continued plan to create doubt, what if they would have just let that message reach the public without creating controversy? What then? Did they do that? No.
They made a choice to go back to the drawing board and continue their plan to give smokers a reason to keep smoking. What if they would have not done that? These are the choices that you
have to consider when you're considering how much fault to put on these companies.
What we know now is this: That in the late 1990s the tobacco industry was forced to admit what they already knew, smoking cigarettes caused lung cancer, smoking cigarettes are addictive. If they had chosen to tell the public about the dangers in 1953 or in 1964 or in 1975, cigarette-induced lung cancer would be on the decline and be at a lower rate than it is today.
That's what would have happened if they would have linked arms.
So is it a case about choices? You bet it is. It's about the choices that everyone in the case made. Is it a case about responsibility?
You bet it is.
Do the tobacco companies bear a significant amount of responsibility? Absolutely. For 50 years, doubt was their product, and you saw that here today in the courtroom. It still is.
For 50 years, you heard some iteration of the mantra, We just don't know. And you heard We just don't if cigarette smoking causes lung cancer.
You heard that today.
For many years you heard them attack the
Surgeon General. And when Dr. Burns is on the stand, they attacked him, too. Nothing has changed.
Herman Allen was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. Herman Allen's addiction led to the development of lung cancer. The tobacco companies bear a significant amount of fault. Herman Allen's at fault, too.
The damages we suggested to you are reasonable for what this woman lost. Herman Allen relied to his detriment on the omissions and concealments of these defendants. And if ever there was a case that punitive damages was warranted, it's this case here.
We thank you very much for your attentiveness today and for the duration of the trial.
In a moment you're going to retire to start your deliberations. Thank you very much.
