         MR. GEISE:  It's been a couple of weeks since
    I've had a chance to address you.  We've talked in
    jury selection and we talked in opening statement.
    And once again, it's now the bottom of the inning,
    right?  Once again, I want to start by thanking you
    all for your service.  As I said in opening
    statement, we couldn't have a jury without jurors,
    and you're a big part of that.
         There are a lot of ways that people contribute
    in this country.  Last week we celebrated Veterans
    Day that honored those who served in the military. 3702 In November, we typically vote and some of us go and
    vote, some of us don't, but it's a way to
    contribute.  And for the past three weeks, you all
    have made a great service and sacrifice by coming
    here every day and helping us decide this case.
         So whatever you decide, whatever the verdict
    is, you can go back to your homes, to your office,
    to your lives, to your friends, and you can tell
    them that you've made a difference and you've
    contributed, because you have.  So on behalf of
    myself and my team, for your service for the last
    few weeks, thank you.
         Now, when this case started, I told you that
    it's not about other smokers, it's only about John
    Barbose.  And in particular, the case is about the
    choices he made when it came to smoking.  As this
    case now draws to a close, that's still what this
    case is about.
         A couple of weeks ago, I told you you would
    hear an avalanche of information about things that
    have nothing to do with Mr. Barbose.  Remember I
    talked about the ball pit or the ping-pong balls?
    And you sure did.  And you heard about it again
    today.  Things that Judge Stearns told you had
    already been resolved in that other case, things 3703 that I told you in my opening statement weren't in
    dispute.
         Dr. Villa and Dr. Stein spent a lot of time
    telling you that smoking causes lung cancer.  You
    heard that from Judge Stearns on day one.  It wasn't
    an issue then, it's not an issue now.
         Dr. Cummings and Dr. Drobes spent a lot of time
    telling you that smoking and nicotine is addictive.
    You heard that from Judge Stearns and from me on day
    one.  It wasn't an issue then, it's not an issue
    now.
         And you recall in opening statement that I told
    you to keep your eye on the ball and focus on the
    evidence that relates to John Barbose.
         Now, when I said that, I assumed that the
    plaintiff would only tell you half the story on
    certain things and you'd have to wait for us on the
    bottom of the inning to tell you the rest of the
    story.  And the plaintiff did just that.  It started
    with their first witness, Dr. Cummings.  The general
    on the war on tobacco; testified in more than 90 of
    these trials, each time saying he's rooting for the
    smoker to win, each time saying the smoker is
    addicted, and each time he sets his objectivity
    aside. 3704 How many times did we have to show you the rest
    of the story with Dr. Cummings?  They would plant a
    seed with you on direct examination and then wait to
    see if we would expose it on cross.  And Mr. Carter
    had to do it over and over with Dr. Cummings.
         Mr. Bigger showed you a Winston ad in opening
    statement.  Mr. Clark played it again with
    Dr. Cummings while he was on the stand, and they
    showed it and talked to you about it today, planting
    a seed that Reynolds advertised to youth with that.
    I called that half story in opening statement.  I
    told you they would do it, and they still did.
         So on cross with Mr. Carter, you learned the
    other side of the story; that the Flintstones were
    originally an adult comedy, that it was modeled on
    the Honeymooners, that it was a nighttime show, not
    a Saturday morning one, and it was sponsored by not
    Zantac, but by Alka-Seltzer and One-a-Day vitamins.
         Mr. Bigger asked earlier like, what's that
    show?  What it shows is it was an adult program and
    those are adult products.  Kids don't use
    Alka-Seltzer.
         And the other thing you learned is that
    Reynolds never advertised on the program when it
    moved to mornings.  And you learned that Mr. Barbose 3705 was a grown man with a family and businesses by the
    time that show aired.  And the other thing you
    learned, there is no evidence in this case that he
    ever saw it.
         Plaintiff told you about Dr. Teague and that
    1953 report he did with all those articles cited in
    there.  And Dr. Cummings told you he didn't make
    that research public.  But on cross, you learned
    that research was already public.  All 78 articles
    that were cited in it were public articles.  Now,
    some of them were originally in German, but it
    doesn't mean they weren't in public, and it just
    means that Dr. Teague did a good job to get the
    German articles.
         Another example of only getting half the story
    is the company research on nicotine.  Dr. Cummings'
    suggestion -- you heard it again today -- that
    they're trying to find a level of nicotine to keep
    smokers addicted or adjust the pH to drive market
    share.  But during his cross-examination, you heard
    from Dr. Cummings that this research was done at the
    urging of public health officials like the National
    Cancer Institute.  And it was done as a way to try
    to find a less hazardous cigarette.
         Dr. Cummings told you that people at Roswell 3706 Park were looking at a way to get a higher-nicotine,
    lower-tar cigarette.  And he even used the term they
    were trying to jack up the nicotine to see if it
    would be better.  The idea, if people are smoking
    and going to get a certain amount of nicotine, why
    don't we lower the tar and give them the same amount
    of nicotine, because tar is where the cancer cause
    is.
         Now, the plaintiff called that nicotine
    manipulation.  The NCI at the time called it
    progress.
         Along a similar vein, you saw it again today
    and it was talked about, a 1972 document in which
    Claude Teague referred to nicotine as the
    sine qua non of the cigarette.  Do you remember that
    one?  Dr. Cummings told you that means nicotine is
    the essential ingredient of tobacco.
         Well, again, on cross, Mr. Carter had to show
    you with Dr. Cummings a Reader's Digest article from
    1950.  This was AS-995.  1950.  22 years earlier
    that it was reported to the public that nicotine is
    an essential ingredient in tobacco.
         Talked about this morning, in 1958, that they
    identified carcinogens in cigarette smoke.  You
    heard about that from Dr. Rodgman, the document he 3707 had where he recognized that there were eight
    polycyclic hydrocarbons in 1958.  Dr. Cummings told
    you that information was secret from the public.
         On cross-examination, once again, Mr. Carter
    had to show you that those 80 polycyclic
    hydrocarbons were identified in the same year in
    Reader's Digest.
         And you saw that Dr. Rodgman didn't keep it to
    himself, but he actually talked about that to the
    American Chemical Society.  And you can see his
    report.  It was AT-956.  And in his report, he
    talked about the presence of benzpyrene and nicotine
    in cigarette smoke.  And he also drew the
    constituents.  Do you remember that?
         Now, Dr. Cummings showed you a lot of memos
    from a lot of different folks with the tobacco
    companies, but he didn't show you this one, this one
    from 1968 from the president of Reynolds to the head
    of research and development.  And what does it say
    that Dr. Cummings didn't want you to see?
         "In cooperation with others, you should push
    the work concerning tobacco and health.  You should
    prepare a plan to foster any relationship with
    government personnel in the quest for mutual
    understanding of facts ultimately to gain their 3708 cooperation in proper research on the subject.
         "Second, if there is a safer cigarette, let's
    continue and increase our efforts in this program.
    Please prepare a plan to carry it out."
         This memo wasn't prepared to be a trial
    exhibit.  It was a directive to continue the work
    that was already going on and to increase efforts to
    develop a safer cigarette.  Dr. Cummings knew about
    the document, but he didn't bring it to you.  We
    did.
         So why did you have to wait for
    cross-examination to get the full story on these and
    other documents, besides the plaintiff didn't want
    to tell you?  The answer is simple:  To get you mad,
    to get you to take your eye off the ball.
         Dr. Cummings talked to you for three days in
    the hopes of getting you so mad that you would
    decide this case on the basis of emotion rather than
    the facts of John Barbose.
         They started their case with Dr. Cummings
    reading tons of documents, and they ended their case
    with Mr. Bigger reading more documents and with
    another attorney asking Dr. Figlar about the same
    documents that Dr. Cummings had already read to you,
    hoping you would forget what happened in the middle 3709 of the case, hoping you would take your eye off the
    ball, hoping you would lose your focus.  Because if
    you keep your eye on the ball and you focus on the
    facts of John Barbose, Mrs. Barbose loses in this
    case.  She loses because she can't meet her burden
    of proving that he had a primary adenocarcinoma that
    started in his lung.  She loses because Mr. Barbose
    was not addicted.  He was in control over his
    smoking choices and he wasn't significantly impaired
    or distressed.  He wasn't motivated to even try to
    quit for decades.  And when he was motivated to
    quit, he was successful for weeks, for months, or
    for good.
         And Mrs. Barbose loses because any addiction
    Mr. Barbose may have had wasn't the legal cause of
    his death.  Instead, his decisions and his choice to
    do what he wanted to do, not what other people
    wanted him to do, was a legal cause of his actions
    and their consequences.
         Finally, Mrs. Barbose loses because she can't
    prove a link between anything Reynolds and
    Philip Morris said, didn't say, did, didn't do in
    any smoking decision made by Mr. Barbose.
         I showed you this slide in opening.  These are
    the three burdens or hurdles that come into the 3710 first question on your verdict form.  And as I said
    and as Mr. Bigger agreed, the plaintiff has the
    burden of proof.  That was true then and it's true
    now.  And they have to clear all three of these
    hurdles.  And they're all contained in the first
    question on the verdict form.
         If the plaintiff fails to meet any one of these
    burdens, any one of those hurdles, they lose on that
    entire question.  They have to meet all three in
    order to get a "yes" to that question.
         Now, throughout my closing and Ms. Yates'
    closing, we're going to talk about these three
    things.  And we're going to show you why the answer
    to each would be no.
         The first hurdle is whether smoking caused a
    primary lung cancer in Mr. Barbose.  And I'm not
    going to say very much about it.  As I said in
    opening, Dr. Villa told you that you need some
    imagination to see the features of adenocarcinoma.
    And he admitted the stains used back in 1996
    produced iffy results.  That wasn't my words.
    That's what Dr. Villa came and told you.
         He also told you that there were immunostains
    available that could have identified the particular
    cell type and identified where the cancer started. 3711 But those weren't done.
         There is not much more I can say about that.  I
    don't dispute Mr. Barbose had cancer, but it's hard
    to go back in time when the evidence doesn't exist
    and prove what exactly it was.
         Now, if the plaintiff can clear that first
    hurdle, the next hurdle is addiction.  And this is a
    big hurdle.  And I'm going to spend a lot of time
    this morning talking about this, because it's a lot
    of what you heard about in this case.
         This is the evidence in this case that
    Mr. Barbose was not addicted.  First, there is no
    medical record from any doctor who ever treated
    Mr. Barbose that diagnosed him with an addiction, a
    dependence, or a tobacco use disorder.  None.  The
    only doctor you heard from in this case who actually
    saw, met, and treated Mr. Barbose was Dr. Stein.  He
    didn't even offer an opinion that Mr. Barbose was
    addicted.
         He was treating Mr. Barbose right at the time
    that he had stopped smoking in 1996.  If he was
    addicted at that time and suffering from withdrawal
    symptoms, would Dr. Stein have remembered it and put
    it down in his records?  He said he would have, but
    he didn't make any record of it, nor did any other 3712 doctor who ever treated Mr. Barbose.
         Second, Mr. Barbose was never an out-of-control
    smoker.  Mr. Bigger put up a slide and said it's not
    about whether he lost control.  You'll remember --
    and we'll talk more about the definitions you saw in
    this case.  Dr. Drobes talked about addiction being
    a loss of control.  Mr. Barbose never lost control.
    His ability to control his smoking when he wanted to
    was documented.  You know he followed no smoking
    rules.  You know he didn't avoid going places where
    he couldn't smoke.  You know he didn't smoke in
    people's houses when they didn't want him to smoke.
    You know it didn't interfere with family functions.
    You know he didn't smoke in the car with Stacey
    after she told him she was allergic to cigarette
    smoking.
         And the only place in his house that he would
    smoke was the bathroom.  Mr. Bigger said he would
    sneak in there and do it.  He didn't sneak in there.
    Mrs. Barbose knew he was in there.  She could smell
    it.  And when she asked him about it, he said, It's
    my house too.  That's control.  When you are doing
    what you want to do, you are in control.
         Mr. Barbose completely controlled the
    situations and his smoking behavior when other 3713 people told him to do something different.  When
    they told him how he should behave, what did he do?
    He shrugged it off, he ignored it, he laughed at the
    notion that he should stop, and he went right out
    the door and continued doing what he wanted to do.
    Mr. Barbose was not out of control.  He was
    completely in control of what he wanted to do and
    what he was going to do.
         I told you during opening statement that you
    would hear some simple facts about nicotine and
    nicotine addiction, and you did in this case.  You
    heard that nicotine addiction does not permanently
    change brain receptors.  I think that's clear.  I
    think every addiction witness in this case agreed to
    that.  But you did hear lot about nicotine
    receptors.  You know Dr. Drobes made a big deal
    about it, and he showed you images of different
    receptors they had and he showed you a diagram of
    the nucleus accumbens.  And he didn't want to do it,
    but ultimately he had to admit to me the following
    about nicotine receptors:  Everyone has them; they
    go back to normal after you quit, within two to
    three months; and the changes in your nicotine
    receptors are not permanent.
         But then they tried to get Dr. Drobes to say 3714 something about smoking has to make a permanent
    change in your brain, because I put it up in
    opening.  I think they wanted to refute it.  So what
    Dr. Drobes told you is there is this memory of
    smoking creates a permanent change in your brain.
    Do you remember his testimony on that?  So on cross,
    I asked him this:
         "So the memory of a loved one nagging you about
    stopping smoking can also cause a change in your
    brain, right?
         I think all of our experiences can be
    remembered, and memories are associated with changes
    in the brain."
         I asked him, "Including memories of those
    conversations with a loved one, correct?"
         And he said, "I wouldn't exclude any experience
    from potentially having an effect on the brain."
         If there was something that was ingrained in
    Mr. Barbose's brain, it was his wife's hounding him
    about smoking.  It's probably ingrained in your
    brains by this point of this trial.  But we know
    that Mrs. Barbose complained to him about smoking
    changed his brain, and we know it didn't cause him
    to change his behavior.
         You also learned that nicotine addiction 3715 doesn't do other things.  It doesn't interfere with
    the smoker's ability to understand the risks of
    smoking, it doesn't interfere with their ability to
    make a choice to quit or a choice to continue
    smoking, and it doesn't prevent then from quitting
    permanently.  Any smoker can quit.  Every witness in
    this case agreed; Dr. Cummings, Dr. Drobes,
    Dr. Hayes.
         Now, on cross-examination, Dr. Cummings and
    Dr. Drobes admitted that millions of smokers, over
    60 million smokers, including millions of addicted
    smokers, have stopped smoking for good, most of them
    cold turkey.
         Now, Mr. Bigger talked to you about populations
    in his closing argument.  And what you were told
    from the judge is the population of Florida is about
    19 million people.  The whole state of Florida has
    quit smoking three different times.  That's how many
    former smokers there are.  And you heard there are
    more former smokers than current smokers.
         Now, I want to talk for a minute about
    Dr. Cummings and Dr. Drobes.  The plaintiff called
    both of them to tell you Mr. Barbose was addicted,
    and both of them had some similarities.  They had
    four similarities. 3716 First, neither one of them currently treats a
    single patient.  And I wasn't going talk about this,
    but Mr. Bigger spent so much time yesterday trying
    to beat up Dr. Hayes for, Is it 10 to 15?  Is it 20
    to 25?  Is it five at a time?
         It's funny, because neither Dr. Cummings or
    Dr. Drobes is treating a single patient right now.
    And when Mr. Bigger talked about Dr. Cummings
    counseling people, the reason he had to use that
    term is because Dr. Cummings is not able to actually
    treat people.  He doesn't have that type of a
    background.  He can't write a prescription or
    anything.
         Now, the other similarities about these two is
    you've heard they never passed on a case because
    they didn't think the smoker was addicted.  You
    heard they've never testified in a deposition or a
    trial that the smoker wasn't addicted.  And you
    heard that both of them were disclosed in this case
    to say that Mr. Barbose was addicted before they
    knew a single fact about Mr. Barbose.
         Now, Mr. Bigger said, you know, The evidence
    was obvious in this case.
         Well, with these experts, they had their
    opinions before they had any evidence in this case. 3717 And think about that.  Is it such a slam-dunk
    certainty that they will give any plaintiff who asks
    the opinion that they want and need on addiction?
    Is it such a certainty that their opinions can be
    disclosed before they bother to know a single fact
    about the smoker?  Something is not right with that
    picture.  You have an expert on call to give you the
    opinion you need each time, every time?  That's not
    right.
         Now, contrast that with Dr. Hayes.  She needs
    to know all the facts.  Does she go into the record
    deeply?  Yes.  Does it add up for her hours?  Yes.
    Does she know the facts of the case?  You'd better
    believe it.  Did she get stumped once yesterday on
    any fact you heard in this trial?  Not a once.  And
    she tells you that she looks at all the evidence and
    forms an opinion.  And you've heard that her, in
    other cases, she's looked at it and said, You know
    what, I've looked at it, and I think that smoker is
    addicted.  And she'd say that to a jury or say it in
    a deposition.  The facts of the case matter.  They
    matter to Dr. Hayes.
         But they didn't matter to these two.  They were
    perfectly comfortable having their opinions
    disclosed before they knew a single fact about 3718 Mr. Barbose.
         Now, despite these similarities between
    Dr. Cummings and Dr. Drobes, you'll see that they
    disagreed sometimes pretty significantly.  Now, you
    know that the Court is not giving you a definition
    of addiction.  You had the jury instructions say
    there is no definition.  Well, Dr. Cummings and
    Dr. Drobes, they didn't agree on a definition.
         Dr. Cummings talked about criteria from the
    Surgeon General's report and something called the
    Heaviness of Smoking Index, but not Dr. Drobes.  He
    talked about other definitions he uses.  He never
    mentioned the Surgeon General's reports or the
    Heaviness of Smoking Index.
         Now, Mr. Bigger did it again in his closings
    today, and he reminds you, Dr. Cummings read from
    the Surgeon General's report where it said "Nicotine
    addiction is the fundamental reason why people
    persist in daily cigarette smoking."  And he pointed
    out that he asked Dr. Hayes that question.  And he
    pointed out that Dr. Hayes disagreed.
         Well, you know who they didn't ask that
    question of?  Dr. Drobes.  You know why?  Because he
    would have had the same answer that Dr. Hayes had.
         MR. BIGGER:  I'm sorry.  Objection, Your Honor. 3719 THE COURT:  Approach, please.
         (The following bench conference took place
outside the hearing of the jury:)
         MR. BIGGER:  Since I'm half asleep over there,
    I'm not sure.  But what I'm hearing Mr. -- if what
    I'm hearing is correct, I'm hearing him say that
    there is something not in evidence that he's about
    to tell the jury.
         MR. GEISE:  No.
         MR. BIGGER:  You said, What did you not hear
    Dr. Drobes say?
         MR. GEISE:  I didn't ask him that question.
         MR. BIGGER:  Well, then no one asked him that
    question.
         MR. GEISE:  I'm going to get to it.  I'm going
    to get to the next question I asked him about the
    prevalence of smoking.
         MR. BIGGER:  Oh, this is cross.
         MR. GEISE:  Yeah.
         MR. BIGGER:  Okay.  Sorry.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. BIGGER:  My apologies.  I'm mishearing
    again.  I was paying attention.
         (End of bench conference.)
         MR. GEISE:  May I continue, Your Honor? 3720 THE COURT:  You may.
         MR. GEISE:  Thank you.
         And you know that Dr. Drobes agrees with
    Dr. Hayes.  I asked him this.
         "Now, you also know that the DSM-5 that talks
    about the prevalence of dependence among current
    daily smokers using the DSM-IV criteria is 50
    percent, correct?  Remember, he came here to talk to
    you about the DSM-5?"
         He said, "I'm familiar with that, yes."
         And I said, "In fact, you agree that there are
    daily smokers who are not addicted, right?"
         And he says, "Correct."
         And I'll get to this one in a minute.  But he's
    willing to agree that 100 percent of people who
    smoke five cigarettes per day are addicted.
         So on that point of whether nicotine addiction
    is the fundamental reason why people persist, the
    DSM-5 tells you only 50 percent of daily cigarette
    smokers are addicted.  So what does that tell you?
    For the other 50 percent, nicotine addiction can't
    be the fundamental reason why they persist in daily
    cigarette smoking.  If only half are, half aren't.
         Now, that's what Dr. Hayes said.  That's why
    she disagreed.  She's relying on DSM-5 just like 3721 Dr. Drobes.
         Now, that last point up there where Dr. Drobes
    says, "You wouldn't say a hundred percent of people
    who smoked five cigarettes per day are addicted," he
    said he would not.  You know who disagrees with
    that?  Dr. Cummings.
         Remember, he was asked, "Even if someone smokes
    only one cigarette a day, if they smoke them daily,
    you believe that smoker is addicted?"
         "Yes, I do.  If they do it on a persistent,
    daily basis over, you know, months, years, decades,
    absolutely."
         Dr. Drobes and Dr. Cummings disagree.
         Now, Dr. Drobes and Dr. Hayes talked to you
    about DSM-5.  Dr. Cummings didn't mention it at all.
    Why?  Because he's not a psychologist.  He doesn't
    use it.  Dr. Drobes told you that mental health
    professionals look at the facts under the DSM
    criteria and have to apply their own critical
    judgment based on their experience, their
    background, and their training.
         Dr. Hayes did just that for you.  She told you
    how she formed her opinion that Mr. Barbose was not
    addicted.  And Mr. Bigger questioned her for almost
    two years about websites, about images from Google 3722 Maps, but he never asked her a single question about
    the DSM-5 and how she applied it to John Barbose.
         Why not?  Well, his whole cross was to get you
    to take your eyes off the ball, to focus somewhere
    else.  And as Mr. Bigger said, he was taking a shot
    at Dr. Hayes for her qualifications.
         Well, you know, the Court wouldn't allow an
    expert to give you opinions if they weren't
    qualified to give them to you.
         Dr. Hayes told you that Mr. Barbose was not
    clinically significantly impaired or distressed.  In
    addition, Dr. Drobes, when he applied the DSM-5, he
    didn't do it the right way.  He didn't follow the
    steps.  First of all, you've got to look for the
    clinically-significant impairment or distress.
    Dr. Drobes never mentioned that to you.
         The second thing you have to look for --
    remember in the criteria where it says you have to
    look for it in the same 12-month period?  I asked
    Dr. Drobes about it and he said, I didn't do it.  I
    didn't do it here.
         So he didn't even apply it correctly.  He
    pulled information from the 1950s, Oh, that might
    fit here.  In the 1980s, that might fit here.  Oh,
    the 1970s, it might here.  That's not the way the 3723 DSM-5 works.  You heard that from Dr. Hayes, and
    nobody challenged the way Dr. Hayes applied it in
    this case.
         Choosing to do something you want to do is not
    a sign of a significant impairment or distress.
    Doing what you want to do is not a disorder.  It's a
    decision.  And John Barbose had the choice and the
    control to make a decision or a different decision
    if he wanted.  You heard that quitting takes
    motivation, determination, and persistence.
    Dr. Hayes told you she looks at those factors to
    determine whether somebody has a clinically
    significant impairment or distress, and she
    explained why Mr. Barbose does not.  When he was
    motivated to succeed, he was a man who came up with
    a plan to succeed.
         Now, I want to look at his personality a little
    bit.  For a successful business, you know you need
    to plan the work and work the plan, right?  You've
    got to rent the space, you've got to order the food,
    you've got to hire the workers, you've got to file
    the tax returns, you've got to register with the
    state, you've got to do all those things.  You need
    to have a plan for success.  Mr. Barbose
    demonstrated the ability to do that when he wanted 3724 to time and time again, at work and even at home.
         You heard from his brother Sam he built a
    house.  Think about that.  Do the plans, buy the
    supplies, get the contractors, get the equipment,
    get tools, and build it.  Does that take dedication,
    motivation, planning?  You bet it does.  And he
    succeeded.  If you're a person not capable of making
    a plan and following it, those projects would be
    disastrous.  But that wasn't John Barbose.  He made
    a plan and he succeeded.
         And he did that even when others thought the
    plan might not be a good idea.  Remember Sam told
    you, I don't know why, but he had a great business
    going and he decided to close it up and start a new
    one.  I thought he was crazy.  Sam couldn't
    understand why Mr. Barbose would do that.  But the
    answer is simple.  Mr. Barbose was a person who did
    what he wanted to do and wasn't afraid to take
    risks.
         Did he ever bring that same planning and
    motivation to a decision to quit smoking?  You know
    the answer to that.
         Now, unmotivation.  You remember in opening
    statement I showed you these two slides.
    Dr. Cummings, I said he was going to tell you anyone 3725 can quit if they make up their mind to do it, and I
    told you he would say the success rate for people
    who really want to quit and stick to it is 100
    percent.  It's what Dr. Cummings tells people in
    that Smart Move pamphlet he has that Mr. Carter
    showed you.  But here, when he was asked about it,
    Dr. Cummings told you those quotes were taken out of
    context.  These quotes were taken out of his
    pamphlet.  This is what he tells people.
         Now, it's not the only time Dr. Cummings
    disagreed with himself here in court.  Sometimes he
    had a hard time telling you the same thing he told
    some other jury under oath or what he said in his
    deposition under oath.  And Mr. Carter had to
    impeach him a number of times with his prior
    testimony.
         A couple of examples:  Mr. Carter asked him,
    "Was it fair to say 30 million people have quit
    between 1964 and 1979?"  It's what he said in
    another trial to another jury, but here he said, No,
    that's unfair, so we had to show him.
         Mr. Carter said, "Was it possible for
    Mr. Barbose to quit at any point throughout his
    time?"  In his deposition he said yes, but here to
    you he said no.  So Mr. Carter had to point that 3726 out.
         Mr. Carter asked him, "There was no evidence
    that Mr. Barbose used a patch after 1994, was
    there?"  In his deposition, Dr. Cummings said no,
    but here at trial he said yes, so we had to show
    that.
         But there was one thing that really struck me
    about what Dr. Cummings told you.  When Mr. Carter
    was pressing him over and over and over about these
    different inconsistencies, I think Dr. Cummings got
    tired of it after a while, frankly, and he said
    this:  "I always say don't rely on me, don't
    manufacture evidence."  That's what Dr. Cummings
    said.  And I think that's good advice from
    Dr. Cummings.
         So instead of relying on Dr. Cummings, let's
    look at what the people who knew Mr. Barbose said
    about his motivation and his attempts to quit.
         Dr. Hayes reviewed this for you yesterday.  I'm
    not going to go through her chart.  I want to show
    you what Mrs. Barbose told you when I asked her,
    "And you believe that Mr. Barbose was motivated to
    quit in that April 1996 time period?
         "Yes.
         "But you don't believe he was motivated to quit 3727 smoking earlier in the 1990s or 1980s or at any
    point earlier in time, do you?
         "Well, I know he tried.  I don't know how
    motivated he was about it."
         And then I asked, "Well, you never noticed that
    he was motivated, correct?"  And she agreed.
         What do we know about Mr. Barbose's attempts to
    quit?  You heard from his brother Sam.  He came down
    here from Pennsylvania, and he told the story about
    his brother would take those loosy cigarettes when
    he was in high school.  Didn't really remember how
    much he smoked them.  But then he also talked about
    how he saw John smoke all through the years when he
    would help him with anything, he would see them.
    When they were having coffee, he would see him
    smoking.  When he would be at his diner, he would
    see him at the end of the counter smoking.  When
    they were building the house working side by side,
    he would see him smoking.
         Sam Barbose was not aware of Mr. Barbose ever
    making an attempt to quit ever.  This was his
    testimony:
         "You do not recall your brother, John, ever
    trying to quit smoking, do you?
         "No.  I don't recall any times that he tried. 3728 "And you don't have any conversation -- you did
    not have any conversations with him about attempts
    to quit smoking, correct?
         "That's correct.
         "Your brother, John, never told you he wanted
    to quit smoking?
         "He never told me that."
         Is that evidence of a tortured smoker, of
    somebody who is out of control, of somebody who is
    significantly impaired or distressed?  No.
         What was the other evidence about his attempts
    to quit?  Dyanna, their oldest daughter, she said
    there was no attempt to quit before he moved to
    Florida.  She said he used mints and gum on one
    occasion and maybe a patch on another, and those are
    the only attempts to quit she remembers.  And she
    never recalls him using nicotine gum.
         The younger daughter, Debbie, what did she say?
    She told you that he didn't make any attempts to
    quit when they lived in Pennsylvania, including in
    the 1970s.  You heard that her dad would tell her in
    the 1970s, Don't start smoking, because you won't be
    able to stop.  And she told you that he gave her
    that advice long before he ever tried to stop
    himself. 3729 Now, Dr. Drobes told you, Oh, I think you can
    speculate that was an attempt to quit.  She told you
    you can't speculate on that.  She knew the facts.
         Now, after Mr. Barbose moved to Florida, she
    recalled him on a couple of occasions when he was
    trying to quit by chewing gum or eating candies or
    using a toothpick.  Again, she has no recollection
    of nicotine gum and no recollection of a nicotine
    patch.
         The granddaughter, Stacey, you heard from
    yesterday, she recalled the toothpicks, the candy,
    the coffee stirrers.  Only in Florida, and she
    wasn't sure of whether there was ever a patch or
    gum.  Maybe, maybe not.  That's the evidence you
    heard from the other fact witnesses about these
    attempts to quit.
         So that leaves us with one other fact witness
    you heard from, and that was Mrs. Barbose.  I want
    to walk through what she told you about the attempts
    to quit.
         You heard and saw about this first worksheet
    that she submitted in April of 2009.  She verified
    it.  It was under oath.  It was under penalty of
    perjury.  And in that worksheet, she said that her
    husband's only attempts to quit where he tried to 3730 quit for three to six months in 1993 and then he
    quit for good in April of 1996.  That was her sworn
    testimony as of April of 2009.
         In her amended worksheet from September of
    2009, she verified once again under oath, once again
    under a penalty of perjury, that her husband's only
    attempts to quit were three to six months in 1993
    and when he quit for good in 1996.  Same sworn
    testimony then.
         But as trial approached, you heard that her
    lawyers arranged this phone call between
    Mrs. Barbose and Dr. Drobes.  And she told him a
    little bit different than what she said in those
    worksheets.  One of the things she said was that he
    had tried to quit multiple times a year beginning in
    1984.
         Now, remember what Dr. Cummings said about
    manufacturing evidence?  Look at the evidence you
    have.  Dr. Drobes told you those quit attempts were
    never mentioned on those worksheets that were
    submitted under oath under penalty of perjury.  And
    despite recognizing that there was an inconsistency
    between what she was telling him on the phone and
    what he knew in the record, he didn't bother to ask
    her -- ask her at all about it. 3731 Now, if we ignore those worksheets and set them
    aside for a minute and look at what Mrs. Barbose
    said in court, I think we have about three times
    that she recalled Mr. Barbose attempted to and quit
    smoking, with some clarity.  In the late 1980s, she
    said he quit smoking for one to two weeks.  And
    after he resumed smoking, she didn't ask him why he
    resumed, because as we'll talk about, it was kind of
    a touchy subject.  In 1993 and '94, he quit for
    months.
         Now, when I was asking her questions, she
    originally said it was just three or four months.
    And then I showed her the worksheet, she said, Okay,
    it's three to six months.  And then I showed her
    this medical record where Dr. -- or Mr. Barbose told
    his doctors that he did stop for a period of seven
    months, and then Mrs. Barbose said, Okay, if that's
    what he said, it was seven months.
         Now, Mrs. Barbose believes that on this
    occasion in 1990- -- that on this occasion in '93,
    that he may have used the nicotine patch.  But she's
    not sure how long he wore it.  And you heard from
    Stacey yesterday, despite being very close with her
    grandfather, she never recalls him wearing it.  And
    the other fact witnesses couldn't either.  So we 3732 don't know how long he would have wore a patch in
    that period of time or not.
         But the more important thing is, after
    Mr. Barbose quit successfully, be it for four
    months, for six months, for seven months, he decided
    to start smoking again, and Mrs. Barbose doesn't
    know why he did that.  No one said he was having
    cravings or withdrawal symptoms that drove him back
    to smoking.  Nobody observed that in him.  He wasn't
    impaired or distressed or out of control.  He wasn't
    experiencing cravings.  You know that nicotine was
    long gone out of his system.  And you know that the
    receptors in his brain had returned to normal for a
    few months.
         He knew at that time smoking was hard to quit,
    but he knew he had succeeded in quitting.  We'll
    talk about, Dr. Drobes said at that time period he
    wasn't addicted anymore.  And yet after all that,
    after successfully stopping, he chose to start
    smoking all over again.
         And then finally you heard about 1996, around
    the time of his cancer diagnosis, where he quit cold
    turkey.  In almost 40 years of marriage, it's the
    first time Mrs. Barbose recalls him ever trying to
    quit cold turkey and he succeeded. 3733 Was it too late at that point?  We know the
    facts of when he died, but he never had a cigarette
    after that point.
         Now, I want to talk about what you've heard
    about these withdrawal symptoms or how his
    personality may have changed on these quit attempts.
    And you heard that sometimes he would get grouchy or
    irritable.  Well, compare that to how he sometimes
    responded when he was smoking and was told that he
    shouldn't; when he was told to do something he
    didn't want to do.
         And let me say up front, there was kind of an
    accusation this morning that I equated Mr. Barbose
    and how he acted as somebody who commits domestic
    violence.  You've heard everything I've said in this
    case, and you know that is just a cheap shot that I
    would never have taken and I didn't take.  I have
    the utmost respect for Mr. Barbose.  I've treated
    him with respect, and I think we should respect his
    decisions, and that's part of what I'm saying today.
    I have never suggested that this is a man that
    committed domestic violence.  And to suggest that in
    this case is just over the line.
         But we do have to look at the facts you heard
    from the witnesses and what they said and how he 3734 responded.  You heard that on occasion he would give
    Mrs. Barbose an evil look.  He would tell people to
    mind their own business.  He would tell them to
    leave him alone.  And on occasion, he would even say
    "shut up."  Now, some people might say that's
    grouchy or irritable as well.  And if it is, so be
    it, but we know that it has nothing to do with
    nicotine or the absence of nicotine, it's how he
    responded.
         Now, a couple things about -- Mr. Bigger said
    people didn't come in here and try to change their
    story.  Well, let's look at some of the
    inconsistencies you saw.
         Mrs. Barbose would say one thing under oath and
    she said another thing to Dr. Drobes.  I have three
    examples of that.
         One, you heard that he came in and said, Oh,
    she told me he was motivated to quit.  Then I walked
    through with him what she said in her deposition
    where -- the part I just showed you -- where he
    wasn't motivated to quit until 1996.
         The other thing is, she told Dr. Drobes on the
    phone, Yes, I remember him having sleeplessness when
    he tried to quit.  And I had to show Dr. Drobes in
    his own notes that he took from the deposition that 3735 she said, No, he didn't have sleeplessness.
         And you know that Dr. Drobes told you that she
    said, and he put in his notes from the phone call
    that, Yes, he was anxious when he was trying to
    quit.  So, again, I had to show Dr. Drobes his notes
    from her deposition where she said, No, he didn't
    have any anxiety.
         Again, what did Dr. Cummings say about
    manufacturing evidence?
         Now, one other point on addiction.  The
    plaintiff had Dr. Drobes throw out this point about
    genetic reasons why people smoke and how genetics
    could play into whether somebody's addicted or not.
    If so, you know that Debbie and Dyanna bucked their
    genes and never smoked.  The daughters never smoked.
    And you know that Mr. Barbose's father and his
    brother weren't prevented from quitting for any
    genetic reason, because they both stopped smoking.
    So there was no genetic reason why Mr. Barbose had
    to smoke and no genetic reason that kept him from
    making a decision to stop.  When he wanted to make
    the decision to quit, he quit successfully.
         So because Mr. Barbose never experienced a loss
    of control over his decisions, he never lost the
    ability to quit, and he was able to quit when he was 3736 motivated to, he wasn't addicted.  Because he was
    never significantly impaired, he never was
    significantly distressed, he was not addicted.
         Because the plaintiff did not prove that he was
    addicted and, in fact, the facts of this case and
    DSM as applied by Dr. Hayes shows that he wasn't
    addicted, the plaintiff doesn't clear that second
    hurdle.  So for this additional reason, the answer
    to the first question on your verdict form has to be
    no.
         Now, if you think the plaintiff clears that
    hurdle, the third hurdle is to show that addiction
    was a legal cause of Mr. Barbose's death.  And this
    is just that third hurdle pulled out.
         And Mr. Bigger put up the instruction.  I'm
    going to show you the same instruction I showed you
    in opening statement, and you'll see it when you
    look in there.  This language appears.  But what
    this legal cause means is they have to prove that
    directly and in a natural and continuous consequence
    produces or contributes substantially to producing
    such lung cancer and death so that you would say but
    for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine,
    such lung cancer and death would not have been
    suffered. 3737 Mr. Bigger is right.  You read the instruction,
    it can be a combination.  It can work with something
    else.  But even if it's working in combination, it
    has to be a but-for reason.  It has to mean that if
    you took addiction out of the picture, we would have
    had a different consequence.
         Now, the evidence here proves that addiction is
    not a but-for reason for Mr. Barbose's smoking
    behaviors.  The but-for reason for his smoking
    behaviors was his choice, his decision to smoke for
    as long as he wanted to, because that's what he
    wanted to do, because he enjoyed it, because it
    helped him deal with stress.  And ask yourself this
    question:  If Mr. Barbose was not addicted, would he
    have continued to smoke?  The answer to this, as
    we'll talk about, is of course he would have.
         For this reason alone, addiction cannot be a
    legal cause of his death, because it's not a legal
    cause of his smoking.  If his smoking behavior would
    be the same whether he was addicted or not,
    addiction cannot be a substantial cause.
         Now, you heard about Mr. Barbose's -- when he
    was in high school and this initial time when he was
    smoking that his parents didn't want him to smoke
    and he would face punishment if he got caught.  So 3738 what he did was he stole the cigarettes when his
    parents weren't minding the store.  And his brother
    really couldn't tell you how many cigarettes he had
    in high school; never in the morning before school
    and only a couple times after school.  It wasn't
    until Mr. Barbose had graduated from high school,
    had a full-time job, and was independent that he
    became a regular smoker.  And he chose to remain a
    regular smoker for many years.
         Now, plaintiff's counsel can say, oh, we're
    using this choice word in that.  But let's look at
    what Mr. Barbose said.  Let's look at how he
    responded.
         How did he respond when people told him, "You
    should stop; you should quit; you shouldn't smoke;
    they're coffin nails; they're cancer sticks?"
         He said, "Leave me alone.  Mind your own
    business."  He would ignore them; he would reject an
    offer to help; he would laugh; he would give an evil
    look or he might shut -- tell them to shut up.
         And then what did he do?  He'd continue
    smoking.
         There's no evidence that but for addiction, he
    would have given any different response than those.
    No evidence of that. 3739 So we know what Mr. Barbose chose to do.  What
    choices didn't he make?
         He didn't say help me quit.  He didn't say it
    won't happen to me, it's not proven, there's an open
    debate.
         And what else didn't he do for decades?  He
    didn't try to quit.
         If Mr. Barbose wanted to quit smoking and just
    couldn't do it, do you think he would have asked his
    loved ones to help him, to support him in that?  Of
    course he would have, but we know he didn't do that.
         For decades, he never told his family members
    that he wanted to quit or was trying to quit.  And
    Mrs. Barbose told you she doesn't think anybody
    could have said anything to Mr. Barbose that would
    have mattered.
         And his daughter Dyanna said it best about her
    father's smoking.  "Dad just liked to smoke.  He
    smoked whenever he felt like it, all day."
         He smoked for as long as he did not because he
    was addicted, but because he wanted to.  And when he
    wanted to quit, either in the late 1980s or 1993 or
    1996, he succeeded.
         Dr. Drobes admitted when he quit for that
    seven-month period, he wasn't addicted.  He was 3740 asked, "Was Mr. Barbose addicted to smoking the day
    before he went back to smoking, having been quit for
    seven months in '93, '94?"
         In his deposition, his answer was, "I don't
    believe he would meet formal criteria for addiction
    at that time."
         I pointed out, do you see that?  And he agreed.
         Remember, Dr. Drobes was like, well, I don't
    know if you're talking about DSM or what you mean by
    that addiction.
         And I said, that question didn't ask about
    DSM-5 and that question didn't ask about NIDA.  That
    was his testimony under oath that Mr. Barbose did
    not meet the formal criteria for addiction at that
    time.
         And he also said this:  "Now, for that
    seven-month period, addiction did not cause
    Mr. Barbose to smoke, correct?"
         He said, "If he didn't smoke, then nothing
    caused him to smoke."
         Nothing was causing him to smoke in that time
    period.  When he made the choice to start smoking
    all over again, addiction wasn't the cause.  It
    could not have been a but for reason.  Because we
    know he wasn't addicted then. 3741 So if we take addiction out of that equation of
    the time period and ask yourself if Mr. Barbose was
    not addicted, would he smoke?  That tells you the
    answer is yes.
         I showed you this in opening.  These are the
    four factors of what legal cause requires, and you
    need to determine that in this case.
         But you saw what the real reasons were for
    Mr. Barbose's smoking.  They were his choices:  His
    choice to begin smoking, his choice to continue
    smoking despite all the health warnings, his choice
    to control his smoking, to stop smoking, to start
    smoking again and for all those years to ignore all
    the warnings.
         When Mr. Barbose made the choice to smoke, his
    choice was a legal cause.  As a result, any disease
    or death brought about by his smoking was not
    legally caused by addiction.
         Get back to the verdict form.
         Question 1:  Based on the evidence in this
    case, you saw where the plaintiff cannot meet all
    three hurdles.
         If they can get over the iffy evidence on the
    smoking history, that's the first hurdle, but they
    can't get over the next two.  Mr. Barbose did not 3742 suffer from a loss of control or a significant
    impairment or distress.  He was not addicted.
         And because addiction was not a but for cause
    of his smoking and death, they can't meet that
    hurdle either.  So because the plaintiff failed to
    clear these hurdles, the answer to Question 1 must
    be no.
         Now, if you answer yes to Question 1, you next
    get to this question.
         I think that ends the case.  We go home,
    there's no second phase, there's no other questions
    to answer.  The answer is no, we're done.
         If you answer yes, you'll get to the second
    question that asks:  Was smoking cigarettes
    manufactured by each defendant a legal cause of his
    lung cancer and death?
         Now, the medical part is a reason to answer
    this no that I covered on the first question, but I
    also want to talk about the testimony you heard
    about my client's brands of cigarettes.  Because
    what the plaintiff has to prove on this question,
    and they have the burden of proof, they have to
    prove what Mr. Barbose smoked and how long he smoked
    it.  And with respect to my client, you didn't hear
    much about it. 3743 To quickly recap the evidence you heard about
    my client's brands, you heard that he smoked Camel
    unfiltered and Lucky Strike unfiltered.
         The first recollection we have is after he was
    already a regular smoker, Mrs. Barbose said he went
    back and forth between the two brands, but she
    wasn't sure when he started them and she wasn't sure
    how long he smoked either one.
         His granddaughter Stacey recalls him smoking
    Camel, but she recalled the Camel pack on one
    occasion and the occasion she recalls it doesn't
    really match up with Mrs. Barbose's dates.  No one
    else recalls Camel at all.  Not Dyanna, not Debbie,
    and not Sam, his brother who smoked with him all
    those years.
         Debbie recalls Lucky Strike, but she doesn't
    know when or for how long.
         Stacey, Dyanna and Sam never recall him smoking
    Lucky Strike.
         Winston, Sam said he saw John buy one pack of
    Winston in his entire life, and that was when he was
    out of his regular brand.  Sam doesn't even know if
    he smoked the whole pack.
         Mrs. Barbose thought she recalled her husband
    smoking Winston, but again, she didn't know when and 3744 she didn't know for how long.  Same for the
    daughters.  And Stacey never mentioned Winston
    yesterday.
         You heard about Kool or Salem at some point.
    Nobody ever said it was more than a pack or what it
    was.
         And finally, Stacey said she recalled Doral,
    but, again, she only recalled a pack.
         That's it.  That's the testimony you heard in
    this case about Mr. Barbose smoking products
    manufactured by my client.
         They have to prove what he smoked and how long
    he smoked it.  They have to prove it by the greater
    weight of the evidence.  They have to prove that but
    for smoking my client's products, that he wouldn't
    have got sick, wouldn't have got cancer.  I don't
    think they did that here.  They didn't have the
    evidence.  They didn't have the proof.
         Now, if the brand history testimony was clear
    enough, they would have asked Dr. Villa or Dr. Stein
    whether Reynolds' smoking was sufficient or
    Philip Morris's smoking was sufficient, but they
    didn't ask that question.  They played you their
    testimony today and they just said smoking caused
    lung cancer. 3745 But for this question on 2, it's cigarettes
    manufactured by each company.  Instead, they just
    asked about smoking.
         The question called for them to be specific,
    but they didn't meet their burden of proof by
    proving by the greater weight of the evidence what
    he smoked, how long he smoked it.  So for that
    reason, the answer on Question 2 has to be no and it
    has to be no for both defendants.
         Now, if you check no there, we're done.
    There's two chances to stop.  If not, we'll go to
    the third question.  I'm going to address all of
    them.
         If you get to this third question, we've
    already decided that he died of an adenocarcinoma in
    his lung that was caused by smoking, that he was
    addicted and addiction was a legal cause of his
    death and that both the Reynolds cigarettes and then
    separately the Philip Morris cigarettes caused it.
    If you get that far, you'll have to allocate
    responsibility.  That's what this question is, the
    allocation of fault for his death.
         Now, a couple points to keep in mind here.  The
    assignment of fault relates only to actions that
    were a legal cause of Mr. Barbose's death.  Your 3746 instructions tell you that.  The defendants can't be
    assigned fault for action that were not a legal
    cause of his death.  And these points are important.
         Comparative fault is not some global comparison
    of conduct.  It's not what did John Barbose do over
    the course of his lifetime versus the global conduct
    of the tobacco industry.  It is a comparison of the
    actions between Mr. Barbose and R.J. Reynolds and
    Philip Morris that were the legal cause of his
    death.  It's a very narrow inquiry.
         Now, you may have seen things from the tobacco
    companies that they said in public or wrote
    internally that you don't like.  But the issue in
    this case is whether they affected John Barbose and
    caused his death.  If you find something Reynolds
    did was wrong and you don't like it, but it's not
    connected to John Barbose, it can't be considered
    for part of this analysis.
         Now, one thing to think about when you get to
    this question, you heard during jury selection, you
    heard in opening statement, you heard again in
    closing argument today that they accept
    responsibility that Mr. Barbose's actions were a
    legal cause of his death.  They told you that.
         But the only person you ever heard say that 3747 from the plaintiff's side was Mr. Bigger.  He said
    it in jury selection, opening, and closing.  No
    witness took the stand to say that Mr. Barbose was
    responsible.  Mrs. Barbose didn't.  The daughters
    didn't.  The brother didn't.  Granddaughter didn't.
         Keep your eye on the ball.  Mr. Bigger telling
    you they accept some responsibility is a ball fake.
    It's a head fake to get you to change your
    direction.  You're told this because they want you
    to try to split the responsibility.  That's why they
    told you this.  But you didn't hear a witness say
    it.
         Now, what do we know Mr. Barbose said or never
    said?
         Well, he never said the tobacco companies
    should be responsible for his smoking decisions.  He
    never said he wanted to sue, not to Sam, not to
    Phyllis, not to the daughters.
         Was Mr. Barbose the type of man who would only
    take a slight wee bit of responsibility?  No.
         Did he take full ownership of his decisions?
    Yes.
         Did he take full responsibility for his
    decisions?  Yes, for his businesses, for his
    employees, for his house.  Smoking was no different. 3748 When he was diagnosed with cancer, he never
    placed the blame on anyone else.  If Mr. Barbose had
    to assign responsibility, would he?
         Nobody made Mr. Barbose's decisions for him.
    Nobody could decide for him to choose to smoke, and
    we know from all the testimony that nobody could
    decide for him to choose not to smoke.  Those
    choices were Mr. Barbose's.
         He had the control, he had the responsibility.
    So if you get to this point on the verdict form,
    based on the fact that they say he's legally
    responsible and based on knowing his personality, I
    ask you to give him 100 percent of the
    responsibility for his conduct.
         If you continue past these questions, you'll
    get to the two questions on fraudulent concealment
    and conspiracy to fraudulently conceal.  Now, for
    both of these, there are essentially two parts to
    the question.
         First, you have to ask whether the material
    information about the health effects or addictive
    nature of smoking -- were they known, did people
    know about it, did Mr. Barbose know about it.
         And then the second part is this where it says
    legal cause.  It's in both.  And that part means did 3749 Mr. Barbose rely to his detriment, did he reasonably
    rely to his detriment, on something that Reynolds or
    Philip Morris said or didn't say or did or didn't
    do.
         So the first part of that is, were the dangers
    of smoking a secret?
         The evidence showed you that the public knew
    about the risks of smoking, and more importantly,
    Mr. Barbose did.  It was drummed into him over and
    over.
         Mrs. Barbose said she was a recorder.  Remember
    this?
         She said, "I was very bad, yeah.  I had a
    recording going in my mind all the time.  When he
    went outside, I would tell him.
         "And a recorder means you were saying it over
    and over and over?"
         And she said, "Over and over."
         I said, "The kids today would say you put it on
    repeat, right?"
         She said, "Yes.  Exactly."
         I said, "And you would pester him to quit
    smoking?"
         She said, "Yes, I did."
         But the music of this recorder started even 3750 before Mr. Barbose was born.  Dr. Cummings told you
    this.
         Before Reynolds existed, everybody knew -- or
    it was known that tobacco contained nicotine.  Knew
    it could be addictive.  Knew it could be hard to
    quit.  Knew it could be bad for you.  And you heard
    about these slang terms going back to the early 20th
    century, "coffin nails," "cancer sticks."
         We talked about Mr. Barbose knew as a teenager
    he wasn't supposed to smoke.  You saw Florida health
    notes 1906.  They described the cigarette as the
    worst form of tobacco addiction.
         You saw the coverage in Reader's Digest in the
    1950s.  You saw the coverage in Luzerne area papers
    in the 1950s when the American Cancer Society was
    doing that study there.
         Not surprisingly, the public health officials
    in that time recognized the awareness of the
    information.  You saw this from Surgeon General
    Burney in 1957 and Dr. Heller who was the director
    of NCI in 1957.  They recognized that the
    information was not a secret.
         1964, over 50 years ago, the Surgeon General
    had that report linking smoking with lung cancer.
    It was published.  It was front page news 3751 everywhere.  In Pennsylvania, here in Florida, it
    was on the evening news.  You remember, there were
    only three networks at the time.  All three of them
    covered it.
         The warning labels, from January 1st, 1966, and
    every day thereafter that Mr. Barbose smoked, every
    pack of cigarettes had a warning label.
         Mr. Bigger had a big pack-year sign up there,
    lots of packs of cigarettes.  From 1966 on, every
    pack that Mr. Barbose put in his hand, put a warning
    in his hand about the risks of what he was doing.
    And they showed you some government reports where
    they said, oh, people don't know about the warning
    labels.  We don't need a government report for that.
    We have Mrs. Barbose's testimony.
         She told you she remembers reading in the paper
    or somewhere about the warning label and then
    talking to Mr. Barbose about it.  So we know he knew
    about it.
         You heard that 13 million people quit smoking
    in the four years after this label went on.  13
    million people had that warning in their hands and
    took matters into their own hands and quit.  And
    Mr. Barbose could have too.
         The warnings continued.  1970, 1985. 3752 On top of this, we know the case-specific
    warnings.  We know the recorder was always playing.
    We know Mrs. Barbose gave Mr. Barbose articles about
    the health risks of smoking.  She said she gave him
    quite a few from different magazines and newspapers.
         "And the articles talked about the health risks
    of smoking, right?
         "Some of them, yes.
         "And you gave those articles to John in an
    attempt to get him to quit smoking, right?
         "Yes.
         "And you understood he wasn't happy that you
    were giving him those articles to read, right?
         "No, I don't think he was."
         These articles were hand selected by
    Mrs. Barbose and hand delivered to him.  No one was
    cutting out or giving him tobacco company
    statements.  They were giving him articles about the
    risks of smoking.
         Did he ever say he didn't believe anything she
    gave him?  No.
         The risks of smoking were not a secret to him.
    Dr. Drobes admitted this.
         "So I'll ask you, do you agree that by the late
    '70s, Mr. Barbose understood not only that 3753 cigarettes were harmful, but that they were likely
    to be harmful to him personally?
         "Well, I think I did agree to that."
         If Mrs. Barbose noticed him smoking more on a
    given night, she'd say, You know you're smoking a
    lot tonight.
         He'd shoot her a look and she knew to be quiet.
         She told him about this:  "One of the things
    you would tell John was that he was putting another
    nail in his casket by smoking?
         "Sometimes I would say another nail in your
    coffin, but that wasn't too often."
         I asked, "Was it a running refrain that you
    would communicate?
         "I would say it now and then, yes.
         "And that was a nail in his casket, not
    somebody else's casket?"
         And she said, "Exactly."
         You heard that he -- she would say, "Oh, you're
    going outside to have a cancer stick."
         She would tell him he was having a nicotine
    fit.  This one thing, she told him about a nicotine
    fit.  He understood it was a reference -- she
    understood it was a reference to the addictive
    nature of nicotine.  And she's understood -- she 3754 said, "First, I don't really know if he understood
    it."
         And I said, "Did you testify that he did?
         "I would think he did.
         And what would he do?  What did she say at the
    end?
         He'd go right out the front door and have a
    cigarette.  He had the information and then he
    walked out and had a cigarette.
         Now, we know -- we talked about this.  He told
    his daughter Debbie when she was in high school,
    "Don't start.  You'll be able" -- "you won't be able
    to stop."  In other words, you might become
    addicted.  He knew it.
         So if we look at the first prong of these
    questions, what is the material information about
    the health risks of smoking and the addictive
    nature?  What -- what really does that mean?  What's
    the bottom line, big ticket takeaway on that?
         Cigarettes can cause cancer and kill you.
         Did he have that?  I'd say so.
         "Cancer sticks," "coffin nails," "nail in your
    casket."
         And cigarettes are addictive and can be hard to
    quit.  Did he have that? 3755 Nicotine fit, you're addicted.  You'll start,
    you won't be able to stop, yes.
         There's no question that Mr. Barbose knew the
    material information.  He had the material
    information.
         So on this first prong for these two questions,
    the plaintiff can't prove that the material
    information about the health effects of smoking or
    the addictive nature of smoking were secrets from
    Mr. Barbose.  They assuredly were not.
         And this case is only about Mr. Barbose.  And
    this evidence I've been showing you deals with
    Mr. Barbose.
         So for this reason alone, the concealment
    claims No. 4 and 5, the answer has to be no.
         But there's another component to those, that --
    that legal cause, that reliance component.
         And think of this:  In this courtroom the
    plaintiff has to build a bridge.  And what they have
    to do for the second part of these claims is they
    have to build a bridge between statements, conducts,
    acts or omissions from the defendants and some
    action that Mr. Barbose took.
         For purposes of the verdict form, it's called
    legal cause.  It's defined in your instructions as 3756 reasonably relied to your detriment.
         The plaintiff has to prove that Reynolds and PM
    caused Mr. Barbose, not some other smoker, to take
    some action to rely on something that was or wasn't
    said and get a disease that he otherwise wouldn't
    have gotten.  If they can't build that bridge, they
    meet -- fail to meet their burden of proof.  The
    evidence you heard in this case doesn't let them lay
    the first span of that bridge.
         I told you to keep this question in mind.
    Mr. Bigger reminded you you should keep this in
    mind.
         Dr. Cummings came in here and he tried to help
    build this bridge, but he failed.  How?
         Let me give you a couple of examples.  Remember
    he showed you that clip from the movie of the two
    lovers sharing a cigarette and he talked about how
    that -- that motivated so many people to go out and
    smoke because it made it look so glamourous?  That
    was fiction.
         The fact in this case, Mr. and Mrs. Barbose
    never shared a cigarette together.  Instead of
    looking into each other's eyes and sharing a
    cigarette, the only looks they exchanged were he
    looked at her and went out the door and smoked a 3757 cigarette.
         Dr. Cummings showed you Lucy and Desi.
    Remember this, and the ad, and Lucy's like, you want
    to keep your man happy, buy him cigarettes.  That
    was fiction.
         The fact is Mrs. Barbose never bought
    Mr. Barbose cigarettes.
         I asked her, this was clear.  "You never bought
    John cigarettes?
         "Never.
         "In fact, you refused to?"
         And she said, "Exactly.  Never."
         Dr. Cummings told you, oh, they would buy him
    cigarettes for Christmas.  Remember the Christmas
    boxes?
         There's no evidence of that in this case.  Not
    at all.
         But perhaps the biggest reach in trying to
    build this bridge was the story Dr. Cummings tried
    to tell you about there were all these
    advertisements from unfiltered to filtered to light
    and Mr. Barbose fit right in there because he
    switched and he's like he went from unfiltered to
    filtered in the '50s and then lights in the '80s.
    Well, that's his fiction again.  Because it doesn't 3758 meet the facts in this case.
         If you believe Mrs. Barbose's worksheets,
    Mr. Barbose smoked unfiltered cigarettes from the
    '50s into the '80s.  So her version of the facts on
    her worksheets is different than Dr. Cummings'
    version of the fiction.
         Her version is he wasn't moved, he wasn't
    impacted by these filter ads in the '50s.  He smoked
    unfiltered for the next 30 years.  That's if you
    believe the worksheets.
         This split between fact and fiction with
    Dr. Cummings on this means one of two things:  One,
    if he's right, it means Mrs. Barbose is wrong.  Or
    it means Dr. Cummings' story is just that, it's a
    story.
         He wanted to come in and tell you a story that
    he tells all the juries that this is what happened.
    You go from unfiltered to filtered to lights and
    it's the ads that cause people to do it, and, boy,
    his smoking history fits right in there and that's
    what I saw in this case.  But the problem is, he's
    trying to fit a round peg into a square hole here,
    because the facts in this case just don't support
    it.
         Now, Dr. Cummings admittedly had his opinions 3759 before he has any facts.  So he may not have cared
    about that.  But for purposes of this case, you
    should.
         One other thing, I believe Ms. Yates will talk
    more about lights and filters and compensation and
    that.  But there was never any evidence in this case
    that Mr. Barbose smoked a light cigarette made by my
    client.  So to the extent they want to talk about
    lights and that, I'm not going to address that.
         Dr. Cummings did spend a lot of time showing
    you statements that industry representatives made to
    the public.  You'll probably see more when I sit
    down today.  And -- and look, some of those are bad.
         But Dr. Figlar, when he was shown them and
    asked about them, he told you, look, whether those
    statements were based in science or not, they were
    clung to for far too long, and he didn't agree with
    them anymore.
         So in some other smoker's case, they may be
    relevant, but in Mr. Barbose's case, they're not.
    Why?
         Because of this:  Every fact witness we asked
    if they could identify anything from the companies
    or the organizations that Mr. Barbose relied on,
    every one of them said no.  Not for the Frank 3760
    Statement, CTR, TIRC, TI, any of these press
    releases or statements by the companies.
         Now, you heard that there are direct evidence
    and sequential evidence and all this other evidence
    you can look at.  But here's the thing, if you have
    the facts, you don't need to assume something
    differently.  Assumptions are not facts.
         Someone who has the proof doesn't need to infer
    something.  This is the proof.
         You heard it not just from all -- let's look
    specifically at what Mrs. Barbose said.  And I know
    this is wordy, but this proves why there is no
    reliance.
         "Your husband never told you he relied on a
    statement by a tobacco company and decided to begin
    smoking?
         "Never mentioned anything like that.
         "Never mentioned he heard or read or saw
    anything from Reynolds?
         "No.
         "PM?
         "No.
         "B&W?
         "No.
         "Hill & Knowlton?
25 3761 "No.
         "TIRC?
         "No.
         "CTR?
         "No."
         Then this, "He never mentioned he ever saw,
    heard or read about the Frank Statement?
         "No.
         "He never mentioned seeing any TV statements
    from the tobacco company executives?
         "No."
         There's no evidence of him ever seeing that
    stuff and relying on it.  They can't build a bridge
    between the two of them.
         So for these reasons alone, the answer to
    Questions No. 4 and 5 has to be no.
         Now, I want to talk real quickly about ads.  I
    told you in opening you would see documents or
    allegations about youth marketing and that and they
    were going to try to -- try to make the industry
    look bad.  I think Ms. Yates said they're going to
    bash us.  And they did and they showed you a lot of
    documents.  But, you know, some of the documents
    showed in 1970s and '80s, that's when Mr. Barbose is
    in his 40s or 50s with multiple businesses and 3762 multiple kids.
         Beyond that though, we asked the witnesses who
    knew Mr. Barbose if he ever discussed ads with them,
    and they all said no.  So whatever these ads and
    whoever they're attracting, whatever they're doing,
    that might be somebody else's case, but there's no
    evidence in this case that it relates to
    Mr. Barbose.
         Mr. Cummings -- or Dr. Cummings told you that.
         "In your review of the materials, you're unable
    to identify any print, broadcast or billboard ads
    that he himself saw?
         "That's right.
         "And he never told Mrs. Barbose that he started
    smoking because of an ad?
         "That's true.
         "And Sam and the other witnesses who testified
    said the same thing?
         "That's right."
         No witness who knew Mr. Barbose testified that
    he ever smoked a brand of cigarette because of an ad
    or a slogan.
         And, finally, your instructions include this
    one:  The manufacture, sale and advertising of
    cigarettes is a lawful activity.  Therefore, I 3763 instruct you that a defendant cannot be held liable
    merely for manufacturing, selling, or advertising
    cigarettes.
         The plaintiff knew that would be the
    instruction, and worse yet, knew the testimony about
    ads not having anything to do with Mr. Barbose, but
    they still showed you hours of ads.
         Mr. Bigger, in his closing, played a snippet
    from Mrs. Barbose's testimony about, oh, what do you
    think would have happened if your husband knew
    something that you learned during the trial.  And
    you remember they asked a series of witnesses this,
    both Debbie and Dyanna, that if he had seen
    something that came up in this trial, would it have
    made a difference.
         Well, you know that Debbie and Dyanna, in their
    testimony, they said they wouldn't have engaged in
    continuing to sell and promote cigarettes if they
    knew some of this information.
         A couple comments about their testimony.
    First, you know, neither one of them ever smoked.
    They knew growing up that the parents didn't want
    them to smoke.  They heard their mother nag their
    father about quitting smoking all those years.  And
    yet, they both worked in various capacities selling 3764 cigarettes.
         Every cigarette package either one of them ever
    sold had a warning label.  Every one.  Yet they both
    told you that they had no idea smoking was bad for
    them until their father got lung cancer.
         Does that make sense?  When you look at
    instruction 19 on believability, ask if that is
    believable.  Or ask if that's something that just
    might be said because I think it helps their side in
    a lawsuit.
         Because we know that those answers to those
    hypothetical questions contradict the reality in
    this case.  Mr. Barbose died in 1996.  A death the
    family associates with cigarette smoking.
         Before he died, did he tell his daughters to
    stop marketing cigarettes?  No.
         What did Dyanna do?  She continued doing it
    into the 2000s.
         Did Phyllis tell her not to?  No.
         You heard what Mrs. Barbose -- I talked to her
    about their granddaughter who in 1999, a few years
    after Mr. Barbose died, she got into the business of
    selling cigarettes with H.T. Hackney.  You heard
    this lawsuit was originally filed in 2007.  The
    granddaughter continued selling cigarettes after the 3765 lawsuit, after the allegations that you're going to
    have to decide today were put in pleadings for them.
    She continued to do that.
         Why?
         Mrs. Barbose told you.
         "And after you filed your lawsuit, you
    didn't" --
         MR. BIGGER:  Your Honor, we need to approach
    for a second.
         (The following bench conference took place
    outside the hearing of the jury:)
         MR. BIGGER:  I mean, I'm in disbelief.  We
    stipulated on the record with Stacey that no one was
    going to go into her working history.  The evidence
    did not come out in this trial.
         MR. GEISE:  I asked Mrs. Barbose.  That's what
    I asked Mrs. Barbose.
         MR. BIGGER:  The granddaughter.
         MR. GEISE:  I asked Mrs. Barbose about her
    interaction with her granddaughter.  That's her
    testimony.  And it came in without objection.
         MR. BIGGER:  Okay.
         THE COURT:  I overrule the objection.
         MR. BIGGER:  I just --
         THE COURT:  I mean, you're dipping into her 3766 time.  Is that what you want to do?
         MR. BIGGER:  They have two hours.  They have
    two hours.
         THE COURT:  Total?
         MR. BIGGER:  Yeah.
         THE COURT:  And I don't want to shortchange --
         MR. GEISE:  No, I'm just going to save that,
    yeah.
         MS. YATES:  I'll be as quick as I can,
    Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  No, that's fine.  I just
    want to make sure.
         (End of bench conference.)
         MR. GEISE:  Everybody doing okay?  I know we're
    getting close to the lunch time.  I'm going to try
    to finish up and save time for everybody else.  You
    guys have been very patient.
         So we know what Mrs. Barbose told us in this
    testimony.  "After you filed your lawsuit, you
    didn't tell your granddaughter to stop working and
    promoting cigarettes?
         "No.  Because it was she had a job.  She had a
    very good job.  I don't think cigarette --
    cigarettes were the top thing in it.  If somebody
    wants a cigarette, they're going to smoke it no 3767 matter who sells it.  If it's in the store, they'll
    buy it, if they're smokers, that is."
         The point here is cigarettes are a legal
    product.  Legal to sell, legal to advertise, legal
    to -- to make.
         You heard Mr. Barbose and his father sold
    cigarettes.  You heard the daughters and
    granddaughter sold cigarettes or promoted them.
         And we heard a lot of things early in
    Mr. Bigger's opening statement about society.
    Society allows cigarettes to be sold with the
    knowledge that they're harmful and kill people.
         And the Barbose family believed everyone had
    the right to smoke if that's the choice they wanted
    to make.
         Now, when they try to tell you that the
    additional information would have made a difference,
    you know that's not the case.  The information
    Mr. Barbose had from the plaintiff over and over
    didn't make a difference.  It didn't cause him to
    even make a quit attempt for decades.
         This demonstrates that putting the material
    information about the health risks of smoking into
    his hands, hand delivered by his wife, didn't make a
    difference to Mr. Barbose.  And she told you, he 3768 never thought he was misled.  He never thought
    information was withheld.  He never said if he had
    more information, he wouldn't have started.  He
    never said if you had given more information, he
    would have tried more frequently to quit.  He never
    said that he felt reassured.  Never said he thought
    smoking was okay.  He never said he was confused.
         And the one thing he did say after his
    diagnosis is he said, you remember, why didn't I
    listen, why didn't I quit?
         You heard that from a couple different
    witnesses.  The two questions he asked, why didn't I
    listen, why didn't I quit, provide the answer to you
    on this verdict form on these two questions.
         They tell you that he had the material
    information, that he didn't rely on anything the
    tobacco companies did or said to make his decision.
    They tell you he had it and it didn't make a
    difference to him.  So keep your eye on the ball.
         Did concealment of information cause his death?
    No.  No.
         What information could Reynolds or
    Philip Morris have provided to him that would have
    been more material, more direct, more persuasive,
    more from the heart than the information he was 3769 given from his family?  None.
         And this case is only about Mr. Barbose, not
    some other smoker.  In this case, they had to prove,
    they had to build, they had to do the bridge.  They
    didn't.  There's no proof of reliance.
         Now, another thing on these questions, you
    heard Mr. Bigger say that -- you know, about them
    accepting responsibility.  And they said Mr. Barbose
    is the legal cause of his death.
         If you check yes to these questions, you
    basically say no to Mr. Barbose's responsibility.
    You wipe it off on those questions before.
         So if you say yes on this, you eliminate any
    responsibility for Mr. Barbose.
         So because Mr. Barbose knew the material facts
    about the health risks of smoking and the addictive
    nature, the answer to these questions must be no.
    And because there's no reliance or legal cause on
    anything Reynolds or Philip Morris said or did, the
    answer has to be no.
         Now, if you find everything that I've said
    today and throughout this trial unpersuasive and
    decide to return a verdict for Mrs. Barbose, you'll
    have to decide the amount of damages.  And, you
    know, I don't think we should get to this point, but 3770 I recognize that it's always a possibility.
         And it's hard.  It's hard because we all feel
    compassion whenever somebody loses a loved one.
         It's natural.  And we all wish Mrs. Barbose the
    best, but compassion and good wishes are not reasons
    to exceed common sense and good judgment.
         Mr. Bigger told you in opening statements he
    was going to ask for an enormous amount of money,
    and -- and he did this morning.  He asked for, I
    think, over 9.2 million.
         But you understand that your verdict can't be
    based on sympathy.  You knew that in jury selection
    and said you could set that aside.  And I think when
    you do and you look at the facts in this case and
    compare it to your own common sense and good
    judgment, that the evidence does not suggest an
    award in the millions.
         It isn't a question of whether the defendant is
    a big company or not.  That's not part of the
    consideration.  You just look at the damages and
    what there was evidence on.
         So if you get to this point and if you decide
    to make an award of damages, please do so based on
    the evidence and your common sense and your good
    judgment, not sympathy. 3771 Finally, if you get all the way to the back,
    you'll have to consider this question of punitive
    damages.  And punitive damages are damages in
    addition to the damages that you've already fully
    compensated the plaintiff on.  And they're damages
    that can only be awarded for conduct that's a legal
    cause of the harms suffered by the plaintiff.
         They're about more money, basically.  And
    they're designed to punish and deter and punish for
    conduct that is tantamount to a reckless disregard
    for human life.
         Now, these damages need to be -- or the
    entitlement to them need to be proven by a higher
    level of proof.  That's clear and convincing.  It
    has to be more compelling and persuasive.  It has to
    be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and at
    such weight that it produces a firm belief or
    conviction.
         If you get to this part and decide to go on,
    we'll have another phase with more evidence, more
    witnesses, but I don't think we should get there.
    Why?
         Well, consider one, what you heard from
    Dr. Cummings.  Reynolds participated with the
    Tobacco Working Group for ten years.  They spent 3772 millions trying to develop cigarettes that are less
    hazardous and reduce the risk and they addressed
    suggestions that came from the public health
    community like filters, like lights, like changing
    the pH.
         You also heard from Dr. Cummings about
    Dr. Rodgman.  He was a good scientist.  His research
    was excellent.  And he disclosed what you saw at the
    American Chemical Society, but also to the
    Surgeon General's report.
         You heard about this Larson, Haag & Silvette
    book where it was a comprehensive account of all the
    literature at the time on smoking and health,
    summarized the articles, including those favorable
    and unfavorable, and it was relied on and recognized
    by the Surgeon General.
         You heard that Reynolds took out dozens of
    patents.  They're all publicly available patents.
         You saw in the 1980s how Reynolds tried to
    focus on the cigarette that would heat tobacco
    instead of burn it.  That was the Premier that
    Dr. Cummings talked about.
         And no matter what is said in this trial,
    during the entire time that Mr. Barbose was alive,
    the public health community, including Dr. Cummings, 3773 encouraged companies to make lower tar and nicotine
    cigarettes.
         You heard about publications.  And Dr. Cummings
    can say what he wants about CTR, but he had to admit
    there were 6,000 peer-reviewed articles.  Over 600,
    I think that have been cited or dealt specifically
    with the issues he was here to talk about.  And it
    had a substantial influence on public health.
         The grantees were repeatedly cited by the
    Surgeon General Report and you heard that CTR
    research funded 10 Nobel laureates.  These weren't
    some schmuck scientists.  These were pretty good
    guys.
         You heard some of the research that they
    funded.  This article from 1963 that was in the
    American Journal of Psychiatry, this was
    Exhibit AIW-2649.
         The Tobacco Industry Research Committee and the
    American Cancer Society co-supported this research
    that found in 1963 that nicotine is an active agent
    and has addictive quality and that heavy smokers are
    true addicts.  This was published.
         With regard to people trying to quit smoking,
    you heard about ZONNIC, what Reynolds does now.
    It's a nicotine replacement therapy that 3774 Dr. Cummings says is a good idea and he supports.
    He just wishes it was a little bit cheaper, but he
    thinks it's a good idea.
         You go through this.  This is not a record of
    wanton conduct.
         It's a record of trying to lower risks of what
    is an inherently risky but lawful product.  You've
    heard there is no safe cigarette.  The risks are
    inherent in the product.  And the companies have
    tried to lower those risks over time.
         Sometimes they've had some success.  Sometimes
    they haven't.
         But trying to lower the risks of an inherently
    risky product is not something that should be
    punished or deterred.
         You also heard about these organizations that
    are out there, the TI, CTR.  They don't exist
    anymore.
         The documents, you heard they were secret.  And
    you can think of -- in your common sense about other
    companies and the availability of their documents,
    but for the tobacco companies, these documents are
    now publicly available.  18 million documents
    available.
         So when you're released from your -- your 3775 service here, you can go home and you can get online
    and you can search for all the documents you want
    from Dr. Teague or Dr. Rodgman.
         If the company position on smoking and health
    and addiction throughout the years angers you, and I
    can see where it might, Dr. Figlar told you in that
    video that Reynolds' position changed over 15 years
    ago when it admitted that cigarette smoking causes
    cancer and was addictive.  In the past, industry
    representatives would challenge the findings of a
    new Surgeon General's Report.  Not anymore.
         You saw this link.  Reynolds has a link on
    their web page taking people to those reports.  Rely
    on them, go to them, look to them.  And
    Philip Morris does the same thing.
         Looking at all of this, there's no need to
    punish or deter for changes that took place over a
    decade ago.  So if you get to this point and you've
    already fully compensated Mrs. Barbose, the evidence
    does not justify awarding more money.  It's not
    clear and convincing.  The plaintiff has not met
    that even higher level of proof.
         So if you get to this question on the verdict
    form, I suggest you should check no.
         I'm trying to rush through this so I save 3776 Ms. Yates some time.  She's been kind enough to let
    me go first throughout this trial and eat up a good
    chunk of the time.  I appreciate that.
         But I want to -- I want to conclude by saying a
    few things.
         In jury selection, each of you committed to
    holding the plaintiff to her burden of proof.  And
    you committed that if the evidence warranted it, you
    would have the ability to enter a verdict in favor
    of our clients.
         At the end of this trial, the evidence compels
    a verdict in the defendant's favor on each question.
    Mr. Barbose was a responsible man.  He was a good
    man.  He was a good man who made his own decisions
    about what he wanted to do, not what others wanted
    him to do or told him to do in business, in life, in
    leisure.  And one of those decisions he made was the
    decision to smoke.
         Mr. Barbose never described himself as a
    victim.  Don't reward the plaintiff in this case by
    making him a victim for his choices.
         Now, this is the last chance I get to speak to
    you-all.
         As the plaintiff with the burden of proof,
    Mr. Bigger actually gets another chance this time. 3777 So I get a bottom of an inning, but he gets another
    at bat.
         I don't know what he's going to say after
    Ms. Yates sits down.  He told you when you go back
    and deliberate to -- to sit around and to talk.  And
    I agree.
         And because I won't get another chance to
    respond to him, I ask you to remember when you sit
    around and talk how we have responded throughout
    this trial to give you the other side of the story.
    And as you deliberate, I ask you to keep the full
    story in mind, but more importantly, I ask you to
    keep your eye on the ball and focus on the facts
    pertaining to John Barbose.
         Ladies and gentlemen, it's been a pleasure to
    present this case to you.  You've been attentive.
    You've been timely.  You've taken notes.  You've
    done your service.  I hope this is the last time I
    get to say this to you in open court, but thank you
    so much for your service.


          MS. YATES:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Your Honor?  Ladies and gentlemen, let me
     close with where I opened.
          "Why didn't I listen?  Why didn't I quit?"
     Those are the words of John Barbose, words he said
     to his wife after he was diagnosed with cancer.
     Those words tell you that Mr. Barbose had the
     information he needed, but he chose not to listen.
          This is what this case is about, Mr. Barbose
     and his decisions to start smoking and continue
     smoking even knowing the risks.
          Your Honor, Counsel, ladies and gentlemen,
     Mrs. Barbose, good afternoon.  You've been very
     patient and very attentive throughout this entire
     process, and we're almost done.  All of the
     evidence is in, and the case is about to be turned
     over to you.  And you will decide the case based
     on the evidence that occurred in this courtroom.
          And I stood before you in opening statement
     and previewed what I thought the evidence would
     show.  And I told you I thought it would be like
     two ships passing in the night.
          Now, Mr. Bigger said somebody had the 6 audacity to say that.  Well, that was me.  I'm
     standing up.  That was me.  Not somebody.  I said
     the evidence will be like two ships passing in the
     night.  Why did I say that?  Because there was no
     intersection of the bashed tobacco and the
     evidence that applies to Mr. Barbose.
          Relevant evidence does not mean connected to
     or relied upon.  It may come into this courtroom,
     but it doesn't mean it's connected or relied upon.
          I believe that the evidence that came in this
     courtroom showed that none of those dots
     connected, nor did the ships intersect.  And I
     think probably the biggest example of that was a
     statement made by Mr. Bigger in opening
     statements.  "In this case, you will hear that
     John Barbose was directly told by representatives
     of Philip Morris that Marlboro Lights were safer
     for him, he believed them, he smoked them."
          And you might recall, when I heard that in
     opening statement, I got up here and I said,
     Somebody's going to change their testimony on that
     stand because there is no evidence based on what
     we know about this case that you are going to hear
     that.
          But you know what?  Nobody did change their 7 testimony.  I was right.  Nobody said that.  No
     evidence.  Nobody changed their testimony.  You
     were not presented with a single piece of evidence
     that any representatives of Philip Morris ever
     said to Mr. Barbose that lights were safer,
     whether at a trade show or anywhere.
          That's one huge example of the dots not
     connecting.  No evidence.  A statement, a promise
     made by counsel, and no evidence to back it up.
          And ask yourselves, why did counsel -- why
     did Mr. Bigger say he would prove that?  Because
     he needs a connection to Philip Morris on
     something they said or did, and we don't have it.
     It might exist in another case, it doesn't in this
     one.
          Let me focus on a second important example of
     what I think of the two ships passing, the
     disconnect in the evidence.
          Dr. Cummings, an anti-tobacco advocate.  Just
     as I predicted, he came in here to try and make
     you mad.  I'm going to spend some time talking
     about some testimony from Dr. Cummings and why the
     facts of a particular case don't matter to him.
     The facts don't matter, the medicine doesn't
     matter.  No matter what the evidence is in any 8 particular smoker's case, Dr. Cummings is going to
     come in here into any courtroom and bash tobacco
     and tell his story no matter what.
          And you know what?  Tobacco companies are
     pretty easy targets based on some of those
     internal documents you saw.  I told you there were
     going to be some bad ones.  I told you there were
     going to be some real doozies, and there were; 50,
     60 -- some of them were 90 years ago.
          And nowhere was the complete disconnect
     between the story Dr. Cummings told and the issues
     in this case.  Nowhere clearer was the disconnect
     than his story of lights fraud.  An entire story
     told by Dr. Cummings based on smokers who, what?
     Compensate when they switch to light cigarettes.
          But what do we have in this case?  We have
     evidence that pertains to Mr. Barbose and his
     smoking.  And what did witness after witness say?
     Mr. Barbose did not compensate, did not smoke
     more, did not inhale more deeply when he switched
     to light cigarettes.  The dots do not connect from
     Dr. Cummings' ship and the evidence in this case.
     And I'll come back to the compensation issue in a
     moment.
          So as I did in opening, I want you to ask 9 yourselves, as you deliberate and as you go
     through the evidence in this case, what does the
     evidence have to do with Mr. Barbose?  And despite
     Mr. Bigger making comments about that, I stand by
     that question.  And I ask you again, ask
     yourselves what the evidence has to do with
     Mr. Barbose.
          And in my closing, I'd like to focus on the
     same two themes I addressed in opening.
          Number one, there is no evidence that
     anything Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds did or
     said that had any effect on Mr. Barbose and his
     decision to start smoking or continue smoking.
          And the second theme is the choices
     Mr. Barbose made.
          Let me begin with number one.  And there were
     three key issues here, I think.  Number one, the
     compensation; number two, the wallpaper -- we're
     going to talk wallpaper -- and number three,
     reliance.
          And the reason we have these two ships is, as
     I've said, the facts don't matter.  Dr. Cummings
     will give the same presentation whether it's in
     this courtroom or any other courtroom in Florida
     or wherever he testifies.  And why?  Because he 10 has a significant bias against tobacco companies.
     He wants to sink tobacco.  He wants them out of
     business, and he wants cigarettes illegal.
          That's not your decision to make.  And this
     is not an opinion poll on tobacco.
          Why is it important the evidence relates to
     Mr. Barbose?  Because that's how you will decide
     this case.  It's not about hypothetical smokers or
     smokers in general or an opinion poll.  This case
     is about one smoker and one smoker only,
     Mr. Barbose.
          So let's look to see if the dots connect, if
     those two ships intersect anywhere other than just
     the words of counsel.  Okay?  That's not evidence.
     I want you to look at the evidence.
          So the clearest example, as I already
     mentioned, is this issue of compensation.  The
     entire lights fraud story told by Dr. Cummings is
     because smokers compensate.  But he did admit
     under cross-examination.  "Sir, not all smokers
     compensate?"  That's what I said.
          And second, "And people in the public health
     community were of the opinion that if you got
     lower tar and nicotine, it would be better for you
     so long as you did not compensate, correct?" 11      Answer, "That was the assumption, yeah."
          And remember I had to go back and forth.  I
     had to fight with him a little bit until he
     finally admitted that smokers who do not change
     their smoking habits when they go to filters or
     lights, they get less nicotine and less tar, which
     is better for them.  I had to fight, but I got it
     from him.
          What else?  Well, you know, if we go to the
     medical and scientific literature, we find
     Dr. Cummings' article and -- Predictors of Smoking
     Cessation in a Cohort of Adult Smokers Followed
     For Five Years.  What does Dr. Cummings say in
     that 1997 article?
          "From a treatment perspective, the findings
     from this study highlight the importance of
     helping smokers, especially heavier smokers,
     overcome their need for nicotine.  The means to
     achieve this therapeutic goal could take many
     forms including, but not limited to, having
     smokers switch to cigarettes with less nicotine."
          But according to Dr. Cummings, he was
     bamboozled.  He was fooled.  But his admission
     remains the same.  If a smoker does not
     compensate, they are getting less tar and less 12 nicotine.  What he wants you to believe is all
     smokers compensate.  Not the facts in this case.
          During his direct examination, Dr. Cummings
     didn't even discuss this article.  I brought it up
     on cross-examination.  Has he retracted the
     article because he was bamboozled?  Has he said,
     Dear Editor, we were duped, we were fooled, we
     were wrong?  Has he written a letter?  Has he
     withdrawn the article?  No.
          I go to the literature and I find
     Dr. Cummings wearing one hat, his hat when you
     look at this published paper of saying one of the
     ways is to go to light cigarettes.  He wears
     another hat in this courtroom, his bias hat.
          So let's look a little more closely about
     what we heard, the evidence we heard about
     Mr. Barbose as it relates to this issue of
     compensation.  And this is not an issue where
     there was no evidence.  There was lots of evidence
     of compensation.  No compensation.
          He did not change his smoking habits.  He did
     not smoke more cigarettes.  He did not inhale more
     deeply.  He didn't change the way he smoked,
     period.  And anything beyond those facts would be
     a guess and will be speculation.  Actually, it 13 would actually be ignoring the undisputed evidence
     in this case that Mr. Barbose did not compensate.
          Let's look at some specific testimony.  Well,
     you probably got sick and tired of it, but I got
     up and I asked those compensation questions of
     just about every witness.  And Mrs. Barbose said
     he had a smoking routine, no increase in the
     number of cigarettes he smoked, and did not change
     how he inhaled.
          Dyanna; no increase in the number of
     cigarettes he smoked, did not change how he
     inhaled.  No change whatsoever in the way he
     smoked.
          Deborah; no increase in the number of
     cigarettes he smoked, did not change how he
     inhaled.
          Stacey; no difference in the amount of
     cigarettes he smoked, no change in the way he
     smoked.
          But it didn't end with the fact witnesses,
     because I actually asked Dr. Drobes, "Sir, you
     don't recall any testimony consistent with an
     interpretation that Mr. Barbose compensated his
     smoking behavior at any point in time, correct?
          "Answer:  So should I assume the jury has 14 some familiarity with the term 'compensation'?
          "Question:  They do.
          "Answer:  Okay.  Yes, I saw no specific
     descriptions that he changed his smoking behavior
     in any appreciable way when he might have switched
     brands.
          "Question:  No.  You agree there's no
     testimony Mr. Barbose smoked more cigarettes or
     changed his behavior after he switched to light
     cigarettes, correct?
          "Answer:  Correct."
          And Mr. Bigger said, and I think Dr. Cummings
     threw it in there, Smokers don't know when they're
     compensating.  They don't know if they're smoking
     more, they don't know if they're inhaling more
     deeply.
          Well, the problem in this case is that at one
     point Mr. Barbose smoked another full-flavored
     brand a short period of time, and he realized he
     was smoking more.  What did he do?  I'm smoking
     too much of this, and he got rid of them.
          So he did know what he was doing when he did
     it.  As Mrs. Barbose said, he had a routine.  That
     routine did not change when he changed to light
     cigarettes. That is the opposite of being unaware 15 of compensation.
          And just briefly, what did Dr. Cummings cite
     to you as part of his compensation story?
     Remember that study from 1975?  Five smokers
     changed from regular to lights.  And I had to
     tussle with him a little bit, but two smokers did
     not change, okay?  They didn't change, they didn't
     get more smoke as they changed to lights.  And so
     they got less smoke, less tar, less nicotine.
          If Mr. Barbose had been in that study, based
     on the evidence we heard in this case, Mr. Barbose
     would have been one of those two.  All right,
     maybe three others did change.  Maybe that's
     evidence in another case that somebody sat there
     and inhaled much more deeply or went to two packs
     a day.  Not the evidence in this case.
          So Dr. Cummings is trying to fit his story,
     and it doesn't fit the facts.  And he needs it
     because he needs to try to show that somehow there
     was some connection, and there's no connection.
          Mr. Barbose was not looking for additional
     information on smoking and health.  He rejected
     the information that was being provided to him.
          Let's think about it this way.  If all the
     information that Dr. Cummings told you, my 16 goodness, the dangers of filters and lights was
     plastered on the front page of a newspaper, what
     would have happened, based on what we know in this
     case?  Well, Mrs. Barbose probably would have
     clipped it out of the newspaper, put it on
     Mr. Barbose's chair, and he would have put it to
     one side.  Same way he pushed away the other
     articles she gave him on the ill health effects of
     smoking.
          Now, you've seen the verdict form.  Mr. Geise
     went through it in quite a bit of detail, and the
     jury instructions were read to you this morning.
     But I do want to focus on a couple of quick areas.
          Let me ask you the question, it's on the
     form, "what information was concealed or omitted
     from Mr. Barbose such that he would not have acted
     as he did but for the concealment or omission of
     that information?"
          The answer is "none."  There's no information
     that would have changed Mr. Barbose's mind or his
     actions with regard to his smoking.  Mr. Barbose
     would not have relied on any additional
     information about smoking and health that he could
     possibly have foreseen.
          And let's not forget, there was always health 17 warnings on the Marlboro Lights he smoked,
     including that smoking causes lung cancer.  Not
     oh, by the way, if you smoke a light, no, it
     doesn't.  It was the same warning on the lights as
     the regular cigarettes.
          And another thing with lights.  They came on
     the market in 1972.  There were no television or
     radio ads.  None.  That was gone from 1971.
          And we never heard anyone say that
     Mr. Barbose thought Marlboro Lights were safe.  We
     did not hear that.
          So one more point on the jury instructions.
     They also state, you've seen it, that reliance by
     John Barbose on the conduct of RJR or PM may be
     inferred from the evidence and testimony.  But I
     want to make something very clear.  Inferred does
     not mean guess or speculate.  And given everything
     we know about John Barbose from the evidence and
     testimony in this case, we know that, based on his
     rejection of the information he was being given,
     there's no evidence he would have relied on any
     additional information he was receiving from the
     tobacco companies.  He rejected warnings, he
     rejected words, he rejected nagging, he rejected
     articles. 18      So where does the anti-tobacco evidence
     presented by Dr. Cummings -- and there was a lot
     of it -- where else does it not intersect in this
     case?  The wallpaper, the advertising.
     Advertising all over the place.  Wallpaper;
     couldn't escape it.
          But is there any evidence that cigarette
     advertising really had an effect on Mr. Barbose's
     decision to start smoking or continue smoking?
     The claim here is that Mr. Barbose's smoking
     pattern -- I think Mr. Bigger said "exactly
     followed what industry wanted.  That's what the
     promotions were and that's exactly how John
     Barbose responded."
          It's a few problems there.  Let's look.
          As I previewed for you in my opening
     statement, we don't know why Mr. Barbose had his
     first cigarette.  We don't know what brand it was,
     who he had it with, or where he got it from.  We
     do know, early, he smoked this Philip Morris
     brand, these loose cigarettes -- loosies -- three
     for a nickel from his father's store.  And his
     friends would go in, and while his mom and his
     brother went looking, he'd help himself.  And the
     only reason he smoked those loose cigarettes is 19 because his father decided that was the packet,
     the brand that he was going to cut open and sell
     individually.
          There's no wallpaper.  There's no connection
     to any wallpaper for those early cigarettes.
          What happens next?  Well, the story changes
     depending on who you listen to.  And as I
     previewed for you in opening, what the brand
     history is and how long, it gets different
     depending on the witness.
          Mr. Barbose, there is no doubt, smoked a
     variety of different brands at different times and
     in a different order.  We're not sure.
          And I'm here.  Mr. Barbose smoked some Philip
     Morris brands.  Mr. Geise is here.  We're not
     running away from that.  Clearly, our cigarettes
     were smoked.  When, how long, et cetera, that
     depends on the witness that testified from the
     stand.
          But some of them we heard he tried briefly,
     some became his regular brands.  Some witnesses
     disagree.  But while all those differences exist,
     there is one consistency.  There's no evidence
     that advertising played any role in Mr. Barbose's
     decision to start or switch or continue on any of 20 these brands.
          So there may be debate over what, how long,
     when, but there's nothing that ties it to the
     wallpaper.
          Let me focus on Marlboro and Marlboro Lights.
     Those are the two Philip Morris brands.  And let
     me start with Marlboro.
          This is the verified worksheet.  Remember
     there was a verified worksheet -- an amended
     verified worksheet, under oath.  This is the brand
     history, and this is from Mrs. Barbose.  And we
     have Marlboro from the years 1984 to 1993.  And
     while lights -- Marlboro Lights are not listed in
     there specifically, Mrs. Barbose cleared up that
     she meant that to cover Marlboro and Marlboro
     Lights during that timeframe.
          Now, Sam Barbose has a different memory.  He
     remembers seeing one pack of Marlboro Reds from
     their -- being purchased by John from their
     father's store early on, 1957.  And he also
     recalls seeing his brother with a pack -- a pack
     of Marlboro Reds, at Sam's high school graduation.
          Deborah recalls her father smoking Marlboro
     Reds in Pennsylvania in the latter years when she
     got older, but she doesn't know when he first 21 began smoking Marlboro Reds.
          Now, Dyanna thinks she recalls her father
     smoking Marlboros when she was eight or nine, but
     she has no memory of them smoking them when she
     was a teenager.
          And Stacey doesn't know when her grandfather
     first started smoking Marlboro Reds, but she does
     recall him smoking them after 1980.  And,
     remember, Stacey's memory on brands starts in
     1986.  So that would put it in the same timeframe
     as Mrs. Barbose.
          So even if you take all the differences --
     and these are memories.  They fade.  People can
     remember different things.  Nobody came in here
     and said, Aha, the 1970s, that's when he was
     smoking Marlboros -- nobody until Dr. Cummings.
          And I sat and I went, Did he just say the
     1970s?  And so I had to impeach Dr. Cummings and
     show him his prior testimony.  And in his prior
     testimony, he admitted, Well, the totality of the
     evidence is that he was smoking Marlboro Reds in
     the 1980s.  The first time he came up was the
     1970s was in this courtroom.  And despite all the
     differences, nobody else gave that testimony.
          So it's confusing.  We have the differences. 22 You decide.
          Now, we heard several witnesses testify that
     there was a switch at some point to Marlboro
     Lights.  And according to Mrs. Barbose it's in the
     same timeframe, but that includes Marlboro and
     Marlboro Lights.  So sometime between 1984 and
     1993.
          Sam Barbose recalls his brother smoking from
     a different color Marlboro pack after he moved to
     Florida.  So that would be after 1984.
          The earliest Deborah recalls Mr. Barbose
     smoking Marlboro Lights was in Florida in 1987.
     She doesn't remember when he smoked before then.
          And Dyanna remembers her father smoking
     Marlboro Lights in Pennsylvania, but doesn't
     testify as to which year.
          And then Stacey recalls Mr. Barbose smoking
     Marlboro Lights in 1987 or 1988.
          And on this, Dr. Cummings actually seems to
     agree that it seems to be in the 1980s that
     Mr. Barbose was smoking Marlboro Lights.
          When did Marlboro Lights first become
     available?  You heard it from Dr. Cummings, 1972.
     So we have Mr. Barbose, at least 12 years -- at
     least 12 years behind the wallpaper. 23      Mr. Barbose did not follow the wallpaper.  He
     switched when he wanted to, when he felt like it.
     And there's no evidence he switched because of
     anything the tobacco company did or said, neither
     RJR nor Philip Morris.  Nothing.
          So that's lights.  Let's look at the timeline
     that I think Mr. Bigger said he -- Mr. Barbose
     responded to it, responded to the promotions.
          So just like there was a lag time --
     significant lag time for lights, there was a lag
     time for filters.  According to -- sorry --
     Mrs. Barbose, Mr. Barbose did not smoke filters
     until approximately 1984, that those first two
     brands were unfiltered.  That's her recollection.
          Well, if Mr. Barbose didn't switch to
     filtered cigarettes until 1984, you might be
     asking yourselves, what happened with filtered
     cigarettes in 1984?  How long have they been on
     the market?
          Filtered cigarettes first became available in
     the 1950s.  So Mr. Barbose wasn't following --
     well, he was, but decades later.  Decades.  Once
     again, Dr. Cummings, with his wallpaper story,
     tried to fit a square peg in a round hole.
          That's the same wallpaper story 24 Dr. Cummings -- he said it, that this is what he
     says.  He tells it.  And regardless of whether the
     smoker didn't switch to filters or switched to
     lights and when they first did it, it's all the
     wallpaper story.
          And just as there is evidence that millions
     of Americans did not follow the wallpaper, they
     chose not to smoke, there is no evidence
     Mr. Barbose, as a smoker, followed the wallpaper.
     The evidence is to the contrary.  He did not.
          One other fact on the cigarette types that
     Mr. Barbose smoked.  Plaintiff claims he went from
     unfiltered to filtered to lights.  And that's
     where the plaintiffs's timeline or story stopped.
     Why?  Well, because if you go back and look at
     that chart, 1993 to 1996, Mr. Barbose went back to
     smoking a regular full-flavored brand.  That's a
     glitch in their story.
          So, where does that leave us?  Well, it
     leaves us that the time lag for filters, the time
     lag for lights, and then the switch back to a
     full-flavored brand does not match the wallpaper.
     And although the evidence is somewhat conflicting
     on Mr. Barbose's quit attempts, we do know that
     around 1993 or 1994, he quit for about three to 25 six or seven months.
          So if Mr. Barbose is following the wallpaper
     or moving to a healthier cigarette, there's no
     fit.  After he quit for three to seven months, he
     went back to smoking a regular, full-flavored
     brand.  But what we do know is, before he was
     diagnosed, whether it be one week, three weeks,
     four weeks, a few weeks, Mr. Barbose quit cold
     turkey.  The wallpaper dots do not connect.
          Let me quickly move to the third issue.
     Mr. Geise covered quite a bit of this.  He showed
     you a chart of the testimony.  And not a single
     witness said that John Barbose relied on any
     statement by any tobacco company or organization
     to start or to continue smoking.  No advertising
     reliance, nothing.
          Nobody testified that he thought it was okay
     to smoke cigarettes.  Nobody testified that he
     said cigarettes were safe and that he didn't
     understand the warnings.  No evidence.
          So on the issues of anything Philip Morris or
     R.J. Reynolds did, no compensation; no evidence.
     No following the wallpaper; no evidence.  No
     reliance; no evidence.
          Now, let's put that into perspective a little 26 bit by looking at it in the context of the
     instructions that the Court read to you and that
     you will see.  And plaintiffs have to prove to you
     that Mr. Barbose relied to his detriment.  In
     other words, but for some disclosure of
     information, Mr. Barbose would not have developed
     cancer.  That just isn't the case.  It may fit the
     facts of another case where Dr. Cummings
     testifies, but not this one.
          And to answer that question with the
     evidence, let's quickly look at what we know.
          We know Mr. Barbose never expressed any
     desire to quit or made any attempt to quit until
     the mid to late 1980s after he moved to Florida,
     despite all the public information about the
     health risks of smoking, all the warnings he
     received about the health risks of smoking, all
     the years Mrs. Barbose talked to him about
     quitting, all the articles of smoking and health
     she tried to show him, and the millions of people
     quitting in this country starting in 1964 with the
     release of the Surgeon General report.
     Mr. Barbose chose to continue smoking.
          And he smoked light cigarettes even though
     the pack of cigarettes had the same Surgeon 27 General's warning as the full-flavored pack's
     warning.  You've seen them all.  You've seen 1966,
     1970, 1985.  And if he's only smoking in the
     1980s, he's getting a warning, whether lights or
     regular, smoking causes lung cancer.
          Plaintiff presented no evidence that
     Mr. Barbose would have quit smoking had he not
     switched to a filtered cigarette.  Plaintiff
     presented no evidence that Mr. Barbose would have
     quit smoking had he not switched to light
     cigarettes.  Mr. Barbose chose to continue
     smoking.  And no additional information would have
     changed that, because we know, unfortunately,
     Mr. Barbose chose not to listen.
          We know he was stubborn on his smoking.  He
     didn't go to doctors.  He didn't want to hear them
     nag him.
          Mrs. Barbose didn't know he had that
     prescription.  No smoking.  She found it in the
     drawer after he passed away.
          The clipping of the newspaper articles, the
     fingernail one, no reliance, no connection, and
     certainly no reliance to his detriment.
          Let me change subjects briefly and talk about
     the medical side of this case.  And plaintiffs 28 have the burden of proof, as Mr. Geise says, to
     prove that Mr. Barbose's cancer was caused by his
     smoking.  And something interesting happened in
     this courtroom.  Plaintiff's medical expert,
     Dr. Villa, he was honest.  He said, Pathologists,
     well, we can differ.  We can disagree.  And we can
     specifically disagree in this case on whether
     Mr. Barbose had an adenocarcinoma.  We're not
     sure.
          And we talked about some features.  You
     remember the one I couldn't pronounce, the -- I
     want to say amici or something, and he -- acini or
     something cini.  He corrected me.
          And the mucin stain, he said they're
     questionable, they're iffy; right?
          And he said we're not sure.
          Well, why is that important?  Well, because
     Dr. Cummings, not a medical doctor, came into this
     courtroom and said, Adenocarcinoma is the filter
     cancer.  And once again, he's trying to connect
     those dots to Philip Morris and RJR, but he
     doesn't care what the evidence is in a particular
     case.  He's going to sit in that witness chair and
     tell you his story.  That's what's coming out.
          And another thing on the medical side, 29 Dr. Cummings said, you know, the additions of
     these filters made it easier to draw the smoke
     deeper into the lungs where you see it more in the
     peripheral part of the lung where you see most of
     the adenocarcinomas these day.
          If Mr. Barbose had an adenocarcinoma, where
     was that big tumor?  Smack dab in the center in
     the bronchus; right?
          Dr. Stein showed you a video, right in the
     central part.  I think Dr. Villa was up at the
     screen and he was showing.  And it was right in
     the center.  It wasn't peripheral.  It doesn't
     matter to Dr. Cummings.  He's just going to come
     in here and say what he has to say.  No connection
     to the facts.
          So while we're on the medical, let's briefly
     talk about some of the admissions Dr. Villa.  And
     we've been, I think, accused of challenging the
     plaintiffs on the medicine.  All we're saying is
     meet your burden of proof.  You have to prove
     this.
          So I asked Dr. Villa certain questions.
     Let's quickly take a look.   No treating doctor
     identified in the medical records what caused
     Mr. Barbose's cancer.  That's a fact.  The lung is 30 the most common site of metastatic disease.
     That's a fact.  Two cancer nodules in the lungs
     raises suspicions for metastases from elsewhere.
     Dr. Villa said it.  And this was not a small cell
     lung cancer, and that's the one that has the
     highest correlation with smoking.
          And Dr. Villa also testified, you know, we
     don't have an autopsy in this case, and that's
     important for determining definitely the primary
     site of the cancer.  And Dr. Villa testified he
     thinks it should be a requirement of an autopsy
     for bringing a medical/legal case.
          Now, Mr. Bigger may try and interpret those
     words, "medical/legal," but he was not asked what
     he meant by that.  There's no evidence what
     Dr. Villa would have said if he was asked, Well,
     what do you mean by a medical/legal case?  We're
     here, it's legal, we're talking about medical
     issues.  He was not asked to explain that.
          One other issue.  Before I shift my focus to
     my second thing of Mr. Barbose and the choices he
     made, I'd like to make a final comment on
     Dr. Cummings' version of the lights and the filter
     issues.
          Dr. Cummings had a gotcha moment here.  We 31 made the holes in the filters invisible.  We're
     hiding them from the smokers.  You know what he
     would have said if we'd made them visible?  Well,
     we put them there so that smokers would know they
     could go find them and cover them so they could
     get more tar and nicotine so they could
     compensate.
          So we're criticized for people having to not
     see them.  We would have definitely been
     criticized if you had been able to see them,
     because then we're giving you a tool to hide them;
     right, to block them.
          You all know Dr. Cummings' agenda by now.  It
     is to sink tobacco.  It is to make cigarettes
     illegal.  And he's going to bash tobacco no matter
     what the facts are.
          Second thing, choices Mr. Barbose made.  Why
     didn't I listen?  Why didn't I quit?  And what he
     meant by that, according to Mrs. Barbose, is why
     didn't he listen to her for all those years?  She
     begged him, she nagged him.
          And others told him to quit.  The friend
     Elise, the employee Marge, why didn't I listen?
     He had the information.  He chose not to listen.
     He was stubborn about his smoking.  He didn't want 32 to go to doctors.  He knew that cigarette smoking
     had health risks, but according to Mrs. Barbose,
     he thought this was going to happen to someone
     else.  He didn't think it would happen to him,
     despite all his awareness.
          I'm not criticizing Mr. Barbose.  He made
     those choices.  By all accounts, he was a loving,
     intelligent, capable man, but he was fully
     entitled to make those decisions about his
     smoking.  He chose to continue to smoke after his
     father quit for health reasons.  He chose to quit
     after the warning labels were put on the first
     packets of cigarettes in 1966.  I can go on
     through the decades.  I can go all the way up to
     April 1996 before he was diagnosed.  He finally
     quit.
          And with those choices come responsibility,
     responsibility for the risks associated with them.
          And after he was diagnosed, Mr. Barbose never
     said, Bring a lawsuit against tobacco, I was
     misled by tobacco.  He never said he was confused.
     What he did say was, Why didn't I listen?  Why
     didn't I quit?
          And when it comes to discussing the choices
     of Mr. Barbose, some of the most important 33 testimony came from Dr. Villa.  We know that there
     was no quit attempts by Mr. Barbose until after he
     moved to Florida, mid to late 1980s.  We never
     heard any specifics until the mid to late 1980s.
     And we know a little bit about that with the gum,
     maybe toothpicks, candy, maybe one to two weeks.
     And then we know a little bit more about a quit
     attempt in the early '90s, three to six months,
     seven months, 1993 to 1994.  You've heard all
     that.  And he managed to quit for those months.
     And nobody gave us a reason why he started smoking
     again.  Nicotine was long gone from his system.
     If he had been addicted, it wasn't because of an
     addiction that he picked up.  He chose to pick it
     up again.
          So let's put the importance of quitting in
     perspective.  What did Dr. Villa say about
     quitting?
          Well, if a person stopped smoking, their risk
     of developing lung cancer declines over time.  A
     smoker's risk of developing lung cancer begins to
     decrease five years after the smoker quits.  If a
     smoker quits for 15 years, a smoker's risk of lung
     cancer is cut in half.  By the time a smoker has
     reached 25 to 30 years of cessation, their risk of 34 developing smoking-related cancer has decreased
     close to that of a non-smoker.
          So let's look at that in terms of what we
     know about Mr. Barbose, again, from Dr. Villa.
          If Mr. Barbose had quit around mid 1960s, his
     risk would have approached that of a never smoker.
     If Mr. Barbose had quit around 1979 or 1980, his
     increased risk of lung cancer would have been
     reduced by half.  Even if Mr. Barbose had quit
     into the early to mid 1980s, his risk would have
     still been reduced.
          And if we tie those facts to the timeframes
     of what's going on, we have the Surgeon General
     report in 1964, we have his father quitting, we
     have the labels going on every pack, 1966, '70,
     '85.
          And, you know, Mr. Bigger actually showed you
     some wallpaper.  It looks like Marlboro wallpaper.
     Now, that's the number of packs of cigarettes at
     one pack a day, 365, right?  That's what he said.
          You want to know something?  Every pack of
     cigarettes after 1966 -- well, even before -- had
     20 cigarettes in it.  So every time Mr. Barbose
     opened one of these packs of cigarettes to get out
     one of those 20 cigarettes, that was 7,300 times a 35 year Mr. Barbose had the warnings and chose to go
     right past them, chose to ignore them.
          I'm not going to go back through the various
     quit attempts, Mr. Geise covered that.  And I want
     to quickly just finish up with a couple of points
     about the jury instructions.  And Mr. Geise
     covered a lot of ground about addiction.  I'm not
     going to repeat that, but I do want to focus on a
     couple of issues.
          Dr. Drobes acknowledged the DSM-5 is the only
     tool he used for his work in this case that was
     developed for diagnostic purposes.  And even
     though that DSM-5 requires that 12-month period,
     didn't matter to Dr. Drobes.  Ignored it.  And
     then we had a difference that Mr. Geise
     highlighted about, you know, Dr. Cummings thinks a
     smoker's addicted if they've got one cigarette a
     day.  Dr. Drobes is slightly different.  And so
     they're not on the same page.
          And speaking of addiction, we have yet
     another example where Dr. Cummings seems to pick
     and choose which facts he wants to rely on.
          Do you remember the criteria that
     Dr. Cummings uses to determine addiction as being
     time to first cigarette in the morning?  It's kind 36 of one of the things he looks at.  And when
     Dr. Cummings looked at his notes to determine the
     time to first cigarette, he didn't include a note
     from Ms. Barbose.  And I had to point that out to
     him in cross-examination.
          So ask yourselves, ladies and gentlemen of
     the jury, why wouldn't Dr. Cummings include the
     testimony on the first cigarette from the lady who
     woke up with him in the same bed every morning for
     all those years?  He selectively chose other
     witnesses who didn't even live with him.  Why?
     Because he's going to pick and choose and try to
     make it fit, but it doesn't fit.  The dots do not
     connect.
          Mr. Bigger asked you for over $9 million.  I
     agree with Mr. Geise that I don't think you should
     get there.  But if you did, you were asked to
     award $9.256 million.
          And I don't pretend that I'm standing here
     and asking you to do something easy, because I'm
     asking you to award no money to a nice lady, a
     nice lady who tried to get her husband to quit.
     But being nice and feeling sympathy is not enough
     in a court of law, and plaintiff has to prove by a
     preponderance of the evidence the claims that have 37 been made.  And I don't think they met that
     burden.
          But I want to put something in perspective.
     If you have a family that makes about $50,000 a
     year, 9.256 million would take 185 years to get to
     that total.  If you get to damages, use your
     common sense.
          Apportionment of fault.  Mr. Geise covered
     this.  But if you get to the intentional torts and
     you had to assign percentages, all gone if you get
     to the intentional tort.  So those numbers are
     wiped out.
          And recall that Mr. Bigger has stood here and
     said that Mr. Barbose accepts some responsibility.
     You will wipe that out if you find intentional
     tort.
          Finally, Mr. Geise talked about the
     entitlement to punitive damages.  That's a
     different standard.  You have the instruction.
     It's clear and convincing evidence.  And the
     evidence you are to consider in making that
     decision is not the amount of the number.
     That's -- we'll come back and there will be a
     second phase of witnesses and arguments and
     testimony.  That's what you do next if you find 38 that.
          But when you look at the instructions, clear
     and convincing evidence is defined.  And it is a
     much higher burden of proof than greater weight or
     preponderance of the evidence.  You'll see the
     evidence is precise, explicit, lacking in
     confusion.
          And let me tell you one more thing.  If we
     get there, punitive damages are warranted based
     only on conduct that relates specifically to
     Mr. Barbose.  This case is about John Barbose, not
     all smokers, and not the general public.
          John Barbose always had the information
     available to him and, unfortunately, he chose to
     ignore it.  Mr. Barbose always had the ability to
     quit smoking when he was motivated to do it.  We
     saw that through the evidence.  He simply didn't
     quit until it was too late.
          You've heard no evidence during this trial
     that anything the defendants did or did not do,
     said or did not say, caused Mr. Barbose to begin
     smoking or to continue smoking.  John Barbose made
     his own lifestyle choices.  No one else made them
     for him.  He was bright, ambitious.  He was an
     entrepreneur.  He was strong-willed. 39      Given the evidence that you've heard, ladies
     and gentlemen, plaintiff has simply not met their
     burden to prove to you their case and certainly
     not that punitive damages are warranted.
          To conclude, this is the last time you'll
     hear from me.  Plaintiff goes last because they
     have the burden of proof.  If the evidence is even
     or in our favor, they did not meet their burden.
     And while I don't know exactly what Mr. Bigger
     will say, he may make some shots about things I
     say, ships passing in the night, what does this
     evidence have to do with Mr. Barbose -- I stand by
     those questions.
          I anticipate he will try to make you angry
     again, try to show you by going after tobacco
     again, but I want you to ask yourselves the
     following as he speaks, because he will have no
     response to the following evidence.  The evidence
     shows that Mr. Barbose did not compensate when he
     switched to light cigarettes.
          Second, Mr. Barbose started smoking light
     cigarettes in the mid to late 1980s after the move
     to Florida.  The wallpaper, the advertising for
     lights began in 1972.  There's no following.
          Third, he will have no response to 40
     Mr. Barbose's own words.  "Why didn't I listen?
     Why didn't I quit?"  There will be no response,
     because there's nothing that has contradicted or
     questioned this evidence.  I ask you again, I
     stand by this question, what does the evidence
     have to do with Mr. Barbose?
          And finally, I want you to ask yourselves --
     Mr. Bigger gets the last word, but what would
     Mr. Geise and Ms. Yates say in response?  Because
     you know by now we'd have something to say in
     response.
          Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your
     patience, thank you for your attention throughout
     this important process.  Our system would not work
     without jurors like you.
          Thank you.