          MR. REILLY:  Thanks.
          It's still before noon, so good morning,
      everybody. (Response was heard.)
          MR. REILLY:  Mr. Freidin began his closing
      argument with a thank you and just as I said in
      my opening statement, I want to express my
      thanks on behalf of Hassia, myself,
      Philip Morris and everybody for your service
      here as jurors.  Without you guys our civil
      justice system wouldn't work.  And it requires
      that you guys pay very close attention to the
      evidence, the witnesses, as it comes in and
      you've done a great job, no question about it.
          Now, Judge Blake has given you the
      instructions.  He's going to give you a few more
      in just a minute, when I'm done and when
      rebuttal is over.  And then you'll have an
      opportunity to take the instructions, follow the
      law, take the facts as you learned them in this
      room, and then take our verdict form and answer
      the questions and resolve this civil dispute,
      right.
          So, again, thanks for your service.
          Now, you can see how many boards I have.
      You know that I've used these in my opening
      statement.  And when I gave you my opening
      statement I said I was confident that what I was telling you in my opening statement was what the
      evidence was actually going to be.  Confident
      enough that I said, you know what, I'm going to
      use these same boards in my closing argument.
      And I am.  There are many of the same boards I
      used in my opening statement right here.
          But, of course, as you can see from the size
      of this, I've supplemented that with a bunch of
      additional boards, right, because during the
      course of the trial there was evidence that came
      in that was important enough for me to actually
      extract it and put on it a board and show it to
      you in this case.  Because that's really what
      this case is all about, the facts that came out
      during the course of this trial.
          Now, where did the evidence come from in
      this case?
          Well, we had a total of eight witnesses.
      Some of them were live, like Dr. Proctor.  Some
      of them were on videotape, like their Dr. Jack
      Henningfield.  Dr. Abel was live.  Electo Reyes
      was read to you.  Luisa Gonzalez was read to
      you.  Eduardo De La Vega was read to you.  These
      two were very short.
          Electo Reyes, you remember, was the best friend of Mr. Blasco as he was growing up.  Gave
      us a tremendous amount of detailed information
      about his youth, right.
          Mrs. Blasco of course came live and she
      provided a lot of the evidence that I'm going to
      be showing you here in a little bit, a lot of
      the information about Mr. Blasco and his
      feelings about smoking, his decisions about
      smoking.  You can call it his choice if you want
      to.  And of course while Mr. Freidin said choice
      has nothing to do with class membership, it
      frankly does.  It's all about the choices that
      we make in our lives, how we live our lives, and
      that's what this is about.
          And then Dr. Ira Dosovitz, you saw him just
      yesterday, he was the only medical doctor to
      come here and talk to you about addiction.  And
      I'll talk more about all these folks and the
      information they provided as we go through this
      closing argument.
          Now, what did I tell you this case was
      about.
          That's Devon Moss' job.
          In my opening statement I said, I promised
      you that the judge was going to give you pages of instructions.  And he has.  And you'll
      actually get a copy of all those pages of
      instructions.  And I said they're going to be
      filled with legal terms.  And they are, tons of
      them.  And I said you're going to get a
      multi-page verdict form as well, and you will.
      And it has lots of legal terms in it too.  But I
      said I truly believe that you can condense all
      that down into just two words.
          What this case is about, what does it
      distill down to?  And that is control and
      responsibility.  Who was in control of
      Mr. Blasco's life, his lifestyle choices, and of
      course in particular his decision about whether
      he would begin to smoke, continue to smoke,
      become a regular smoker, and decide whether he
      wanted to enjoy smoking for decades and then
      whether he truly wanted to quit smoking?  And if
      he did, what level of motivation did he
      exercise, and can you tell from what he did and
      what he said and what he said to his wife
      whether he wanted to quit smoking or whether he
      wanted to continue to enjoy the pleasure he
      derived from smoking and whether or not
      Mrs. Blasco is the one that truly wanted him to quit smoking?  And you'll see that from the
      quotes that I'm going to show you here in just a
      little bit.
          And by the way, this case, well, you heard
      an awful lot about the American public and
      things going on in America and statements made
      to Americans.  You know, this case is only about
      one smoker, isn't it?  You all knew that when
      this case started.  We told you that in opening
      statement.  This is not a class action.  This
      case is about the decisions made by one smoker,
      and that's Mr. Blasco, that's Mr. Blasco.
          And where did Mr. Blasco grow up?  Where was
      he born?  Where was he raised?  Where did he
      live?  We'll cover all that as we go through
      this closing argument.
          Who was in control of Mr. Blasco's decisions
      about how he lived his life?  And then when you
      understood that, then you could determine who
      had responsibility for the decisions that were
      made by Mr. Blasco, and did Philip Morris really
      and truly in this case and this case only have a
      significant role in the decisions that
      Mr. Blasco made?  And that's what this case is
      really all about. Now, I said that you won't see these terms
      on the instructions or the verdict forms --
      verdict form, and you won't, but that is what
      this case turned out to really be all about.
          I also told you in my opening statement that
      I said that there were things that
      Philip Morris, and, frankly, other cigarette
      companies did that I described as wrongheaded in
      my opening statement.  I said, you know what,
      they clung too long to the position that smoking
      didn't cause lung cancer, hadn't been proven to
      cause lung cancer.  And I said they shouldn't
      have disagreed with the Surgeon General in 1988
      that smoking couldn't be addictive.  I said that
      right up front.  I said it right up front.  But
      I said, you know what, if that's all they had to
      prove in this case then you guys didn't need to
      share -- we're in our third week now.  You guys
      didn't need to share three weeks with us.  You
      could have all gone home.  But you couldn't
      because they had to prove much more than that in
      this case.  Because that's the law of the case.
          You're going to see a term called "legal
      cause."  You're going to see a term called
      "reliance."  But you're going to see a term called "legal cause."  Incredibly important
      terms in this case, in these instructions, on
      this verdict form.  And I warned you that legal
      cause is a concept that law students spend three
      years in law school trying to learn.  It's
      difficult.  There's a lot of legal terms in
      defining it.  And we expect you guys to come
      from your nonlegal jobs and join us and learn it
      and apply it.  It's asking you a lot.  But you
      can't overlook it.  You'll see it at least five
      times on the verdict form.  You'll see
      instructions on it five times, or thereabouts,
      in the instructions.  It's the most essential
      element of this whole case in terms of your
      responsibility as jurors.
          So now, I showed you this little diagram in
      my opening statement.  I have it again here in
      my closing argument to help you understand what
      the obligation of legal cause is.
          In order for the plaintiff and her lawyers
      in this case to establish that Philip Morris is
      the legal cause of Mr. Blasco's lung cancer and
      death, they have to prove that there was a
      direct connection between Philip Morris,
      something it said or something it did, and Mr. Blasco.
          What does that mean, direct connection?  It
      means he has to have seen it or heard it.  It
      has to have touched him.  It has to be connected
      to him, not the American public, not internal
      memos to some other people in a company.  It has
      to apply to him.  And there's no getting around
      it.  But it has to be more than he just saw it
      or heard it.  It has to have had a substantial
      impact -- I'll show you this language in each
      one of these instructions -- a substantial
      impact on the decisions of Mr. Blasco.
          How substantial?  So substantial that
      without whatever it is that they're complaining
      about that Mr. Blasco, what, wouldn't have begun
      smoking, wouldn't have continued to smoke,
      wouldn't have become regular smoker, would have
      avoided all of that and at some point would have
      quit smoking if he became a smoker and would
      have quit in time to avoid getting his lung
      cancer altogether.  That's what legal cause
      requires.
          Reliance is the same concept.  He has to
      have heard it.  He has to have seen it.  He has
      to have relied on it.  Where was Mr. Blasco? We'll go through that.
          Only then can whatever it is they're
      complaining about be a legal cause of
      Mr. Blasco's lung cancer and death.  And that is
      an obligation they have in this case.  And
      there's no getting around it.
          You virtually didn't hear anything about
      that in either Mr. Freidin or Mr. Alvarez's
      closing argument, did you?  There was virtually
      no emphasis on what I'm talking to you about.
      But I'll show it to you in each and every
      question.
          I put this board up in my opening statement
      and I said, when we go through this evidence, I
      suggested to you that you have these thoughts in
      mind, just kind of be thinking about this as we
      go through it because it's so important in
      determining that issue of legal cause.
          Did Mr. Blasco keep well-informed about
      current events?  Was he an intelligent and
      capable guy?
          Was there evidence that Mr. Blasco was
      influenced in direct and substantial way by
      Philip Morris?
          When he finally gets to the United States in 1972, and ladies and gentlemen, there's a big
      difference between being in Puerto Rico and
      being in the continental United States, and I'll
      explain that to you more in a little bit.
          Was Mr. Blasco waiting to hear something
      from Philip Morris about the health risks of
      smoking?
          Those are things that I suggested to you
      that you should be listening for, listening for.
      Because this case involves somebody who wasn't
      born here, wasn't raised here, didn't live here,
      didn't live in the continental United States
      until 1972 when he was 41 or '2 years old, a
      grown middle-aged man, a grown middle-aged man
      who had made decisions about smoking for how
      many years?  30 years?  30 years before he ever
      gets here and before he -- obviously there's an
      issue about when he began to smoke cigarettes
      manufactured by Philip Morris.  Was it 1972?
      Was it 1983 or '4 or '5?  We'll go over that.
      But at a minimum he had been smoking for over 30
      years and he was a middle-aged man who had made
      decisions about whether he was going to begin
      smoking, continue to smoke, become a regular
      smoker, continue to smoke for decades enjoying the pleasure that he derived from smoking, and
      there's not going to be any question that he
      derived pleasure from smoking when I get through
      reviewing the evidence in this case.
          We now have the verdict form.  So what I'd
      like to do is just walk through the questions
      that you're being asked to answer and just see
      what the evidence was and then suggest to you
      what I think the answers, based on the evidence,
      prove to be.
          Now, briefly let me talk about the burden of
      proof.  Because the burden of proof rests on the
      shoulders of the plaintiff to prove virtually
      all the issues in this case.  Mr. Freidin said,
      well, the burden of proof is only to tip the
      scales a little bit.  What it really is is when
      we present to you a mountain of evidence, their
      mountain has to be higher.  That's their burden
      of proof.  Their mountain has to be higher.  So
      when I go through this evidence, their mountain
      has to be higher than what I'm showing you.
          What's the first question?  "Was Mr. Blasco
      addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?"
          Well, who came and testified about that?
      Who came and testified about Mr. Blasco? Yes, you spent the day yesterday with
      Dr. Ira Dosovitz, and obviously Dr. Ira Dosovitz
      is an expert in the field of addiction,
      addiction medicine, addiction psychiatry,
      there's no question about it.  They criticized
      him because of a sickness and a death in his
      family that he let his certification lapse for a
      short period of time in the middle of his
      career.  But did George Washington Medical
      School think that he was somehow unqualified
      because he delayed recertifying himself because
      of a death in the family?  Obviously not.
      That's ridiculous.
          And Dr. Dosovitz explained to you how people
      who are truly experts in this field go about
      making a determination of whether someone is
      truly addicted.  This is a court of law.  This
      is not the street.  This is not the boulevard,
      this is a court of law, and in this Court of law
      we bring experts to you to assist you in making
      serious determinations.  And whether or not
      Mr. Blasco was addicted is a serious
      determination to be made by you in this case.
          Now, yes, Dr. Dosovitz walked you through
      the criteria that psychiatrists, psychologists, he described a world full of physicians use this
      tool along with their clinical judgment.  He's
      told you that he's cared for 3,000 people who
      wanted to deal with smoking.  And we went
      through the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
      criteria.  He walked you through the whole thing
      and how he analyzed it.
          Now, let me ask you this.  Who did the
      plaintiff and her lawyers, this team of lawyers,
      who did they bring to address this issue for
      you?  Did they bring you anybody who read all
      the depositions like Dr. Dosovitz did?  Did they
      bring you somebody who had looked at the medical
      records, the medical records that we have in
      this case?  No.
          Did they bring you anybody that knew
      anything about Mr. Blasco?  Because this case
      isn't about the American public.  This case
      isn't about smokers in general.  This case is
      only about one smoker and one smoker only, isn't
      it?  And that's Mr. Blasco.
          So who on behalf of the plaintiffs analyzed
      this situation for you?  If it was so easy to
      determine whether or not Mr. Blasco was addicted
      or not, then, my goodness, it must have been a snap to go find somebody to come in here and
      talk about it.  But that wasn't done.  You have
      to ask yourselves I think, my goodness, if it's
      so easy to do then why wasn't that done?
          Why is the only evidence they presented
      somebody on a videotape taken years ago who
      wasn't even a medical doctor?  Why was that
      done?  A matter of strategy?  Perhaps so,
      perhaps so.  But does that raise a question in
      your mind as to what's going on?  Who has the
      burden of proof on this issue?  Not Hassia and
      me.  Yet we brought you somebody to address this
      very issue.  We brought you a highly qualified
      person who does what?  Who makes these
      determinations every day, makes these
      determinations every day.
          Based on all the evidence that Dr. Dosovitz
      had, he addressed this issue and his conclusion
      was that although, yes, Mr. Blasco had
      withdrawal on those occasions when he quit
      smoking and yes, he had tolerance -- he said,
      you know what, this fellow does not meet the
      diagnostic criteria and from my clinical point
      of view I do not think that he was addicted, I
      don't think he qualified as addicted. If all you had to do -- they've taken the
      cigarettes away, but if all you had to do was
      figure out how many cigarettes were smoked, you
      don't need this book, right.  You don't need
      this book.  But why does the American
      Psychiatric Association bother to print it if
      that's all you need to do.  It's because that's
      not all you need to do, not all you need to do.
          So I would suggest that, frankly, in this
      particular case the uncontroverted evidence,
      because they brought nobody to address it,
      Mr. Blasco in particular, is that the answer was
      no, he wasn't addicted.  If that's what you
      conclude -- and all these answers have to be
      unanimous.  They all have to be unanimous.  You
      can't go on until you answer this question.
      Because the next sentence says, it directs you
      to whether you go on or you don't go on, and if
      you answer it no then you don't go on and your
      work is over.
          If you answer this question yes, and
      everybody would have to agree that the answer
      was yes, then you go on to the next question,
      and that is, "Was an addiction to cigarettes
      containing nicotine a legal cause of Mr. Blasco's lung cancer and death?"
          Well, did you hear anything in their closing
      argument about that, legal cause?
          Here's the instruction.  I mean, look at all
      this verbiage.  "An addiction to cigarettes
      containing nicotine is a legal cause of the
      disease if it directly and in natural and
      continuous sequence produces or contributes
      substantially," that's the minimum, it either
      has to do it by itself or it has to contribute
      substantially to producing the disease.
          How substantial does it have to be?  It has
      to be so substantial that but for the addiction
      to cigarettes containing nicotine he wouldn't
      have gotten sick with lung cancer and died.
          Ladies and gentlemen, you can't skip over
      it.  That's their burden in this case.
          Now, who did they bring to address this
      question?  Nobody.  Dr. Henningfield didn't even
      address this question.  They brought nobody.
          And you can't skip over it.  Every
      instruction, everything I'm showing you you will
      have in the jury room, every one.
          So in order to know the answer to this
      question you've got to ask yourself, so was addiction why Mr. Blasco developed his lung
      cancer and died?  Is that why he kept smoking?
      Or did he keep smoking because he enjoyed
      smoking?  Did he keep smoking because that was a
      lifestyle choice that he made for himself?  Now,
      let's look at the evidence that was presented in
      this case.
          Every time I quote somebody, that's who's
      saying it, and this is exactly where the court
      reporter created in the trial transcript what
      was said so there's no question about what I'm
      putting up.
          This is Mrs. Blasco.  I asked, "In fact,
      when you met him, you couldn't stand the smell
      of the smoke of his cigarettes.
          "No.
          "And, in fact, you told him that.  You told
      him you didn't want him smoking around
      you because" --
          This is 1953, right?
          -- "because you didn't like the smell of his
      cigarettes?
          "Yes.  But he told me that I had met him
      that way, smoking."
          This is 1953.  He's been smoking for a decade.
          "Right.  So he intended to keep on smoking
      because that's the way he was when you met him.
          "Yes.
          "And Mr. Blasco enjoyed smoking when you met
      him, didn't he?
          "Yes."
          This is Mrs. Blasco.
          Why is he smoking?  There's the answer right
      there, because he enjoyed smoking and he
      intended to keep on doing it.
          And this is going to go right on through,
      I'm going to move pretty quickly because I only
      have a limited am of time and an awful lot of
      boards because there was an awful lot of
      testimony on this.
          Remember she got married and she found out
      he was smoking in bed.
          "Now, you said to Mr. Alvarez that he would
      smoke two or three cigarettes before he would
      get out of bed in the morning."
          You know he said it takes 10 to 15 minutes
      to smoke a cigarette so he would apparently stay
      in bed for 30, 45 minutes getting out of bed.
      That's the testimony. "Yes.
          "So he liked to stay in bed for a while in
      the morning, didn't he?
          "Yes.
          "All right.  This was his style.
          "Yes."
          This is Mr. Blasco's style.
          "And then you said he would smoke some
      cigarettes before he went to bed at night.
          "Yes.
          "He liked to get in bed and spend some time
      in bed before he went to sleep?
          "Yes.
          "That's just the way he liked to live his
      life?
          "Yes.
          "Right.  And didn't you tell me, hey, I
      don't like the smell of the smoke in the car and
      I wish you wouldn't do it?
          "Yes, I would tell him, but he continued
      smoking."
          I'll get the system down yet.  Probably not.
          Still Mrs. Blasco.  There's so much
      Mrs. Blasco testimony here.
          "Did you say to your husband, look, I don't want you smoking American cigarettes in Cuba now
      because you could be put in jail?"
          Do you remember that?
          "Yes, but he continued to buy them.
          "Did he give you any explanation as to why
      he was willing to risk going to jail just to buy
      American cigarettes?
          "Because he liked them."
          Because he liked them.
          "Mr. Blasco never had any desire to quit
      smoking in the '50s or the '60s while you were
      dating him or married to him in Cuba, did he?
          "Never."
          This is Mrs. Blasco's testimony.  "Never."
          If he started smoking in 1953 -- I'm sorry,
      1943 and he continued to smoke in Cuba until
      1967, what is that?  24 years?  Maybe that's not
      good math, but pretty close.
          "Did Mr. Blasco tell you that he enjoyed
      smoking his Winstons in Puerto Rico?
          "Yes."
          Yes.  Was there any evidence -- I heard
      Mr. Alvarez say, oh, why does he switch to
      Winstons in Puerto Rico?  We have no idea.
      Nobody came here and told you why he switched to Winstons in Puerto Rico.  It was a mystery,
      wasn't it?  I mean, he switches from
      Chesterfield that he was willing to go to prison
      to smoke and then all of a sudden he gets in
      Puerto Rico and he switches to Winstons.  And
      there was no explanation.  It was a mystery.
      But now Mr. Alvarez has an answer for that.
          More testimony.
          "Did Mr. Blasco ever try to quit smoking
      while you were in Puerto Rico was the question.
          "No."
          "Well, he told you many, many times when you
      would talk to him that he didn't want to stop
      smoking either, didn't he?
          "Yes.
          "And, in fact, he would tell you that he
      didn't want you to talk to him anymore about
      quitting smoking, didn't he?
          "Yes."
          That's in the '80s.  I mean, I've walked you
      straight on through.  We've been in Cuba.  We've
      been in Puerto Rico.  Now we're in the United
      States.  She's saying he tried to quit.
          "Well, he told you many, many times when you
      would talk to him that he didn't want to stop smoking either, didn't he?
          "Yes.
          "And, in fact, he would tell you that he
      didn't want you to talk to him anymore about
      quitting smoking, didn't he?
          "Yes."
          These are decisions that we make.  This is
      how we live our lives.
          "The times that he would hand you the
      cigarettes and tell you to take them was in
      connection with you telling him you wanted him
      to quit smoking, wasn't it?
          "Yes.
          "And the times that he would stop smoking
      for two or three days were in connection with
      you telling him you wanted him to stop smoking,
      weren't they?
          "Yes...
          "And Mr. Blasco continued to tell you that
      he enjoyed smoking.
          "Yes."
          Whose idea was it to quit?  You know the
      answer to that.
          Look at these pictures.  And I said, so
      there's you're husband he's enjoying smoking and drinking beer at a festival, right?
          "Yes.
          "Something he enjoyed doing.
          "Yes.
          "But there he is having beers and smoking
      cigarettes.
          "Yes, we were on vacation."
          That's what he enjoyed doing, isn't it?
          I need this again because the next board
      there's more.
          "Looks like he's having a cup of coffee and
      there's his package of -- those are Marlboros,
      aren't they?
          "Yes.
          "And he enjoyed having coffee and
      cigarettes, didn't he?
          "Yes.
          "If we went all the way back to Cuba, he
      enjoyed from the time you got married to him and
      were spending mornings with him, he enjoyed
      having a cigarette with his coffee in the
      morning, didn't he?
          "Yes.
          "He liked to have his cigarette after
      dinner, didn't he? "Yes.
          "He liked to have a cigarette after
      breakfast in the morning, didn't he?
          "Yes."
          Ladies and gentlemen, these are the choices
      that you get to make.  These are the choices,
      whether it's cigarettes, alcohol, these are
      substances that have danger, there's no question
      they can be addicting, they can cause you to get
      sickness and die.  But we've made the decision
      as a society that these are legal products and
      you get to use them if you choose to.  Nobody
      puts a gun to your head and says you've got to
      smoke this or you've got to drink this.  Whether
      it's beers, alcohol, or cigarettes, these are
      choices that we make.
          "Now, when you said to your husband in the
      '80s you wanted him to quit smoking, did you
      ever suggest to him that he go to a stop-smoking
      clinic?
          "No."
          You know why not, because she said he didn't
      want to go, wouldn't go.
          Remember they lived across the street from a
      physician, Dr. Gala. "Did you ever say to your husband, why don't
      you walk across the street and ask Dr. Gala to
      help you quit smoking?
          "No.
          "When Dr. Gala was at your house" --
          Remember, Dr. Gala would come over.
      Dr. Gala was a cardiologist and family practice
      physician.  Dr. Gala has children who grew up
      with their children.  Dr. Gala would be in their
      house.
          And I said, "When Dr. Gala was at your
      house, did you ever say, Dr. Gala, my husband is
      having difficulty quitting smoking, can you help
      him?
          "No.
          "Is the reason why you never did that
      because you knew your husband wouldn't go to
      Dr. Gala?
          "No.
          "Why didn't you suggest that to your
      husband?
          "Because I never thought of it."
          "And did you say to him," talking to her
      husband, "I want you to quit smoking while
      you're receiving treatment?" Remember, there was a question, why did he
      continue to smoke after he was diagnosed?  Why
      did he do that?  Did he do that because he was
      addicted?  And you heard Dr. Dosovitz explaining
      that.
          "And did you say to him, I want you to quit
      smoking while you're receiving treatment?
          "Yes.
          "And did he tell you, I don't want to stop
      smoking, I want to smoke now?"
          And the answer is "Yes."
          You know what, we get to make that decision.
          "And after he knew that he wasn't going to
      get cured, did he tell you he absolutely wanted
      to keep smoking because that's what gave him
      pleasure in life?"
          That's what gave him pleasure in life.
          "Yes, and what he had left, he could no
      longer walk, because that way he would die to
      his pleasure, smoking.
          "Because that's what had given him pleasure
      in life, right?
          "Yes."
          Right up to the end.  I walked you from Cuba
      to the end of his life. And here was Mrs. Gonzalez.  This is the
      most important thing Mrs. Gonzalez had to say.
      This was the friend of the family.  And she was
      there when Mr. Blasco quit smoking on occasions.
      And this is the question that she was asked and
      this testimony was read to you.  You can have it
      read back if you want.
          "When Elba was deposed and she was asked
      about when she and others would encourage
      Mr. Blasco to stop smoking, she responded that
      he wouldn't pay attention to anybody about
      cigarettes, he would continue smoking.  Is that
      your recollection as well?"
          She said, "I know we encouraged him, then he
      ended up smoking within a few days, so obviously
      he blew us off."
          He blew us off.
          Now, this is a friend of the family.  She
      has no stake in this case.  And that was a
      friend of the family speaking about her
      experience watching Mr. Blasco return to
      smoking.
          Could Mr. Blasco have quit smoking if he had
      wanted to?  Here's what the American Cancer
      Society has to say, Smart Move.  This is their brochure on what it takes to takes to quit
      smoking, three things.
          Do you want to stop smoking?
          Well, the first question, ask yourself right
      now after all this testimony, did Mr. Blasco
      want to stop smoking?  You know the answer to
      that as you sit here right now.
          Was he willing to make changes to his daily
      routine?
          Obviously not.
          Are you willing to put up with some uneasy
      moments after stopping?
          Clearly he was not.
          So now back to the question.  You know the
      requirement of their burden of making addiction
      a legal cause of why Mr. Blasco got his lung
      cancer and died.  What's the answer?  You know
      why he kept on smoking.  Why did he keep on
      smoking?  Because he enjoyed smoking and did not
      want to quit.  So what's the answer to this
      question?  The answer to this question is no.
      And if you agree with that then you proceed no
      further, sign this verdict form and your work is
      done.  Your work is done.
          Now, that's what the evidence shows.  You guys have to come to a conclusion.  If you
      disagree with that then you have to go on, you
      have to go on and answer the rest of the
      questions.
          The next question, I have I think four
      questions here.  "Was smoking Philip Morris'
      cigarettes a legal cause of Mr. Blasco's lung
      cancer and death?
          Again, you see this requirement of legal
      cause.
          For the Philip Morris cigarettes to be a
      legal cause of Mr. Blasco's lung cancer and
      death those Philip Morris cigarettes have to
      have been a substantial reason, they have to
      have either produced or been a substantial cause
      to why Mr. Blasco got his lung cancer.  How
      substantial?  That if he hadn't smoked Philip
      Morris manufactured cigarettes he wouldn't have
      gotten his lung cancer.
          When did Mr. Blasco begin smoking
      Philip Morris manufactured cigarettes?  You
      know, there's a great debate about that.
      Mrs. Blasco said -- you remember her deposition,
      it was sometime after he came to the United
      States. Was it before or after her daughter got
      married in 1984?
          And she said, you know what, now I know for
      sure that it was in 1972.  It was shortly after
      we came to the United States.
          And I said, why?
          And she said, because I've seen this
      picture, I've seen this picture and I know that
      those were Marlboros in that picture.
          And so I asked her -- remember we did this,
      and I said, where are the Marlboros in this
      picture that convinced you that your husband was
      smoking in the early '70s in the United States?
          And I said, is it this white pack here?  Is
      it this?
          And she said, no, no.
          And she had me point -- remember we had it
      way out, she had me point, remember we had it
      way out and it turned out to be his shirt
      pocket.  It turned out to be his shirt pocket.
          So when did Mr. Blasco begin to smoke
      cigarettes?  That's the only reason why she now
      knew it was in the early '70s.
          When did he start smoking?  Why is this
      important?  It's important because of a couple of questions that Hassia asked Dr. Abel, their
      expert.
          The question was, when did the cancer start
      in his body?  And Mr. Alvarez said, well, he
      knows when it was.  It couldn't have been 10 or
      20 years ago.  But that's not what their expert
      said.  Here's what their expert said.
          Dr. Abel's testimony was, "Based on the
      records we have, you can't tell when the lung
      cancer originated in Mr. Blasco's body, right?
      I'm talking about originated at the cellular
      level."
          That's how cancer starts.
          "There's no way to tell when it originated.
          "No way I can tell.  No way you can tell.
          "Exactly.  No way anybody can tell that,
      right?
          "Right."
          So then the next question was -- Because you
      all have heard about people who quit smoking and
      a decade later, two decades later they still get
      lung cancer, don't they, because it's called a
      latent disease?
          And so Hassia asked that very question of
      Dr. Abel.  She said, "So let me ask the question again, Doctor.  Have you had, in your practice
      have you had patients who quit smoking for 20
      years and still developed lung cancer?
          "I'm not sure if 20 years, certainly 10
      years.  But, you know, we examine the data, you
      get off the elevator ride and you keep your
      risk.  So I'm sure they're out there."
          20 years.
          I'm sure they're out there that have
      developed cancer -- and I've seen them for 10
      years.
          So if Mr. Blasco didn't begin smoking
      Philip Morris manufactured cigarettes until 1972
      and he's diagnosed in 1991, we've got people 20
      years, that's 1971, when he's still living in
      Puerto Rico and he hasn't smoked a Marlboro yet.
      If it's 10 years and he didn't begin smoking
      Marlboros until the mid '80s...
          Who's got the burden of proof on this?
      Hassia didn't need to prove that.  Who has the
      burden of proof on this issue?  Not
      Philip Morris.  And that's their expert who said
      that.
          So what's the answer to this question --
      remember, it's a balance.  Who brought bigger evidence?  Did they overcome that mountain from
      their own expert?  I didn't even -- Hassia and I
      didn't even bring a doctor because we knew he
      would say that.
          So what's the answer to this question?  The
      answer to this question is no, they didn't
      satisfy their legal cause requirement because
      their own expert said, I don't know when the
      cancer started and I know that there are people
      who have cancer in their bodies for 10 or 20
      years after they've quit smoking.  That's a
      fact.
          Next two questions.  These questions are
      about -- you still have to go on and answer
      questions regardless of how you answer that one.
      That's what the evidence shows in response to
      that question.
          Questions 4 and 5, in order to answer these
      questions about reasonably relying, see that
      word "rely," to his detriment, that means he has
      to make a decision to his detriment on a
      statement by Philip Morris that concealed or
      omitted material information concerning the
      health effects so that the reliance was a legal
      cause of his death.  The same thing applies here for some act in furtherance of the agreement
      they're talking about, they still have to show
      that Mr. Blasco reasonably relied on something
      that was said.  This is where we're talking
      about legal cause, reasonable reliance, is it
      something that Mr. Blasco heard or saw, did it
      touch him?  But it has to do more than touch
      him.  It has to be something that substantially
      influenced him.  How substantially?  So
      substantially that Mr. Blasco would not have
      done what he did, he wouldn't have begun
      smoking, he wouldn't have continued to smoke, he
      would have quit smoking and quit smoking in time
      to avoid his lung cancer.
          Did they show you that?  They don't even
      mention, they don't even mention a cigarette
      company in the United States in Mr. Blasco's
      life until sometime in the mid to late '80s when
      he's been smoking for what, 40 something years.
      40 something years.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge,
      mischaracterized the requirement by law.
          THE COURT:  Jury will listen to the evidence
      and the instructions and apply the law
      accordingly. MR. REILLY:  Well, I'm just reading it right
      to you, so there you have it.
          Here's the requirement of the reliance being
      a legal cause.
          Now, in order to answer these two questions
      you really have to know how Mr. Blasco lived his
      life, right?  You need to know, well, is there
      some connection between Philip Morris -- for the
      conspiracy question -- Philip Morris or some
      other U.S. cigarette manufacturer?  Was he
      really being influenced in some material way?
      Did he reasonably rely on something that was
      said?  Well, you've got to walk through
      Mr. Blasco's life.  And that's what I'm going to
      do right now.  That's what I'm going to do right
      now.
          Mr. Blasco was born in 1931 in Cuba.  He
      wasn't born here in the United States.  And
      there isn't even an allegation of conspiracy
      until 1953.  1953.  There's no claim that
      Mr. Blasco was caused to begin smoking
      cigarettes by Philip Morris, no claim.  None.
          In the 1940s what is being told to the Cuban
      population about American cigarettes?  You can't
      even find an ad.  There isn't even an ad in this case from the 1940s regarding a cigarette
      company in the United States.  They had less
      than 1 percent of the market, 1 percent of the
      market.  I'll show you that their own expert
      Dr. Proctor agreed with that.
          Here's Dr. Proctor.  "And from the Cuban
      manufacturing standpoint Cuban cigarette
      manufacturing standpoint, as of 1945 American
      cigarettes comprised less than 1 percent of the
      total Cuban market, right?
          "It was very tiny, yeah."
          Very tiny, yeah.
          So when they talk about the atmosphere that
      was created by cigarette companies, who was
      creating an atmosphere about smoking in Cuba?
      Who has 99 plus percent of the market in Cuba?
      Cuban cigarette companies.
          You heard Mrs. Blasco talk about all the
      brands of cigarettes in Cuba that were for sale,
      Cuban cigarettes.  And how proud -- you know
      this is the number one industry in Cuba.
          Yeah, we put in evidence, Bohemia magazines.
      Can you find ads for American products in
      La Bohemia?  You bet.  Look at those magazines,
      you can find ads for tires, for cars, find ads for American cigarettes, because, guess what?
      There aren't ads for cigarettes.  Yeah, I think
      they found 20 ads or 30 ads after combing
      everywhere for a decade.  A decade.
          I gave you the whole magazines.  They're
      filled with Cuban cigarette ads.  Why?  Because
      they have 97 percent of the market.  Makes
      sense, right?
          We'll talk more about that in just a minute.
          Bottom line, when does Mr. Blasco begin
      smoking?  He begins smoking in the early '40s.
      How do we know?  Because we know from Electo
      Reyes.  What's being said to him by his buddies
      when he begins smoking?  Is he being encouraged
      to smoke?
          "Once Eddie was smoking and you would see
      him after school" -- I'm sorry.
          I've got this one out of order.
          What were his friends telling him?
          "Okay.  Now you were talking about all of
      Eddie's friends, including you, told Eddie to
      stop smoking.
          "Yes, they did.
          "Prior to him moving to Havana was the
      question.  Did anybody else tell Eddie to stop smoking?
          "All his friends told him to quit doing it,
      to leave it alone because it's sick."
          Was there any evidence in this case that
      Mr. Blasco heard or saw any statement by any
      cigarette company from the United States in the
      '40s?  None, not one word in this case.
          Remember, reasonably rely, legal cause.
      These are requirements.  That's why you didn't
      hear about this during plaintiff's closing
      argument.  Because these are burdens that they
      have that you can't overlook because you have to
      follow the Court's instructions.
          Does he spend some time in the United
      States?  Yeah.  Yeah, here's his report card.
          When does he go there?  He enters on
      September 6th, 1948 from the Ministere de
      Educacion Instituto de Segunda Ensenanza.  He
      doesn't do well in school and guess what?
      Withdrew December 17, 1948.  He's there for
      three and a half months.
          Was he a regular smoker before he went to
      military school?  Sure.
          This is Electo Reyes testimony.
          "Once Eddie was smoking and you would see him after school for about an hour and a half,
      how many cigarettes would you see Eddie smoke at
      that time?
          "Two or three cigarettes".
          So here he is before he even goes to Havana
      he's smoking two or three cigarettes in an hour
      and a half after school.
          All right.  That's the '40s.
          Let's go to the '50s.  You know, that the
      Blascos meet each other in 1953.  You know that
      at that point he's already smoking, he's already
      a regular smoker.  He's smoking Chesterfields.
      Not made by Philip Morris, right?  Made by
      Liggett.  And you saw Liggett's lawyer here at
      the beginning of this trial when you were being
      selected.  They're not here anymore.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. REILLY:  At that point in time
      Mrs. Blasco asks him to -- tell him to quit --
      asks him to quit.  And what's he say?  You
      already saw the testimony.  No.  You met me I
      was a smoker, you got me as a smoker.
          We talked about advertising for American
      cigarettes in Cuba.  Here's what Electo Reyes had to say about advertising for American
      cigarettes.
          "Did you recall seeing any print
      advertisements for American cigarette brands in
      Cuba before the revolution?
          "No.
          "Do you recall seeing any television
      advertisements for American Brands in Cuba
      before the revolution?
          "No.
          "Do you remember hearing any radio
      advertisements for American Brands in Cuba
      before the revolution?
          "No.
          "After the revolution do you recall seeing
      any ads, any print ads for cigarettes, for
      American cigarettes in Cuba?
          "Oh, no, even less then."
          Did Mrs. Blasco say something different?
          "And, in fact, rarely were there any ads in
      Cuban magazines or newspapers for American
      cigarettes, were there?
          "Yes, there were.
          "Yes, I understand.  But rarely, right?
          "Yes." Rarely.  Rarely.  Is this some major
      influence?  Well, you'd think that if you
      advertised heavily in Cuba you might get more
      than 2.75 of the market, but that's all they
      ever had.
          Now, Mr. Alvarez spent a great deal of time,
      90 percent of his presentation in his closing a
      argument was spent talking about things that
      were said in the United States by American
      cigarette manufacturers.  Frank Statement,
      company statements, speeches, articles.  Was
      there any evidence that any of that ever
      appeared in Cuba?  None.
          He gets to get back up.  He's got 12 minutes
      after I sit down.  He's got 12 minutes to come
      up here and say, well, here are the articles
      that reflected American cigarette companies'
      positions on whether smoking had been proven to
      cause lung cancer in Cuba, in Puerto Rico in the
      '60s or early -- '50s, '60s, early '70s.  There
      are none.  There are none.
          And, in fact, you may or may not remember
      this, but several of the videos that Mr. Alvarez
      showed you, remember the two guys from
      Philip Morris and then the last guy, the guy that was giving a deposition?  Remember these
      instructions that were given to you by Judge
      Blake just before both those videos were shown.
          Regarding the Philip Morris one, it says,
      "Ladies and gentlemen, you're about to see a
      portion of a recorded interview given by two
      Philip Morris executives in 1976.  This
      recording was never broadcast in Florida or
      anywhere else where Mr. Blasco could have seen
      it.  There is no allegation Mr. Blasco ever saw
      this recording or that Mr. Blasco ever relied on
      it when making decisions whether to smoke or
      refrain from smoking."
          This is their burden, ladies and
      gentlemen -- gentleman.
          How about the fellow giving his deposition?
      "All right, ladies and gentlemen, you're about
      to see a recorded deposition given by a former
      executive from a tobacco company called the
      American Tobacco Company.  This deposition was
      used in a court case in 1987 that was never
      broadcast.  There is no allegation that
      Mr. Blasco ever saw this recording or that he
      relied on it when making decisions whether to
      smoke or refrain from smoking." In the '50s was a tobacco company talking
      about the health risks of smoking to Cubans?
      Sure.  Their Dr. Proctor with a document
      Mrs. Blasco's lawyers gave him had this
      Perfectos Habana cigars ad from the Gente
      magazine in 1958 in which Perfectos said "There
      is no doubt that Cuban cigarettes are to be
      considered the purest and healthiest in the
      world and are also lower in cost than,"
      et cetera, et cetera.
          ..."cleaning and purifying process."
          And that American cigarettes cause chronic
      bronchitis and reproductive organ problems for
      women.
          Yeah, there was -- and you have an
      instruction from Judge Blake that says this
      didn't involve Cuban cigarette companies this
      conspiracy that they're talking about.
          So that is what cigarette company -- that's
      the only evidence in this case as to what a
      cigarette company was telling Cuban smokers in
      Cuba in the '50s, that's it.
          We put in evidence articles from Selecciones
      telling consumers and Mr. Blasco, because he
      read Selecciones, Mrs. Blasco said so, and La Bohemia and Diaro De La Marina.  Articles in
      which there was a discussion of the health
      effects of cigarette smoking.
          The science begins in 1950, grows in '53,
      grows some more, you saw the Life Magazine,
      grows some more where the Cuban people being
      informed of these advances in science connecting
      smoking with lung cancer.
          Yeah, you're going to see not only the
      articles, but the translations.  I know that
      some of you I'm sure speak and read Spanish, for
      those that don't there will be translations on
      these exhibits.  Is there any statement of
      denial in those records from people from the
      United States?  No.  None.
          Remember the obligation, reasonable reliance
      it's got to touch him, it's got to touch
      Mr. Blasco, he's got to see it, he's got to hear
      it, he's got to believe it, he's got to rely on
      it and it has to affect his decision whether
      he's going to smoke, continue smoking or not.
          1959, they marry.  When they get married
      Mr. Blasco is smoking in bed.  You saw the
      references to when he smokes in bed, when he's
      getting up in the morning, when he's going to bed at night.  Mrs. Blasco asks him don't do it.
      He says, you know what, I'm going to keep doing
      it.
          How about risks of cigarettes?
          That Gente article announced that Cuban
      cigarettes were safe, right?  But Dr. Proctor
      knew that wasn't right.  Their expert said -- he
      agreed with "the Surgeon General has addressed
      whether dark tobacco," which Cuban cigarettes
      are made of, "is more dangerous and more
      addicting than American brands, hasn't it?
          "That's right.  That's been one conclusion,
      yes.
          "Well, that's the Surgeon General's
      conclusion, isn't it?
          "Yes, that's right."
          Cuban cigarettes with dark tobacco are more
      addicting and more dangerous than American
      Brands.  That's more dangerous and more
      addicting.
          Here are some of the articles that we've put
      in evidence for you.  "Cancer of the lung."
      United States Congress, information in the
      United States Congress regarding the dangers of
      cigarettes.  You'll see it. And is Mr. Blasco somebody who reads
      La Bohemia?  Yes.  Is he somebody who reads
      Selecciones?  Yes.  Is he somebody who reads
      Diaro De La Marina?  Yes.
          Is he intelligent?  Yes.  Does he keep
      abreast of current developments?  Yes.
          Is there any reason to believe that
      Mr. Blasco doesn't have this knowledge?  No.
          Is there ever a moment -- well, 1960s,
      Mr. Blasco, the revolution is successful.  Now
      Mr. Blasco is buying Chesterfields on the black
      market, still not manufactured by Philip Morris.
      Cuban tobacco industry is nationalized.  You
      can't even buy American cigarettes in Cuba
      anymore unless you buy them from on the black
      market from the mafia, as Mr. Reyes said.
          But if -- matter of fact, here's the article
      in one of the Bohemia magazines that you have.
      This is the April 10th, 1960, you have it.
      There's this little picture, you can see it.  I
      forget what page it's on.  But it says there's
      not one American cigarette left in the entire
      country.  "Capital fight has broken the local
      habit of blowing 'yankee smoke.'"
          There's a huge nationalism of the sugar and tobacco industry in Cuba.  So they're very
      opposed to smoking American cigarettes, yet
      we're told that Mr. Blasco continued to do it
      because he enjoyed it.
          Okay.  He enjoys them regardless of whether
      or not they're going to be very expensive.
          After the revolution it was illegal to buy
      American cigarettes in Cuba.  This is from
      Electo Reyes.  "I think.  I seem to remember, I
      have a vague idea that nothing in America was
      allowed into the country.
          "Where would you have to buy American
      cigarettes after the revolution?
          "To the Guantanamo, the naval base in
      Guantanamo.  And if they caught you they would
      put you in jail.  So if you wanted to buy
      American cigarettes, you had to buy them from
      the gray market in Cuba.  You'd have to go to
      the mafia."
          You know that he leaves and goes to -- the
      family leaves -- oh, by the way, in 1966 if he's
      smoking Chesterfields, then every package, and
      if they came from the United States every
      package has got to have this "Caution:
      Cigarette smoking maybe hazardous to your health" on it.  So if he's smoking two packs a
      day, 40 cigarettes a day or two and a half or
      three, whatever the number is, how many times a
      day does he take a cigarette out of the pack?
      How many times a day does he have the
      opportunity to look at that language from his
      Chesterfield pack of cigarettes?
          Now, you can choose to ignore it, but it's
      there.  And whether you believe it or not you at
      least are given the opportunity to be aware of
      the health risks, to be aware.  Then you make
      your decision.
          1967 they arrive in Puerto Rico.  They move
      to Caguas.  He switches to Winstons.  We have no
      idea why.  All we know is he switches to
      Winstons and he smokes Winstons from there on
      out until 1972 when he comes to the United
      States.
          But now we have that very personal and very
      powerful experience that he has when Electo
      Reyes has the throat nodules.  You remember?  He
      was smoking cigars and so he  -- the doctors
      tell him, hey, those maybe cancerous.  So he
      announces to all of his buddies including
      Mr. Blasco, don't smoke, quit smoking.  I may have cancer of the throat.
          This is what he said.
          "Since Ms. Blasco listed you as a witness,
      everything you know concerning Eddie, his
      life --
          "Blasco and I were buddies from time to time
      when we were in Cuba.  We were 11 or 12 years
      old and I would insist, because he's been
      smoking from the time he was 12 or 13 years old,
      I would tell him not to smoke, but he never paid
      any attention to what I told him.  I smoked
      cigars, but one day I developed some nodules
      here in my throat.  Yes, unfortunately, and the
      doctors told me, thank heavens, that those were
      benign.
          "However, the doctors set an example for me.
      He told me that, you know, when you take a piece
      of meat and put it on broil that it's going to
      burn up very quickly.  If I put it on bake it
      will eventually burn, but it will take longer.
      And I gave that example to Eddie.
          "So I haven't smoked now for I don't know
      how many years, but Eddie didn't pay any
      attention to me."
          Was Mrs. Blasco telling Mr. Blasco when he lived in Puerto Rico that she wanted him to quit
      smoking?
          "Were you ever present when Elba told
      Eduardo to stop smoking?
          "Once or twice.
          "And that was in Miami?
          "In Puerto Rico, the one or two times that I
      saw them."
          All right.  Let's go to the '70s.  Now
      there's a warning on every pack.  In fact, if
      you look at instruction 20, you receive on
      instruction 20 -- do we have that on the screen?
      We have it on a board.  One more board.  You
      thought I was one short.
          Instruction 20, the warning labels placed on
      cigarette advertisements and packs by
      Philip Morris and other tobacco companies
      complied with federal law.  After July 1, 1969
      Philip Morris had no obligation to place any
      additional warnings on their cigarette
      advertisements or packages.
          That's this warning, ladies and gentlemen.
      "Warning:  The Surgeon General has determined
      that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your
      health." Dangerous to your health.
          Does that cause Mr. Blasco to stop smoking
      or even consider stop smoking?  You already saw
      the testimony from his wife, he had no interest
      in quitting smoking in the '50s, '60s, '70s,
      until sometime in the middle or late '80s.  And
      that was because she wanted him to quit.
          Before they ever moved to the United States
      there's no more cigarette advertising on
      television.  Remember I asked Dr. Proctor, by
      the time they moved to the United States the
      Surgeon General's Report was out eight years
      earlier, smoking is on the decline, per capita
      level of smoking in the United States has
      already declined.  And there have been tens of
      millions of people who have already quit smoking
      in the United States.
          Mrs. Blasco continues to talk to him about
      his smoking.  He has no interest in quitting
      smoking.
          There are public service announcements
      running on television in the '60s and '70s.
          Michael, do we have public service
      announcements?
          I think is the Talman.  I'm just going to play one from the '60s/'70s time frame, but they
      ran all the time.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  This is the house we live in.  This
      is Billy.  He's pretty handy to have around.
      Steve, home from college.  Barby looking after
      her brother Timmy.  Debbie, who will soon
      graduate from high school.  Susan, our youngest.
      And my wife Peggy, who looks after all of us.
      And that's me, Bill Talman with a friend of mine
      you might recognize.
          You know, I didn't really mind losing those
      courtroom battles, but I'm in a battle right now
      I don't want to lose at all.  Because if I lose
      it means losing my wife and those kids you just
      met.  I've got lung cancer, so take some advice
      about smoking and losing from someone who's been
      doing both for years.  If you don't smoke, don't
      start.  If you do smoke, quit.  Don't be a
      loser.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          THE CLERK:  Counsel, you have 25 more
      minutes.
          MR. REILLY:  Thank you.  Let me hurry on through.
          Let's go to the '80s.  Do people know that
      smoking causes lung cancer?  This is San Diego
      Tribune, January 17th, 1981.  Here's Dr.  David
      Burns.  He's the author of so many -- he's a
      significant public health figure, he's the
      author of so many Surgeon General's Reports.  He
      says, "It isn't that smokers don't know the
      risks.  In fact, 95 percent of them are
      thoroughly aware of the health dangers and 90
      percent of them realize that their health could
      be affected, according to Dr. David Burns."
          Somehow they are shoe-horning Mr. Blasco
      into the 5 percent that aren't thoroughly aware
      and the 10 percent that realize it and believe
      it.  Is there some reason to believe that
      Mr. Blasco somehow is such an oddball?
          More public service announcements.  I won't
      play more of them for you.  But Mrs. Soto moves
      down.  And Mrs. Soto is now joining the chorus
      of telling Mr. Blasco to quit smoking.  Does he
      ever say to Mrs. Soto or to Mrs. Blasco's
      brother Reynaldo Reyes [sic] that cigarette
      companies have convinced him to continue to
      smoke?  No, he never said that.  And Mrs. Blasco acknowledged that her husband never said that in
      front of those people.
          Warnings change in 1985, now the warning
      says explicitly "Smoking causes lung cancer."
          Did Mr. Blasco control his smoking?  Does he
      know that smoking comes with a health risk?
      Sure.  That's why when his granddaughter
      Christina comes and lives with the family, or
      stays with the family three months he's not
      smoking in the house.  Not smoking in the house.
          Unfortunately, he's diagnosed with lung
      cancer in 1991 and unfortunately dies in 1992.
          I won't spend the time to go again in detail
      through the reasonable reliance requirements but
      you know that they've got to prove that he
      relied on some statement, he has to reasonably
      rely, he has to hear it, he has to see it, he
      has to rely on it and then you have to find that
      it's a legal cause so that it can reasonably be
      said that but for that statement he would have,
      what?  Now that we're in the mid to late '80s,
      what?  That he would have quit smoking and
      avoided getting his lung cancer?  There's no
      evidence of that, ladies and gentlemen.  Same
      for reasonably relying on some statement in connection with the agreement, the conspiracy
      that they talk about.  Same requirements,
      reasonable reliance so that but for the
      reasonable reliance he wouldn't have gotten his
      lung cancer.  Was there any evidence of that in
      this case?  No.  The whole time that Mrs. Blasco
      is asking her husband to quit smoking he's
      saying, I don't want to quit, I enjoy smoking,
      I'm not interested in quitting.
          Advertising.  Mr. Alvarez talked about
      advertising.  I asked Mrs. Blasco, "But your
      husband never told you that he began smoking
      because of advertising of any kind, did he.
          "No.
          Matter of fact, Mr. Blasco never told you
      that advertising for cigarettes affected him in
      any way, did he?
          "No."
          How about, was there any evidence in this
      case that Mr. Blasco was deceived in any way?
          "During the time that you were dating your
      husband" -- I did this in segments.
          "During the time that you were dating your
      husband I guess until December of 1959, did you
      ever have a conversation with him about -- that he was taking a health risk by smoking?"
          "No."
          She never even talks to him about it.  I
      broke it down into this next segment.
          "In between the date of your marriage and
      January of 1960, you didn't talk to him about
      quitting smoking.
          "No.
          "And other than the fact that he said to you
      that he liked them, that he enjoyed them, he
      never gave you another reason why he chose
      Chesterfields as his brand in Cuba?
          "No."
          Talking about changing to Marlboros.
      Mr. Alvarez said it was due to ads.  I asked
      Mrs. Blasco directly, "Now, your husband never
      told you why he changed from Winstons to
      Marlboros whenever that happened, right?
          "No, never."
          Where's the evidence that Mr. Alvarez is
      relying on?  Certainly not in this case.
          "When you were living in Puerto Rico, did
      you ever talk about the health risks of smoking
      with your husband?
          "No. "While you were living in Puerto Rico, did
      your husband ever report to you that he had read
      or seen anything anywhere about the health risks
      of smoking?
          "No, because I never saw it."
          How about the '70s in the United States?
          "Did you talk to your husband about smoking
      at all in the '70s here in the United States?
          "No.
          "Now, sometime after you got here in the
      United States you began telling your husband
      that you thought he ought to quit smoking,
      right?
          "Yes, after the '80s."
          After the '80s.
          "And didn't you and Nora Soto talk about the
      fact that your husband should stop smoking for
      his health?
          "Yes.
          "And didn't you do that in front of your
      husband?
          "Yes.
          "But he never said to Nora Soto that he was
      going to continue smoking because somebody from
      a cigarette company told him that it was safe to smoke, did he?
          "I don't know if he told her.
          "While you were sitting there, he never said
      that to Mrs. Soto, did he?
          "No."
          So let's go back to these questions.  If you
      get this far on this verdict form, have they
      really shown you a bigger mountain of evidence
      than I just did?  That Mr. Blasco truly
      reasonably relied on something that
      Philip Morris or some other cigarette company,
      in this case Philip Morris said about the health
      risks of smoking such that he made a decision,
      to what?  Certainly not begin smoking or become
      a regular smoker, because that happened decades
      ago, right?
          So the only question here could be, did
      Mr. Blasco actually decide, reasonably rely on
      something that Philip Morris said to decide to
      continue to smoke in the '80s when he had
      already been smoking for 40 plus years?
          And you saw over and over and over again
      Mrs. Blasco saying, every time I talked to my
      husband he said he did not want to stop, he
      enjoyed smoking.  That's their burden of proof in this case.  Have they really proved that to
      your satisfaction, each and every one of you,
      really and truly?
          Hey, look, there is no doubt that everybody
      in this room feels sympathy for somebody who has
      lost a loved one.  That is the most natural
      thing on the planet.  But you receive an
      instruction from Judge Blake, it's contained in
      instruction 30, and this is what it says, "In
      reaching your verdict, do not let bias,
      sympathy, prejudice, public opinion, or any
      other sentiment for or against any party
      influence your decision.  Your verdict must be
      based on the evidence that has been received and
      the law on which I have instructed you."
          So that's what your job -- and I know it can
      be hard because, you know, our heartstrings are
      plucked.  We're human beings.  We can feel
      sadness for another human being.  We can feel
      sympathy.  But your job as jurors are hard
      sometimes and you have to set aside feelings of
      sympathy and just go on the evidence that was
      presented in the course of this trial and the
      law as Judge Blake gave it to you in the
      instructions and these questions on the verdict form.
          So what are the answers to questions 4 and
      5?  They're clearly no.  The man is in Cuba.
      The man is in Puerto Rico.  There's no evidence
      of any involvement, no touching, no hearing, no
      seeing.  The most you have in this case is a
      very vague statement by Mrs. Blasco sometime in
      the mid to late '80s where he said something to
      her about some cigarette company executive said
      something that he heard.  But I asked her in
      detail, who was it?  What was it?  Do you know
      anything?  No, nothing.  Nothing.  And nobody
      else heard him ever say that.
          So now what's the mountain of evidence that
      they've brought that's bigger than what I just
      gave you?
          Let me go on to this -- so what are the
      answers to these questions?  These questions are
      so much easier.  These answers are no, on this
      fact.  You can be critical.  You can be doggone
      critical of Philip Morris, other cigarette
      manufacturers for clinging too long to whether
      or not smoking caused lung cancer or not or not
      agreeing with the Surgeon General in 1988, sure
      you can.  But that doesn't get a verdict in this case.  And you see why.  This is the judge's
      rules.  You see this as the law of Florida.
          Now, if you get this far you have to assign
      responsibility.  And Mr. Alvarez said put 85
      percent of the responsibility for Mr. Blasco's
      decisions on Philip Morris.  He doesn't even
      smoke cigarettes -- the decisions he makes in
      smoking are to begin smoking, to continue
      smoking, to become a regular smoker, to smoke
      for decades.  He can't possibly have even
      touched a Philip Morris manufactured cigarette
      until when?  At the earliest 1972.  But if you
      don't believe that there's a Marlboro pack of
      cigarettes in that photograph it's probably the
      mid '80s, right?
          He's in the last, what, five, six, seven
      years of his smoking career probably when he
      starts smoking Marlboros.
          Every day when Mr. Blasco wakes up and he
      looks in the mirror, according to Mr. Alvarez,
      he's in a little tiny piece of the mirror and
      Philip Morris is completely occupies the mirror
      practically.  Is that the way we live our lives?
      Is that who makes our decisions every morning
      when we decide how we're going to live our lives when we wake up and wash our faces, take a
      shower, look in the mirror?  You don't leave
      your common sense at that door.  We don't let
      sympathy take away your common sense.  You can't
      do that.  I know it would be easy, but that's
      why we're in a court of law.
          I leave this to your sound discretion.  You
      know what, is there really anybody else in the
      mirror, really?  When we wake up in the morning
      and we look in the mirror and we say, this is
      how I'm going to live my -- whether it's we're
      going to drink cocktails, we're going to smoke
      cigarettes, we're going to gamble, who else is
      in the mirror really when we decide how we're
      going to live our lives?  I leave that to your
      sound discretion.
          Mr. Alvarez asked you for 12 million dollars
      in damages.  You know what, I don't think you
      get anywhere near this in the verdict form, but
      if you do, I leave that to your sound discretion
      too.  In light of all the evidence in this case,
      I don't think you get anywhere near any of these
      questions.  But if you do, use your sound
      judgment.  That's all I ask.
          All right.  Ladies and gentlemen, I'm done. And I greatly appreciate -- you all have been
      incredibly attentive during any closing
      argument.  I greatly appreciate it.  On behalf
      of Hassia and myself I thank you very much.  I
      sit down now, and I don't know whether it's
      going to be Mr. Alvarez or Mr. Freidin or who
      else, but they get another 12 minutes.  Why do
      they get that 12 minutes?  Because they have the
      burden of proof.  They have the obligation to
      persuade you that what I just went through is
      wrong.  So I don't know what they're going to
      get up and say.  Maybe they'll throw up some
      more old documents from Philip Morris or some
      other cigarette company from the '50s or the
      '60s, but ask yourself, the touch, where's the
      touch to Mr. Blasco?  You know what you have to
      do in terms of -- you have to be persuaded in
      terms of legal cause and reasonable reliance.
      You know what the obligation is.  Thank you very
      much.