          MR. FREIDIN:  Good morning.
          (Response was heard.)
          MR. FREIDIN:  I think the first thing to say
      is thank you.  We're aware of what you've done
      and how much you've been here and how much
      attention you've paid.  And certainly on behalf
      of Mrs. Blasco she wants to thank you and all
      the lawyers on both sides.  Thank you.
          Jury service is a very special thing.  When
      we go to vote, that's very special, but as we
      know, we can often be one of thousands, if not
      millions.  But today, of course, you are the law
      on what is pretty much sort of historic in a
      very significant case.  I think you all are
      aware of that.
          So your position as a juror --
          MR. REILLY:  I object, Your Honor, reference
      to historic.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. FREIDIN:  Your position as a juror, as a
      citizen is an honor as well as a responsibility, but I feel honored to be able to speak to you
      about this for a few minutes.
          I'm going to talk about the first part of
      the case, which is the class membership.
      Mr. Alvarez will then speak about the rest of
      the case.
          Class membership is the area in which the
      question is whether or not, essentially,
      Mrs. Blasco, or through her husband, would be
      entitled to even come here and bring a case and
      bring up all these issues.  We try this
      together, but basically it's really nothing more
      than this, a key to the courthouse.  Class
      membership is nothing more than a key to open
      the door and say, now can I come in and hear my
      case?
          The reason why there are requirements for
      class membership, quite simple.  In order to
      bring a case against Philip Morris, you have to
      demonstrate that you satisfy certain criteria.
      But basically what you would think of as not a
      class action or class membership would be
      somebody who smoked a handful of cigarettes a
      year or hardly ever smoked.  That would be
      somebody who really doesn't fit the category of a cigarette smoker that should be in the class,
      not someone who is smoking two to three or three
      packs a day.
          And the second part of it is that if
      somebody has a disease that you would be sort of
      sorting that out and say, well, this is not even
      something that you get from smoking; not
      something that we have in this case either.
          So basically class membership is just the
      idea, can they come in and make their case to
      you?  Can Mrs. Blasco make her case to you about
      what happened -- which Mr. Alvarez is going to
      talk about at length, about what was done, what
      was not done, all those things?
          And it's not about certain other things.
      It's not about who's at fault, class membership.
      It's not about what choices were made.
          Perfect.
          Those issues will be discussed when
      Mr. Alvarez gets up and when Mr. Reilly speaks,
      but for the first three questions that you're
      going to have, or three of the first four
      questions, which are class membership questions,
      and they're labelled as such on the verdict
      form, those issues don't concern class membership.  Once you have class membership you
      get to those issues.  But when you're answering
      the three questions on class membership, they
      have nothing to do with it.
          When you decide things -- I'm going to kind
      of do some of this on there.  The judge
      discussed burden of proof with you.  Earlier on,
      I can't remember exactly when it was he used the
      expression, we have to tip the scales when we
      have a burden of proof.  Burden of proof on the
      plaintiff, that's us, is to take the scales of
      justice and tip them.  Another way of putting
      it, as he has told you, is by the greater weight
      of the evidence.  But that's really, if the
      scales are loaded and they just tip, which one
      has the greater weight.  It doesn't have to be
      90 percent or 95 percent or beyond a reasonable
      doubt, which is a criminal case, just needs to
      be 51 percent, just tip the scales.  That's what
      greater weight of the evidence is.
          And you'll see that the burden of proof will
      switch back to Mr. Reilly on the issue of
      comparative negligence, that's his affirmative
      defense.  So he'll have the burden of proof on
      that.  But in terms of class membership and in terms of our case, burden of proof is simply
      tipping the scales, 51 percent.
          I want you to know that -- let me show the
      two questions that we're going to start with.
      Number 4.
          Of course I've taken the liberty of checking
      "yes" there.  This is your decision, but it if
      the answers are no then the case is over.
      There's no key.  You're saying that the key
      doesn't open the lock.  Mrs. Blasco cannot come
      into the case.
          And there's a third question, which we'll
      get to.
          In order to determine was he a member of the
      class, was he addicted to cigarettes, which I'm
      going to talk about in a few minutes, and was
      the addiction a legal cause.
          Now, it's important to note that a legal
      cause, I say a legal cause because it's not the
      legal cause, it's not the only legal cause, it's
      a legal cause.  And the judge instructed you and
      said, there can be other causes, it doesn't have
      to be the only cause.  A legal cause is a very
      important point.
          The instruction, which is number 3, Robert, please.
          You don't have to prove -- we don't have to
      prove that Mr. Blasco was a member of the
      class -- in order to prove he was a member of
      the class we do not have to prove that he was
      addicted to cigarettes manufactured by
      Philip Morris.  He could have been addicted to
      any of the cigarettes created by American
      manufacturers, any of them at any time.
      Remember, it's just to take the key and open the
      lock, that's all it is, to get into the
      courthouse.
          And for this purpose we don't have to prove
      that his addiction and death were caused by
      smoking Philip Morris cigarettes or any other
      particular brand.  Any American cigarettes in
      part of this group of cigarette companies would
      suffice.
          So we heard he smoked other cigarettes and
      so on.  For the purposes of the class action, no
      need to prove which brand caused addiction or
      death, which is the bottom thing on the red.
          Now, let's talk about whether he was
      addicted.  And I want to talk common sense first
      before I put anything on the board. We already heard from Dr. Dosovitz.  I'm not
      going to say that's the best source of
      information for you, but I'm going to say
      Dr. Dosovitz conceded, so if he conceded it you
      know you can bank on it, that Mr. Blasco was at
      the top end of the scale of smoking, smoking
      three packs a day.  Three packs a day.  He never
      heard of anyone smoking four packs a day.
          So let's just say, without having heard
      anything, using your common sense, whether
      someone is addicted if they smoke two packs or
      three -- he said two packs is a heavy smoker --
      three packs a day of cigarettes every day after
      the first initial few years of working your way
      up or working his way up to smoking, which takes
      a few years when they're teenagers.  He started
      as a kid and every day -- he smoked in bed.
          We can put that up, number 5, please.
          We compiled a list of some of the evidence
      in this case.  And ask yourself, just using the
      test of common sense, is this an addicted
      smoker?  He smoked regularly for 40 plus years.
      Truthfully I think it's closer to 50 because he
      started when he was an early teen and he smoked
      from like 1943 or '4 till 1992, close to 50 years, two or three packs a day.  I mean, his
      wife said many, many times it was three packs.
      It doesn't matter.
          I just want to show you what three packs of
      cigarettes, 60 cigarettes looks like.  And
      realize that is a lot of smoking in one day.
      And that's today, and then that's tomorrow, and
      that's the next day.  Until you get to the point
      where, as we showed, he smokes hundreds and
      hundreds and hundreds of thousands of
      cigarettes.
          So going along on this, smoking in the bed,
      Dr. Henningfield said, and he was quoting the
      FDA, Food and Drug Administration, he was
      quoting the Surgeon General, he was quoting the
      National Institute of Drug Addiction, he was
      quoting almost every organization.  The only
      person he wasn't quoting, who disagrees with him
      and who disagrees with all those organizations,
      is Dr. Dosovitz.  Dr. Henningfield, who has
      written 400 papers, who consulted with the
      Surgeon General, who consulted with the FDA, who
      consulted with the DSM, who consulted with
      almost every major organization dealing with
      tobacco addiction, said the two most important things are how much people smoke and when did
      they first smoke it.
          VIDEO TECH:  You want that slide?
          MR. FREIDIN:  No, I'll stay with this one.
      We'll come back to that.
          We know that he smoked in bed and we know
      that there was at least one episode where there
      was a fire.  Is this common sense that somebody
      is addicted?  He smoked at home.  He smoked
      several cigarettes before he left for work.  He
      smoked during his meals.  He smoked at work.  He
      smoked in his car.  He smoked the last thing at
      bed just before going to bed.  The cigarettes in
      the ashtray were on his nightstand.  He hid
      backup packs in his car so he wouldn't run out.
      He smoked one after the other like a chimney
      using sometimes the stub of one to light,
      another.  Common sense would say I don't need to
      hear anything about that.  That's an addicted
      smoker.  He's at the upper levels of what
      Dr. Dosovitz has seen.
          He risked going to jail in Cuba by smoking
      the American cigarettes.  After he was diagnosed
      with lung cancer -- now, this is something
      Dr. Dosovitz made a big deal out of, but let's think it through.  He said, well, he knew he was
      dying.  Well, he did not know he was dying when
      he was first diagnosed with lung cancer.  He
      only knew that or we may think he knew it, and,
      in fact, we don't know what he knew, but we know
      that when he first was diagnosed he did not have
      metastases and he did not believe he was going
      to die.  But during his radiation therapy, he'd
      finish the radiation therapy, you heard this
      testimony, and then he would smoke.  He was
      being burned by radiation then he would smoke.
      Is this common sense addiction?
          If this is not addiction, what is?
          Asked Dr. Dosovitz, is four packs addiction?
          He said, I can't tell.  I have to do three
      sessions at $375 a piece, maybe five sessions,
      then I'll first tell you if you're addicted.
          There's no definition of addiction except
      common sense really.  There are some criteria
      that people use.  The Fagerstrom is
      world-recognized, according to Dr. Henningfield,
      who himself is world-recognized.  And under the
      Fagerstrom we know what he scored.  By
      Dr. Dosovitz's scoring he was 8, highly
      addicted.  But he scores 10 if you follow the testimony of Mrs. Blasco.
          In addition to that, he was smoking just
      before he passed away.  Now, you say, okay, he
      didn't want to give it up.  Everybody said he
      was addicted.  And the testimony was that he
      tried to quit many, many times.
          Let's look at evidence of quit attempts,
      number 6.
          This is the evidence.  I'm just talking
      about evidence, the law and common sense.
      That's all I want to talk about.  I don't want
      to be argumentative.  I want to talk facts.
      That's all I'm going to talk about.
          Anxiety.  When he stopped smoking for a day
      or two, he'd get anxious, he'd get restless, he
      couldn't sit still.  He's bouncing off the walls
      literally.  He's depressed.  He has trouble
      sleeping.  His appetite is lost.  He's pacing.
      He's irritable.  He's frustrated and angry.
      He's usually a very calm man.  And what happens?
      He starts arguing with his wife.  He gets angry.
      He has difficulty concentrating.  He gave
      himself gum.  She gave him gum.  He sucked on
      candy.  He had these cigarettes, these phoney
      cigarettes or candy cigarettes to suck on, fake cigarettes.  They threw away the cigarettes.
      And of course Dr. Dosovitz would say, well, he
      didn't throw them away, that's all the
      difference in the world.  Threw away his
      personal ashtray.  There was only one ashtray.
      He threw it away.  And his wife said he quit or
      tried to quit many, many times, many, many,
      many, many, many times.  She must have said that
      50 times, many, many times.  She couldn't count
      how many times.
          Well, is this consistent or inconsistent
      with the scientific evidence?  I think I must
      have asked Dr. Dosovitz about that several
      times, which is, what do the statistics show
      about people quitting?  Dr. Dosovitz even
      admitted it's a very small percentage that
      successfully quit, under 5 percent, in any given
      year.  80 percent of people, and this is from
      the DSM, 80 percent of people who are regular
      smokers want to quit, about half of those, about
      40 percent of them, try to quit, and about 5
      percent succeed for a year.
          So it's not -- it's pretty much common sense
      that he tried and he tried and he tried.  He did
      not have treatment with Dr. Dosovitz, whose statistics are staggering, staggering
      statistics, that he's -- he's got better
      statistics than anybody who has ever dealt with
      this, the Surgeon General, the FDA.  They'd be
      interested in those statistics, I'm sure, but
      the statistics that the public agencies have put
      together are that a very tiny percentage of
      people get through it.
          Now, they will try it five times, ten times,
      and ultimately about half the people quit,
      ultimately.  But that's 30 years later, 20 years
      later, 40 years later.  And that's how those
      numbers wind up being 30 or 40 or 50 million
      people quit.  Although, it's not quite fair to
      say that the hundred-cigarettes-a-lifetime
      person is the same as the person who smoked as
      much as Mr. Blasco did, 50 to 60 cigarettes a
      day.  That's addiction.
          And there's no definition of addiction per
      se.  The judge is not going to tell you anything
      along the lines of -- he hasn't, you've heard
      the instructions, there's no specific
      definition.  It's a definition that you apply
      using your common sense, listening to the
      evidence. If we talked about Dr. Henningfield for a
      second, number 8.
          VIDEO TECH:  7 or 8?
          MR. FREIDIN:  No, his opinion.
          Dr. Henningfield said:  The two most
      powerful indicators of addiction are the number
      of cigarettes -- and more than one pack per day
      is heavily dependent -- and how soon after
      waking.
          Just because you're able to quit does not
      mean you were not addicted, by the way.
      Everybody agrees with that.
          Quitting, being able to quit does not relate
      to addiction.  So in your class action questions
      it's not relevant.
          You don't have to be an expert to recognize
      addiction is what Dr. Henningfield said.  It's a
      biological barrier to acting on free choice.
      It's a compromised free choice.  Now, remember,
      Dr. Dosovitz, you know, the truth sometimes
      slips out, said, well, my patients don't have a
      choice, some of them.
          Do we have that one?
          Yes, number 11.  "Many of my patients who
      are addicted, you know, that's what I do for a living.  I treat people who are addicted, among
      other things.  Those people don't have a choice.
      That's the difference."
          That's Dr. Dosovitz.  Now, he later said,
      well, it's a compromised choice.  He rebounded
      from I think the truth slipping out about this.
      I'm not contending that someone can't quit.
      What we're contending is it's very, very hard
      and that's why there are 50 million people still
      smoking.  I mean, you can say 50 million quit,
      but it's just as important, if not more, to say
      50 million still are.  Are all of them not
      motivated, all the people that that includes?
      We know that 80 percent want to quit.  We know
      that 40 percent, half of those try to quit.  And
      we know that the relapses are devastatingly
      high.
          I'm a little disorganized here.  So let's
      show -- well, let me just talk to you about the
      Surgeon General's Report.
          Let's put that up, number 18 and number 19
      after that.
          These three, the Surgeon General of the
      United States, the highest medical officer in
      the United States of America says, "Cigarettes and other forms" -- that means I've used 20
      minutes.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Right.
          MR. FREIDIN:  Starting to get the hook.  I
      can feel it.  But I'll remain calm and I will
      not go faster, a little bit faster.
          "Nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes
      addiction.  The pharmacologic and behavioral
      processes that determine addiction are similar
      to those as such drugs as heroin and cocaine."
          You don't have to conclude that heroin and
      cocaine are addicting.  You just have to know
      that the highest ranking medical officer in the
      United States went on public record and issued a
      report and actually said that, and so did the
      FDA and so did a number of other agencies,
      because they feel that it's true.
          Dr. Dosovitz doesn't feel it's true, but
      Dr. Dosovitz is the person who, out of 13 cases
      where he's testified, has never found anyone
      addicted.  He's never found it.  And
      Dr. Dosovitz is somebody who time and time again
      said things that were different than what were
      in his depositions of other cases.  Dr. Dosovitz
      couldn't explain why four days after he gave his opinion in this case he was testifying in
      another case, I haven't reached an opinion in
      the Blasco case.  Dr. Dosovitz couldn't explain
      why he said DSM-IV will be obsolete in a matter
      of a month.  He couldn't explain so many things.
      Why he had 3,000 patients but in another
      deposition it's 1,000 patients.  He couldn't
      explain -- he didn't explain so many different
      things.  And the only thing he explained well
      was he's got three questions to answer and two
      of them are already done.  You are never going
      to get an answer out of this man, their expert,
      the one they brought to you, they will say to
      you, we want you to rely on this expert even
      though 13 times in a row he's found the same
      thing.  I mean, the odds -- you know, the
      statistics, he says 50 to 60 percent are
      addicted, well, the statistics are higher than
      that with everyone else, 60 to 80, 70 to 90, 85
      to 90 from all these publications.
          When you talk about more likely than not in
      tipping the scales, if you take 100 people like
      Mr. Blasco, what percentage, just without even
      regard to how heavy a smoker he is, what
      percentage of them are probably addicted?  The scales are already tipped.  They're already much
      higher than 50 percent, just statistically.
          Just like with the lung cancer, this is a
      large cell lung cancer.  Dr. Abel testified --
      if you can keep up with me and put them up.  I
      know I'm running out of time.
          Dr. Abel testified five or six different
      times actually, I said, Randy, you covered it
      pretty well.  He kept saying more likely than
      not if he stopped smoking Marlboros in 1972,
      then he said 1975, 1978, and I think 1982, he
      would not have gotten cancer.  And there is no
      doubt, there's been no expert to oppose him.
      They didn't put on anyone to say otherwise.
      This is a classic smoking cancer.  As Dr. Abel
      said, 97 out of -- if you had a room of 100
      people who had this cancer, 97 would be smokers.
          So if you talk about what's more likely than
      not, tipping the scales, these issues are all
      very simple in that sense.
          So the questions you have:  Was he addicted?
      Common sense.  Of course Dr. Henningfield, you
      can tell -- he uses the Fagerstrom test.  He's
      addicted in triplicate.  He's addicted under the
      DSM if you have a straightforward approach to it.
          Can we show the number of cigarettes he
      smoked, please?
          Down to about five minutes.  Okay.  The last
      five are going to be -- I don't know.
          THE COURT:  It's up.  They're showing it.
          MR. FREIDIN:  Thank you.
          They gave me more than I could cover.
          Look at the chart, you can look at the top
      or the bottom, and ask yourself, was addiction
      the cause of his death?
          And I think we didn't show the Surgeon
      General one, number 19.  I'd like to show that.
          Because this is right out of the Surgeon
      General's Report.  That traces his report of
      showing how addiction, nicotine addiction on the
      left leads to lung cancer on the right.  You
      don't have to really understand -- I'm not sure
      I could -- all that happens in between --
      Dr. Dosovitz of course wouldn't even look at
      that -- to know that that's the Surgeon General,
      the highest ranking medical officer in this
      country, telling you.  And then they bring on an
      expert who says, I don't believe it ever causes
      it.  It never causes it.  So that's a gimme for them, for Philip Morris.  He will never testify,
      he will never look at the records of a case and
      feel that the plaintiff belongs in the class.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  You should also give priority to the
      one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is
      killing more than 300,000 Americans each year.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. FREIDIN:  I think I'm down to about a
      minute or two.
          MR. MCPHARLIN:  Four minutes.
          MR. FREIDIN:  You were instructed that we
      have to prove that this was a substantial
      contributing cause, more likely than not, again
      that tipping of the scales.  Every time you
      apply something just ask, were the scales
      tipped?  That's all that's involved, because
      this is a civil case, not a criminal case.
          I guess what I want to just close with,
      because I know I'm running out of time.  Let me
      just look and see.  I could go through all these
      tests, but I guess I want to cover one more
      thing.
          THE COURT:  I didn't say anything. MR. FREIDIN:  Starting to hear things.
          MR. MCPHARLIN:  That was Robert.
          MR. FREIDIN:  Robert was asking which one I
      wanted to do.  And I'd like to do the DSM
      criteria.  That's number 15.
          That's where I'll end.
          Again, common sense.  This is what -- they
      built their case on he doesn't fit the DSM,
      okay.  DSM does not say "serious and sustained
      quit attempts," which Dr. Dosovitz used about 20
      times.  You will not find the words "tearing at
      the fabric of someone's life" in the DSM.  That
      came from him.  That was his idea.  You will not
      find a total control of someone from the DSM.
      You will find the question that begins, "These
      things manifested by three or more of these
      issues."
          The withdrawal -- number one, tolerance, he
      agreed on so we don't have to talk about that.
          Number 2, withdrawal, he agreed on.
          Number 3 he agreed on when I showed him the
      practice guidelines.  And he said, oh, well,
      those are just practice guidelines.  He built
      this entire edifice about the DSM, and then I
      said, well, what about the practice guidelines? He says, well, I guess she does apply it and she
      does fit that, but that's just practice
      guidelines.
          Number 4 was the same thing.
          Number 5 is the chart, spending a great deal
      of time using or recovering from the use of
      whatever.
          We showed you that in his average day he was
      spending between eight and ten hours with these
      (indicating).  Every day of his life.  All day
      long, morning, noon and night, bedtime, in bed,
      causing a fire, waking up.  He left church
      services.  They said, well, he only went three
      times a year.  He left concerts.  He left the
      movies when he went with his son.  He gets a
      lung removed, he's getting radiation and he's
      smoking.
          So you've got three questions that apply to
      what I'm talking about and I'll just say them
      quickly.
          Number one, was he addicted?
          Common sense, the evidence, the testimony of
      Dr. Henningfield, overwhelming.
          Was the addiction a legal cause, a legal
      cause, of lung cancer?  It's really in a way the same thing.  It's the addiction that put him on
      the road to smoking.  Nothing else would make
      someone do that 60 times a day every day for
      their entire lives.  And this is exactly what
      the plan was, and that's the irony of it.  They
      argue, didn't he enjoy it, when the whole plan
      was for him to enjoy it.  Their plan was he will
      enjoy it and he'll keep doing it.
          And you'll see later, Mr. Alvarez is going
      to show you, what they thought of it was it was
      like Pavlov's dogs.  Did he enjoy it?  They
      have -- I'm done.
          I'm going to say this:  They come in here
      and they say, he enjoyed it.  Well, that was the
      plan all along, wasn't it?
          Thank you.


          MR. ALVAREZ:  May it please the Court?
      Counsel.
          Morning.
          What I want to talk to you about, because
      obviously I have limited time, is to get right
      into this case and talk about what this case is
      about.  And this case is really about a
      conspiracy.  This is about a conspiracy that started in December of 1953 that affected the
      lives of many, many, many people, including
      Eduardo Blasco.
          And the sad part about this is it could have
      been stopped right then.  And I'm going to show
      you points in history where it could have
      stopped, where a difference -- if they would
      have stopped it would have made a difference, it
      would have saved his life.
          Now, you heard one of the jury instructions
      about what Philip Morris is legally responsible
      for.  And they are legally responsible for the
      acts of each of its co-conspirators named in the
      Engle case, as long as those acts were done in
      furtherance of the conspiracy to conceal or omit
      information regarding the health effects of
      smoking.
          What does that mean?  It means that if
      you're in a group of people and you all get
      together to do something, you don't have to be
      the guy who throws the rock that hits somebody
      to be responsible.  That's what that means.
      That's what the law is telling you.  It's the
      statements that a co-conspirator made that he
      may have heard and he relied on.  Philip Morris is on the hook for 100 percent, even if they
      didn't throw the rock.  And I'm going to show
      you that they did throw some rocks.
          I'm going to skip, it's actually question 5,
      but I'm going to skip to question 5, which is
      the conspiracy question.  "Did Eduardo Blasco
      reasonably rely to his detriment on any act
      taken in furtherance of Philip Morris USA Inc.'s
      agreement with other tobacco companies or
      organizations to conceal or omit material
      information concerning the health effects of
      cigarettes or their addictive nature, and, if
      so, was such reliance a legal cause of
      Mr. Blasco's death?"
          And you know what the strongest evidence of
      this is, comes from this lady right here, who
      lived with this man, who knew this man since he
      was 18 years old.  Okay.  And she'll tell you
      that she was frustrated that one of the only
      things that he wouldn't listen to her about was
      that, that every time she said you gotta quit in
      the '80s when she found out and she believed,
      she said, you've got to quit smoking, this is
      bad for you.  He says, no, the tobacco
      representatives are saying no, it's not. Now, you've got to think for a second.  If
      you have someone who is highly addicted to
      smoking, two to three packs of cigarettes a day,
      who is highly addicted, okay, and he gets two
      competing messages:  One is, smoking is bad for
      you, it can hurt you, it can harm you; and then
      the other one from the makers of the product who
      say, it hasn't been proven, don't worry about
      it, we'll put filters on them, that will keep
      you safe, you know, it hasn't proven the science
      out, don't worry, there's a controversy about
      that, it's okay to keep smoking.  If you're
      addicted, an addicted smoker hearing those two
      messages, which is the message that that
      addicted smoker is going to accept?  And that's
      what frustrated this woman.
          So did he reasonably rely?  And the answer
      to that is yes.  But let me show you the
      evidence of that.
          First of all, I don't have to prove that
      there was a conspiracy, because that's a
      finding.  It's binding upon you.  That's the law
      of this case.  Philip Morris agreed with other
      tobacco companies to conceal or omit information
      concerning the health effects of cigarettes and their addictive nature with the intent that
      smokers and the public would rely on them, on
      this information to their detriment.  I don't
      have to prove that.  That's the law of this
      case.  They did it.  They did it.
          The question that you have to decide was,
      did Philip Morris and the rest of their buddies,
      did Eduardo rely on that information that he
      got?  And there's plenty of evidence in this
      case that he did.
          Because they created this atmosphere of
      normalcy, they used doctors and professionals
      and athletes to portray this thing as normal
      part of everyday life.  That's what they wanted
      people to believe.
          Play the tape.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  Tens of thousands of doctors,
      doctors in all parts of the country, in every
      state of the union, doctors in every branch of
      medicine were asked, what cigarette do you
      smoke, Doctor?  Brand named most was Camel.
      Yes, according to this survey, more doctors
      smoke Camels than any other cigarettes. VOICE:  Do you inhale?  Then you're better
      off smoking Philip Morris.  And here's how you
      can prove it.  Light up a Philip Morris, take a
      puff, get a good mouthful of smoke and slowly
      let the smoke come through.
          VOICE:  (Singing inaudible.)
          VOICE:  (Singing inaudible.)
          VOICE:  Yes, dear.
          VOICE:  Give me a cigarette, will you.
          VOICE:  Don't say cigarette.  Say
      Philip Morris.
          VOICE:  Oh, is there any other kind?
          VOICE:  Not for you there isn't.  Nothing
      but the best for Mr. Ricardo.
          VOICE:  I got a better idea.  Let's take a
      Winston break.
          VOICE:  That's it.  Winston is the one
      filter cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a
      pack.  Winston's got that filter blend.
          VOICE:  Yeah, Fred.
          VOICE:  Why don't you settle back and have a
      full flavor.
          VOICE:  Television advertising of cigarettes
      ended in the U.S. in 1971, but Marlboro made a
      smooth transition to print and outdoor advertising.  Today the Marlboro Man is a cowboy
      who has ridden around the world.
          VOICE:  Has something to do with that?
          VOICE:  Yeah, I think.
          VOICE:  Cigarette manufacturers don't make
      movies.
          VOICE:  Well, what do you think, that the
      moviemaker just showed Marlboro on his own?
          VOICE:  Perhaps the moviemaker was a
      Marlboro smoker.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. ALVAREZ:  So they create this whole
      scheme, this whole scam, from 1953 to 2000.
      Till eight years after this man died they kept
      this thing up, okay, for one purpose and one
      purpose only, was to dupe people into keep
      believing, keep doubting that their product is
      dangerous so that they keep smoking, that was
      it.  And they did it for one reason and one
      reason only, so that they could make money.  And
      they didn't care who they hurt, who they killed
      and how many families they destroyed.  They
      didn't care.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.  It's
      not a class action. THE COURT:  Well, sustain that it does not
      apply for that purpose.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  So in 1953 they had an
      opportunity.  Listen, there's choices to be made
      here, I agree, but you know who can make
      choices, companies can make choices too.  And in
      1953 when they were being told by the scientists
      that this causes cancer, instead of telling the
      truth to people, instead of coming forward and
      saying, you know what, this is true, maybe we'll
      sell less cigarettes, but we're not going to be
      killing people.  They made another choice.
          And look what they said in 1953.  "It's
      fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit
      they can't break."
          "Boy, wouldn't it be wonderful if our
      company was the first to produce a cancer-free
      cigarette."
          "There is only one problem, confidence.  How
      to free millions of Americans from the guilty
      fear, regardless of pooh-poohing logic, every
      time they light up a cigarette."
          They knew back then in 1953 it was bad.  We
      know it now because we have these documents.
      Eduardo Blasco didn't have those documents.  The American people didn't have those documents.
          And what do they do?  They take out a
      full-page ad in major cities and tell people
      that smoking, there's no proof, when they knew
      it was a lie.
          1953.  These are documents 1953.  "Studies
      of clinical data tend to confirm the
      relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco
      smoking and incidence of cancer of the lung."
          1961.  "Partial list of compounds in
      cigarette smoke also identified as carcinogens."
          And look at that.
          1962, "Obviously the amount of evidence
      accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as health
      hazard is overwhelming.  The evidence
      challenging such an indictment is scant,"
      meaning little.  This is 1962.  This is what
      they knew.
          And it took them almost 40 years later until
      they finally -- too late for him, too late for
      him.
          1961, "Carcinogens are found in practically
      every class of compounds in smoke.  Present
      technology does not permit selective filtration
      of particle [sic] of smoke." Why is that important?  Because they knew
      that they couldn't take out carcinogens in
      smoke.  They knew they couldn't put filters on
      cigarettes and do that.
          Here's the report in 1963 to the Surgeon
      General by them.  "None of the chemical
      substances listed therein, to our knowledge, has
      been found by scientific research to be harmful
      to the health of smoker in the amounts reported
      in smoke.  It is possible, of course, to modify
      the chemical composition of cigarette smoke by
      the use of filters."
          They knew the filters didn't work.  They
      knew the stuff was bad.  They were lying to the
      government.  They were lying to the American
      people.
          Here's more internal documents.
          1969, "Doubt is our product since it is the
      best means of competing with the body of fact
      that exists in the mind of the general public.
      It is also the means of establishing a
      controversy."
          That's it, that's what they wanted, they
      wanted the American people to believe.  Let's
      put doubt on people who are addicted because you know they can't stop or they're having trouble
      stopping.  All you have to do is give them a
      reason.  Let's give them a reason to doubt this
      thing and they'll keep buying our products and
      we'll keep making money.  That was the plan.
      That's what they wanted to do.
          "The most important story is that which
      casts doubt on the cause and effect theory of
      disease and smoking."
          "We must in the near future provide some
      answers which will give smokers a psychological
      crutch and a self-rationale to continue
      smoking."
          "If this committee had not been formed the
      cigarette industry by now would have been in a
      deplorable position.  The TIRC has been a
      successful defensive operation."
          That's what they cared about.  All they
      cared about was money.  They didn't care about
      people.
          "Our basic proposition -- our basic position
      in the cigarette controversy is subject to the
      charge, and may be subject to a finding, that we
      are making false or misleading statements to
      promote the sale of cigarettes." Somebody there in 1968 said, you know guys,
      he writes it internally, you know guys, what
      we're doing here is wrong.  At some point it's
      going to come out and people are going to know
      that we were lying to them.
          They had broken promises.  Let's look at
      some of their statements from 1953 to 1970.
          Go ahead.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  We accept an interest in people's
      health as a basic responsibility paramount to
      every other consideration in our business.  And
      that's where we stand.
          VOICE:  If we do find anything that we
      consider harmful, and so far we have not, we'll
      remove these from smoke and still retain the
      pleasure of your favorite cigarette.
          VOICE:  We want to be the detective just as
      much as the Surgeon General's (inaudible) and
      we'll cooperate in every way.  Well, obviously a
      filter takes out certain tar and nicotine.  I
      don't think the industry admits there are any
      bad elements.  If there are bad elements,
      through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts of God
      and luck we hope we may find them.  And if they
      are found they will be removed.
          VOICE:  There's no program that I know of to
      try to help people to stop smoking.  We do talk
      to the question of whether or not cigarettes are
      hazardous.  We do not believe that cigarettes
      are hazardous.  We don't accept that.
          Because when, as and if any ingredient in
      cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious
      to human health, we are confident that we can
      eliminate that ingredient.
          VOICE:  Do you believe that cigarettes are
      safe?  Have they been proved to be safe,
      Mr. Cullman?
          THE WITNESS:  I believe they have not been
      proved to be unsafe.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. ALVAREZ:  That was a lie.  It was a
      boldfaced lie.  He knew it when he said it that
      it was a lie.  Their internal documents told
      them that it was a lie.  And they did it for one
      reason, to keep people smoking.
          Hundreds of millions, they spent hundreds of
      millions of dollars on these front organizations so they could make it seem like they're doing
      real scientific research, right.
          "For nearly 20 years, this industry has
      employed a single strategy to defend itself on
      three major fronts -- litigation, politics, and
      public opinion.  While the strategy was
      brilliantly conceived and executed over the
      years, helping us win important battles, it is
      only fair to say that it is not, nor was it
      intended to be, a vehicle for victory.  On the
      contrary, it has always been a holding strategy
      consisting of" -- here it goes, here's another
      confession -- "creating doubt about the health
      charge without actually denying it."
          I mean, don't take my word for it.  Because
      everything I've told you here is their words.
      There's a box of exhibits that we're going to
      send back there that have all these things.
      Look at them.  They're not me.  Don't believe
      me.  Don't believe me just because I'm wearing a
      tie.  Look at their words.  Believe them.  This
      is what they thought.
          And from 1970 to 1990s -- and by the way,
      starting in 1967 Mr. Blasco was in the United
      States, okay.  They're going to say, well, he was in the Puerto Rico.  Puerto Rico is a
      commonwealth territory of the United States.
      Puerto Ricans are American citizens just like
      everybody else here, okay.  American cigarette
      companies advertised in Puerto Rico, okay.
          So between 1970 and 1990, let's start
      hearing some of the things that they were saying
      that Mr. Blasco believed because he heard some
      of them.  And he used it, he used it to foster
      that belief that smoking wasn't bad.  Now, you
      say, well, listen, you've got to be crazy to
      think about that.  Well, you can't use your
      shoes of 2013, you just can't, because what he
      believed in the '40s, '50s, '60s, '70s, '80s and
      '90s, it was a different time.
          Go ahead.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  Take the controversy about
      cigarettes.  In the 91st Congress a house
      committee heard testimony from leading experts
      on smoking and health.  The record shows that
      many of the countries most respected doctors
      openly challenged anti-cigarette claims.
          VOICE:  We simply don't know scientifically what makes a normal healthy cell suddenly go
      malignant.
          VOICE:  And I have to disagree with you in
      that we don't know what causes the ailments that
      have been attributed to cigarette smoking.
          VOICE:  Wouldn't be in the business if I
      thought cigarettes were harmful to people.
          VOICE:  If you were convinced that
      cigarettes were killing people would you stop
      making cigarettes?
          VOICE:  Well, I've personally been on record
      on that for a long time.  I'm not in the
      business of killing people, obviously.  I've
      said all along simply there are plenty of ways
      to make a living.  I happen to believe in what
      I'm doing very strongly.
          VOICE:  ...the company as a whole believed
      that cigarettes were really harmful we would not
      be in the business.  We're a very moralistic
      company.  I think the management of
      Philip Morris is sincere in this position.
          VOICE:  Case is still open.  The jury has
      not come in.
          VOICE:  It may not be harmful, you're not
      convinced. VOICE:  It may be or it may not be, we don't
      know.
          VOICE:  Cigarette smoking does not cause
      cancer, yes or no?
          VOICE:  It is not known whether cigarettes
      cause cancer.  It has not been causally
      established.
          VOICE:  Do cigarettes cause cancer?
          VOICE:  I don't know if they do or not.
          VOICE:  I'm not in a position to give you a
      does or does not answer.
          VOICE:  We believe our product is not
      injurious to health.
          VOICE:  As far as you're concerned, is the
      Surgeon General simply wrong in concluding that
      cigarette smoking causes lung cancer?
          VOICE:  I would use the term "misguided."
          VOICE:  If he's misguided then I take it
      that your opinion is he's wrong.
          VOICE:  I was simply trying to be polite
      about it.
          VOICE:  But not being polite about it in
      your opinion he's wrong, correct?
          VOICE:  Dead wrong.
          VOICE:  Congress is wrong in requiring these warnings, correct?
          VOICE:  We do not think they're justified.
          VOICE:  So they're wrong.
          VOICE:  They're wrong.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I mean, these are the
      statements that were being made when this man
      was in this country reading, looking and making
      an informed decision on whether to continue to
      smoke.  They wanted him to believe.  They wanted
      him to doubt it.  They wanted him to have
      controversy brewing in his mind.  They wanted
      that.  And now they're going to come into court
      and say, hey, he should have known, everybody
      knew it was bad.  Well, a statement like that
      would have been blasphemy 20 years ago by the
      tobacco executives because they were saying the
      exact opposite.  But now when it's convenient
      for them to defend this lawsuit and say
      everybody should have known, that's not what
      they were saying back then.  That's not what
      they were saying to this woman's husband.
      That's not what was happening.
          And the level of this conspiracy, what they
      did to destroy evidence in this -- because we only see some of it.  They destroyed a lot of
      documents.
          Look what they've said:  At the outset,
      Arnold Henson reminded us all participating at
      the meeting that there should be no written
      record of what transpired issued for
      distribution.
          1977, "We have gone to great pains to
      eliminate any written contact with INBIFO."
          Now, remember that, Dr. Proctor talked
      about, INBIFO was a company that they bought out
      in Europe so that they could run tests to see if
      smoking causes cancer.  And what they didn't
      want was anyone to know anything about that
      because they didn't want a lawyer like me
      subpoenaing those records.
          "If this procedure is unacceptable to you,
      perhaps we should consider a dummy mailing
      address in Cologne," that's where this company
      was at, "for receipt of samples, since we have a
      major program in INBIFO and since this is a
      locale where we might do some things which we
      are reluctant to do in this country."
          Yeah, we're going to do stuff over there
      that we're not going to do here because we don't want lawyers and the public finding out about
      it.
          Here's personal notes from one of the
      Philip Morris -- by the way, this is
      Philip Morris.  This isn't somebody else who
      threw a rock.  This is them.  I caught them with
      a rock in their hand.  This is them.
          "Ship all the documents to Köln by Tom.  If
      important letters have to be sent, please send
      to home.  I will act on them and destroy."
          "We do not foresee any difficulties to
      remove certain reports from research files once
      such action is necessary for the successful
      defense of our present and future suits.  We
      will promptly remove all such reports.  As an
      alternative to invalidation, we can have the
      authors rewrite those sections of the reports
      which appear objectionable."
          "This is to inform you that I have either
      returned to the library or destroyed all formal
      reports and the like, checked out to me.  If,
      however, the results with nicotine are similar
      to those gotten with morphine and caffeine, we
      want to bury it.  Accordingly, there are only
      two copies of this memo, the one attached and the original, which I have."
          I mean, these guys went to great lengths,
      well, they stopped at nothing, they stopped at
      nothing, from forming corporations outside of
      the United States so they could do their dirty
      work over there, to destroying documents here,
      to lying to Congress, to lying to the American
      people, to lying to the world, these guys
      stopped at nothing.  Because they had one thing
      and one thing in mind and all they cared about
      is making money that people keep buying their
      product.  That's all they cared about.
          And here's -- when they found out that there
      was a researcher that was going to find an
      antagonist, something that would stop people
      from feeling the effects of nicotine, they went
      like, well -- and this is what they're talking
      about here, Dr. Seligman brought up the grant by
      "Dr. Abood in which one of the stated aims was
      to make a clinically acceptable antagonist to
      nicotine.  This goal would have the potential of
      putting the tobacco manufacturers out of
      business."
          "Dr. Leo Abood, whose presentation showed a
      high degree of competence, has on [sic] his aims a specific antagonist to nicotine.  This is done
      by various chemical manipulations of nicotine
      and could well lead to a clinically accessible
      antagonist.  It is my strong feeling that with
      the progress that has been claimed we are in the
      process of digging our own grave."
          So they're paying this guy to do research,
      we've got to shut this guy down.
          "I believe that the program as set up has
      the potential of great damage to the industry."
          Shutting down research at -- you know, it
      wasn't just this one.  It was any project that
      looked like it was going to hurt them, they shut
      it down.
          "CTR should not fund work largely by
      means -- excuse me.
          "CTR should fund work largely by means of
      contracts, thus reserving the right to control
      publications which might be detrimental to our
      industry."
          The long-term scientific program should be
      carefully planned such that the results obtained
      should not be able to harm the industry.
      Recommendations for scientific programs will be
      given later." "Attempts to relate human disease to
      smoking."
          So that's what they wanted, they said,
      listen, guys, we're just not going to fund --
      and that's what they told the world, by the way,
      that's the problem.  They went out there in 1953
      when this mouse-painting study came out and
      said, hey, we're going to form this organization
      and we're really going to study this.  We're
      really going to find out.  If there is, we're
      going to tell you about it and we're going to
      stop it.  And we're going to take bad things out
      of cigarettes, or we're going to put filters on
      there so it will take all the bad stuff, that's
      what they told the world, right.  But internally
      they were saying, no, we're not going to do
      that.
          And then when the Surgeon General Report
      comes out, they attack the Surgeon General.
      Look at some of the things they say.
          "The tobacco industry has an obligation to
      see that the public is not hood-winked."
          "Unjustified emotional campaigns based on
      the health scare technique."
          They're attacking the Surgeon General. "The number one problem is to the extent to
      which these officials knowingly mislead the
      American public.  It is a gross insult to the
      scientific community."
          "Turning a significant health question into
      a public stunt is an insult to serious science."
          These guys, so now when public health
      officials are coming out and saying, look, this
      is bad for you, we're finding this out, what do
      they do?  Instead of embracing it, that's
      another opportunity.  1964 was another
      opportunity, another opportunity to tell the
      truth.  What do they do?  They take swings at
      the Surgeon General.  They call him reckless.
          "After years of well-funded research, it has
      not been established that cigarette smoking
      produces a physical dependence to nicotine."
          Play the tape.  This is the former president
      of the American Tobacco Company.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  Throughout your tenure with American
      it was not only American's position but your
      position that cigarettes weren't injurious to
      health; is that accurate? VOICE:  Through my tenure?
          VOICE:  Yes.
          VOICE:  Yes, that is so.
          VOICE:  That's something American Tobacco
      wanted the public to believe; is that correct?
          VOICE:  Yes.
          VOICE:  It's a statement that American
      Tobacco takes great reliance on.
          VOICE:  We issued that statement, yes,
      certainly we wanted them to believe it.
          VOICE:  As far as you're concerned, a person
      is justified on relying on that statement.
          VOICE:  Yes.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I mean, they wanted the
      American public to believe.  That's what they're
      saying.  No, we wanted them to rely, we wanted
      them to believe this.  And now when this family
      comes in and says he believed it, they're saying
      no.  That's called catch-22.  No matter which
      way it comes out, they want to win.
          Why did Philip Morris do what they did?
          "Who ain't for more money?"
          "Do we really want to tout cigarette smoke
      as a drug?  It is of course, but there are dangerous FDA implications."
          "That is to say that if the exit gate from
      the market should suddenly open, we could be out
      of business almost overnight."
          "Moving towards reduction or elimination of
      nicotine from our product, then we shall
      eventually liquidate our business."
          They know that if they take nicotine or
      reduce the level of nicotine so it's not
      addictive anymore, people aren't going to smoke
      60 cigarettes a day.  They may not even smoke
      one cigarette a day.  The only reason people
      smoke is because they're addicted.
          "Products we are making and selling was in
      any way harmful to our customer's health and our
      own as well, we would voluntarily go out of
      business."  That's what they said, right.
          "If our product is harmful, says James
      Bowling, vice-president of Philip Morris, we'll
      stop making it.  We don't know if smoking is
      harmful to health and we think someone ought to
      find out [sic]."
          You know, this is 1972, right.  This is
      1972, the year he moves to Miami, right, and
      these guys still got this sham going on.  When their records back in the '50s and in the early
      '60s they've already identified all the
      carcinogens in smoke.  They already know it's
      addictive.  They already know that it can kill
      people.  And they're still lying about it.
          "Without the chemical compound, the
      cigarette market would collapse, PM,"
      Philip Morris, "would collapse, and we would all
      lose our jobs and our consulting fees."
          That's all they cared about.  They didn't
      care about Eduardo Blasco.  They didn't care
      about him.
          "A cigarette is a perfect type of a perfect
      pleasure.  It is exquisite and it leaves one
      unsatisfied.  All we would want then is a larger
      bag to carry the money to the bank."
          That's all they cared about.
          So when you get this question, which I think
      is actually question 5, "Did Eduardo Blasco
      reasonably rely to his detriment on any act
      taken in furtherance of Philip Morris USA Inc.'s
      agreement with other tobacco companies or
      organizations to conceal or omit material
      information concerning the health effects of
      cigarettes or their addictive nature, and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of
      Mr. Blasco's death, the answer should be yes.
      And I will tell you, reading that verdict form,
      they all should be yes.  Don't exclude her from
      the class.
          The next question is, "Did Eduardo Blasco
      reasonably rely to his detriment on any
      statements or omissions of material fact made by
      Philip Morris that concealed or omitted material
      information concerning the health effects of
      cigarettes or their addictive nature, and, if
      so, was such reliance a legal cause of
      Mr. Blasco's death?"
          That's them throwing the rock.  That
      question is, hey, did Philip Morris throw a rock
      and hit him?  Did he rely on something that
      Philip Morris said or failed to say that was
      material?
          And I'm going to show you that it was.
          Remember, I don't have to prove that they
      did that, that they concealed or omitted
      information.  That's an Engle finding.  The
      question is, did Eduardo reasonably rely?  Well,
      you've got to ask yourself this question.  This
      guy smoked Chesterfields for most of his life early on, right.  Then he came to Puerto Rico
      and for five years he smoked Winston, which is a
      filter, because Chesterfield is an unfiltered
      cigarette.  So he smoked a filtered cigarette
      and then he came to Miami and he smoked for 20
      years a filtered cigarette.  Why the switch to
      filters?  Why the switch to filters?  Right.
      Why did he go from an unfiltered cigarette to a
      filtered cigarette?  Why?  Because they wanted,
      they wanted people to believe that filters were
      safer.
          Because in the 1950s less than 1 percent of
      the cigarettes were filtered.  By 1960, 51
      percent and by 2000, 99 percent.  They created
      this whole filter scam to get people to believe
      that if you smoke a filtered cigarette it would
      be safer for you, but it's not, it's more
      dangerous for you.  Okay.
          They sold Marlboro, a filtered cigarette.
          "The smokers of a filtered cigarette was
      getting as much or more nicotine and tar than he
      would have gotten from a regular cigarette."
      This is a 1976 memo after he's already here in
      Miami, okay, this is an internal memo.
          "The illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration."
          I'm going to skip through these because
      these deal with nicotine and I think we've heard
      a lot about nicotine and filters, but the
      reality is they knew that if they put filters on
      cigarettes and sold them as a safer alternative
      people would buy them, and that's what
      Mr. Blasco did.  Okay.
          So why in 1972 when he came to Miami, why
      would he all of a sudden switch to Marlboro?
      Why?  Why didn't he keep smoking Winston?  Why
      did he keep smoking Chesterfield?  Why did he
      pick their brand to smoke for the next 20 years
      until he died?  Why?  Well, I'm going to tell
      you.  Let's listen to them because they're going
      to tell you why smokers would do it.
          Play it.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  The image of the Marlboro Man in
      Marlboro Country has gone beyond cultural
      differences.  It has been adapted
      internationally by maintaining a consistent
      heroic look around the world.
          In 1955 Marlboro sales in the United States were a modest 6 billion.  However, within only
      one year volume nearly tripled and Marlboro
      sales to smokers took off domestically.  At that
      time Marlboro had just been introduced
      internationally in limited markets.  Throughout
      the 1960s Marlboro sales to smokers gained even
      more momentum, both domestically and around the
      world.  In fact, total volume for Marlboro sales
      to smokers more than doubled during this decade.
      As a result, combined sales reached 105 billion
      in 1972, making Marlboro the best selling
      cigarette in the world and it has remained the
      leader ever since.  Marlboro is far and away the
      leader in the cigarette industry, and the trend
      is continually upward.
          In 1990 Marlboro sold more than 344 billion
      cigarettes worldwide.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Why in 1972?  Because that was
      the number one cigarette in the world, was
      Marlboro.  And in 1992 you saw how many billions
      it was selling.  They wanted him, they wanted
      him and they got him.  And now they're
      responsible for him.  They can't hide from their
      responsibility. So when this question comes up in the
      verdict form, Did Eduardo Blasco reasonably rely
      to his detriment on any statement or omission of
      material fact made by Philip Morris that
      concealed or omitted material information
      concerning the health effects of cigarettes or
      their addictive nature, and, if so, was such
      reliance a legal cause, the answer to that is
      yes.  Because they could have made a difference.
      In 1967 when he came to Puerto Rico they could
      have said -- they could have told the truth.
      When he came in 1972, instead of spending all
      that money on advertising to make Marlboro the
      number one cigarette in the world, if they came
      out and told the truth to people, they told the
      truth to Mr. Blasco it would have made a
      difference.
          So the next question they're going to ask
      you is about comparing fault, okay.  And you
      answer this question if you believe that the
      cigarettes that he smoked starting in 1972
      caused his lung cancer.  And you heard from
      Dr. Abel.  He said, look, it's ridiculous to
      think that if this guy got cancer in 1991 that
      this cancer was in his body before 1972.  This guy didn't walk around with cancer for 19 years
      and it not show up.  His cancer occurred when he
      was smoking their cigarettes.
          So the question here is, what's the percent
      of responsibility from 1972 to 1991 or 1992
      until his death, those 20 years, those 20 years?
      Because our claim against them for the
      negligence is for those 20 years.
          Now, could he have quit?  Could he have
      tried harder?  Yeah.  If he tried 10 times,
      could he have tried 11?  If he tried 20, could
      he have tried 21?  If he had gone three days,
      could he have gone four days?  Listen, everybody
      could try harder.  But this man had an
      addiction, because he smoked on the high end of
      the number of cigarettes that you could smoke.
          And this isn't 50/50.  You know why this
      isn't 50/50?  Because 50/50, when you say
      something went bad between two parties, there's
      always fault on both sides, right.  But that
      only assumes one thing and one thing only, that
      both sides have the same information and one is
      not lying to the other.  Because when one side
      lies to the other then it ain't 50/50.  It ain't
      50/50.  So don't do 50/50, because it isn't 50/50.  You can do whatever you want.  What I'm
      suggesting to you is it should be closer to --
      and I'll get to the number.  Let me build up to
      it.  I got a build up to that number.  All
      right.
          Now, one of the instructions that you're
      going to get as part of the Engle findings if
      he's a class member, Philip Morris is negligent
      and that they sold or supplied cigarettes that
      were defective and placed cigarettes on the
      market that were defective and unreasonably
      dangerous.  I don't have to prove there's a
      defect in the cigarette.  That's already been
      proven.  I don't have to prove that they were
      negligent.  That's already been proven, okay.  I
      don't have to prove that to you.  You have to
      accept that that's the law of the case.
          So nicotine caused death, look, they're in
      the business of selling nicotine.  This is their
      own words.  "Cigarettes that does not deliver
      nicotine cannot satisfy the habituated smoker
      and cannot lead to habituation."
          "Nicotine is a potent drug.  Our industry is
      based upon the design, manufacture and sale of
      attractive dosage and forms of nicotine." "Most of those who have smoked for any
      significant time would like to stop.  Many, but
      not most, of those would like to stop smoking
      and are able to do so."
          "...we should be able to maintain the size
      of the total market by influencing exit/entry
      rates."
          "We cannot be comfortable marketing a
      product which most of our customers would do
      without if they could."
          So this is what they're doing.  They're
      saying, look, guys, we're going to manipulate
      cigarettes.  We're going to make sure that we
      maintain an adequate amount of nicotine in there
      to keep people addicted to smoking, keep them
      duped.  We'll create this controversy, we'll do
      this.  You know, this is like the perfect scam.
      You've got them from both ends.  You're
      producing an addictive product and you tell them
      it's not addictive and it's not bad and they're
      so diminished in their capacity to want to
      believe you because they're addicted they'll do
      anything to keep doing it.  It's like a perfect
      scam.
          "Without nicotine, the argument goes, there would be no smoking.  No one has ever become a
      cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without
      nicotine."
          Duh.
          "The product is nicotine, think of
      cigarettes as a dispenser for the dose unit of
      nicotine.  Think of a puff of smoke as a vehicle
      of nicotine."
          "Smoke is beyond question the most optimized
      vehicle of nicotine in a cigarette and the most
      optimized dispenser of smoke."
          "The lawyers remind us that the entire
      matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a
      prosecuting attorney could have in a lung cancer
      cigarette case."
          I've got to pause and read this slowly.
          "We cannot defend 'free choice' if the
      person was addicted."
          This is them in 1980 when this man was in
      this country smoking their product, and they're
      saying, "We can't defend 'free choice' if the
      person was addicted."
          Choice.  Their words, not mine.
          THE COURT:  It's been an hour and 15
      minutes. MR. ALVAREZ:  I'm going to bleed into it a
      few minutes.
          It says, Please state the percentage of any
      fault which was a legal cause of Eduardo's lung
      cancer and death that you charge to Philip
      Morris and Eduardo Blasco.  Remember, I said it
      was not 50/50 because both people don't know the
      same information.  I think it was 85 percent for
      Philip Morris and 15 percent for Eduardo Blasco.
      You may think it should be 100 percent, and
      that's up to you.  It could be 100 percent
      against Philip Morris, that's up to you.  I'm
      suggesting 85/15.  But it certainly isn't 50/50
      because both people didn't know the same
      information.
          So let me tell you, this is it.  This is the
      end.  This is where I get to talk about my
      client, who's a -- I got to know.  And they just
      don't make women like that anymore.  She's the
      original.  This is a generation that's almost
      gone.  This is a generation that when you met
      and you fell in love and you made a vow, those
      vows meant something, they meant something.
          She was born in a time where virtue, a
      woman's virtue meant something.  She loved one man and one man only for the rest of her life.
      Look at the magnitude of her loss.  At 55, 56
      she became a widow.  You know, there's nothing
      more beautiful than watching an elderly couple
      just walking down the sidewalk holding hands,
      watching a viejita holding on to her viejito.
          He was a great husband, a wonderful father
      and what he wanted to be that was taken away
      from her watching him do was be a great
      grandfather.  That joy of watching your husband
      immerse into the arms of your grandchild and
      that unconditional love that they would share
      together is gone.
          You know, there's one vow, though, that, you
      know, she didn't keep, and that was the vow that
      said until death do us part.  That vow she
      didn't keep, because she's still married today
      to him.  She never took off her ring.  But she
      took off his ring and she puts it over her ring,
      and to her they're still married.
          So I'm going to suggest a figure.  And you
      may think it's too high or you may think it's
      too low, but no one can tell you what that
      amount should be.  That's for you to decide.
      And I would suggest the amount of 12 million dollars is a fair and reasonable in light of the
      evidence and in light of the loss that this
      woman has suffered.