         MS. LUTHER:  Yes, your Honor.  Good morning,
    everyone, your Honor.  May it please the Court.
         This case boils down to the four bullet points
    I put up with Dr. Webster yesterday.  If you could.
    That's what this case comes down to.
         Ms. Blitch had multiple risk factors for the
    development of esophageal cancer, including alcohol
    abuse, HPV, GERD and smoking.  And so everyone is
    clear on this point, I made this chart, I did.
    Dr. Webster didn't.  And I did put smoking last in
    that first bullet point because that's -- with
    Liggett the only tobacco company in this case,
    that's exactly where smoking belongs, at the very
    end of that list of risk factors.
         Mrs. Blitch's alcohol abuse, her HPV and --
    that's not the current -- that's not the right chart.
         Anyhow, her alcohol abuse, her HPV and GERD --
    that point two is missing, two of the three factors
    -- were significant risk factors in the development
    of her esophageal cancer.  We talked about that in
    detail.
         If the only risk factor she had was smoking, no
    one can say that she would have gone on to develop
    esophageal cancer.  She would have had a risk for
    going on to develop esophageal cancer but kind of
    like Mr. Wilner's fatal bullet concept, she probably
    wouldn't have had that fatal bullet if you only have
    smoking as a risk factor in this case.  The
    esophageal cancer -- or the GERD the HPV and the
    alcohol abuse are the bullets that put her over the
    top for developing the esophageal cancer.
         Now, the total dose of Liggett brand cigarettes
    was not enough to have caused or substantially
    contributed to cause Mrs. Blitch's development of
    the esophageal cancer.  That's what this case boils
    down to.  Should Liggett be held responsible for Ms.
    Blitch's esophageal cancer?  Should Liggett be
    required to pay -- and Mr. Wilner told you about
    compensatory damages.  He thinks we should pay
    Jonelle and James Blitch millions of dollars for their mother's lifestyle choices over the almost
    60 years that she smoked and drank.
         As I mentioned to you in my opening, which
    obviously was the last time that I got to speak with
    you directly, Liggett does have sympathy for the
    Blitch family.  I mean, it's never easy to lose a
    parent.  It isn't.  But that doesn't mean that
    Liggett is responsible for Mrs. Blitch's injuries or
    Liggett should be required to compensate Jim and
    Jonelle for that loss.
         Before I turn to what the evidence showed, I
    want to highlight a couple of the instructions that
    Judge Arnold is going to give you and as Mr. Wilner
    mentioned, we were working on the instructions well
    into the night.  I normally would have put it up so
    I could show you what it said, but we don't have a
    final copy with me, so I'm just going to read it to
    you.
         Judge Arnold's going to instruct you in
    determining the facts, which is what your job is.
    As the jury, you're the fact finders in this case.
    You may draw reasonable inferences from the
    evidence.  You may make deductions and reach
    conclusions which reason and common sense lead you
    to draw from the facts shown by the evidence. Judge Arnold is also going to instruct you that
    in determining the believability of any witness and
    the weight to be given to the testimony of any
    witness, you may properly consider the demeanor of
    the witness, the frankness or lack of frankness of
    the witness, the intelligence of the witness, any
    interest the witness may have in the outcome of the
    case, the means and the opportunity that the witness
    had to know the facts about which the witness
    testified, the ability of the witness to remember
    the facts about the witness testified and the
    reasonableness of the testimony of the witness
    considered in the light of all the evidence in the
    case and in light of your own experience and common
    sense.
         Reason and common sense.  You didn't leave
    either of those things outside this courtroom when
    you came in and were selected to sit as jurors.
         We ask that you rely on both of those things,
    your reason and your common sense as you evaluate
    the testimony of the various witnesses who testified
    in this case.
         So with that in mind what did the evidence
    show?
         What kind of person was Betty Blitch?  Everyone who came into this courtroom who knew Betty Blitch
    pretty much described her in the same way.  Jim said
    his mother was intelligent, strong-willed
    independent, and she had her opinions.
         Jonelle said her mother was smart,
    strong-willed, hardheaded.  Once she made up her
    mind, she was going to do it her way.  She was able
    to gather information that was available to her.
    Jonelle never once, even after Betty became sick,
    heard her mother say that she regretted smoking.
         Gail Clements said that Betty was a very
    elegant woman and cigarettes were part of her
    persona with the cigarette and the tip and she
    smoked the cigarette with the tip once and said,
    what are you doing?  She said, don't I look cool.
         Gail described Betty as intelligent,
    principled, not easily influenced.  She had very
    strong opinions.  Again, not the first time we've
    heard that in the evidence.  She could make a
    decision and stick to it.  She was aware of what was
    going on around her in the world and if she thought
    something was right, she'd back it up.
         Even Mary Sapp who didn't testify for a long
    time, she considered Betty well-read and intelligent
    and everyone agreed that Betty enjoyed smoking. This is the kind of person who would have been able
    to quit if she had decided she wanted to quit.
         Plaintiff spent a fair amount of time in this
    case trying to run away from critical established
    facts.  They tried to make the Liggett brand more
    extensive than it really was.  In doing that they
    minimized the most critical piece of evidence we
    have in this case, evidence brought to us by Betty
    Blitch herself, the questionnaire.
         If you could just show us the first page of
    that questionnaire.
         This document was filled out by Betty Blitch
    herself before she passed away and it was filled out
    sometime around the beginning of March of 1997.  The
    date on the middle of that page is March 12, 1997.
         Through the fact witnesses who came to testify
    in this case, they tried to make Betty's Eve smoking
    history more than what it really was.  I mean, I get
    it.  Liggett's the only company they sued, so
    obviously they need to emphasize her smoking of
    Liggett brands.  But aside from the questionnaire,
    what do we really know about Mrs. Blitch's smoking
    history?  What did the evidence show us about
    Mrs. Blitch's smoking history?
         And as you've already figured out, I like making charts.  So I made a chart.  Nope, wrong
    chart.  The one with the testimony.  Okay.
         So the smoking history is really all over the
    board.  The people who knew Betty best, her son
    Jonelle -- her daughter, Jonelle, and her son,
    James, don't really know what Betty smoked and when
    she smoked it.  In her answers to interrogatories
    what you were told about, Jonelle said that her
    mother smoked Salem, Virginia Slim, Winston, and
    Benson & Hedges.  No mention of Eve.
         And you saw yesterday when I read to you from
    interrogatories they could have supplemented that
    response at any time, because they did it with
    regards to some of the other answers, but they
    didn't supplement that answer.
         In her deposition she said she saw her mother
    smoke Winston, Marlboro, Salem, Benson & Hedges,
    Virginia Slim, Marlboro Light, and Misty, but Benson
    & Hedges was the brand she remembered her mom
    smoking the most.
         Most significantly Jonelle said Betty was the
    person who knew best what she smoked.
         And Jim's testimony is comparable.  Jim
    remembered that she smoked Benson & Hedges, Virginia
    Slim, Eve, Misty, and Lucky Strike.  Towards the end, meaning the end of her life, he recalls her
    buying her Benson & Hedges, Misty, and Eve, but when
    he was deposed, he couldn't remember any of the time
    frames.  He -- he kind of tried to fight Mr. Feiwus
    on that.  He's like, no, no.  I just couldn't
    remember specific days.  Well, he wasn't asked
    specific days.  He was asked time frames and he
    couldn't give them in his deposition but when he
    came here to you to explain what he believed the
    smoking history was, he was conveniently able to
    come up with time frames.
         What did Gail Clements say about the smoking
    history?  What's interesting is that the two people
    who testified with the most particularity about her
    Liggett smoking history were actually the two people
    who came into this courtroom with the least
    relationship with Betty Blitch; Gail Clements and
    Mary Sapp, not the children.
         So Gail said she didn't know what Betty smoked
    when she first met her, which was around 1975 or
    1976, except to say it was a long, slender
    cigarette.  And she also confirmed during her
    testimony that Misty is a long slender cigarette.
    Virginia Slim is a long slender cigarette and Benson
    & Hedges is a long slender cigarette and she didn't know what was in the clutch, the cigarette holder,
    unless Betty actually ran out of a pack and took the
    empty pack out and replaced it and she said that
    only happened, I don't know, maybe 12, maybe more
    than 24 times.
         Well, given the fact that she knew Betty Blitch
    for about 22 years, if you take that number, she
    only saw her take the cigarette pack out of the
    holder about once a year over the average of time
    that they knew each other.  So for her to come and
    tell you that she knew she was smoking Eve, that's
    just not credible.  She remembers that Betty smoked
    Eve in the 1980s and we don't dispute that.
         We think that the questionnaire is what
    controls here.  That's what Betty said and
    everybody, Jonelle, James, Gail and Mary Sapp, all
    four of them said Betty is the person who would know
    best what Betty smoked.
         And what did Mary Sapp have to say?  You know,
    Mr. Wilner said, oh, you know, Mary Sapp remembered
    that she was -- that Betty was smoking Eve in the
    1970s.  Well, you know what, that's not what Mary
    Sapp said.  Let's take a look at what Mary Sapp
    said.
         THE COURT:  Let me interrupt you just a second. Tracy, could you hand me what I gave you
    earlier to type for me.
         Go ahead.
         MS. LUTHER:  Mary Sapp, when she came to us to
    testify, was 76, almost 77 years old.  She's an old
    family friend and no matter how the plaintiff
    represents it to you, she didn't say what they said
    she said.  This is what she actually said.  This is
    an excerpt from the trial transcript.  That's what
    the court reporters have been doing this whole time.
    We have a complete transcript of everything that
    everybody said.
         So what did Mary Sapp say?  Do you recall when
    you began smoking Eve cigarettes?  And remember they
    tried to show that Betty had been smoking Eve longer
    than Mary because Mary remembered when she was
    smoking Eve.  She doesn't remember when she started
    smoking Eve.  That's what she told you.
         Do you recall whether or not you were smoking
    Eve cigarettes before or after Ms. Betty Blitch?
         I believe after.  Not, oh, I know it was after.
    I believe it was after.  She thinks it was after.
         So you believe Betty Blitch started smoking Eve
    before you started smoking Eve?
         Yes, sir. Okay.  And do you recall an event in your life
    when you began working at a new job at Holiday Inn?
    Yes, sir.  Do you recall about when that was?
         Again, I believe it was about 1976.
         And were you smoking Eve when you were working
    at the Holiday Inn in 1976?
         Again, I believe so.
         This is not definitive testimony.  She's
    speculating.  She's not sure when she started
    smoking Eve cigarettes.
         And you testified that you believed Betty
    Blitch was smoking Eve before you were smoking Eve?
         Yes.
         So on cross I tried to clear this up.  And I
    said, now, I get the impression from your testimony
    that you believed that Ms. Blitch was smoking Eve
    cigarettes in the 1960s; is that right?
         And she said:  I don't know when it was.  All I
    know is that she smoked them and I was smoking them.
    So that's what we -- that's what Mary Sapp really
    said about when she and Betty were smoking.  She
    doesn't know when they started, but she does know
    that it was later on in their relationship, and
    Betty knew best what Betty smoked.  She would defer
    to what Betty said about what she smoked.  That's what Mary Sapp said about smoking Eve.
         Then we have Gail Clements and I touched on her
    briefly in the last slide.  She actually filled out
    the questionnaire with Betty Blitch.  She knew the
    reason that she was filling out the questionnaire.
    She understood it was an important document, and it
    was important to get it right.  I mean, she's the
    person who actually filled in the brands in the
    brand section of the questionnaire.  That's Gail
    Clements's handwriting.
         And when Betty said, I smoked Eve from 1980 to
    1987, Gail didn't say, now, hold on there, Betty.  I
    know I bought you Eve cigarettes since 1987.  She
    didn't do that.  She wrote down what Betty said
    because back then she knew it was the truth.
         Now, Liggett is the only defendant in this
    courtroom.  Now that it's the only defendant in this
    courtroom, it's no longer a convenient truth.
         Now Gail told you that Betty was a truthful
    person.  So to minimize the importance of the
    questionnaire, she told you, and Mr. Wilner repeated
    this in the first part of his closing.  She told you
    when they filled out this questionnaire, Betty was a
    very sick woman and she was very tired.  And -- but
    instead of minimizing the importance of the questionnaire, that testimony really only emphasizes
    that the information contained in the questionnaire
    is trustworthy.
         She confirmed that she and Betty took the time
    filling out the brands and when Betty got tired, she
    took a break because Betty understood that the
    questionnaire was important and she wanted to get it
    right.
         Plaintiff's counsel tried to run away from the
    questionnaire by implying that, well, you know,
    maybe Betty wasn't quite in her right mind when she
    filled this out.
         You may recall both Jonelle and Jim were asked
    questions on their direct along the lines of, well,
    isn't it true that your mother wasn't quite in her
    right mind towards the end, but neither of them took
    the bait.  They both said, no, she was fine right up
    until the end.  Jim said she didn't have any
    cognitive mental difficulties at the end.  And this
    wasn't at the end.  This was in March.  Her
    recurrence was diagnosed in November of '97.  Jim
    said she had her faculties all the way to the end
    and Jonelle even said, after the occurrence after
    November when she had a session of chemotherapy
    which made her very ill that it didn't affect her mind at all.
         On top of that, contrary to what Gail would
    have you believe, there's no evidence that Betty was
    ill at the time she filled out the questionnaire.
    In fact, there's a medical record dated February of
    1997, February 20th of 1997.  If you could pull that
    up, please.  She was just going for routine
    monitoring of the lung cancer -- or the esophageal
    cancer and she's with Dr. --
         MR. LANTINBERG:  Objection, your Honor.  The
    document date is '96, not '97.
         MS. LUTHER:  I apologize.  You're absolutely
    correct.  I misread the document.
         Well, I take that back then.  In 1996 she felt
    well, but regardless, that doesn't change the
    argument.  The recurrence occurred in November of
    '97 and in March of '97 she was still living on her
    own and there was no indication, other than Gail's
    self-serving statement trying to run away from the
    questionnaire, that she wasn't feeling well and that
    the cancer had already started to deteriorate her
    system.
         In fact, evidently we don't even have any
    medical records from that point in time.  If she was
    feeling ill, she would have sought medical attention.
         Now, I get why they're trying to distance
    themselves from the questionnaire.  They know that
    it's the best evidence of what Betty smoked and
    when, and when you look at the questionnaire -- it's
    coming back into the jury room with you, it's
    Defendant's Exhibit Number 1 -- they have to
    distance themselves from the questionnaire because
    it doesn't make sense when you look at that brand
    history that Liggett's the only defendant in this
    courtroom.  The questionnaire proves that Betty
    Blitch only smoked Chesterfield for a short time,
    between 1945 and 1946, and then Eve from 1980 to
    1987.
         Now the brand chart.  And as you're aware,
    because you've seen this chart a number of times,
    what I did was, I took the brands that were listed
    alphabetically in the questionnaire and I put them
    in chronological order.  That chart is not evidence.
    It's not going to come back into the jury room with
    you, but you can make your own chart and confirm
    that what I'm telling you is right.
         Chesterfield from '45 to '46; Eve from '80 to
    '87, and none of the other brands listed in that
    questionnaire are Liggett brands. Now, the two experts who came in here and
    talked to you about the science were Dr. Feingold
    and Dr. Webster and they both agreed that the dose
    of cigarette exposure is relevant to the response or
    to the disease that you get from that dose and in
    the scheme of her overall smoking, the Chesterfield
    smoking wasn't consequential at all.  It was a blip,
    because it happened in 1945, almost 50 years before
    she ultimately went on to develop her disease.  And
    the Eve smoking in and of itself doesn't rise to a
    level of a sufficient dose to increase her risk of
    developing esophageal cancer.
         Dr. Webster told you, you have to have 20 to
    30 years of exposure to cigarette smoking to
    increase your risk of going on to develop esophageal
    cancer.
         Essentially what plaintiff is attempting to do
    in this courtroom is to hold Liggett responsible for
    brands that it didn't manufacture.
         So the only witness plaintiff called into this
    courtroom to talk about what actually caused
    Mrs. Blitch's esophageal cancer was Dr. Feingold.
    Who is Dr. Feingold or more importantly what is
    Dr. Feingold?
         Dr. Feingold is, in his own words, a lung specialist.  Well, this isn't a lung cancer case.
    This is an esophageal cancer case, which I know
    you've been hit over the head with since we started,
    and Dr. Feingold is someone who wants the cigarette
    companies to close their doors.
         Don't get me wrong, Dr. Feingold is a qualified
    lung doctor and if we were here because Mrs. Blitch
    died of lung cancer or emphysema or any other
    disease process of the lung, it would make sense
    that the plaintiff would bring you a lung doctor to
    talk about these ailments, but what was he doing
    here?  This case isn't about a disease of the lung.
    It's about esophageal cancer.
         You heard Dr. Webster, someone who is an
    otolaryngologist.
         In this country, board certified pulmonologists
    do not practice otolaryngology.  It's below the
    standard of care for a pulmonologist to treat
    esophageal cancer.
         Dr. Feingold knows this.  That's why he was
    evasive when I asked him questions about that.  He
    never really did give me a straight answer.  No, I'm
    involved in their care and treatment.  I'm involved
    in their care and treatment, but the esophageal
    cancer is treated by an otolaryngologist or an oncologist or somebody who has a specialty to
    dealing with that.  That's not Dr. Feingold.
         Plaintiff brought you a professional witness, a
    man who's worked up over 10,000 asbestos cases and
    has been disclosed in over 250 tobacco lawsuits.  80
    to 90 percent of his income comes from reviewing and
    preparing cases so he can come to court to testify,
    and in tobacco cases he only testifies on behalf of
    plaintiffs.  He doesn't spend most of his time
    treating patients.  And when he does see patients
    he's not treating them for esophageal cancer.
         Even so, Dr. Feingold is the person the
    plaintiff brought you to tell you that Mrs. Blitch's
    esophageal cancer was caused by her smoking and not
    by any of the other risk factors that were present
    in this case.  I suggest you give his testimony the
    weight it deserves when you go back to the jury room
    to deliberate.
         Dr. Feingold didn't even know that having
    moderate to massive GERD meant that the entire
    esophagus was involved and Mrs. Blitch's GERD was
    more than a risk factor for developing esophageal
    cancer in this instance.
         But Dr. Webster, who's practice actually
    involves treating patients with GERD, he was able to explain to you how GERD can cause esophageal cancer
    and he explained when you have massive to moderate
    GERD the stomach acid goes from your stomach -- and
    obviously this is not to scale -- from your stomach
    up your throat and your throat is not supposed to be
    exposed to stomach acid and the esophagus -- the
    tissue of the esophagus is affected by the acid and
    that allows the process to develop whereby you can
    go on to develop esophageal cancer.
         Dr. Feingold also didn't mention HPV as a risk
    factor on his direct examination.  Despite the fact
    that there have been studies that have looked at the
    increased risk of a person with one HPV cancer,
    meaning the cervical cancer in Mrs. Blitch's case,
    going on to develop another HPV cancer, in this case
    the esophageal cancer.
         There are particularly studies to show that a
    person with cervical cancer going on to develop a
    head and neck cancer carries an increased risk.
    Dr. Feingold knew about the cervical cancer and he
    knew that most cervical cancers are caused by high
    risk HPV viruses but he didn't bring you that
    evidence.  I elicited some of the evidence on
    cross-examination.
         In attempting to attack the credibility of Dr. Webster on this risk factor, Mr. Wilner used old
    science.  He referred to the 1989 Surgeon General's
    report and a 2003 article.  Well, we're in 2011.
    Now science is making progress by leaps and bounds
    everyday.
         As it turns out Dr. Webster spent a great deal
    of time doing research to make sure his opinions
    were current; that they complied with the current
    state of medicine.  And the current knowledge is
    that HPV causes esophageal cancer.  It's not a
    hypothesis anymore.
         Then there was the alcohol abuse as a risk
    factor.  Another example of plaintiff trying to
    distance herself from the evidence.  Plaintiff tried
    to suggest that Mrs. Blitch stopped drinking to
    excess after her 30 days of involuntary commitment
    in 1977.  A voluntary commitment that -- proceeding
    that were started by Mrs. Blitch's mother because
    she had had a drinking problem since she was
    16 years old.  The evidence proves that the
    inference that Betty Blitch stopped smoking (sic)
    after that 30 days's detox is just flat out wrong.
    That's not what the facts demonstrate.
         We know she was arrested for disorderly conduct
    in 1978.  We know she had a -- she fell so hard that she ended up with a subdural hematoma that they
    treated by drilling holes in her head in 1979.
         We know that she continued to fall and she
    continued to break bones throughout the 1980s.  This
    information is contained in her medical records.
    These are documents in evidence as Plaintiff's
    Exhibit 1A and I'll show you some examples of the
    medical records but I want to -- excuse me --
    explain something first.
         At the bottom of every page of the medical
    records is a Bates stamp number and this might help
    you as I go through.  I'm going to refer to the
    Bates stamp number as opposed to the evidence
    number.  It will be easier for you to find these
    medical records when you take them back to the jury
    room.
         She broke two hips.  She broke her right
    humerus.  She tore her rotator cuff.  She was
    injured badly enough on another occasion that they
    felt a need to x-ray her facial bones.  And they
    never tried to say that these falls were caused by
    anything other than her use of alcohol consumption.
         We know she continued to drink until just
    before she passed away because that's what the
    people who knew her said.  Jonelle, Jim, Mary, they all told us that she continued drinking after 1977.
    They were a little cagey about the drinking after
    1977.  They hedged their answers but they conceded
    she did continue drinking after that date.
         The witnesses were asked something along the
    lines of, did she have a drinking problem after
    1977, and they said things like, not that I noticed
    or not that I saw, but when pushed, they did concede
    that even though they hadn't actually seen her drunk
    after 1977, they had certainly heard that she had
    been and the medical records tell their own story.
         If we could pull up -- okay.  We've got a
    couple of different records up here.  One is Bates
    number 210315.010.000024.  To make it easy, I'm just
    going to refer to the Bates numbers, the last six
    numbers, 10.24.  You'll be able to find it that way.
         So 10.24, has consumed heavy alcohol in the
    past.
         10.29, moderate drinker in the past.  Stopped
    four to five months ago and that was dated June 22nd
    of 1994.  So that means she stopped drinking in
    approximately, you know, January of '94, just a
    few -- about 11 months before her esophageal cancer
    was actually diagnosed.
         And 10.30, she has gait ataxia.  The pattern is most consistent with an anterior cerebellar syndrome
    which may have been related in part to her previous
    alcohol use.
         104.1 (sic), there is some history of heavy
    alcohol use in the past.
         10.17, gait ataxia, this is most likely a
    combination of degenerative and alcoholic cerebellar
    degeneration.
         10.42, used to be a heavy drinker.
         10.7, he felt her gait ataxia was most likely a
    combination of degenerative and degeneration.
         Those are some of the records that confirm she
    was a heavy drinker and she continued drinking until
    at least June -- or at least January of 1994 by what
    she reported to her physicians.
         Now, who did Liggett call as its expert witness
    regarding the science issues?  We called
    Dr. Webster.  He's an otolaryngologist.  He's highly
    qualified.  He's got gold plated credentials.  I
    mean, he went to Yale Medical School and he did his
    residency and his internship at the number one
    ranked hospital facility for otolaryngology at the
    time that he was in medical school.  He treats
    diseases of the ear, nose and throat.  He's even
    done original research on oncogenes and he explained to you the proteins that have a relationship to
    causing cancer.  He treats patients every day for
    diseases of the ear, nose and throat.
         Dr. Webster only spends about one percent of
    his time doing legal consulting.  He's as far from a
    professional witness as you can get.
         And I think I might be getting short on time so
    I'm going to skip some stuff.
         Dr. Webster confirmed that more likely than not
    smoking did not play a role in Mrs. Blitch's
    esophageal cancer.  And her smoking of Liggett
    brands definitely did not play a role in her
    esophageal cancer.
         Even if you were to remove all of Betty
    Blitch's smoking, she had a substantial risk of
    going on to develop her esophageal cancer because of
    the other risk factors that she had.  In her
    lifetime, despite the fact that she only smoked two
    Liggett brands and she had three significant risk
    factors for the development of ESCC, separate and
    apart from smoking.
         So we've got the medical record that talks
    about her having moderate to massive
    gastroesophageal reflux.  That's significant.  It's
    significant GERD.  And people who never smoked and never drank but had GERD had an increased risk of
    going on to develop esophageal cancer.
         And there was an issue with the cell type, you
    know, whether it was a risk factor for squamous cell
    carcinoma, and Dr. Webster agreed it's more usually
    associated with adenocarcinoma which is the cell
    type that Mrs. Blitch didn't have, but he said there
    are studies that confirm that it can cause squamous
    cell carcinoma as well.
         We know Mrs. Blitch had cervical cancer for
    which she had a hysterectomy.  We know that
    virtually all cervical cancers are caused by the
    virus strains of HPV.  We know that there's a great
    incidence of head and neck cancers, including
    esophageal cancer, in people who already had a
    history of HPV caused cancer.  We don't know how
    Mrs. Blitch was exposed to the HPV, but we know she
    was because we know she had cervical cancer and we
    also know women who have had cervical cancer are
    more likely to go on to develop second HPV caused
    cancer than women who never had HPV caused cancer.
         Alcohol as a risk factor, the studies are
    clear.  A heavy drinker who never smoked has a
    higher risk than a smoker who never drank of getting
    esophageal cancer.  Some studies have found that the risk from drinking is almost double the risk of
    smoking.
         The evidence was also clear, if you stopped
    smoking or you stopped drinking, you reduce your
    risk of getting esophageal cancer, but -- and this
    is important -- the risk of getting esophageal
    cancer presented by heavy alcohol consumption stays
    with the drinker for a lot longer than the risk of
    smoking stays with that person.
         According to one of the studies, it took almost
    three times longer for the risk acquired from heavy
    drinking to go back to the baseline of a nondrinker
    as compared to a smoker.
         Dr. Webster said that after a smoker stops
    smoking for three to five years, she reduces her
    risk of going on to get esophageal cancer
    significantly and after ten years she's back to the
    baseline of a never smoker.  Meaning her risk of
    getting esophageal cancer after ten years is the
    same as if she never smoked.
         For alcohol cessation it took about 15 to
    20 years for the risk of developing esophageal
    cancer to drop significantly and even longer to go
    back to the baseline of a never drinker.
         So clearly the affects of heavy alcohol consumption in the context of esophageal cancer have
    more of an impact on the development of the
    esophageal cancer, if it takes that much longer for
    you to get it out of your system once you stop.
         Bottom line, the alcohol consumption is this.
    Even if she never smoked a single cigarette, she
    would have had a significant risk of going on to
    develop esophageal cancer.
         Taking all of this into consideration,
    plaintiff has failed to satisfy her burden and
    that's an important part of the instructions that
    you're going to get from the Court.  It's the
    plaintiff's burden.  I don't have to come in here
    and prove anything.  The plaintiff has to prove that
    it was the smoking to the greater weight of the
    evidence, that her addiction to smoking cigarettes
    caused her esophageal cancer.  She didn't satisfy
    that burden, let alone Liggett cigarettes did.
         Now, nicotine occurs naturally in tobacco.
    Everyone agrees.  This wasn't a secret at any point
    in time.  It's not information that the tobacco
    companies were hiding from the world and nobody came
    in here and claimed that it was.
         Dr. Feingold acknowledged that there was a
    great deal of information contained in the public literature going as far back as the 19th Century
    regarding nicotine's pharmacologic affect.
         Going back to 1931, Dr. DiBacco showed you
    excerpts from text in elementary schools that told
    students that the tobacco habit grows on most
    people.  It gets worse.  They smoke more and more
    until they're smoking all the time and bad habits
    are hard to stop, so don't start them.
         There are other examples that Dr. DiBacco
    talked about during his examination yesterday that
    demonstrate the people have long known that once you
    start smoking, it could be difficult to stop.  I'm
    not going to go into them.
         Betty knew there was nicotine in cigarettes and
    she knew that nicotine was part of reason she was
    smoking.  She used to tell her son Jim, I'm having a
    nicotine fit.
         The only quit of which we're aware of is a quit
    that no one thought was sincere.  No one believed
    she actually meant to quit.  It was something she
    did because she thought that what she -- she thought
    that was what Betty and Jonelle -- I'm sorry --
    Jonelle and Gail wanted her to say.
         Jim and Jonelle weren't even aware of her
    having quit during this week.  They testified they weren't aware of quit attempts.  Gail learned about
    this quit attempt shortly after she resumed smoking
    and agreed she didn't notice Betty smoking once
    during that one week.
         Betty never mentioned to any of them she had
    withdrawal affects during that week of smoking
    cessation.
         Dr. Feingold confirmed that nicotine's out of
    your system within a couple days of stopping
    smoking.
         Most importantly Betty never told anyone she
    thought that she was addicted, nor did she ever tell
    anyone she was unable to quit.
         No one came in here and told you that being
    addicted means you cannot quit.  Dr. Feingold said
    it doesn't mean you're a robot, that you have no
    control over your actions.  And even Dr. Feingold
    agrees that a smoker chooses to smoke the first
    cigarette and continue smoking after that first
    cigarette.
         He agreed Mrs. Blitch could have stopped
    smoking.  Everybody can quit smoking.  Addiction
    does not prevent people from stopping smoking or
    wanting to stop or acting to stop.  And the more
    often you sincerely try to stop, the better your chance of actually succeeding.
         So was Mrs. Blitch addicted to nicotine?
    Maybe.  If you believe Dr. Feingold, she was
    addicted by the time she was 15.  He said that
    teen-agers are addicted within three years of their
    smoking initiation.  This is well before she ever
    smoked a Liggett product.  She started smoking in
    1936.  She didn't smoke her first Liggett product
    until 1945.  She was about 21 years old when she
    smoked her first Liggett product.  It was about nine
    years later.
         The important question, did the addiction to
    nicotine cause her esophageal cancer?  And the
    answer to that question is definitely not.
         More importantly did an addiction to Liggett
    brand cigarettes cause her esophageal cancer?
    Again, definitely not.
         Plaintiff takes the position in this case that
    Liggett concealed material information from Betty
    Blitch and if she had had that information that was
    supposedly concealed that she would have been able
    to avoid her esophageal cancer.  That's just not
    credible based on everything we know about the
    evidence in this case.
         We have a wealth of information that demonstrates the falsity of that claim.  Betty
    Blitch had available to her the information we
    talked about in her school books.  The Surgeon
    General's 1964 report was considered one of the top
    news stories of the 20th Century.  News that the
    Surgeon General had concluded that smoking caused
    lung cancer in men was everywhere you turned back
    then.
         She was well-read.  She stayed up with current
    events.  She watched the television news every
    night.  Rates of smoking in the United States
    started to decline even before the 1964 Surgeon
    General's report came out.  And the rates of smoking
    continued to go down to the point that today only
    20 percent of the US population smokes.  More than
    half of every smokers have quit.  More people than
    not have quit smoking.  There's no reason that Betty
    Blitch, if she had wanted to quit, could not have
    been part of that group.
         Betty saw the warnings on the cigarettes packs
    starting in 1966.  I'm not going to read them to
    you.  You've seen them a bunch in this case.
         When Jim was in high school from about 1970 to
    1975 he tried to get Betty to quit.  He said, we all
    did.  We thought it was a nasty habit and he didn't like her doing it.  He tried to stop her from doing
    something that he knew was hurting her.  So what did
    Betty do when her only son told her to quit because
    he was concerned for her health, she ignored his
    warnings.  He was a child.  She was the adult.  She
    would listen to him, but she didn't have to defend
    herself to him.  These are his words.  She was an
    adult and she was doing what she was accustomed to
    doing.
         In 1969, around the same time she was actually
    diagnosed with a cancer, her cervical cancer, her
    personal physician told her to stop smoking.
         She knew enough about the health risks of
    smoking that she didn't smoke around her
    granddaughter.  Jim actually forbid it.  He
    expressed wholeheartedly to her he did not want his
    child exposed to cigarette smoke.  Betty didn't
    argue with him about this.  She loved spending time
    with her granddaughter more than she wanted to
    smoke.
         With all of this personal information available
    to her, she clearly knew that smoking caused cancer
    risk.  She could have chosen to stop smoking at any
    one of these points in time.
         It's true, the more technologically advanced therapies that are available to today to help people
    quit smoking were not available before Mrs. Blitch
    passed away.  There were things available she could
    have tried if she had been inclined, which she
    wasn't.  She could have tried nicotine gum.
    Dr. Feingold said that was available in the 1970s.
    She could have tried the nicotine patch.  That was
    available in 1992.  She didn't know that she was
    going to go on to develop an esophageal cancer in
    1994.  She could have tried to use the patch.  She
    didn't.  I mean, there's the rub.
         Even Dr. Feingold conceded this point.  In
    order to quit, you have to decide you want to quit
    and you actually have to try to quit.  Betty never
    decided that she wanted to quit.  Betty never told
    anyone that she wanted to quit and Betty never
    actually did want to quit.  She knew that smoking
    came with health risks and she continued smoking
    anyway.
         Dr. Goldenberg is the witness plaintiff called
    to discuss marketing with you.  He clearly had his
    own agenda.  It was abundantly clear he does not
    like cigarettes.  That's his choice, but it is an
    example of one of the things you can consider when
    determining the weight to give to his testimony. Dr. Goldenberg showed us a number of
    advertisements from the past 70 years.  Some of them
    were Liggett ads, but most of them were ads from
    products manufactured by other companies.  I'm not
    going to spend time talking about other companies's
    ads because Dr. Goldenberg agreed, Liggett did not
    participate in the marketing of its competitors
    brand.  That's just common sense.  Liggett's not
    responsible for the contents of the advertisements
    that its competitors put out into the market.
         And interestingly, Liggett brands did not
    experience an increase in their market share just
    because the Marlboro man was a successful ad
    campaign.
         What do these other companies brands have to do
    with Liggett?  For that matter, what do they have to
    do with Betty Blitch?  The answer to both questions
    is absolutely nothing.  None of the ads that were
    shown to you during plaintiff's case had anything to
    do with Betty Blitch or the facts of this case.
         You may recall that in my opening, I
    acknowledged that there was a lot of cigarette
    advertising in the past.  And I told you that you
    might have to decide if cigarette advertising had
    anything to do with why Mrs. Blitch started and continued smoking.  More to the point, was there
    anything false in Liggett's advertising that
    Mrs. Blitch saw -- and this is the important part --
    relied on.  That's critical.  That's like the
    lynchpin of plaintiff's case.  They have to prove
    Liggett did or said something that Betty Blitch
    relied on and that caused her -- and that reliance
    caused her to develop her esophageal cancer.
         Did Liggett fail to warn Mrs. Blitch of
    anything that it had a legal obligation to warn her
    of?
         Before I go on, you'll hear this when Judge
    Arnold instructs you.  Plaintiff does not have a
    claim for failure to warn after 1969.  So any of
    those ads that Dr. Goldenberg talked about, they
    neutralize.  They made it look glamorous.  Those ads
    aren't in play if they were after 1969.
         Now, Dr. Goldenberg came here to tell you that
    advertising drives sales and market share.  Over the
    years, he's been paid three quarters of a million
    dollars to tell juries that advertising drives sales
    and market shares.  Okay.  I mean, that's common
    sense, isn't it?  That's why companies advertise.
    Obviously the goal of advertising is to sell a
    product.  It's not a phenomenon that's unique to the tobacco industry.
         Cigarettes are legal and Liggett's allowed to
    advertise its cigarettes as long as it complies with
    the law in this country, and there's no evidence it
    did not do that.
         Dr. Goldenberg also spoke briefly about the
    health-based ads from very early on, in the early
    '50s, the tobacco manufacturers were using to
    promote their products.  On their face, some of
    those ads sound pretty farfetched today.
         Dr. Goldenberg raised an interesting point with
    regard to those health-based ads though.  He pointed
    out that the companies didn't use those campaigns
    for very long because rather than reassure smokers,
    they actually had the affect of reminding smokers of
    the raging debate going on regarding the health
    risks of smoking.  And those health-based ads
    stopped running in about 1954, 1955.
         Now, the crux of what I took away from
    Dr. Goldenberg's testimony was that the tobacco
    companies's advertisements were deceitful because
    the imagery was pretty and made smoking look
    glamorous and healthy; snow skiing, water skiing,
    canoeing, skydiving, without actually getting
    injured.  These activities are just that, they're activities.  They're not false statements.
         Dr. Goldenberg also talked about Eve
    advertising specifically.  He had no idea how much
    Liggett spent on marketing Eve.  He mentioned in
    1971 a marketing plan where all of the magazines
    where Eve was going to be advertised was listed over
    a period of a number of years.
         He had no information regarding Eve advertising
    during the period Betty Blitch actually smoked Eve
    and we know from the interrogatories that I read
    into the record yesterday afternoon that Betty
    Blitch read National Geographic, the Florida Times
    Union, Southern Living, and Better Homes and
    Gardens.  And I took a look at that marketing plan.
    Eve wasn't advertised in those publications.
         We knew what publications Mrs. Blitch read.
    That information was available to Dr. Goldenberg
    too.  He didn't even attempt to tie his testimony
    regarding Eve advertising to magazines we know Betty
    Blitch read.
         Regardless of what Dr. Goldenberg said, there's
    no evidence that Betty Blitch ever relied on any of
    the ads that he showed you in making her smoking
    decisions.  Dr. Goldenberg never said, this is an ad
    that Betty Blitch saw.  He never said, this is an ad that Betty Blitch relied on.  He never said, this is
    an ad that impacted Betty Blitch's smoking-related
    decisions.
         I mean, how could he have?  He didn't know
    Betty Blitch.  And the people who did know her never
    once told you that she relied on advertising.  They
    didn't talk to her about cigarette advertising.
    They didn't know if she relied on cigarette
    advertising either.  There's no evidence she relied
    on anything in cigarette advertising for making her
    smoking-related decisions.  In fact, Betty started
    smoking long before the majority of the ads that
    were shown to you even appeared.
         Now, Dr. Goldenberg talked about the Tobacco
    Institute too.  And I plan to talk about it in a
    little more detail when I talk about the Liggett
    side of the story, but since I'm talking about
    Dr. Goldenberg and the impact of what he talked
    about on Betty Blitch, I think it's important to
    note that Betty Blitch started smoking 22 years
    before the Tobacco Institute even came into
    existence.  You know, presumably you were shown all
    this information as evidence that Liggett hid the
    ball regarding smoking and health.  So what was
    Liggett supposed to have hidden that would have made a difference in Betty's smoking decisions?  I submit
    absolutely nothing.
         Now I'm going to turn to what I referred to in
    my opening as the side story.  I've been talking
    about the main story up to now.  So the side story
    is about Liggett.
         What does the evidence show about what Liggett
    did and what does the evidence show about what the
    other major tobacco companies --
         THE COURT:  Let me interrupt you just for a
    second because I don't want to break at the end of
    yours.  I want to give you a little more time and
    then Mr. Wilner comes right in.
         Is this a convenient time to take a brief
    recess?
         MS. LUTHER:  Sure.
         THE COURT:  Let's take a ten-minute recess.
    Ladies and gentlemen, we'll come back and finish up
    the arguments.
         THE BAILIFF:  Court's in recess for ten
    minutes.
         MS. LUTHER:  Judge, by my calculation I have
    about 35 minutes left.  Is that your understanding
    as well?
         THE COURT:  Let's see.  We recessed at 11:07 -- or 08, so you have 42 and eight would be 40 (sic),
    so you have 35 minutes left.
         MS. LUTHER:  Outstanding.  Thank you.
         (A recess was taken.)
         THE COURT:  Did you find it now, Tracy?
         MS. THOMPSON:  I'm sorry?
         THE COURT:  Did Ms. Hartley show you --
         MS. HARTLEY:  They had already corrected it,
    your Honor.
         THE COURT:  It just wasn't corrected on my
    copy.  It still isn't corrected on my copy.
         MS. HARTLEY:  I think it's the way it's
    appearing on your screen, your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Just so that the one we hand to the
    jury has a space everything's fine.  Otherwise one
    of you has to go get it.
         MS. HARTLEY:  It will be Tracy, your Honor.
         MR. FEIWUS:  Your Honor, not my Word Perfect,
    not my document, but it may be because you have full
    justification on.  Sometimes when you have full
    justification it messes up the spacing.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  Good.  Because I don't know
    nothing about what full justification is.
         MR. FEIWUS:  It means when it's straight on
    both sides. THE COURT:  Okay.  Bring the jury in.
         (Whereupon, the jurors entered the courtroom.)
         THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, what we're
    going to do, I'm going to let counsel for both sides
    finish their argument.  I don't want to break for
    lunch and just have one side finish their argument,
    which will put us going to lunch a little bit later
    than usual, but not much.  Then we'll go to lunch
    and give you instructions of law right after lunch.
         Go ahead, Mrs. Luther.
         MS. LUTHER:  As I was saying, I'm going to turn
    now to the Liggett story, the side story.  What does
    the evidence show about what Liggett did and what
    does the evidence show about what the other major
    companies did?
         The evidence showed that Liggett was a
    responsible tobacco company.  It took a path
    independent from the rest of the industry during
    critical parts of the tobacco and health story.
         We saw evidence that beginning in the late
    1940s and culminating with the 1964 Surgeon
    General's report there was a merging scientific
    evidence concerning the lung cancer risk from
    smoking.  The first widely publicized story was the
    1950 statistical study of Wynder and Graham.  This was followed by the Doll and Hill study in 1952 and
    the Wynder Graham mouse painting studies in 1953.
    And these are all studies that were discussed during
    the testimony of Dr. Feingold and were also
    mentioned during the testimony of Dr. DiBacco.
         There's no question that these early scientific
    studies were very important.  And by today's
    standards we know that they were largely correct.
    Now, today, in 2011, looking back, no one today
    disputes cigarettes are an important cause of lung
    cancer and other diseases, but in the 1950s this
    issue was not yet resolved.  There was a debate, a
    scientific debate, a controversy of sorts, Liggett
    scientists -- regardless of what Mr. Wilner tells
    you -- on both side of the question as to what these
    studies really meant.
         You heard Dr. Feingold testify that even the
    famous Dr. Evarts Graham himself -- Mr. Wilner
    referred to him as the grand old man -- in the early
    1950s was not convinced of the evidence.  He and
    other scientists acknowledged that a correlation
    existed between cigarette smoking and lung cancer.
    As you heard Dr. Feingold testify, physicians and
    scientists were skeptical because they needed more
    evidence before they could draw conclusions about disease causation.
         Correlation studies are important to science
    because they identify topics for future research but
    in and of themselves, they are not proof.  While we
    may only remember the famous scientific studies,
    science is a process.  Even landmark experiments
    must be repeated with alternative explanations
    investigated and further research undertaken until
    the evidence grows to a point where a scientific
    consensus emerges.  This is exactly what started
    happening in the 1950s.
         So while these studies in the early '50s were
    important, they weren't dispositive of the issue and
    this makes sense, and as we would expect, scientific
    studies continued throughout the 1950s and the early
    1960s on the issue of lung cancer and cigarette
    smoking.  The evidence mounted, but it wasn't until
    1964 and the first Surgeon General's report that a
    scientific consensus on lung cancer was finally
    reached.
         Indeed, you heard what Dr. Feingold admitted at
    the end of his cross-examination.  The Surgeon
    General didn't even come to the conclusion that
    there was a causal link between esophageal cancer
    and cigarette smoking until the 1982 Surgeon General 's report.  That was a fact that plaintiff's
    conveniently ignored in their case in chief.
         So what did Liggett do in response to this
    information coming out in the early 1950s and what
    did the other companies do?  You will see that there
    is a critical distinction between the two.  Liggett
    responded to the controversy by investing enormous
    resources and a biological testing program with
    Arthur D. Little.
         You heard that Arthur D. Little was a reputable
    scientific consulting firm, a group of scientists
    from MIT who broke off and started this consulting
    firm.  They consulted with government officials.
    They consulted with NASA.  The man in charge of
    Liggett's testing program at Arthur D. Little was
    Dr. Charles Kensler.  He was a preeminent scientists
    from Sloan-Kettering, one of the top cancer
    institutions in the country, in New York City and he
    had impeccable credentials, and together Liggett and
    Arthur D. Little headed out to do two things.  First
    to coordinate with Dr. Wynder himself and see if the
    Wynder and Graham skin mouse painting test could be
    duplicated.  And second to see if they could
    identify what -- if anything, what specifically in
    the cigarette smoke could be identified as the problem.  With the hope if they could identify it,
    they could remove it.
         Essentially they were trying to figure out what
    in cigarette smoke was responsible for producing the
    tumors on the mouse skin.
         The Wynder Graham mouse painting test was a
    landmark experiment.  You've seen a lot of coverage
    of it and when the results were released some of the
    top research labs in the country, Sloan-Kettering,
    Roswell Park, Yale, all tried to start replicating
    Dr. Wynder's results.  Liggett wasn't the only one
    trying to do this.  Wynder himself said replicating
    the results was an important scientific endeavor and
    that he himself participated with Liggett and Arthur
    D. Little in this endeavor.  Other public health
    officials were also invited to participate in
    Liggett's replication of these studies.
         You saw the report by Arthur D. Little and
    Liggett concerning the results of their testing.
    They were, in fact, able to replicate Dr. Wynder's
    results, but they got significantly lower incidences
    of tumors than Dr. Wynder did and when they applied
    a less amount of tar, they received no papillomas or
    cancers at all.  And you heard that Dr. Kensler was
    reluctant to publish those results because he didn't want to undermine the information that was already
    out in the open about the causal connection.
         He didn't want Liggett to be taking the
    position that, you know what, maybe those results
    aren't valid.  We know that Liggett continued in
    earnest with its biological testing program
    throughout the 1950s and we know that Liggett's
    researchers were able to identify important
    carcinogens in cigarette smoke that they believed
    were contributing to the biological activity in
    Wynder's tests and the ABL test.  And at the
    appropriate time Liggett made that science publicly
    available.
         It published its results when Dr. Kensler spoke
    at the New York Academy of Science in 1960 and even
    more significantly, it voluntarily provided all of
    its research, all of its data to the Surgeon
    General's Advisory Committee in the 1960s.  The
    volume is in evidence.  It's extensive.  It's about
    this much material.  You know, it's a ream of
    scientific studies and the results of those studies.
         And Mr. Wilner says that Liggett lied to the
    Surgeon General.  Well, you know what, the Surgeon
    General didn't think that Liggett lied to the
    Surgeon General.  The Surgeon General's committee was very grateful for the work that Liggett gave and
    shared with them, and they recognized that and they
    acknowledged that and they said, simple gratitude is
    not enough to thank you for your sharing those
    results with us.  There's no indication that Liggett
    lied in that submission.
         Now, Mr. Wilner has tried to turn Liggett's
    positive efforts, its extensive research and
    consultation with Dr. Wynder and its cooperation
    with the Surgeon General's advisory committee on its
    head instead of congratulating Liggett on what no
    other tobacco company did.
         Mr. Wilner criticizes Liggett because Liggett
    tried to do the right things back in the 1950s and
    '60s.  It's the independent science on important
    issues at hand and made all of its research and all
    of its data available to the public health community
    whose job it was to protect the public.
         It's very easy for Dr. Feingold to come in here
    60 years later and apply present day scientific
    standard about what we know today to disease
    causation in the 1950s.  But that's not a fair
    judgment and its not an accurate judgment.
         The scientists working for Liggett did exactly
    what legitimate scientists do and most importantly they shared their data.  I know I'm harping on that
    but it's important.  It's important to know Liggett
    wasn't hiding the studies that they were doing.
         You know, Mr. Wilner said, we call these the
    secret documents.  They weren't secret documents.
    All of this information was shared in the scientific
    community and with public health officials.  You'll
    see in the nine volume submission that we have
    identified specific carcinogens that appear in
    tobacco smoke, including polycyclic aromatic
    hydrocarbons, benzopyrene and a host of others.
         Now, Mr. Wilner -- or not -- maybe not
    specifically Mr. Wilner, but plaintiff's counsel
    repeatedly showed you a document called L&M, a
    perspective review.  If we could get the Elmo,
    please.
         I am not going to show you the whole document.
    It's in evidence.  You can take a look at it.  And
    they harped on what I've got highlighted here.
    These five lines essentially where Arthur D. Little
    wrote, there are biologically active materials
    present in tobacco.  These are cancer causing,
    cancer promoting, poisonous, stimulating,
    pleasurable and flavorful.  Liggett didn't hide this
    ball. All of this information is information that was
    contained within the nine volume submission.  It was
    information that Liggett shared with the Surgeon
    General's committee.  It wasn't a secret document.
         So let's contrast Liggett's responsible conduct
    with its competitors, the other tobacco companies in
    the 1950s.  What did they do?  Dr. Feingold
    testified to that during his examination.
         They got together at the Plaza Hotel in New
    York City in 1953.  They hired the PR firm of Hill &
    Knowlton.  They created an organization called the
    Tobacco Industry Research Committee, otherwise known
    as TIRC.  And Liggett did not belong to that
    organization when it was known as TIRC.  It was
    created in 1953, 1954.  Liggett became a member of
    the Council For Tobacco Research, which was the
    successor to the TIRC, in 1964, but for that
    ten-year period of time, between 1954 and 1964,
    Liggett had nothing to do with that organization.
    Liggett only belonged to the Council For Tobacco
    Research from March of 1964 to January of 1968.  So
    it was is a very short period of time.
         The document that Mr. Feiwus showed on his
    cross of Dr. Feingold, which we've referred to as
    the trip report, demonstrates that Liggett did not participate in those activities.  And I'm just going
    to show you the relevant paragraphs.  So the
    document that I'm about to show you is a document
    from 1958.  It was authored by a tobacco company
    scientist from England who met with all the tobacco
    companies and many reputable individuals who were
    involved in the tobacco and science issues of the
    day.  And what did they write about Liggett?
    Looking specifically at the area in the brackets --
    and I confess, I'm not very adept at this zooming
    thing.  All right.
         So it says, Liggett & Myers stayed out of TIRC
    originally because they doubted the sincerity of
    TIRC motives -- TIRC motives and believed that the
    organization was too unwieldily to work efficiently.
    They remain convinced that their misgivings were
    justified.  In their opinion, TIRC has done little,
    if anything, constructive.
         The constantly reiterated, not proven
    statements in the face of mounting contrary evidence
    has thoroughly discredited TIRC and the SAB, which
    stands for Scientific Advisory Board, of the TIRC is
    supporting almost, without exception, projects which
    are not related directly to smoking and lung cancer.
         Liggett felt that the problem was sufficiently serious to justify large scale investment by the
    company directly in experimental research on smoke
    and cancer.  Accepting privately that a strong case
    against tobacco had been made out and avoiding any
    public components until their own research had
    provided something concrete to offer.
         Unlike the other companies who were involved
    with the TIRC, Liggett engaged in serious science
    and didn't speak on the issues until it had solid
    concrete science to offer.  When it had scientific
    results, it did.  It shared them with the Surgeon
    General's committee.
         What would Mr. Wilner have you believe?  He
    wants you to believe all these companies are the
    same.  He wants you to buy into the concept of guilt
    by association.  Just because Liggett was a tobacco
    company, it should be lumped in with all these other
    tobacco companies despite the evidence, its conduct
    is distinguishable from these other companies.  You
    shouldn't accept that.  There is no evidence of
    that.
         What Mr. Wilner is arguing is one fact that his
    whole conspiracy theory rests on and that one fact
    is that in 1958 Liggett joined the Tobacco
    Institute, which I touched on briefly during the main story.
         Mr. Wilner's claim is, because Liggett was a
    member of this industry group, it's now responsible
    for what every other tobacco company did or said for
    a 50-year period of time.  That doesn't meet the
    common sense standard.
         You heard what Dr. Goldenberg said about the
    Tobacco Institute.  You can see it had many members,
    at least 17.  It included tobacco growers.  It
    included everybody who had any interest in tobacco.
         He conceded that the principal role of the
    Tobacco Institute as set forth in its charter was
    lobbying, representing the tobacco industry in
    Washington and in state governments and activity
    that is protected by our constitution.  And the
    evidence showed that Liggett was a minor player at
    best in terms of financial contributions to the
    Tobacco Institute, in terms of governance and
    control.  But what Mr. Wilner wants you believe is
    that every letter, every comment, every statement by
    the Tobacco Institute or by Philip Morris or by
    Reynolds or by Brown & Williamson or the American
    Tobacco Company regarding smoking or tobacco health
    issues is somehow attributable to Liggett and
    somehow part of a conspiracy.  That's simply not true.
         Ask yourself what documents or letters did you
    see from any Liggett personnel authorizing or
    directing Tobacco Institute conduct or Tobacco
    Institute statements or components.  There weren't
    any.
         Now there's shortcut for all of this, a crucial
    test for evaluating the claims on this case.  Did
    any of the statements by the Tobacco Institute,
    Liggett, Philip Morris, RJ Reynolds, American
    Tobacco Company, Brown & Williamson or anyone else
    play any role in Betty Blitch's decisions to start
    smoking, to continue to smoke or to not quit
    smoking?  There isn't a stitch of evidence of any of
    this.  There's no evidence that any of this made any
    difference to Mrs. Blitch.
         Now, Dr. DiBacco told you only about six
    percent of the overall information regarding smoking
    and health came from the companies or their
    representatives.  And that number actually declined
    over the years.
         Does anyone believe that any of those ads or
    any of that information had any impact on Betty
    Blitch's decision to start smoking in 1936?  I mean,
    the primary information that you were shown started in the 1950s.
         Dr. Feingold said the conspiracy started in
    1953 at the Plaza Hotel meeting.  It had nothing to
    do with Betty Blitch's decision to start smoking
    22 years earlier.  Does it make any sense that any
    of Liggett's Chesterfield ads that ran in the 1950s
    would have any impact on her decision to start
    smoking in the late '30s and to smoke Chesterfield
    in 1945?
         The Chesterfield ads in the 1950s certainly
    didn't persuade her to smoke Chesterfield in the
    1950s.
         Professor DiBacco also showed you widespread
    information on cancer coming out in the 1950s and
    '60s.  There were widespread efforts coming out on
    health groups and the federal government on the
    health risks of smoking and the attempt to regulate
    cigarettes.
         By 1968 Daniel Horn who is one of the
    scientists from the 1954 Hammond and Horn
    epidemiological studies was quoted as saying, you
    could stand on a rooftop and shout smoking is
    dangerous at the top of your lungs and you would not
    be telling anyone anything they didn't already know.
         It isn't credible to believe that by 1968 that Betty Blitch who was an intelligent, well-read,
    strong-willed personality that she did not know what
    every other person referred to by Dr. Horn knew at
    that time and that is, that cigarettes are
    dangerous.
         Mr. Wilner suggests that Mrs. Blitch couldn't
    have known the risks.  All of this information was
    somehow lost on her because of the marketing and
    advertising campaign by the companies and the
    lobbying group, Tobacco Institute.  Ask yourself, is
    this really credible argument?  Does it make sense?
         I think Professor DiBacco said it the best.
    Nobody was looking to the tobacco companies and
    nobody was looking to the advertisements to get the
    health information.
         One of last things I want to talk to you about
    are the issue of punitive damages.  Plaintiffs have
    a claim for punitive damages in this case.  Punitive
    damages are a category of damages that are separate
    and apart from compensatory damages.
         Remember, they've asked you to award Jonelle
    and Jim millions of dollars to compensate them for
    the loss of their mother.
         Punitive damages are damages that are intended
    to punish the company and to deter it from acting or engaging in bad behavior going forward.
         The judge will instruct you on the standard for
    punitive damages.  It's important to note that it's
    different than the standard for compensatory damage.
    For compensatory damages they only have to establish
    their claim by the greater weight of the evidence.
    For punitive damages the standard is much higher,
    and that's a clear and convincing standard and the
    instructions will explain to you what the difference
    is between the two.  But in order for the plaintiff
    to prove by clear and convincing evidence that
    plaintiff is entitled to an award of punitive
    damages, they have to show that there is evidence
    that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and
    of such weight that it produces a firm belief or
    conviction without hesitation as to the matter at
    issue.
         Here, whether there is any such evidence that
    Liggett's wrongful conduct caused damage to Betty
    Blitch and whether it is necessary to send a message
    to Liggett to punish Liggett for the way it is
    currently doing business, that's what you need to
    apply the clear and convincing standard to.
         Back in the day, Liggett acted the way a
    responsible cigarette manufacturer should have acted.  It conducted independent research to
    corroborate the results of Dr. Wynder's mouse skin
    painting studies.  It turned over almost a decade
    worth of research to the Surgeon General's
    committee.  The information provided to the Surgeon
    General's committee was instrumental in allowing the
    Surgeon General to conclude in 1964 that smoking was
    associated with lung cancer in men; that it did
    cause lung cancer in men and even after the warnings
    went on the packs in 1966, Liggett continued to do
    research and development to try and make its product
    safe for its smokers, at least safer.
         Liggett today is the smallest of the major
    companies.  It has approximately two percent of the
    market share.  Back in 1996 it was the first tobacco
    company to publicly admit that smoking causes
    certain diseases and is addictive.  And this is all
    evidence that Mr. LeBow testified to.  Liggett puts
    a warning on its cigarettes that is not required by
    Congress stating that smoking is addictive.  Liggett
    discloses its ingredients on its cartons of
    cigarettes.
         Liggett is doing business as a responsible
    tobacco manufacturer.  More importantly, not to beat
    a dead horse, but Liggett's conduct over the years had no bearing on Betty Blitch.  Liggett does not
    deserve to be punished.
         Now, before I sit down, I just want to go over
    a couple of the more important jury instructions and
    the verdict form that you're going to take back into
    the jury room with you.  And I still don't have
    copies of those.  So normally I would put the
    verdict form up on the screen and show you how we
    think it would be appropriate to fill the verdict
    form out.
         But first I want to reiterate, plaintiff has
    the burden of proof in this case.  It's up to her to
    prove Betty Blitch was addicted to smoking and that
    her addiction to smoking was the legal cause of her
    death and plaintiff has to prove that by the greater
    weight of the evidence.
         As far as the verdict form is concerned, rather
    than checking everything off as we go, since I can't
    do that, I'm just going to highlight the first
    question that Mr. Wilner talked to you about and
    that is -- it's my draft copy -- was Laura Elizabeth
    Blitch, hereafter Betty Blitch, addicted to
    cigarettes containing nicotine and if so, was
    cigarette smoking during such addiction a legal
    cause of the cancer that caused her death?  The answer to that question should be no based on the
    evidence that we've just discussed.
         If you answer no to that question, your job is
    done.  You sign the verdict form and you come back
    and your jury duty is over.
         If you don't agree with Liggett's assessment of
    the evidence in this case, you would go on to answer
    other questions on the verdict form.
         Was Liggett Group's negligence a legal cause of
    Betty Blitch's death?  We submit the answer to that
    question again is no.
         And you know what, there's so many scribbles on
    this that I don't want to go into it and read the
    wrong thing, but suffice it to say that we believe
    your response to questions one, two, three, and four
    should be no and if that's the case, then your
    verdict will be for Liggett and we believe that's
    the appropriate finding in this case given the
    evidence.
         I appreciate your time and attention.  I
    apologize for going on for as long as I did.  And we
    thank you very much for your services.  Thanks.
