         MR. WILNER:  Not going to rush.  We've been
    here a long time.  Thank you, your Honor.  May it please the Court.
         I've been looking forward to the ability to
    address you directly.  We've been through a week or
    so of quite a lot of material.  It's been a lot.
    It's been a lot for us.  I'm sure it's been a lot
    for you, but a -- I hope fascinating disturbing,
    disturbing -- very disturbing serious amount of
    information that we've learned about what's happened
    in this country and what's happened to Betty Blitch.
    And in the next few minutes I'm going to try and not
    -- I'm not going to try and persuade you because
    I -- because the evidence that I suggest you make
    your decision on you've already heard and you will
    see because we backed up every single thing we said,
    everything, with reports from the government, with
    evidence from inside the companies.  Every single
    thing anybody said on the plaintiff's side, we have
    backed up a hundred times and sometimes more than we
    needed to, but we thought you deserved it.  And if
    it took time, I'm sorry, but that's the way it was.
         But there are silent witnesses to -- in
    addition to the outstanding testimony you heard from
    Dr. Allen Feingold, the precision, the knowledge --
    and he's my friend.  I'm so honored.  I am.  Just
    the ability to know that much and to have studied that much and to be so -- to be able to cite
    everything like that I think you deserved it.  It
    was a lot.
         But the silent witnesses are the witnesses that
    cannot be changed today and here they are.  And
    you'll see them.
         And might I -- might I get one of the boxes.
         THE CLERK:  A box.
         MR. WILNER:  Any box will do right now.  Thank
    you.
         This is one box.  You're going to get for your
    deliberation these boxes that are sitting back here.
    And they're marked in a way that hopefully will make
    some sense.  For instance -- and I just picked up
    one.  This is marked Plaintiff's 5B.  It's called
    plaintiff's composite exhibits book SG.  And SG -- I
    just picked up one at random -- are excerpts from
    the reports of the United States Surgeon General.
         Now, we had no time to read all of this and
    maybe you won't have time to read them all either
    but they're all here.  Are they all -- are they the
    full text?  Of course not because that would be ten
    feet high.  But they're here and they substantiate
    everything we said scientifically, in terms of
    the -- how the history developed.  Here's the first one, smoking and health 1964, this is the real
    thing.  Number two is 1967 and they go on up to
    2010.
         Nothing we said, I submit to you, may -- I hope
    I didn't make a mistake.  Every single thing we said
    we totally agree with the United States Surgeon
    General, unlike some folks here.
         We also -- sorry to trouble you.  Another one,
    please.  Keep them coming.
         THE CLERK:  Well --
         MR. WILNER:  Thank you.  This is a light one
    too.  I'm not going to mess them all up.
         Here are book S.  This is really interesting
    stuff.  Book S are a compilation -- Dr. Feingold
    talked about it -- of actual scientific journals in
    chronologic order showing how the scientists
    discovered and published the horrors of nicotine and
    what that -- cigarettes and what it does to you.
    Starting with the great Ochsner.  So it's here, with
    Wynder and Graham.  And this is the entire article.
    Levin, Shrink, (phonetic) Mills, Doll and Hill.  And
    you may know these people in a way.  They're our
    friends.  They're the friends of truth today.  And
    they're all there.
         Please another one.  For you to see.  Thank you.
         Now, forgive me in advance if I trip on these
    since I've been tripping on stuff.  Here is book L.
    Book L, several volumes, are what we call the
    Liggett book.  These are chronological order of
    Liggett documents from inside their own company.  We
    call them secret documents but they're here now to
    look at.
         We've discussed many but not all.  And as you
    go through these, you'll see they're in -- we tried
    to make them in chronological order.  There may be a
    few mistakes, but you'll see what went on inside
    this company, what they did.  They can't change this
    stuff.  I mean no matter who they hire, the words
    are here.
         You've seen a lot of them.  I'll put a couple
    up in a few minutes here.  No time to go through
    them all, but you have the right.  You can divide it
    up.  You can say someone read this, someone read
    that.  That's all up to you.  We would not be doing
    what I believe in doing which is complete scientific
    valid verifiable stuff if I didn't give you
    everything we -- we could possible -- not everything
    possible.  We'd be here for months, but a reasonable
    sample.  And then I got something to say about that in a second.
         Okay.  And then we have another set -- I won't
    bother to get it now -- volume P.  Volume P is the
    public statements and the conspiracy between Liggett
    and the Tobacco Institute.  Not between, because
    Liggett was a founding member.  I meant to say
    Liggett as part of the Tobacco Institute.  And we've
    only scratched the surface of that.  So let me say
    first that although you have heard a lot of
    testimony -- and it's been powerful -- there's a lot
    more here.  And we'll stand by everything that's
    here.  It's words and all and we've tried to put it
    in.  If it's a lot, we're sorry but it means
    something.
         So, now, why are we -- what is left to do?
    Well, let me make another remark.  When we did our
    jury selection and I believe it's a -- and I said it
    was -- a tremendous American privilege to sit where
    you're sitting and we respect you.  We really do.
    Today's a voting day and how fitting and proper, you
    know, it really is.  It's proper and you not only
    will -- if you wish to exercise that right, will
    have another right because you've now been
    elevated -- I'll use the word elevated -- you've
    been elevated to be able to make important decisions after hearing things that perhaps only a very few
    people in the world have heard.  There are very few
    people who know what you know now.  There are very
    few people who have access to all these -- all this
    information.
         There are few people who have listened to
    Dr. Allen Feingold and Dr. Goldenberg, excellent,
    knowledgeable people discuss this -- these subjects
    in depth, and there are few people who will have the
    opportunity to look through these internal documents
    in depth because that's what we want you to do is to
    make a considered decision.  But you've been
    elevated and we respect that.  And all we ask of you
    is that you continue to keep your mind open and that
    you not lose your common sense of course because
    that's part of you.  We want that.  But that you
    follow your good judgment and your common sense,
    what makes the most sense, what hangs together,
    who's telling the truth here, who isn't.
         So where are we?  Well, as jurors in this
    situation, you have been able to see under the door
    maybe through the key hole, but we don't have key
    holes anymore.  It's an old expression.  Under the
    door, you've seen under a crack.  We have been
    able -- we have seen under a crack, under the door and we've looked inside.  We looked inside the
    tobacco industry.  We've looked inside the Tobacco
    Institute.  And we've looked inside of Liggett.  And
    it's not pretty.  It's not a pretty way.  It's not a
    legitimate way to run companies in America.
         In America we allow great freedom of operation.
    We allow you to sell product.  We don't have -- we
    have an economy that's based on an individual making
    money.  That's all okay.  But -- here's the big but.
    This is why this country is so great.  Because with
    that freedom, with the freedom to make money and the
    freedom to be a capitalist, which is what we all
    want -- that's brought us the best living in the
    world -- comes a responsibility.  That's the power
    of this country.  It's that with your freedom you're
    responsible for what you do.  You get it but you got
    to know you're going to be called to the table
    should you do something that's not proper.
         And one of the things that you must do if
    you're a manufacturer is you must tell the truth
    about your product.  You have to do it.  It's part
    of the deal.  You get to do it, but you tell the
    truth.  And once you go down the dark side, once you
    start saying, oh, no, not true, it doesn't cause
    cancer, doesn't do this, doesn't do that, and once you get involved with the rest of the industry and
    you link together and you do all the things -- I'm
    going to talk about what they are -- that are mind
    boggling in their scope and power, once you do that,
    once you commit, you're walking down a line, you're
    able to sell your product and up comes a question.
         A scientist in 1941, the great Dr. Ochsner has
    been looking at lung cancer rates and they're going
    up.  Why?  Why is lung cancer going up?  You
    remember that (makes noise).  It's the canary in the
    coal mine.  It's serious.  People die.  This isn't a
    game.  It's shooting up.  People haven't changed.
    People are not changing their genetics that fast.
    So it has to be an outside source, and in 1941 --
    and maybe there were a few early ones.  Ochsner
    wrote, it's our -- we've looked at all this other
    stuff.  We're scientifically evaluating everything,
    the tar in the roads, this, that and the other, and
    you know what, it's cigarettes because they're going
    up too.  And it's biologically plausible because of
    the stuff that's in them.
         So you're a manufacturer and you're making
    cigarettes.  You're doing pretty good, and all of
    the sudden -- let's leave it aside whether you
    should -- whether Liggett should have been the one to do the discovery and not Ochsner because I think
    they should have.  I think it should have been
    Liggett out in front.  I think it should have been
    Liggett doing the research to protect its customers.
    But let's even forget that.  Let's say they were
    just happy.  They didn't buy it.  And then Ochsner
    comes.
         Now you've got to decide what path are we going
    to take.  You know, what, -where are we going?  Are
    we going in this direction which is with Ochsner?
    Are we going to go there and say, let's do -- let's
    not fight, let's err on the side of full disclosure?
    If there's a problem, let's err on the side of full
    disclosure.  That's the correct thing to do.  That's
    the reasonable thing to do.  That's what America
    requires you to do.
         You get the right to sell a product, but you
    got to make the right decision.  You got the
    responsibility.  If there's anything coming up that
    says your customers -- and this isn't soap.  This is
    deadly stuff.  50 percent it turned out of regular
    smokers died.  Nothing like that.  It's mind
    boggling and yet people are still addicted and they
    still smoke and people do smoke, and how is it that
    this something of 50 percent fatality rates with -- and not easy deaths either, horrible deaths, is
    still -- you know, it's still with us.  Dropped down
    a lot but still with us.  Well, you know, I know
    why.  We know why, but -- so my thesis is this.
         My idea is this, that when you take the
    fatal -- when you take the wrong turn -- you know,
    you're going down -- here's Ochsner.  After that
    there's Wynder.  After that there's Doll and Hill
    and they're all saying and you go, hum, do I want to
    go there?  Hum, what you going to do?  It's going to
    hurt sales.  That's the problem.  Going to Wynder,
    going to Ochsner, it's going to hurt the sales.
         So they're on the horns of the most classic
    dilemma, all -- you know, that a business can be in.
    They've got to make that decision.  Is it going to
    be our sales or are we going to protect our
    customers?  Because it's very clear had they gone
    that way, had they made the right turn instead of
    the left, the world would be different.  I'll show
    that with some graphs.
         I mean, the skyrocketing would be different.
    The massive counterattack of the Tobacco Institute
    on the science would be different.  The addiction,
    it would be out in the open.  The research on
    addiction should have happened 30 years before it did.  Instead of this, oh, it's not addictive, not
    addictive.  The people who knew the most about the
    product should have been the ones out there
    realizing really fast that they're not dealing with
    an ordinary, as I say, bar of soap or even an
    ordinary thing that you can pick up and put down.
    We're dealing with something that's not only toxic
    but also very addictive.  And that combination kills
    50 percent of the people.  That's a loaded gun in
    your face.  It -- that's a terrible thing.
         So instead of making the right turn, they make
    the left turn.  And what do they do?  And I'm --
    it's interesting all through this trial I've been --
    we've been on the board showing you stuff, but I'm
    not now because I think I just wanted to get this
    out.  So they go, no, I'm not going there.  And I
    know Liggett's probably going to say, well, we tried
    to, you know, do this with Arthur D. Little and we
    painted the mice and, yes, we found out they got
    cancer, but we told the Surgeon General and I'm
    going to prove to you -- we already did that once
    with Dr. Feingold -- that's just nonsense.
         Yeah, they did the mice.  Then they lied to the
    Surgeon General, and I've got the document here that
    they -- in their big presentation they totally lied. They didn't even say anything about the inhalation,
    they'd proven cancer.  They kept trying to minimize
    it.  Their whole presentation is like it's not as
    bad.
         So -- so that's a distraction.  They took the
    left fork.  They went towards the dark side.  What
    was over there?  What was on that dark side?  Well,
    it's very interesting.  So what they did -- what
    Liggett did -- this is all a summary.  I'll go over
    some of this in more detail.  But what did Liggett
    do when they took the dark side turn?  Well, the
    first thing they did of course is they went back to
    the public and they put this -- put on their little
    statement again.  That was pretty good.
         Can you put on slide 18.
         That was this publication.  That was really one
    of their first steps on to the dark side.
    Because -- because, remember, this is 1954 and a
    year before -- would you put on 16.  I'm not going
    to go back over all this stuff, but, you know, this
    was powerful in its day.  This was the -- you know,
    the right side starting to call out.
         And let me totally agree with certain things
    Dr. DiBacco said although most of it sounds rather
    incredible, but the -- people did see that.  A lot of people did.  And then of course, they began to
    see the dark side.  So this was out there.
         Go back to 18.
         So Liggett then knowing what's there, knowing
    full well that carcinogens, things that cause cancer
    had been found to cause it in those rats which --
    you know, which -- in those mice which was a serious
    thing.
         Let me get my pointer because I forgot it.
         Then they come out with this mealy mouth double
    talk, which is like from all the thousands of
    analyses, our research department's found no reason
    to believe the isolation and elimination of any
    element native to cigarette, blah, blah, blah, blah,
    blah.  The point was, you know, don't worry people,
    because we got great research.  We're going to, you
    know, take care of you.  Don't listen to this mice
    business.  Don't listen to the scientists.  Listen
    to us.  We know what we're talking about.  We got a
    big machine.
         And, you know, why would they say that?  Why
    wouldn't they take out an ad that says, the great
    Dr. Wynder who has proven that cigarettes cause
    cancer using epidemiology, not just statistics but
    epidemiology, including clinical medicine, has also established biologic plausibility and this is a very
    serious finding and we think everybody who's smoking
    our cigarettes or thinking about it ought to know
    about it.
         Instead it's this.  Don't worry.  This is only
    one of probably hundreds of things that you'll see
    as you go through the things that I've talked about.
         So once you get to the dark side, what else
    happens?  Well, the -- 160 -- and incidentally
    you'll see that they're all tabbed, and if you want
    to go back and refer to one of these -- take a note
    or something of what it is, you can.  But this was
    the next -- one of the next big steps on the dark
    side.  I'll just hold it up.  It's all right.  This
    is the minutes of the first board of directors of
    the Tobacco Institute showing that Liggett & Myers,
    along with all the major tobacco companies, sat
    down, sketched it out, what was going to happen.
         What was the purpose of the Tobacco Institute?
    It was to sell cigarettes.  Because it helps to sell
    them if you could keep people quiet and not worried
    so much.  And that was the whole point.  The whole
    point was to give people assurances.  The whole
    point was to create doubt in their minds that the
    scientists were not quite right, or that there was another side to the story.
         Now, Dr. DiBacco seemed to think, although he's
    not a scientist, that, oh, yeah, these are eminent
    scientists who disagreed.  Well, I challenge anyone
    to come forward -- I challenged him of course.  He
    wasn't a scientist, couldn't answer -- to come
    forward with a single legitimate epidemiologic study
    or biologic study that disproved anything that
    Wynder, Graham, Doll, Hill, Hammond, Horn had said,
    and there never was.  All those scientists that you
    heard were paid by the Tobacco Institute and the
    tobacco companies to basically doubt things, to come
    in and say, oh, not so sure.  Oh, can't quite tell.
         And then since everybody loved research, they
    all said, well, more research is needed.  Well, sure
    there was.  There was always more research needed.
    Of course everyone likes research, but that has
    nothing to do with the fact that people are dying
    right now today, today, pick up the cigarette, 1954,
    draw on the cigarette, you're getting addicted,
    you're going to die from it one day.
         What's that got to do with research being
    needed?  Sure there was research needed, and, in
    fact, the research that was needed wasn't done
    because the research that was needed was a cure for addiction.  And that was never done.  They didn't do
    it.
         It's true that they sought, I mean, inside
    their laboratories probably some way to get the
    cancer out of the product.  I'm sure they tried,
    because they don't want to kill people.  I'm not
    saying that they like to kill people.  What they
    want to do is sell cigarettes.  That's the number
    one thing that Liggett needs to do.  That's it.
    They need to sell cigarettes.  So let's think about
    this.  If they could get the cancer out of the
    product and still sell the product, well, that would
    be fine.  We'd be fine with that.  But they never
    did.  They never could.
         But the one thing that they never wanted to
    do -- and I think you'll see in these documents
    totally backs us up.  The one thing they never
    wanted to do, never seriously wanted, was to cure
    the addiction.  And why not, you might ask.  Well,
    you know why.  Because it's the addiction that
    brings you back to the cash register.  There isn't
    anything like addiction to make your sales.  If you
    are selling a pack a day to 50 million people, as an
    industry you have a huge amount of sales.
         If those people are un-addicted and can just decide, well, today I'm not going to smoke because I
    just don't feel like it or I'm sick today or it's
    raining today or I have a cold -- lots of reasons
    that people would not choose to pick up a cigarette,
    but not the addicted people.  They smoke day in and
    day out.  They smoke colds, flus.  They smoke
    through holes in their throat.  They smoke, as
    Dr. Ochsner said -- remember that piece, after
    they're told their legs are going to come off,
    they're going to lose their legs, they smoke.  What
    power of addiction.  You know, powerful.
         And, sure, we'll bring up cases of people who
    have quit though they're addicted, and that has
    nothing to do with anything because it does happen.
    Heroin attics do quit.  The fact is that if you
    want -- if you are addicted and everything goes
    right for you and you get the right help and you
    really, really believe that you have to quit, you
    have a higher chance of quitting than if you don't.
    And Dr. Feingold put up on his board, there on our
    board -- and he talks to everybody that comes in his
    office.  That's -- a lot of these people are dying
    from a cigarette-related disease and he gives
    them -- he throws a book at them.  The truth, the
    whole truth, and nothing but the truth, ten percent after that.  He -- if he gave them doubts and said,
    oh, but there are these scientists over here that
    think it's a problem, none.  If he gave them -- if
    he on the other hand gives them the new drugs that
    have recently come out long since Betty Blitch died,
    then it goes up another ten percent.  I mean, that's
    about -- drugs are good.  They're not a cure-all.
    And so -- thank you.
         All right.  So I'm going to go -- I've spent
    probably too much time already in introducing things
    and I need to get to the heart of the matter.  So
    the first question when you retire to -- retire --
    we're not going to retire you, but when you get
    charged by the by his Honor, Judge Arnold, he'll
    give you instructions and ask you to follow them.
    And we do too of course.  You're pledged to.
         And then you'll get a verdict form and it
    has -- it's being typed up now, so we don't have the
    exact verdict form, but it's going to have something
    like -- I'll try and write it down.  The first
    question will be -- is about the class.  And I
    haven't talked to you too much about the class.  But
    you'll be instructed that if Betty Blitch is found
    to be a class member, that there are a list of
    things which you are to accept and they include that Liggett was negligent and they include that Liggett
    belonged to a -- an agreement among defendants --
    among cigarette companies, and they also include
    that Liggett put a defective product on the market.
         So that's already been done.  That was done in
    the Engle case in 1997.  Those findings if -- if
    Betty Blitch is a member of the class, those
    findings are binding on you because it's already
    been litigated.  So what -- oh, and then the
    question is, is she a member of the class?  Well,
    it's kind of a no-brainer because you're asked to
    find whether she was addicted and whether cigarettes
    containing nicotine or words to this effect caused
    her death due to esophageal cancer.  And just a
    second on that.
         I don't think anyone in this courtroom -- there
    has been no testimony from Liggett trying to get
    away from addiction.  People who smoke all their
    lives we now know have those brain changes.  Those
    receptors in the brain change after what they call
    chronic exposure.  It doesn't really matter whether
    you believe that -- what you -- what Betty Blitch
    thought about smoking was good, bad or indifferent
    or none of that matters.
         Your brain gets changed.  It doesn't make you a robot.  It doesn't make you -- it doesn't make it
    impossible to quit.  I don't know, maybe she could
    have, maybe she couldn't.  That's not the point.
    The point is she had the brain changes.  No one
    disputes it.  So there's no way to get around that.
    This is what we deal with today, every day.
         The next question, did cigarettes cause her
    cancer?  And that's pretty obvious, seems a
    no-brainer.  Even Dr. Webster who was put up to say
    that Liggett cigarettes didn't cause her cancer --
    he didn't really say that either, but when he lumped
    all these things together, he said, well, it's got
    alcohol and HPV, which maybe is a little bit of a
    stretch, and reflux disease, which we don't know how
    long she had it, and cigarettes, which she had
    everyday, and they're all contributory.
         And you'll hear an instruction from his Honor,
    Judge Arnold, that a legal cause can operate with
    other causes and there's no -- it isn't the only
    cause.  It doesn't even have to be the biggest
    cause.  It's a part of cause of other causes.  It's
    called a chain of causation.  And so that's a legal
    cause.  No one suggested -- he didn't suggest that
    smoking wasn't a cause.  These carcinogens, as you
    saw in the 2010 Surgeon General report, are specific -- the NNN and NNK are specific for esophageal
    cancer as you'll see in the materials.
         In the 1989 report, ten times the number of
    people get esophageal cancer than people -- who
    smoke than don't.  That includes people with all
    these other things.  So it's not really that -- it's
    pretty much a no-brainer.  If you find that Betty
    Blitch was a class member, then you go on to the
    next question.  And the next questions do concern
    what Liggett did.
         Before you get there, you are -- you will then
    be asked or -- if you find she's a class member --
    which I mean what was the purpose of the class?
    Obviously this is the kind of person that's in it.
    And if you find that she is, as I say, a number of
    findings that have already been made attach.
         And you'll be asked to find -- and then you'll
    be asked to find more specific things about Liggett
    which is, did they fraudulently conceal things which
    Betty Blitch relied on?  And were they in a
    conspiracy which Betty Blitch relied on or, you
    know, was damaged by?  And were they -- should
    Liggett be held liable for punitive damages which
    are punishment damages.  And let me start -- you'll
    also be asked what -- how much compensatory -- how much ordinary damages should be allocated or should
    be given to what's called Betty Blitch's survivors
    which are Jonelle and James Blitch, her children.
         And you'll also be asked to apportion
    negligence or fault between Betty Blitch and others.
    And let me just say about that as you get to that,
    if Betty Blitch shouldn't have smoked as -- we
    accept that.  And if you want to put responsibility
    on Betty Blitch or negligence on Betty Blitch a
    percentage, okay.  Consider when you do that the
    counterattack that went on, you know, the Tobacco
    Institute's counterattack.  And do we know exactly
    what story she would have read had they not killed
    the stories?  Do we know what she did read?  Do we
    know all the details?  Of course not.
         This was a combined massive effort to sell
    cigarettes that Liggett belonged to and everybody
    else belonged to.  As we look under the door and see
    the ugliness inside, this was the biggest
    conspiracy, the biggest public relations blitz in
    American history.  And I'm not pulling that out of
    the air because you'll see it written by the Federal
    Trade Commission, Surgeon General reports, monograph
    19 of the National Cancer Institute.  No question.
    And of course this was an industry that had the power to spend $250 billion on advertising in this
    time frame.  And so the power that they pushed their
    message, but so considerate.  That's all.
         And if Betty Blitch is lacking, should have
    tried to quit sooner even though there was nothing
    available to help her -- but people did, so we'll
    take that.  Take whatever percentage you think is
    fair.  Liggett says they did nothing wrong.  And, of
    course, that's where we began this discussion.  When
    they took the step to the dark side, that's what
    they did wrong.
         And I can't list for you all the individual
    things.  All I can do is suggest to you to take a
    big picture of what they did wrong and how they
    joined up and how they counterattacked and how then
    they did the research inside their company -- and
    you'll see that in their documents too -- on how to
    fine tune the cigarettes so they delivered what they
    call the physiologic dose of nicotine --
    Dr. Feingold talked about that -- and how they
    failed at the same time to understand that their
    customers needed a cure.  Why didn't they go that
    direction instead of going the other direction to
    make their cigarettes more addictive?  That's the
    dark side.  That's where they went on the dark side. So then you'll be asked to put compensatory
    damages down for Jonelle and James, the son and the
    daughter of Betty Blitch.  Now, I don't -- you know,
    we're dealing here with human suffering.  You'll be
    told to -- that it's their loss of companionship,
    support and services of their mother.  Well, this is
    really one of the most difficult things that a jury
    can do.  I mean, first we know we can't bring her
    back.  That's the truth.  So this is all we've got.
    But it's an honorable thing.  It's honorable.
    You're allowed.  You wouldn't be here if you weren't
    allowed.
         And how do you do it?  Well, we know that she
    lost somewhere around 13 years of life.  Maybe a few
    years less because she wasn't -- you know, she had
    other diseases, though some of those were due to
    cigarette smoking as we recall.
         MS. LUTHER:  Objection, your Honor.
         THE COURT:  What's your objection?
         MS. LUTHER:  Other diseases are not at issue in
    this case and should not be taken into consideration
    by the jury in awarding damages.
         THE COURT:  I think on the issue of life
    expectancy they can be considered.
         Go ahead, Mr. Wilner. MR. WILNER:  So you've got 13 years, by the
    accounting maybe ten years.  Nobody knows.  But ten
    good years would be a lot different than four years
    on a feeding tube, you know, in complete
    destruction.
         So let's say that watching that I -- I think
    that that's a multimillion dollar issue as human
    suffering goes.  That's high on the list.  It's high
    on the list.  As Dr. Feingold said, that's not a way
    that I would like anyone to go.
         MS. LUTHER:  Objection, your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Hold on just a minute.
         MS. LUTHER:  Decedent's pain and suffering is
    not an element of damages.
         THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, the issue of
    pain and suffering in this case is the pain and
    suffering of the surviving children.  Of course you
    may take into consideration what they observed and
    saw concerning their mother.
         Go ahead, Mr. Wilner.
         MR. WILNER:  Okay.  So this is -- it's -- and
    we're only talking about Jonelle, the daughter, and
    James, the son, what they had to go through to see
    this happening in front of them instead of the ten,
    12, 13 years of companionship and comfort they might have.  That's a multimillion dollar issue.  People
    are worth a lot.  Betty Blitch's company and
    motherhood was worth a lot.  Having to go through
    that is unnecessary.
         And I'll also say Betty Blitch's death was
    unnecessary.  It did not have to happen.  And it
    happened because of -- because of a long,
    complicated process that started -- it started when
    Liggett went on the dark side.  And there were other
    things involved.  But the epidemic of half of the
    people dying of -- and there's a document you'll
    see, 157 million years of life lost Liggett computed
    itself.  That didn't have to happen at all.
         Now, the next -- what Liggett will say -- I'll
    cover this and then reserve the last of my time.  So
    I suggest that for Jonelle and James it's several
    million dollars, and you can decide because I'm not
    going to try and compute human suffering.  So two
    minutes.
         What does Liggett want to really do here?
    Well, we are now 13 -- 14 years after their CEO
    Bennett LeBow, confessed.  And we put on his
    confession, and he said, yes, we're in a conspiracy.
    We were -- we combined with the other companies.  He
    said, we lied.  30 years, 40 years.  He confessed. They're back now 13 years later, and this was around
    the time of this Engle case, as we heard, and now
    they're back 13 years later and we're hearing the
    same stuff.
         The confession happened, and in addition, the
    findings of negligence and conspiracy and defect are
    binding on class members.  But now for some reason
    we're hearing more.  Well, it's not really true.  It
    may not be true and wasn't us.
         So perhaps their biggest defense and one that
    I'll talk about later is, well, it's not really us.
    It's just -- it's always somebody else.  Well,
    number one, when you get in with other people -- you
    get in bed with them, you are in bed with them.
    You're -- you are them.  And this was the biggest
    combined conspiracy in America and they were a
    charter member.
         Number two, they want to do the math and say,
    oh, but Eve cigarettes were only so many years
    because Betty Blitch wrote that down just before she
    died.  I don't know how good a recollection it was
    because Mary Sapp, her friend, remembers Eve being a
    big deal in her later life, from 19 -- mid '70s and
    was buying her Eve cigarettes in the '90s.  And they
    want to put their whole defense on that and then ignore everything else.
         But the real issue -- and even Dr. Webster
    said, well, if that's true, then I guess you know
    Eve would be an issue, and don't forget the
    Chesterfield and everything else.  But that is not
    as important an issue.  It is an important issue and
    it's ridiculous what they're trying to suggest.
         Even if it's from only '80 to '87, that's two
    packs a day.  That's year and years of smoking.  And
    remember the fatal bullet theory, that the last
    bullet is within ten years of the disease, and that
    was definitely -- that comes -- even under their
    idea that's all Eve.
         But I'm not saying it's all Eve.  I'm not
    saying that.  If you -- if we took one of these --
    we won't do it because it spills.  If we took one of
    these bottles of water and start adding some water
    to it, we get to the point where it overflows,
    spills out.  Was it the first water that made it
    spill, the middle or the end?  Well, I don't know.
    Nobody knows that.  That doesn't matter.  They all
    did.  We're happy with that.  They're all together.
         Liggett is together -- Liggett sold its brand
    but it also sold cigarettes with the Tobacco
    Institute with their counterattack with the way that they smoothed the waters for smoking, and they had a
    very, very powerful ally and that ally was nicotine
    and its infinity for the human brain and together
    they were almost unstoppable, but not quite, because
    eventually science, reason and justice have
    prevailed.
         I'll -- and I'll see you in a few minutes.


         MR. WILNER:  Just to set the record straight, not to be too personal, consider what counsel just
    said a bunch of double talk, nonsense, misstatements
    of what happened and stuff that doesn't happen.  So
    just to get the record straight, but it may take me
    a second to do that.  But I'll try.
         Turn -- could you activate my controls there.
    Thank you.
         MS. LUTHER:  Mr. Wilner, the control is
    actually right there.
         MR. WILNER:  Thank you.
         And the control is --
         MS. LUTHER:  Right there.
         MR. WILNER:  I wondered when counsel was going
    to -- thank you.  You're a lifesaver.
         I wondered when counsel for Liggett was going
    to acknowledge their own -- the man in charge of
    Liggett because he didn't say the same thing they
    said.  Actually here's what he said.  This is
    Bennett LeBow who pulled the strings of Liggett.  He
    was the CEO of the company that owned Liggett.  He
    could replace anyone in Liggett who he chose to.
         He ran Liggett, came in in the '80s, and he
    says, when you first acquired Liggett, you
    understood that Liggett cooperated in terms of
    positions it took with other tobacco companies?  He says, I knew that.  Liggett and all the other
    tobacco companies acted together.  And he said --
    this is interesting -- the tobacco companies had
    these documents totally contrary.  If these things
    ever came out, it would be devastating.  I mean,
    they haven't told the truth -- excuse me, counsel.
         MR. LUTHER:  I'm just clarifying.  The
    tobacco -- that the actual testimony says the
    tobacco companies in parenthesis.
         MR. WILNER:  Yes, counsel, I couldn't hear you.
         The tobacco companies had these documents
    totally contrary.  If these things ever came out, it
    would be devastating to them.  Somebody couldn't
    spell.  I mean, they haven't told the truth the past
    30 or 40 years.  They had been hiding the documents
    through their lawyers pretty much.  The lawyers,
    they had been hiding them under the guise of
    attorney-client privilege a lot of these devastating
    documents.
         Now, when I came up earlier and I said, you
    know, you're going to get to see secret documents,
    counsel over there says, oh, no, there's no secrets.
    Well, what about this?  This is the guy who ran the
    company.  Now -- and he admitted, he confessed.
    What's happened to Liggett since that confession? Why are we still hearing this?  Why?  What's it
    going to take to finally get to the truth here?
         Their own CEO confesses and says, yes, it was a
    conspiracy.  We hid the documents.  We didn't tell
    the truth.  Over and over we got together with
    everybody else, and now we hear from their own
    lawyers 12, 15 years later, oh, no, none of that was
    true.  We're going back to the old way.  We're going
    back to the hiding.  You know, it's unbelievable.
         I didn't write this.  This is their own -- this
    is the man who is in charge.  It's absurd.  The
    industry's position for 40 years was totally absurd.
    It confirmed what I had suspected.  Now I had
    confirmation.  And then -- and they hadn't disclosed
    it.  That's correct.  The documents confirmed that
    Liggett -- that Liggett lawyers told me there were
    things that confirmed information about the
    addictive nature of smoking, that a lot of these
    things -- you know, the health effects of smoking,
    which the companies all knew, things of this nature
    and there were certain documents that discussed that
    various lawyers were not releasing the documents
    that should have been released.
         On the question of smoking and health or
    whether or not cigarettes caused disease, had you heard the official position that was the official --
    the Tobacco Institute that counsel said three words
    about which was the biggest conspiracy in US history
    and, yes, they joined it in '58, not in '54.  Did
    they ever come out and say, oh, by the way, the
    stuff that was done in '54, we don't want to be part
    of it?  No.  They joined in full.
         The Tobacco Institute became the public
    relations arm, the lobbying arm, the arm of secrecy,
    the arm of pressure, and they -- and they joined it
    in '58 as a charter member and now they want to say,
    oh, but no, no, no.  Well, how about this, the
    tobacco company position on the question of smoking
    and health whether or not cigarettes caused disease,
    have you heard the official position or stance of
    the industry was that there was doubt or a
    controversy about whether cigarettes caused disease?
         They put up a witness in this day and age of
    who still wanted to say, oh, there was a
    controversy.  Well, there was.  But the -- excuse
    me, counsel.  But there was.  But, you know, it was
    a general -- it was a manufactured controversy by
    the Tobacco Institute.  That was the point.
         So the tobacco company position was a lie.
    Says their own CEO in a moment of candor, I knew they were lying all long.  Why didn't we hear that
    from counsel?  Why didn't they admit this?  He says
    tobacco still in 1997 was taking an absurd position.
    They're still standing up saying smoking's not
    addictive, doesn't cause problems.
         And, you know, they did it here, I mean, in a
    way.  They said, well, it's addictive, but maybe not
    here.  And they say, well, it causes cancer but not
    here, not here.  Not -- oh, because there's other
    issues.  There's viruses and there's alcohol.  We
    admitted all that from the start.  Not so sure about
    the virus.  I think that's a stretch, but who cares.
    It doesn't matter.  A cause is a cause.
         And Dr. Feingold got up -- I'll show you the
    graph in a minute -- and said together the smoking
    and the alcohol combined to be a much higher risk.
    Counsel said we never said anything about that.
    That was our whole testimony.  Of course it's true.
    Synergy works.  It took them both.  And I'll tell
    you another thing, it took all her cigarette
    exposure too.  It did.  We're not backing away from
    that.  It's all a cause.
         All -- everything that -- every carcinogen she
    took in, including smoking from when she was 12 till
    God knows when, bathing the esophagus in carcinogens, it's a fact, and the alcohol it's a
    fact.  What it does is it stops the body from
    metabolizing or taking away the cigarette
    carcinogens, but okay.  If you want to blame her for
    that, for being addicted to alcohol -- apparently
    she was, though she tried to meet that.  Don't know
    exactly -- blame her.  Put it on the verdict form a
    certain percentage.  It's okay.
         I mean, I'm standing up here telling you take
    responsibility, and if you feel also that it's such
    a big deal that even though all this -- there was
    all this controversy in the news, she should have
    known better, it's okay.  However, their own CEO
    says on the question of nicotine being addictive,
    did you get an understanding that one of the
    industry positions was that smoking is a matter of
    free will and free choice?
         Well, we went through this in detail.  It is in
    a way.  But it's not really free choice when your
    brain has those receptors that have grown, and it's
    a kind of free choice and it's a very interesting
    scientific matter, but it's not so simple to say,
    oh, well, nobody held her down, right.  That is
    true.
         On the question of nicotine -- and I heard it a million times.  Did you understand that nicotine was
    found to be addictive, it would contradict smoking
    as being a matter of free choice, and it does.  It
    does, and he said, that's right.  Or that if
    nicotine was addictive, smoking was not a matter of
    free will anymore, he says, that's correct.  And if
    nicotine was addictive, maybe the personal
    responsibility of the smoker would somehow be in
    doubt because he or she, I would say, is addicted
    and he says, that's correct, which explains, I
    think, all this stuff that we heard about the
    tobacco company standing up in front of Congress
    saying it's not addictive, not addictive, not
    addictive because they knew blaming people for
    smoking, unbelievably which is what they're doing,
    blaming their own customers for buying their product
    that they make and claiming that their customers
    should have known what they denied.
         Let me say it once more.  Publicly at least
    Liggett denied cigarettes cause cancer through the
    Tobacco Institute into the '80s.  First time they
    admitted it, as you heard from their own witness,
    was in '97 -- you know, this confession type thing
    happened in '97.  Before that, stood together with
    the industry, never admitted a thing. Privately we've learned -- and we'll -- I'll
    show you that document in a minute, the one that was
    up.  Well, they well knew cancer causing -- cancer
    causing, cancer promoting, poisonous, stimulating,
    pleasurable and flavorful getting into a little bit
    of the action of nicotine there.  So they well knew
    these things.  1961 that particular one was.  So --
    and continued to deny these as they did addiction,
    and they denied addiction into the '90s and thereby
    deprived, I think, a lot of folks the ability to
    really understand how to deal with it.
         Because if you just harp on someone like Betty
    Blitch and you say, you need to quit smoking, people
    don't respond well to nagging.  We've heard that
    before.  And Betty Blitch was a very proud
    individual.  And to have to admit time and time
    again that she failed to quit would be not what a
    proud individual likes, and so it is no secret,
    absolutely none that people who are heavily
    addicted, they don't want to announce, they don't
    want to admit they would even try for ten minutes
    because they're going to fail.  They know they're
    going to fail.  They know they can't do it.
         Now, maybe if they had therapy, if it was well
    out in the open, this is an addiction, don't blame yourself, don't have the guilt, because people do,
    they feel guilty, they say, well, why am I doing
    this.  I know it's not good for me.  People have
    told me, why am I -- why did I light a cigarette
    this morning?  Why?  I don't want to.  In a way they
    don't.  Many people don't.  They say, why am I
    smoking?  I'll put it down.  And then they don't.
    Everyday they're going to be asked, did you quit?
    They'll say, well, no, I tried but I couldn't.
    Well, what's wrong with you?  It's a horrible thing.
         If the science was out there and these guys
    knew it, that we're dealing with a brain disease,
    with a clinical pattern of addiction, then we don't
    go into all this moralistic stuff about, well, I'm
    just not a strong person or I am a strong person.
    We go directly to the drugs and we try and get the
    brain receptors fixed, any more than you blame
    somebody for getting a disease.
         You can't blame people for smoking.  You can't
    blame people for getting addicted and maybe
    Dr. Feingold kept talking about that.  He said, you
    know, when I was younger, I was kind of (makes
    noise).  Now I kind of understand.  I kind of get
    it.  You know, people do things and they get sick,
    and when they get sick it's a sad thing.  And addiction is a sickness.  It's nothing.  It's not a
    moral issue.  And some people get well and a lot of
    people don't.
         So 1961 -- oh.  Okay.  Here's the deal.  Here's
    what I'm willing to stand on in this case.  Here's
    what I'm willing to say is a fact -- is an issue.  I
    want you to compare 1961 -- how's my time?
         MS. HARTLEY:  Good.  15 minutes.
         THE COURT:  30 minutes.
         MR. WILNER:  30 minutes more.  Thank you.  And
    good.  I like -- good.  All right.
         And I want you to compare 1961 cancer causing
    secret document.  Oh, we just heard for the first
    time that this was turned over.  Well, you'll have
    it in the -- in the submission to the Surgeon
    General.  If you can find it, more power to 'em,
    because we've looked.  It's sure not there.  Nothing
    even like it is there.  This was secret stuff back
    in the '60s.
         All right.  I want -- here's what's called -- I
    don't know -- juxtaposition or something.  So here
    it is, cancer causing and here it is ten years
    later, maybe this.  Now, they're quick to jump on
    poor Betty Blitch who paid with her life for her
    addiction, for her being a customer of theirs. They're quick to blame Betty Blitch for -- and say
    now, well, we don't know what she saw.  I mean, how
    do we know?  She's not here.  We can't bring her
    back.  You want a list of ads each particular day
    that she saw?  How is that possible?  Couldn't do
    that if she was alive.  Nobody knows that.  That's
    not what Dr. Goldenberg said and it's not -- it
    doesn't make any sense.
         The $250 billion was spent for a reason.  The
    $250 billion was spent to get the word out, among
    other things, to promote the smoking of cigarettes.
    And she was part of the public.  And there was no
    way in the world we can ever go back and say what
    day, what she saw, but we know a few things.  We do
    know that Betty Blitch in -- somewhere in the
    '70s -- and I love this.  Oh, well, Mary Sapp
    doesn't know what she's talking about.
         And it's not even that big a deal.  I mean,
    frankly whether she started in '75, '76, '77, 1970
    when the Eves came out or '71 and smoked till '80 or
    '90 or '94 it isn't that big a deal.  They are a
    contributing cause, a cause as you'll hear from
    the -- from the instructions.  They can't erase
    that.  It's a link on the chain.  We've never said
    it's everything.  We're just saying, yeah, it's a part.  And, in fact, when you talk to people who are
    around her, they remember this Eve a lot more, and
    it goes along with her personality as counsel was
    talking about.  She was glamorous.  And what more
    can you say?  Look at this.
         Now, here's my thesis.  I say that the
    combination of this cancer causing -- that isn't the
    right page.  It's over here.  Cancer causing, cancer
    promoting and flavorful -- I took it back with me --
    the combination of -- I say the combination of
    cancer causing, cancer promoting -- interesting how
    that word came out because, you know, the later
    smoking of the Eve promoting we talked a little bit
    about that or the fatal bullet -- I'm not making a
    claim that we know exactly which bullet.  I'm saying
    you can't take it out of the equation either.
         The combination of this from one company and
    this, I'm willing to tell -- I'm willing to say that
    when you make a representation -- first of all we
    heard, well, that wasn't really a representation.  A
    picture is a thousand words.  A million words in
    this case.  And you know how many pictures are out
    there?  A million pictures.  And this is a picture
    of a lady that Betty Blitch wanted to be.  And you
    know what, she tried to be.  But hidden in this picture is the problem.  And the problem is that
    that lady if she's really smoking Eve cigarettes or
    any cigarette has a 50 percent probability of dying
    prematurely from that product.  And how in the world
    is that not a misrepresentation?
         So this is a big case in that it challenges
    some of the things that we have come to accept in
    this country.  Perhaps we've come to accept that
    advertising is just everywhere.  But should we
    consider -- and we should in this case because we
    know more about it -- that you can't do this -- you
    can advertise a product all you want, but you can't
    do this with that knowledge, with that knowledge,
    and I'll add to it that smoking is addictive.  Add
    that to it and then do that.
         MS. LUTHER:  Objection, your Honor, his
    argument is preempted by the Federal Cigarette
    Labeling Act.
         THE COURT:  I don't think he's talking about
    warnings specifically.  Your objection's overruled.
         MR. WILNER:  So I say that that's really --
    that that is a misrepresentation and that was relied
    on, among many others.  But we know this one.  We
    don't know all the others, but we know this one.
         Now, a couple other things.  Liggett says, it's just a small company.  And I think that's what -- we
    need to take a look at that for a second.  A small
    company.  I think the -- this was done earlier.  And
    really a couple -- there are 300 billion cigarettes,
    300 billion -- 343 billion cigarettes sold.  Two
    percent of that is six billion cigarettes sold per
    year by Liggett, even if you accept two percent.
    You figure out how big a company sells six billion
    cigarettes and tell me that's a small amount.
         Number two, we heard about -- I want to talk
    about causation for a minute and then I'll be back.
    Now, I think counsel for Liggett intended you to
    believe that you had to find for -- to find that
    Betty Blitch was a class member, that you had to
    find that specifically she was addicted to Liggett
    cigarettes and that Liggett cigarettes caused her
    cancer.  Well, she was addicted to Liggett
    cigarettes and they did contribute to her cancer,
    but you won't be asked that first.
         I just want to make sure that we all understood
    -- that that's clear, because the first question
    does not ask anything about Liggett.  Class members
    are class members and everybody was -- all the
    defendant -- all the tobacco industry was in the
    class.  So the question about whether you're a class member is just, were you addicted to cigarettes, any
    cigarettes, and were any cigarettes the cause of
    your death?
         So what is that?  Well, I went around the
    mulberry bush with Dr. Webster about it, finally got
    the answer that it's alcohol according to him, HPV,
    reflux and cigarettes, but they're all contributory
    because, remember, I hid one.  I said, what about
    that, what about that, what about that.  So he said,
    well, you can't take any of them out of the
    equation.  So that's fine.  I don't think that's
    really exactly a good representation of how these
    risks lie because we did talk about this.  It's ten
    to one for smoking, and much smaller for others, but
    together with the alcohol it's even bigger.  And we
    agreed that's the first thing we said, but that
    means that they're both responsible.  And if you --
    and throw in the virus if you want.  It doesn't
    matter because she's not -- there's no fault in
    having a virus.  So it doesn't matter.  Makes no
    difference.
         So the first question remains a no-brainer.  I
    don't understand what counsel was saying.  The
    second question about Liggett we just talked about.
    It is in the process of carcinogenics which is how cancer's formed.  It's the lottery tickets.  You buy
    them.  We don't know whose lottery ticket got
    caught, but all of them together caused the issue,
    caused the cancer.  So Liggett's trying to escape by
    playing this game of what -- when various smoking
    occurred and when it didn't.
         And we talked about that.  I forgot where that
    is.  That was Dr. Feingold's progression, and we get
    precancerous changes all along until we get the
    fatal bullet within ten years of the disease.  And
    it make sense.  It makes sense.  So -- but two
    different questions.  All right.  I'm going to go
    quickly through the next -- okay.  Thanks.
         You'll have all of this written evidence
    including take a look at 14 -- P143, that's the one
    we put up about how the Tobacco Institute did all
    this stuff to try and block the Surgeon General's
    report.  Fantastic, read it.  That's exactly what
    happened for years, not just then.  But this is
    really what this case is about.
         This is L40 and it is -- what they did is they
    asked Arthur D. Little to go and look at what the
    human cost from smoking -- from cigarettes was.
         And could you zoom that a little, Karen.  Thank
    you. And the human cost -- they said, well, maybe we
    can go to the Surgeon General here and tell them
    that smoking's not so bad if it turns out that like
    motor vehicle accidents or something like that are
    worse.  So they went and they did this comparison.
         Of course, this never saw the light of day.
    And they said the number of years of life expected
    to be lost due to fatal motor vehicle accidents, 18
    million, right here, and the number of years lost
    due to cigarettes only 157 million years.  Of course
    that never went anywhere except inside their own
    company.
         And so now we hear Liggett in a continuation of
    the old ways come back in here and out of these
    hundred and seven -- 57 million life -- million
    years lost somehow try to say that Betty Blitch's
    15 years as part of this -- of what happened in this
    country being the biggest -- the biggest advertising
    push and the biggest conspiracy armed with a
    chemical addiction of nicotine and able to do it
    that somehow for some reason, well, she's just --
    let's just ignore her.  She's not part.
         No.  It's time now to get Liggett back into the
    real world.  Their CEO confessed.  We know what
    happened now.  We've laid it out.  Betty Blitch is one of the hundred and 57 million years lost.  And
    the only way we're going to do it is to send Liggett
    a message, it's time to get real.  It's time to get
    back in the real world in the scientific world.
    It's time to consider what you've done to this
    country.  Thank you.
