MR. REILLY: Thank you, Your Honor.
Good morning, everybody.
JURORS: Good morning.
MR. REILLY: You know, let me just tell you, I'm dividing my time with Ann. It's going to be 20 minutes for me. Maybe I'm being piggy, I don't know. But she's going to get 10 minutes. That's not a male-female thing, I
You know, I want to start my presentation to you the same way I've started each and every one of the times I've addressed you folks, and that is to thank you for your service.
You did -- while you didn't render your verdict the way I was hoping you would, the fact of the matter is, you did exactly what our system wants you to do.
And what is that? You took all the evidence that you heard here in the courtroom.
You put it together with the law that Judge Radabaugh gave you, and you answered the questions on the verdict form unanimously, and you resolved Phase I of the issues in this case. So thank you.
The focus of -- well, the focus of Phase I of this trial really looked very backward in time, didn't it?
You went back to the '50s, '60s, the '70s, the '80s, and you were exploring, particularly in response to the question that you were asked to answer that brings us here today, you were focusing on the conduct, the behavior of the folks at Philip Morris.
You know, a company is nothing more than
the people that work there, right? You guys work at companies. You know they're not something separate and apart from the people that work there.
So what you were assessing was the conduct of the folks who worked at Philip Morris, going back to even before -- there was evidence before the '50s, right? But certainly the '50s, '60s, '70s, '80s, during the period of time that Mr. Boatright was making his decisions and deciding to smoke and all that jazz, and the company was -- the people that worked at the company were making their decisions too. Decisions that you found in Phase I to be inappropriate.
And, in fact, you remember that when I stood before you in my opening statement, during my cross-examination of Dr. Proctor, their first witness, and in my closing argument, I stood here and said, you know what, as the lawyer for Philip Morris, I'm not going to stand here and support everything that they did in years gone by, and I didn't and I won't.
And I'm not now.
So why are you here now and why am I
addressing you?
Mr. Schlesinger said I ought to stand up here and announce that I have the power to change how cigarettes are made and all that. I don't have that power, come on.
But what I am here to talk to you about is what is your job in this phase of the trial.
And we have a verdict form, and it's several pages long, but I'm just going to show you what I think is -- and I'm not nearly as articulate as Mr. Schlesinger, but this is for me the ham in the sandwich. And that's not very poetic, I know.
I didn't highlight all of it. But it says: You are to decide the amount of punitive damages, if any, to be assessed as punishment and as deterrent to others. This amount would be in addition -- is this the right form?
I don't think this is the right form.
Oh, yes, it's on page 2. Sorry.
So -- we just got these this morning, so I apologize for not being totally conversant with it.
But one of the instructions here says you should also take into consideration any
mitigating evidence. Mitigation evidence.
Mitigating evidence is evidence which may demonstrate that there is no need for punitive damages or that a reduced amount of punitive damages should be imposed against a defendant.
And here is the other language that really is the guts, the meat of the instructions, and that is, "If you decide to award punitive damages, the award should be no greater than the amount that you find necessary to punish Philip Morris and/or Liggett for the harm caused to Richard Boatright."
This is, as it always has been, a lawsuit about one smoker and one smoker only.
Yes, as Mr. Schlesinger said, there are lots of these cases. There are lots of these cases and lots of juries that are going to be faced with the same question. Because there are punitive damages claims in all the cases.
Okay. So in this case, what is the appropriate amount of punitive damages, if any, that you guys decide that you want to award in this case alone?
And you've already awarded $15 million to the Boatrights. The whole idea of that, what
you were doing in Phase I was figuring out what is the total dollar amount necessary to compensate the Boatrights for their injuries completely, entirely.
So this money, although it still just goes to Mr. Boatright, is on top of the $15 million that you already gave to him.
And so here you're being asked to determine what is the amount of money, it says "if any," but it should be no greater than the amount you find necessary -- necessary -- to punish Philip Morris for the harm caused to Richard Boatright and to deter Philip Morris.
To deter Philip Morris.
Well, look, I saw your verdict. I was here for the evidence. I'm -- you know, as I said, I already told you guys that I wasn't going to support activities that occurred years ago.
So while I haven't -- I can't talk to you, I can't sit down and have a cup of coffee with you and say, okay, what of the evidence really impressed you or caused you to render the verdict that you did, I think I've got a pretty good idea. I'm not the sharpest knife
in the drawer, but I think I've got a pretty good idea.
And so I think that in looking at this issue -- and I know that Mr. Schlesinger said 15 to 20 million, like it was a drop in the bucket. It's not a drop in the bucket. Come on, that's a lot of money.
Big companies, little companies, you know, if you -- if a company gets punished a million dollars, just think of it, what happens? That goes straight to the top, right?
I mean, think about it, really.
A million dollars is a lot of money. 15 or 20 million is a ton of money, really.
But I think that what you need to know, and what I would like to do just for -- I think I've probably got about 10 minutes, 15 minutes left. I just want to run through some things that came in evidence in Phase I, but I really didn't focus on them because, you know what, they really weren't connected with Mr. Boatright and his smoking, because these are things that occurred since 1999.
But as I said, companies are really made up of the people who run them.
I don't know if that's too small for everybody to read. You can?
Well, I'll bet, and I say a dollar to a doughnut, although I'm not sure there is a price differential anymore between a dollar and a doughnut. I'll bet that one of the things that made you guys unhappy with Philip Morris was the fact that it had failed for all those years to acknowledge that smoking caused disease.
Well, in fact, in 1999, Philip Morris decided, you know what? It's time to stop that. The people that run the company now.
You know those old faces that you saw. Think about how long ago that was. Those people are long gone.
But the people that run it now say, you know what? It is time to stop making that kind of statement. And now it's time to tell the American public that smoking does cause disease. It's time to get right.
And so they created a website, because that's what people -- that's how we communicate today, you know, Facebook, the internet.
That's how it's done.
And they tell everybody in the United States, anybody that wants to click on Philip Morris USA's website on smoking and health, it says: PM USA agrees with the overwhelming medical and scientific consensus that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema and other serious diseases in smokers. Smokers are far more likely to develop serious diseases like lung cancer than nonsmokers. There is no safe cigarette.
You know what a screenshot is. I know you've all been on the internet. You probably all have Facebook accounts, for all I know.
The bottom line is, you can click on this, go to another page and find out more on addiction. All the CEOs, in 1994, not addicting.
Well, in 1999, guess what they said.
They said: PM USA agrees with the overwhelming medical and scientific consensus that cigarette smoking is addictive. It can be very difficult to quit smoking, but this should not deter smokers who want to quit from trying to do so. Click and learn more.
Quitting smoking. To reduce the health
effects of cigarette smoking, the best thing to do is to quit. Click and learn more.
Brand descriptors. This actually was from 2009. It's been updated in 2014 when the legislation that created the FDA power over the entire tobacco industry came about. That legislation said no more lights, no more low tar, et cetera.
But here in 2009, Philip Morris was saying this doesn't mean safe, safer or less harmful.
I'll show you in a minute it says, it doesn't mean that they're easier to quit either.
Click over to go see helping reduce underage tobacco use. You can click on there and go to where Philip Morris was informing folks on how to attempt to convince young people not to smoke. There are a variety of methods.
And they click over to more places, like the American Cancer Society, National Cancer Institutes websites and stuff like that.
Parental communications. How to talk to your children. Supporting cessation. I will
show you that in a minute. Smokeless tobacco.
Am I looking for a gold star? No. I'm not looking for a gold star. But that was the right thing to do. It was.
Quitting smoking. You click over there.
You come over to here. Smoking cigarettes with those terms does not help you quit smoking.
Remember Mr. Boatright said: I smoked light cigarettes for a week or two. His wife thought a week, he thought two.
Philip Morris tells you that will not help you quit smoking. If you're concerned about the health effects of smoking, you should quit.
It can be difficult to quit cigarette smoking. And many smokers who try to quit do not succeed.
You know, not looking for a gold star.
But that's what Philip Morris has been saying since 1999, and this is 2009's version.
A wealth of expert quitting information exists, here is how you get it. Go to this spot. You can click right there and get to it.
So that's the kind of thing that Philip Morris has been telling the American public
since 1999.
QuitAssist. You can click on this and Philip Morris has brochures and information that it publishes about how to help you quit smoking.
Does it buy you drugs? No, it can't buy you drugs. Does it send you to the doctor. It doesn't make you a doctor appointment.
But it provides you with information on how to quit smoking, and you can click over and go to a variety of other websites where they give you detailed information about how to get the job done, if that's what you want to do.
Visit these other sites for more information: American Cancer Society, American Heart Association, American Lung Association.
If you decide to quit smoking, visit QuitAssist.
You know, I bet, I bet that that looks like a significant departure to you guys from where Philip Morris was just five years earlier when you saw the CEOs stand before Congress and say smoking hasn't been proven to cause disease and smoking isn't addicting.
You know, five years later, that's what
was being put out.
And that's a significant change.
Not looking for a gold star.
Philip Morris hasn't advertised on billboards -- you know, TV and radio went away in 1971. No billboard or advertising since 1999. In the 2000s, no magazine advertising.
You can go to Circle K. You know, outside the courthouse, you can go down the street and go to Circle K and get a magazine and thumb through it. And you will find cigarette advertisements, but you will not find one from Philip Morris. There are none.
Philip Morris does not advertise its cigarettes in magazines, newspapers.
Why? Because they don't want young people, underage people to have access to that information in that way. Period.
Can you still -- can a 21-year-old sign up through the same kind of program that Mr. Boatright signed up to get information? Sure. A direct marketing program.
If you're 21 and verify that you are 21, swear that you are and verify it, you can get on their database, receive information, receive
the coupons and stuff that Mr. Schlesinger was just talking about. You can do that.
But you've done that as a 21 -year-old adult if you do it. That's how you can get advertising today.
All right. Those are some examples of things that Philip Morris has done, of people that work at Philip Morris today have done to change how the business is done.
You know -- and I told you this through the cross-examination of Dr. Proctor. I know that Dr. Proctor said that the FDA has done nothing. I know that he's very critical of them because they didn't accept his proposal, his two-pronged proposal on how to resolve all smoking issues.
That was put .2 milligrams of nicotine in the tobacco rod -- that's the tobacco part of the cigarette and make cigarettes basically uninhalable and you'll resolve all the issues.
But you know what? The FDA, working with the National Cancer Institute and the National Institutes of Health, through the examination I did with Dr. Proctor recognized that it isn't that easy.
You've got people that want to smoke.
You have people that do smoke. You've got a whole country full of issues. And you've got inputs coming in from a whole variety of sources about what ought to be done.
And so you know that Philip Morris, all the way back to 2000, said to Congress, please, give somebody, give the FDA the power so that we get on the right track, so that everybody's on the right track.
Give the FDA the power to figure out how cigarettes ought to be made, marketed, ingredients. We don't want any more complaining about -- we don't want any more statements about the secret documents.
Come, have access to all of our documents, have access to all of our factories, have access to everything. Control all aspects of this business.
That's what Philip Morris did. They said, please, Mr. President, in 2009, sign the bill, please, sign the bill.
This is what it said in the letter.
"We believe this comprehensive national regulatory framework, implemented thoughtfully,
can provide significant benefits to adult consumers by, among other things, establishing a common set of high standards for all tobacco manufacturers in the US, providing a framework for the evaluation of tobacco products that are potentially less harmful than conventional cigarettes and creating clear principles for accurate and scientifically branded communications about tobacco products to adult consumers."
What power did that give, that legislation? First of all, that legislation itself, that did pass in 2009, the President did sign it -THE COURT: You have four minutes.
MR. REILLY: Four minutes. Thank you, Your Honor.
It did away with those lights, low-tar logos, those descriptors; gone.
It requires that Philip Morris and every other cigarette manufacturer -- and there are a ton of them in this country.
Philip Morris is just one. Liggett is just another. There are lots more.
But it says: You have to disclose all
your ingredients to the FDA. You have to disclose your internal research, your internal documents, open up your manufacturing plants and other facilities for inspection by the FDA. Promptly respond to any requests from the FDA and change cigarettes designs, as well as marketing and labeling as directed by the FDA.
And yes, it's true that they have the ability to regulate ingredients and materials, regulate testing of cigarettes, regulate tar and nicotine yields, regulate new and reduced risk products.
And it's true -- I know that Dr. Proctor doesn't like it. He doesn't think it's moving quickly enough. But the FDA, the National Cancer Institute, and the National Institutes of Health have said, you know what? We want to create our regulations in the most scientifically cutting-edge way we can.
Scientifically cutting-edge way we can.
And this includes marketing, promoting, manufacturing, ingredients, tar and nicotine levels; the whole shooting match.
And so what did they do? They sent out and spent $275 million, asking 12 of the most
capable scientific medical research centers in this country to please take -- and you know this can't happen overnight.
They said: Please, we want you to research these issues and give us the cutting edge, absolute up to the minute best opinions you've got about how cigarettes should be -the whole industry, how it should function.
And that's what is happening right now.
I realize Dr. Proctor doesn't think that they're doing enough, but you know, who would you ask -- really and truly, who would you ask to address those complex issues better than the National Institutes of Health and the National Cancer Institute, along with the FDA?
Who in the world -- who in this country, who in this country would you be more prone to ask to do that?
I know Dr. Proctor doesn't like it. But he's just one voice.
I already mentioned all this to you. I won't take your time up with that.
And yes, it's true that the FDA has come out with a preliminary report. I don't know if you noticed the word "preliminary" on there
about menthol, but it is a preliminary report.
The question of whether or not menthol ought to be used or not is one of the topics that is being researched to a gnat's eyeball. That's very small.
Right now, to determine is it something that should be permitted or is it not something that should be permitted.
That is one of the topics that is being researched right now.
THE COURT: One minute, Mr. Reilly.
MR. REILLY: Thank you, Your Honor.
For once in my life, I actually have a little notepad here. Let me see if I've covered all my subjects. I think I've about done it.
As I said -- well, let me just put this
up.
People say you ought to stop making cigarettes with nicotine in them. Philip Morris did that already.
The public health community came out and banged them for it. They did it in the early '90s, and the public health community came out and filed an action, a petition with the FTC
saying: Make Philip Morris stop that. Make Philip Morris stop making those with no nicotine.
All right. This brings me back to where I was before. And that is, when you look at the verdict form, it's going to ask you, is there a reason why you shouldn't award 15 or $20 million? Is that really the right range?
You know what? I'm not going to stand here and say to you the number is zero. That's in here. That's in here. You could do that if you wanted to.
I realize that it's been suggested that they could be asking for more money. I could be standing here telling you zero is the right number. But I'm not going to do it. Not going to do it.



MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: Thank you,
Your Honor. May I move the podium over here?
THE COURT: Yes.
MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: I do have notes. I've got to put them on something.
Good morning.
JURORS: Good morning.
MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: May it please the Court. Counsel, Mr. and Mrs. Boatright.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, I want to start off again by telling you we appreciate your service as jurors, and I echo Mr. Reilly's comments.
My client heard you. We thank you for following the evidence, and we ask that you do that here as well.
On behalf of myself, my client, and I'm sure everyone here, thank you again for your patience and for your service.
Although you did not assign a percentage of fault to Liggett, it's possible that Liggett could be responsible for the -- for your $15 million compensatory verdict.
In your discretion, you may decline to award punitive damages. You can also decide to award punitive damages to one defendant and not the other.
You heard in Phase I that my client did not work in lockstep with the industry. It wasn't involved with the Frank Statement or Hill & Knowlton.
It performed its own extensive research and invested more than the rest of the industry combined. Liggett had years of productive collaboration with the public health authority.
This phase will focus on a singular question as to Liggett. To what extent did Liggett's conduct -- and by that, I mean Liggett itself -- cause harm to Mr. Boatright that would warrant punishment?
Liggett's specific conduct, as the judge directed you, must be connected to Mr. Boatright to justify a punitive damages award.
And what do you remember about Mr. Boatright's smoking history? You will recall that he smoked less than two cartons of my client's two brands.
Marlboro was the only brand he smoked more than two cartons of.
I did some math. You learned lawyers aren't always the best at that, but I think I got it right.
Conservatively, if Mr. Boatright smoked two packs per day on average over a 35-year period, his use of my client's brands were
approximately 0.007 percent of his overall smoking history. That's it, 7/100.
And that's assuming he smoked two cartons of my client's brands.
Mr. Boatright never quantified it when he testified. It could have been as little as a pack. Now, that's miniscule. It's basically zero.
Yet Mr. Schlesinger is seeking 25 percent of the punitive damages award that he's asking you to award from my client.
Now, to be sure, you cannot award punitive damages against Liggett based upon the conduct of Reynolds, Lorillard, Philip Morris or any other tobacco company or representative.
And that's important, because if you set aside all the statements and documents and conduct from other tobacco companies, what are you left with that Liggett said or did?
All the company documents that plaintiff and Dr. Proctor showed you are not my client's. My client was not on "Face the Nation" or Nightline, those programs Mr. Boatright said he saw, and those videos from before 1993 were not representatives of my client.
And Mr. Horrigan, who plaintiff showed you, he's not Liggett today. And he hasn't been Liggett for a long, long time.
I would like to bring you forward to more recent history.
Plaintiff put into evidence the 2012 Surgeon General's report. As that report details, an executive on behalf of Liggett testified in 1997 -- not that long after Mr. Horrigan was no longer the face of Liggett -- and he testified about industry practices, including youth marketing.
As an industry member, Liggett broke ranks essentially, so to speak, and disclosed industry practices.
As Dr. Proctor told you, Liggett was the first tobacco company to admit that smoking causes lung cancer and other diseases and is addictive.
Since 1997, it has voluntarily added a warning to all of its cigarette brands telling smokers that it's addictive.
I would like to show you actually -Mr. Schlesinger showed you this in Phase I. This is Chesterfield. Now, my client hasn't
owned Chesterfield since 1998, or L&M, for that matter.
Warning: Smoking is addictive.
Today, no one who smokes a Liggett brand picks up a pack without seeing this.
And, in fact, Liggett is the only company to have such voluntary warnings through to today.
If you go to Walmart -- I didn't go to Circle K, but if you go to Walmart on Van Fleet Drive in Bartow and you buy a brand that my client does make, Pyramid, same warning. Warning: Smoking is addictive.
It's also here on the cartons.
November 2014. For 20 years -- close to 20 years, my client has been doing that.
Dr. Proctor also confirmed that Liggett, similarly, in the '90s listed ingredients on its packaging.
And my client also does -- if you go back to Mr. Reilly's Circle K example, my client doesn't advertise in magazines, et cetera, either.
Now, to the extent that you took issue with Liggett or the tobacco company's
membership in the Tobacco Institute or in the CTR, you don't need to worry about them anymore. Those entities don't even exist.
Tobacco companies have not made statements of any kind through the Tobacco Institute since 1998. And my client dissociated from CTR in the 1960s.
Even Dr. Proctor, when he testified, said Liggett is not responsible for CTR statements outside that brief four-year window period over 50 years ago.
As Dr. Proctor told you, the Tobacco Institute was like the embodiment of the conspiracy, I think that's the term he used.
Critically, though, Liggett was an exceptionally minor player in the Tobacco Institute.
As Dr. Proctor told you, Liggett's total contributions to the Tobacco Institute, for over 50 years was 0.3 percent. That's it, 0.3 percent.
And as you heard from Dr. Proctor,
Liggett is a very small company. When he was listing off the major tobacco companies, his list did not include my client.
He also confirmed my client's small size when he talked about those Tobacco Institute contributions.
As Dr. Proctor told you, Tobacco Institute contributions were based upon market share. 0.3 percent. It's a fraction, not even 1 percent.
You have to have a pretty negligible market share if your TI contributions are a fraction, less than 1 percent.
Very small fractions seemed to be a theme for Liggett in this case. Remember,
Mr. Boatright's use of my client's products was at best 0.007 percent of his overall smoking history.
Based upon what I've just described to you, ladies and gentlemen, Liggett has been doing business for the last 20 years in a different way.
We submit that there's no reason to send a message. We got the message.
The Liggett you heard about in Phase I as a market participant in the '50s through the '80s, early '90s, no longer exists. It's a different company.
We submit to you, respectfully, that there's no reason to punish or deter Liggett for conduct impacting Mr. Boatright.
We understand there were mistakes made over 60 years. We understand that the industry needed change. And Liggett in part helped make some of those changes.
And we respectfully submit that you should decline to award any additional money to the plaintiff in terms of punitive damages against my client.
THE COURT: One minute.
MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: However, whatever you decide, we would ask that you take into consideration all of Liggett's conduct, including the positive changes it was responsible for throughout the industry.
I want to thank you all again for your time, for your consideration, for your patience. We know that it's been a long, long slog, but we appreciate everything that you've done, and for your service on this jury.
Thank you.