MR. SCHLESINGER: May it please the Court.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen of the jury.
JURORS: Good morning.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Counsel.
This session will be much, much shorter. You'll be done this morning.
The lawyers have gone through whatever potential witnesses and various pieces of evidence we could put in. We sometimes do.
But we've decided not to. The stipulation is not to.
So we feel that you've heard enough
evidence. We feel that you understand where you want to be in this case, and that you are ready to complete this case.
But, in an abundance of caution and because I'm as nervous as a cat on a hot tin roof, I would like to just offer unto you whatever powers of persuasion I have on behalf of my client for a few minutes so I don't drop a stitch or overlook something or make a presumption that would be inappropriate.
So if you'll indulge me, even though I feel I know you're ready, I would really appreciate it.
First of all -- and this is something we don't always get to do, because so many cases typically are tried in a single phase. Now, some are two phases, multiple phases.
But so infrequently do we actually get to talk to a jury who has already listened to our case and rendered a verdict. You've done that, and we have an opportunity to speak to you now.
His Honor will tell you at the end of this that you are, because of the sanctity of the deliberative process in the jury room and because of the importance we place upon the
privacy of your decisions, a group of folks that did not know each other before this case began. Right?
You came from different walks of life and throughout the community. You did not know each other. You were a neutral, deliberative body.
And so you discuss what must be done, what should be done, what is justice back there, and we don't disturb that, and you have no obligation to speak to anyone.
But His Honor will give you the right to speak to anyone you want to. That’s up to you. You may keep this amongst yourselves for the rest of your days. You may thereafter discuss or do whatever.
The reason I say it's interesting is because we don't always get to address you at the end.
The very first thing I want to say is, on behalf of my clients, Richard and Deborah Boatright, thank you. Thank you for the verdict you've rendered thus far and thank you for the work you've done. We are appreciative.
Now, in this case we start from a verdict
form which you all filled out, and you went through and checked off the various boxes that apply.
And you came up with the compensatory damages for the Boatright family, and we call that restoration. And you laid out what you thought was fair and appropriate under the law.
And then you got to the final question, which has a higher standard of proof, clear and convincing evidence, that we heard, intentional, wrongful conduct historically by tobacco companies engaging in fraud, conspiracy, concealment to commit fraud.
And you found, yes, indeed, they have in such a way as to, under the circumstances of this case, please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are awarded against each defendant. And you identified yes as to Philip Morris, and yes as to Liggett Group.
So now we go to the next phase, which is brief. There is a reason why we have a pause in between the phases. It's a pause for a moment of reflection; reflection by the defendant to decide what do we think about what
the jury has done, how would we like to address them.
It's a pause and a moment of reflection for you so as to move to the next stage in a cool, calm, dispassionate fashion.
Because this jury verdict that you will render today, it's not out of anger. It is out of justice. Nobody likes to have to punish.
But sometimes it is necessary.
So what you are doing is stern, and it doesn't have to be that they like it. They're not supposed to like it. It's supposed to hurt.
However, there are reasonable limits to what you can award in this case, and I told you, you have great power. But the power is circumscribed. And while I would like to say to you that the damage they cause and their financial wherewithal and the amounts of money necessary to make them feel it, and it has to be what we call a lane. You have to find the right number. Because on this verdict form, you'll see, all it has is dollar lines.
It doesn't have any other questions or determinations or anything. Just what should
be the punishment damage for Philip Morris; what should be the punishment damage against Liggett.
It's how will you exact the fine that appropriately censures and condemns the conduct. That's as far as you go.
And that's the only thing that this calls for. But it has to be in a lane. What do I mean by that?
There are protections. You cannot financially ruin the company. You can't put the company out of business. You don't have that power, and you're not supposed to, and we don't want you to.
However, if there was a way for me to say to you an amount of money that would be remarkably substantial, a billion dollars.
Would Philip Morris be able to withstand that? Would they be able to recognize that? Would it mean something definitive? The answer to that question is yes.
However, we are not going to ask you to award anything near that amount. Because it must bear substantial relationship to Richard Boatright and Richard Boatright alone.
I was thinking last night, how can I explain this. And I don’t know why, but I slept like a rock before closing argument the first time. But last night, I was tossing and turning.
I think part of it is, I'm just more uptight in this place in between these two phases.
And I remember there was -- I guess I'll tell you this story. I've got a couple minutes.
There was a movie, Jaws. I think we've all seen it. And in that movie, there was a scene, it's a great, great scene, where Roy Scheider, may he rest in peace, and Robert Shaw, may he rest in peace, and Richard Dreyfuss, who's still with us, were sitting in the hull of the boat, the Orca, you know, trying to figure out how to catch this shark, and they were starting to trade stories of things they'd been through.
And -- I never told this story, so I'm telling it, I'm sorry, but bear with me.
They are telling great stories. And Quint, played by Robert Shaw, who is the old
salty sea captain, shark fisherman, is -finally breaks out, busts out with the baddest story of all, in terms of really going through something.
He had been in the Army. He had delivered the Hiroshima bomb to win the war against Japan on the USS Indianapolis, and it had gotten sunk after he delivered the bomb.
But because his mission was secret, no distress call went out.
When the Japanese torpedoes slammed into the side of the boat, it sunk really quick and 1200 men went into the water. And there was no rescue for like three days.
And after about two and a half, three days, while the sharks were tearing them up, and 900 of the 1200 men who had gone into the water had all been killed or bitten, a PBY came by and spotted them, and they were going to send a helicopter to save the rest of the crew.
And Robert Shaw, I remember he was drumming his fingers on the table while he was telling the story.
He said: Do you know -- because after he had survived all that worry, and the war, all
that risk -- he said, that -- when they saw the rescue, when they saw being saved, that was when I was the most nervous, waiting for my turn to be saved.
And for some reason, in between these two spaces, that's how I feel.
My colleague, my partner, Steve Hammer, we've known each other since we were 12 years old, been best friends, grew up together in the same neighborhood. He doesn't feel that way at all.
But I do the punitive damages part of the case, so I'm going to be the one that asks you to arrive at the right verdict that does justice to this, that honors this system, and brings to a conclusion what I know you guys are ready to do.
In that regard, the only thing you do is write in an amount of money.
And you will see neither of these defendants will claim -- because their financial wherewithal is relative, but we didn't put a bunch of economic damages in because the amount of money we're asking you to consider in your good judgment to award is well
within their ability to pay.
I'm going to give you, I guess, a bit of a range. And one of our economists gave options.
But I would say that as to Philip Morris for the conduct that y'all found justified punishment, damages, to be exacting a fine.
And it comes from them, to say to them: We censure this behavior.
That's the legal nature of it. That's all you are to consider at this point. You've already made the decision that they deserve it, is $25 million as to Philip Morris only.
Now -- no, I got it wrong. I'm sorry.
$20 million as to Philip Morris only and $5 million to Liggett.
When I say that, I ask you not to award any more than that.
His Honor will not give you that instruction. You have a certain kind of power. It's unlimited power.
Today, if you want to award a billion dollars, an amount of money that sounds extraordinary, but is well within Philip Morris's ability to pay, you can do that.
Do not do it. I'll tell you why.
Remember when we talked about -- one of the executives talked about without nicotine, folks would be no more likely to smoke cigarettes than they would be to blow bubbles or light sparklers -THE COURT: Five minutes.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Yes, sir. Thank you.
Meaning that the nicotine was the essential commodity, and the entertainment value or the brief -- you know, a sparkler is no big deal.
So I was thinking a billion dollar award, a $500 million award, it would be fireworks, right? There would be a rocket that went off, and there would be a burst, like on 4th of July, and everybody would look up and notice it and say, wow, look at that.
That's a big verdict. It would be on the evening news. It would matter.
And the executives at Philip Morris would see it, and it would hurt momentarily. But realistically, there are legal bases and justifications, and because it must be tied to Richard Boatright for whom you found
restoration damages of $15 million, it probably wouldn't be sustainable. It would be no more than blowing bubbles or lighting sparklers.
It would be a moment of attention, a news story. It would be averse. They wouldn't like it to happen. It's richly deserved and justified. But I say it's too much power.
Your power is limited. We don't want you to do that.
By the same token, we don't want you to award $100 million either.
I think very richly, something like that would be deserved. However, a range of up to $20 million against Philip Morris, and I would say no less than 15, to make a meaningful punishment that is more than a slap on the wrist, but less than a -- less than something that would cause financial ruin is perfectly appropriate.
Same with Liggett. $5 million. If you want to go as low as 4-1/2 or 4 or 3, I think those are reasonable numbers. And that would do honor to the system.
It would have -- unlike the blowing of the bubbles that I was talking about, it would
have teeth. It would have a hook. It would be painful to these companies in a way that would say: We've rejected what you've done. We want to tell you that while we may not be able to stop you in this case from doing the things we think you should stop doing, we want to say to you as a jury, good folks from the community, in as strong as possible terms, we want you to change.
Now, I'm sure Mr. Reilly will get up and he will offer some explanation of what is called mitigation. They are entitled to do that.
They are entitled to give you guys a -an overview of what it is that perhaps should be considered by way of some of the good that Philip Morris has done, or they'll try to say that.
And I will show you reasons in rebuttal why that is not true and why they haven't done anything good, but some of the things that Dr. Proctor talked about with FDA regulations is there's been no changes. They are just as dangerous. They cause just as much death.
These reports are still in evidence, all
of these reports. And they speak very exquisitely to the fact that the cigarettes today are more dangerous than ever. The relative risk is higher. More folks are dying. Folks are more damaged by cigarettes than ever before because of design. Nicotine is more addictive in cigarettes than ever before.
All of these reports, if you want to delve through them, show that there is no change. They haven't done anything with the FDA. The FDA hasn't done one single thing to change anything.
There was some discussion about the litigation is one arm of the conspiracy, trying to hold off verdicts like this. This is a very rare and special moment. What you all are going to do will stand a very significant test of time.
I told you about that George Orwell quote about we'll lift you clean out of the stream of history, you won't be a name in a register, or a memory in a living brain.
You've now inscribed the Boatright family, in a way you've chiseled those words in stone. And when you see his name again
somewhere and someone says, why is Richard's name here, why do we see it? You all contributed to that.
But to me, as I said, the punishment part is so important. Because it tells the jury -and you are one of many who get to do this. We don't want you to do this.
And I think in terms of you being a brick in the wall. As you know, there are many of these cases going around one end of the state to the other. You can't stop it all. It's a generational fight.
But working together, bit by bit, just like I think of the giant in Gulliver, the Lilliputians, you are throwing one more rope against Gulliver's chest. And eventually, one rope here and one rope there and one rope there, and maybe you make a difference and maybe you're able to stop or modify this conduct or nudge them to think about taking some responsibility or acknowledging some of the things that they have not to this day acknowledged, and that's -MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: That's -THE COURT: Overruled.
15 minutes in.
MR. SCHLESINGER: And then you go through this -- as you recall, Dr. Proctor. All the things they never admitted, and I'll go back to these on my second half.
But basically, despite the FDA, there's been no regulation whatsoever. They staved it off for 40 years. And there's a lot of stuff here.
Menthol is extremely dangerous. One of the things they could offer to do is say, I,
Ken Reilly, on behalf of Philip Morris, pledge to agree with the FDA's recommendation to remove menthol and save 300,000 lives over the next three years -- over the next ten years,
I'm authorized by my client to do it.
And I will tell you that one of the things I will do is a commitment to being better in the future is, Philip Morris, I'm authorized to speak on their behalf. We will remove all menthol from all cigarettes, one-third of sales.
The statistics in these books and the
evidence you have says it will save 300,000 lives in the next ten years.
If Mr. Reilly would do something like that and be able to make an enforceable commitment, we wouldn't ask you for this first penny in any punishment damages, because he would have made a commitment to embark upon a course of action to eliminate all menthol with its addictiveness, its initiation of youth, its additive nature. Just menthol.
And support FDA regulation to make it an industry-wide practice.
Now, that would be real change. That would really be showing we are changing and we are different, as opposed to marketing words or public relation words to that effect.
And as he said, Marlboro is the number one branded cause of death in the world.
MR. REILLY: Same objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: This is all evidence, that they -- they attack the public health authorities. They're going to tell you that they appoint folks to the public health authorities now, but for decades, they attacked
them.
The Surgeon General's report is full of information about the advertising dollars and all the things that have affected youth initiation.
Tobacco is more addictive than ever. How much money is spent on sales and marketing. That Liggett is a big part of the $10 billion a year still being spent on marketing and how it gets after new smokers and there's no way around that.
I don't have time for all this.
But I wanted to show you this. The relative risk of dying from cigarette smoking has increased over the last 50 years in men and women in the United States.
Cigarettes are more deadly and dangerous today than ever before.
So there isn't evidence they've changed.
And Dr. Proctor explained that very well to you, I think.
We will go through some of these.
One of the things Liggett -- Edward Horrigan. He was the chief executive officer at Liggett that got up and raised his hand and
said cigarettes are not addictive. So Horrigan, for RJR in 1994, he got picked up by Liggett. In 1994, when he was lying to Congress, he was working for Liggett.
So Liggett was deeply involved in this conspiracy all the way through the '90s.
Menthol was more dangerous.
Imagine this headline ten years from now, 30 years after the generational case of Engle continues to run its course. November 12, 2024, tobacco companies cease production of cigarettes. That's what is called for by 2024.
It could happen. It's a generational fight. You could be one brick in the wall to help.
And then finally, Iwo Jima. I think about this. I've used this before. It's the Marine memorial. What is interesting, the flag is almost raised. It's almost straight. It's after a great struggle, and these soldiers are pushing it to that vertical position.
That's where we are now. You've awarded the proper compensatory damages, found they should be punished, and all that's left from this point forward is to bring that flag
straight and finish this case for us and for our clients and then go back to your lives after having done this and be able to be proud of what you've done.
This is the kind of thing you still get from Marlboro in this direct marketing campaign. Happy birthday from your friends at Marlboro. They still spent $10 million. Most of it is on price discounts and direct mail to smokers, like I said, to keep encouraging you to go.
Way back in the '50s, they say this is not the way the world ends, not in a bang, but with a whimper. That's from T.S. Eliot, The Hollow Men. It's a poem.
This is one of those internal documents we read to you about how we are going to reinstill confidence.
They knew in the '50s that all their promotional claims were no longer going to work.
And they said to themselves in the '50s, this is the way our world ends, a tobacco war, not in a bang, but with a whimper. And yet they survived. They schemed a way to survive.
Instead of doing the right thing, they schemed a way to survive. They have a survival instinct, as a corporation.
Remember, they're accorded the rights of people, but also responsibilities?
Well, so too does our client, Richard Boatright, stand equal to them, before you, before the eyes of the law.
Tip of the spear.
Last note, and I'll sit. Tip of the spear means you guys are on the cutting edge of important litigation going on in this state and even nationwide. It's happening in Florida.
The tip of the spear is, you are on the state of the art and the cutting edge -MR. REILLY: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: All you can do -- and I've heard this saying, we are the tip of the spear. You are the tip of the spear. What you're doing is historic.
You won't see a lot of it anywhere, ever.
This is a rare thing.
You can't run them through with your spear. We're not asking you to do that. But
you're allowed to prod them, to nudge them, to poke them. And you're drawing a little bit of blood. Just a little bit of blood. Inflicting a little bit of pain.
Not because you want to do it. Not because you're angry, but because you found it's the right thing to do. Thank you.



MR. SCHLESINGER: May it please the
Court.
Okay. Thank you.
So just ten more minutes, and we'll hand this over to you. Thank you so much for letting us talk about this a little more.
I wrote down a few notes I want to address real quick.
I can't go through all of the books with you, and I was clicking so fast in there, but I want to read to you one line from page 541 of the Surgeon General 12.
And this is a great book, because everything about this book shows that all youth marketing is ongoing.
And lip service, marketing slogans and things like that, like that website, that's nice, except it doesn't really show that you've acknowledged past wrongdoing and you are promising to make amends.
And Dr. Proctor is very clear that nothing has changed, and they've been able to evade all regulation from the FDA.
So you all actually are going to exact action and penalty that's even different than anything the FDA has ever put into place.
And that's important, because when he points out his website, it begs the question.
We don't want youth to smoke, right? If you don't smoke, you shouldn't start.
And in addition to that, anybody who is thinking of -- you know, anyone who is smoking, we recommend you quit. That's on the website.
It begs the question. So what is the business that you're in.
Nobody who isn't smoking should start, and anybody who is smoking should quit.
Well, then what is the business you're in, except as the Surgeon General 2014 said, get out of the combustible business. Let's get rid of these inhaled, highly-engineered nicotine delivery devices.
And on page 541, it says right here that:
The internal documents and marketing practices from the industry revealed that in the past, manufacturers modified product design to enhance product appeal to novice users, including adolescents, a practice the industry has continued.
That's all the way up through 2014. And the findings in 2014 talk about the companies
remain reasonably likely to engage in fraud and deception.
So it's ongoing, and they haven't changed. They have evaded regulation. They've been able to do that, but they haven't changed.
And, you know, these are the things that Dr. Proctor was covering with you.
As far as the people aren't there anymore, you didn't hear any evidence of who former executives are there or not there.
But here's what's important. Here's what's important. We've thought about this,
I've heard this before. It's an argument.
It's rhetoric. Okay.
Did they put on any evidence whatsoever to show that any former executive or research scientist or any of the collaborators that worked so hard to make the drug business of nicotine addiction, the sine qua non, that was their language, without which there is nothing, something different?
They did not. There is no evidence that any one of those executives, any one of those research scientists, any one of the collaborators in this terrible scheme that cost
so many lives were ever fired, censured, sanctioned, rebuffed.
If you went to the venerable halls of the Philip Morris offices in Virginia, going back centuries in the oak-lined walls, you don't think you would see the CEO executives portraiture up and down the wall.
These men were honored. They were beloved. They were part of the Philip Morris family.
MR. REILLY: Objection, not in evidence.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: There is no evidence that these folks were found to have done something wrong and got in trouble. That didn't happen.
What was amazing was, they were able to collaborate generationally and hand down a conspiracy to commit fraud, lie to the American public, work together. And Liggett was a part of that conspiracy.
And as Mr. Proctor -- Dr. Proctor said, they could have come clean and outed R.J. Reynolds or Philip Morris at any time, many, many years earlier.
But up through 1994, they were there with Ed Horrigan raising their hands.
So Liggett is a part of it. And they are different.
One time Bennett LeBow said -- and no one has ever said it since and no one has ever admitted it since -- you know what, the business is kids. Replacement smokers, adolescents. That's the whole basis of smoking.
Under the circumstances in '98, Bennett LeBow said it one time -- it's actually in the Surgeon General's report, and you can read it. But it only happened one time. Never again.
And no other tobacco company has ever admitted it, and they vehemently deny it to this day. So there really haven't been any changes.
I remember seeing a cartoon that says: These new regulations are fundamentally going to alter the way we get around them.
And yet, so far, as Dr. Proctor said, they blocked all new regulation.
You are a civil jury that is, in fact, a regulatory body. Sometimes the judge hands
down sentences. Sometimes the jury has to be involved in sentencing.
This is the punishment phase. It has a similarity to that. This is your chance to do that. We hope you will.
In the document that Mr. Reilly referenced about we made a nicotine-free cigarette, remember what Dr. Proctor said.
You didn't make them all nicotine-free.
You can't give a drug addict who is addicted to the nicotine cigarettes a choice and -- to smoke the cigarettes without the drugs, but still make available the cigarette with the drugs and expect him to smoke the cigarette with [sic] the drugs.
And it's the boy who cried wolf.
The tobacco industry had lost such credibility with the Federal Trade Commission over the years, with all of their former fraudulent health reassurance campaigns with fake filters and fake lights, that without providing scientific evidence that their new cigarette was actually going to do something good, they just weren't trusted.
Well, that's the old story of the boy who
cries wolf. If you lie, if you deceive, if folks know it, eventually, even if you seem like you're doing something better, it's going to be viewed with skepticism.
So in that very document, it said -- and it quoted William Dunn, the nicotine kid who said -- this is the document that Mr. Reilly quoted from -- A cigarette should be conceived not as a product, but as a package. The product is nicotine, the cigarette is but one of many package layers.
There is the carton which contains the pack which contains the cigarette which contains the smoke. The smoke is the final package. The smoker must strip off all of these package layers to get to that which he seeks, which is the nicotine.
That's cigarettes. And that's down here.
You know, we talked about that, and that's important to talk about.
There is a whole section in Surgeon General 2012, and you can look at it in the 500 area, and where Bennett LeBow is in here and that Camel Crush and how they were youthening the brand. Lots of this is in here. Up to
2012 -- you can look at pages 536, 537.
MR. REILLY: It's a completely different manufacturer.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I'll tie it in.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: 536, 537, 538 talks about youthening the brand. It's all about getting the kids. And the number one most successful brands or the most highly advertised brands: Marlboro, Camel, Newport. Those are the ones most likely to be used by adolescents. Thousands start every day.
5 to 7 million children are slated to die of tobacco-related illnesses that are getting in to smoking right now.
There is a Project 21 approach to helping folks that's in the Surgeon General 2014, by a professor who wrote a chapter saying, you know what, from 2000, if nobody ever born after 2000 could ever get a cigarette, that would be a way to help save lives in this country. From now on, young people don't get sick.
So if you were born after 2000, cigarette sales to you in the future are illegal.
This book is full of ideas to help do
something about cigarettes.
The Marlboro NXT is the copy of the Camel Crush. They put the mint in the filter. The thing about the novelty in the filter. So in this filter of menthol is a crushable capsule of that peppermint minty filter that cools the throat, eases inhalation and makes addiction worse. It's just like Camel Crush.
If Philip Morris really said we don't want young people to smoke, then why would they copy that which has been found to be that -the youth brand of smoking.
So that's important to take into consideration.
THE COURT: Two minutes.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Thank you, Judge.
And they talked about mitigation.
Mitigation means acknowledge wrongdoing, do something different. They haven't done that.
Here is something.
Can I put up that part of the jury instruction real quick of prejudice, passion, sympathy.
This instruction still applies. They said something about the money going to Richard
Boatright.
The punitive damages are assessed relative to Richard Boatright, and you don't make an award that is so outrageously distant from what you thought his damages were.
However, it does not matter, the law does not tell you who the money is going to. Your consideration is outside of that.
MR. REILLY: Your Honor, that's not right.
THE COURT: Sustained. Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The consideration is who the money is coming from. It does go to Richard Boatright.
MR. REILLY: Your Honor, you sustained my objection, and yet he continued to say the same thing. The money goes to Mr. Boatright -MR. SCHLESINGER: Of course, but I'm allowed to explain that.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Here, when it says: Your verdict must be based on the evidence that is received by you and the law. And it says, you should not be swayed by bias, sympathy, prejudice or sympathy for or against any party.
The law is, this is punishment from the companies. And whatever Mr. Boatright's intent, his charitable intent, whatever it is, that's -MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor.
Motion, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: They cannot tell you not to award -- they can't tell you -- this is a punishment from punitive basis against the company.
That's the point of it. And that's what is important to remember.
THE COURT: Time's up.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Well, then it is, and I will tell you thank you very much.
All I want to say is, whatever you all do, our clients thank you, my trial team thanks you, and we wish you good luck in bringing this to a close.
Thank you so much.