MR. SMITH:
May it please the Court, counsel.
Ladies and gentlemen, I want to start off by 3248
echoing on behalf of Mrs. Bowden -- in fact, on behalf
of everyone, our gratitude for which you have agreed to
do and which you have done so diligently.
I've been doing this an awfully long time, and I
don't know that I have ever seen a jury as attentive as
you have throughout this process.
Some of you have been
note-taking a lot.
Some of you have been watching a
lot, but all of you have been engaged in this, and on
behalf of everybody I want to thank you for that.
I also need to start off by apologizing to the
Court Reporter in advance, because at some point I'll
invariably go to fast.
I think the most important thing you need to know
this morning is our work is about done, your work is
about to begin.
My purpose in my final argument this
morning will be in large part trying to address
immediately you to the issues and the questions that
you're going to be asked, because you're going to have a
Verdict Form.
It will be shown to you later by the
Court, and given to you for your use.
That Verdict Form has the questions that need to
be asked, and I thought what maybe the easiest way for
me to proceed this morning is just to start with the
questions.
I want to back up to something you learned in 3249
opening, and you heard throughout the case, and that
this case is one in which it derived from a much larger
case, a case that we all now know is Engle, something
you may have never heard of before you got here, and may
never forget when you leave here, but the Engle case
really frames much of what we will be doing today.
The first question that is asked of you, and the
one I would like to kind of address immediately is class
membership.
Because if we accomplish class membership
on behalf of Mr. Bowden finding he was one of the
persons for whom Engle was decided and, therefore,
entitled to class membership, then the case becomes much
more clear and the track to your solutions becomes much
more evident.
I'd like to start off with the first question, and
that is the question of class membership.
This is the question you will be asked initially:
Was Mr. Bowden addicted to cigarettes containing
nicotine and, if so, was cigarette smoking because of
such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and
death.
I want to make sure you understand that class
membership is not about fault.
There may be places that
-- you will hear there are places in which fault may be
apportioned.
Class membership is a yes or no; it is, 3250
does he meet the requirements, and you've seen those
requirements in front of you.
That's the first
question.
You notice that you will get an instruction, and
this will be it on what a legal cause is.
Smoking because of addiction is a legal cause of
death if it directly and in natural and continuous
sequence produces or contributes substantially to
producing the death so that it can be reasonably said
that but for an addiction to cigarettes containing
nicotine, the death would not have occurred.
In order to be regarded as a legal cause of death,
smoking because of addiction need not be the only cause.
It may be a legal cause, even though it operates in
combination with the act of another, or some other
cause, if the negligence contributes substantially to
producing the death.
What that means is that, as the Court will
instruct you of this, what that means is that it does
not have to be the sole cause.
It has to -- it can be a
concurrent cause.
It can be a cause that occurs at the
same time, or in conjunction with other things.
So, for instance, and we will talk about this in a
few moments.
If you found that there was some --
MR. REILLY:
Your Honor, I have to -- this is in 3251 error, the bottom of it.
I hate to interrupt you, I apologize.
But the bottom of it says if the negligence
contributes.
That's not right.
MR. SMITH:
It's on the form.
That's exactly --
THE COURT:
Well, that's.
MR. REILLY:
I apologize, though, but I think your
Your Honor will understand that's not right.
THE COURT:
Gentlemen, approach side bar, please.
(A sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the
jury as follows:)
MR. REILLY:
I apologize.
Negligence has nothing
to do with the question.
MR. SMITH:
I checked it this morning.
THE COURT:
I apologize.
MR. SMITH:
It says what it says.
MR. MILLER:
There is a mistake in the jury
instruction, and we looked at it ten times.
MR. SMITH:
I looked at it; that's an odd
instruction.
THE COURT:
Which number are you referring to?
MR. MILLER:
Instruction number 10, page 11.
THE COURT:
Turn it this way.
MR. MILLER:
If the negligence.
I think it should
be the addiction.
Take out the "negligence" and put in
212-279-9424
VERITEXT REPORTING COMPANY
www.veritext.com

"contributes".
That's was Mr. Michael's suggestion, and
plaintiff agrees.
THE COURT:
Just put it contributes?
MR. MILLER:
Yes.
THE COURT:
All right.
MR. MILLER:
Very sorry.
(The sidebar conference was concluded, and the following
proceedings were held:)
THE COURT:
Ladies and gentlemen, yesterday and
the day before yesterday the attorneys and myself
conferred extensively over the instructions on the law
and when I give them to you at the close of the case you
will see they are quite lengthy because there's a number
of issues that are required to be covered, and quite a
bit of evidence to be covered, too.
So a mistake was made.
It was missed by all, all
the attorneys and the Court.
So Mr. Reilly has noted
it, and it has been corrected.
We are now back on final
argument.
Mr. Smith you may proceed.
MR. REILLY:
I apologize, Your Honor.
MR. SMITH:
When I read it, I was thinking the
same thing, so let me reread the last sentence together.
In order to be regarded as a legal cause of death,
smoking because of addiction need not be the only cause. 3253
It may be a legal cause of death even though it operates
in combination with the act of another, or some other
cause, if it contributes substantially to producing the
death.
Now, that's the instruction, and that's the first
question that you will be asked today.
And as I already told you, the legal cause
definition says the following:
In order to be regarded
as a legal cause of death, smoking because of addiction
need not be the only cause.
That's clear.
It may be a
legal cause of death, even though it operates in
combination with the act of another, or some other
cause, if it contributes substantially to producing the
death.
Contributes substantially, we submit, means did
the smoking because of addiction play an important role?
But for the smoking because of addiction, and this
is -- I think the way the question should be considered
by yourselves:
If he was not addicted to nicotine,
would he have smoked one and a half to two packs per day
of cigarettes every day for 54 years and developed lung
cancer and die from it?
As a beginning point, let's talk about what the
weight of the evidence needs to be on this issue.
It is
simply, if you recall all the way back from the opening 3254
statements -- even actually voir dire when you were
selected, it's just the greater weight of the evidence,
the more pervasive weight.
It's which way it tilts.
So the two questions for our starting point this
morning we should deal with are the question of
addiction and the question of the cause of his death.
This is the sequence that we believe that you will
find, and we believe has been proven to be the sequence
by which we apply what happened in this case to the
facts in this case.
He was addicted to nicotine, it caused him to
smoke, which resulted in his lung cancer, which resulted
in his death.
That is the sequence that we will explain
to you this morning.
Now we know, and I think we need to back up for a
moment, that R.J. Reynolds knew that nicotine was the
substantial, important chemical that kept addicted
smokers smoking.
You see in 1963, you see in 1972, and
again in 1972, and you've seen all these and many more.
These are just selections of what many have you have
seen over several days.
Moreover, nicotine is addicted.
We are then in
the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug.
Or, for the typical smoker, nicotine satisfaction is the
dominant desire, therefore, in designing any cigarette 3255
product, the dominant specification should be nicotine
delivery.
Tobacco products contain and deliver
nicotine, a potent -- and I submit to you potent means
powerful drug, with a variety of physiologic effects.
Our industry is based upon the design, manufacture and
sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine.
Philip Morris knew that nicotine was a substantial
and important chemical that kept addicted smokers
smoking.
In 1959, and this was long before there was any
question about using a classical definition.
This is
the terms they used in their business years before 1988.
This would be some almost 30 years before 1988 when the
Surgeon General made his final determination.
Why does
one smoke?
Addiction.
In 1969, the primary motivation for smoking is to
obtain the pharmacologic, that is, the drug effect of
nicotine.
And how important was it?
No one has ever
become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without
nicotine.
The cigarette should be conceived not as a
product, but as a package.
The product is nicotine.
That's what this industry knew, and these
defendants said long before the Surgeon General ever
made his findings.
R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris knew that nicotine 3256
was the substantial, important chemical that kept
addicted smokers in smoking, but there were some people
who didn't know, and we know this from a 1959 document
from Brown & Williamson, which is an R.J. Reynolds
company.
MR. AVERA:
That should be 1979.
I'm sorry, Mr.
Smith.
That should be 1979.
MR. SMITH:
1979.
Very few consumers -- this is 1979.
Very few
consumers are aware of the effect of nicotine.
It has been suggested, and it will be suggested
and argued everybody knew.
But the people who were the
experts in the field of nicotine, the people whose
business was the sale of the product nicotine, they
knew, and this acknowledges as late as 1979 that the
consumers -- that very few of the consumers are aware of
the effects, its addictive nature, and that nicotine is
poison.
We know what the Surgeon General of the United
States has said about the matter.
What he has said is
in 1988, the pharmacologic and behavioral processes that
determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that
determine addiction to drugs, such as heroin and
cocaine.
That's what the Surgeon General found now
almost 30 years ago. 3257
I think as a starting point we have to recognize,
and I'll go back to Dr. Hurt for a moment, which we'll
talk about a great deal later, but Dr. Hurt made it
clear in his testimony that addiction is a disease of
the brain.
It is not a free choice.
But if you choose to say well, I want more proof
of that, let's ask what others have said who have looked
at the issue over the years.
In 1967, the Federal Trade Commission in its
report which is part of the evidence you received, there
is no indication in the advertisement that after a
person smokes cigarettes regularly for a while, smoking
is no longer a matter of choice for him, but becomes a
matter of need.
Let's talk about what the Surgeon General said
about it in 1989.
These two factors refute that smoking
is a matter of free choice.
Most smokers start smoking
as teenagers and then become addicted.
And finally, let's look in 1980 to see what the
tobacco industry knew.
One of the co-conspirators in
that industry, The Tobacco Institute, says the
following.
Well, first of all, they quote Robert DuPont
from the -- who had been with the National Institute of
Drug Addiction saying cigarette smoking is more
addictive than using heroin, hooking two-thirds of the 3258
people who ever smoke.
But then at the end, remember the line?
You have
the document you've seen it.
Our attorneys tell us that
we can't defend continued smoking as free choice if the
person was addicted.
That's what the Tobacco Institute
internally knew, and they were saying it eight years
before the Surgeon General made his finding regarding
the addictiveness of nicotine.
Now, I gave you, and this is important to recall,
that there is going to be no definition of addiction
spelled out within your instructions.
The addiction
will be what you determine it to be.
It is a
combination of the testimony, the documentary evidence
as the Court has explained to you, and, frankly, it will
be your common sense and experience that all of you
bring to this court, and none of you are ever asked to
abandon.
Addiction is defined by the National Institute of
Drug Abuse as following:
Addiction is defined as a
chronic, relapsing brain disease that is characterized
by compulsive drug seeking and use, despite harmful
consequences.
The Mayo Institute, one of the preeminent programs
in the world, that you actually -- I think yesterday
they presented you another Reader's Digest article, and 3259
in the Reader's Digest article they quote the Mayo
Clinic as one of the preeminent places -- hospitals in
America, and all of you through your own common
experience know that.
Nicotine dependence is also called tobacco
dependence, is an addiction to tobacco products caused
by the drug nicotine.
Nicotine dependence means you
can't stop using the substance, even though it's causing
you harm.
Now, let's talk about the evidence that we have
before us in this case as to Mr. Bowden's addiction to
nicotine.
We know from the testimony of Barbara Dampier
that he started smoking at approximately 15 years old.
Now, how do we know that?
Because if you recall Mrs. Dampier said, who is
now 80 years old, Mrs. Dampier says I was about six
years old when he went into the service.
He was nine
years older than me.
It's in the testimony.
That would
mean he was 15.
When he went into the service he was
already smoking.
When he went into the service he was
already smoking.
In fact, Mrs. Dampier later, and we'll talk about
that, defined him as a chain smoker back in the 1940s.
We know that when he went into the Marines was in
1942.
We know that she says he had been smoking about a 3260
year before that.
He went in the Marines at 16, which
means that at age 15 he would have been smoking.
We
also know, and then you can use this to support your
opinion, that from the statistical evidence that was
given us from that cohort -- you remember the cohort
data from Dr. Burns, that the median age for people to
start smoking was 16.7 years, much later in the 1940s.
And the cohort for the 1940s was somewhere around
16 years old.
So at 15 or 16 years old, we know that he
was smoking.
We know from the evidence both from Dr. Hurt and
Dr. Burns, the younger you start, the more likely you
will become addicted.
90 percent of addicted smokers
started before they were 18 years old.
We know he smoked one and a half, two packs a day
for 54 years.
We know that because if you do the math,
he smoked until the last year of his life, 1994, and he
started smoking in 1941 or '42.
We know that he smoked Lucky Strikes and Pall Mall
in the beginning.
How do we know that?
That's from
Yvonne Tillman, Bonnie Tillman, a younger sister.
She
recalls that in 1946 when he came back from the war, she
recalls that he was smoking Lucky Strikes.
She also
says she remembered Lucky Strikes.
He was the only one
smoking Luckys in that household.
She also remembers, 3261
but I know I had seen him smoking Pall Mall before.
It doesn't matter in the larger sense, because
R.J. Reynolds is responsible for both Pall Mall and
Lucky Strike.
It doesn't matter in the bigger picture
of things.
And we know that he was smoking Camel
unfilters.
And how do we know that?
Because in 1953
when he met Mrs. Bowden, he was smoking two packs a day
of Lucky Strikes and Camel.
I want you to remember that, it's important,
because later I will remind you that the two most
advertised brands, or the two most successful brands on
the marked in the early 1950s, according to the Bates
study, which we already have and the testimony you
received, the Bates study being 50 years looking back
from 1953, the two most popular brands, the most
advertised brands?
Lucky Strikes and Camels,
unfiltered.
We know that he switched to Winston and -- he
switched to a filtered cigarette.
The two primary
filters he smoked were Winston and then Marlboro.
Well,
how do we know that?
Well, we have the statements by Mrs. Bowden, but
more importantly is Ted Bowden, the son, the oldest son.
Ted left home in approximately 1970, '71.
He came
back in '70, I think, for the summer, then he was gone 3262
from the home in 1971.
He would have been 20 years old
at the time, because he was born in 1951.
He says he only remembers his father smoking
unfiltered cigarettes.
He only remembers two brands,
and he mostly remembers at the time he was there he was
smoking Marlboros.
He does remember that there was a
time he was smoking Winstons.
Others have said that he smoked Winstons first,
then Marlboros.
Why is that significant?
Well, because
the two most important filtered cigarettes, the two
largest in the market, the two most advertised, and the
two most successful brands of all times of filtered
cigarettes were first Winston, which dominated the
market in the 1950s into the early, mid 1960s, and then
the Marlboro cigarettes which by 1970 became the most
popular filtered cigarette in the world.
And you heard that not just from our experts, but
you also heard that from the Marlboro advertisement,
internal advertisement promotion that you saw a few days
ago.
We know that he smoked mostly Marlboros for the
remainder of his life until very late, maybe in the late
1980s, maybe in the early 1990s, at which time he
switched to smoking still Marlboros and still Winstons
and still Camels, but he was smoking the light variety, 3263
although it is true that he also during that time,
according to the witnesses, was looking for the best
deal.
He was going to lights, and he said the reason,
he told us in the presence of his grandson, to his
daughter, and to his wife, he said that he went to them
because it was better for him.
Either he had seen an article or an advertisement.
We know, of course, that he did what the market was
doing at the time, and that was switching to the light
cigarette.
His daughter explained that it seemed to her that
while he seemed like he was smoking as much or more than
ever, it seemed that he was trying to take a step
towards quitting by using the light cigarette.
We know that if he smoked at the rate we have
determined from the consensus of witnesses, he smoked
between -- he had between 360 and 480 hits of nicotine
to the brain each day.
We know for many years he slept with an ashtray
beside the bed.
We know that throughout his life he woke up in the
middle of the night, as testified to by his wife and
would go outside to smoke.
We know that he smoked as soon as he woke up in
the morning. 3264
Now, I want you to remember this, because it
becomes important in a few moments.
He not only smoked
first thing in the morning, what we know is his wife
said the first thing he did was he went outside and lit
up a cigarette.
But his grandson, who lived with him in
-- really served as his father for much of his early
years as his grandson's life, Chris Marvin, if you
recall, Mr. Marvin says, He would wake me up to get me
ready for school.
When he woke me up I could already
smell he had a cigarette.
He would take me in where he
fixed my breakfast, and as I ate breakfast he would go
outside to smoke another cigarette.
He smoked the first
thing in the morning and he smoked heavily in the
morning.
We know that he tried to stop several times cold
turkey.
We know that he even smoked late in his -- when
he was facing health challenges, carotid artery, heart
attack.
We know he tried a patch.
We know he smoked
while he was on the patch.
We know from the testimony
of Dr. Hurt that's not uncommon, because people -- there
are people who have such a need who have worn patches
that are actually inadequate for their nicotine needs
and, therefore, they end up smoking while on the patch.
We know that the reason he smoked lights, they
were better.
We know that he had time after time, he 3265
discussed with his family over the years from Ted
forward, his desire to quit smoking cigarettes.
And we
know that he smoked continuously despite harmful
consequences, meaning that after he knew he had health
problems, he still could not stop smoking.
And we know that he was so addicted to cigarettes,
that in the -- if he ran out of cigarettes, he has been
observed by various family members at different points
in time going out among ashtrays and digging for butts
so that he could get another hit of nicotine until he
could get a cigarette.
And finally, we know that in his last days he
smoked right up until he could no longer smoke a
cigarette anymore.
And when he laid in the hospital bed
in the middle of the house, we know that the motion he
made, that people observed him doing it, was a
repetition of his smoking experience, the most common
experience of his entire life.
Now, we brought you an expert on addiction.
I
want to go through, because I think it's critically
important, the highlights of the qualifications of
Dr. Hurt.
Dr. Hurt was the co-founder, and is the director
of the Nicotine Dependence Center at the Mayo Clinic.
It is among the largest in the world.
He's board 3266
certified in addiction medicine.
The Nicotine
Dependence Center has treated more than 50,000 patients
since he has served as its director.
It trains
physicians, and he trains health professionals,
including Ph.D. and post-doctoral students in ways to
detect and treat nicotine addiction.
He is an international lecturer in the areas of
the tobacco industry and nicotine addiction.
He's
published in peer-reviewed articles more than 166
research findings.
140 of his articles dealt directly
with nicotine addiction and the history of tobacco.
We know that he has been asked to serve, and has
served as a reviewer on the Surgeon General's Reports.
He has testified before the United States Senate on the
initiation of youth smoking.
He reviewed -- he was
selected to review the confidential tobacco documents
for the state of Minnesota in a ground-breaking tobacco
case.
And we also know that he doesn't get paid to
testify in cases because the Mayo Clinic, and he
explained this to you, has a very special way.
Their
doctors make their salary whatever they are doing.
And
maybe that explains why, but in the last 25 years this
is only the third time he has chosen to testify in a
case involving allegations against tobacco companies. 3267
I want to go over his opinions with you, because
those opinions are to be given the weight that you
believe that they should based on his experience,
education, background, training, and your common sense.
He said that it was his opinion that Mr. Bowden
was not only addicted, but that he was heavily addicted
to the nicotine contained in cigarettes manufactured by
R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris.
He said that it was his determination from reading
all the depositions that he smoked for approximately
54 years at the rate of one to two packs per day.
In pack years, you do the math.
It's somewhere
between 54 pack years and 108 pack years.
It doesn't
really matter in one sense, and why is that?
Because
Dr. Burns tells you that once you have gone beyond 30
pack years, you are already in very treacherous
territory in terms of the risk that you have for
developing the most common cigarette-related disease,
which is lung cancer.
We know -- it was his opinion that he smoked -- he
talked to you about something called the Fagerstrom
test, which the Fagerstrom test is a test used at the
Mayo Clinic.
It's a multifactorial unit based on an
interview.
He said, I actually use that as a tool just
as I use other things as a tool.
But the thing I look 3268
mostly at is what's called a heaviness of smoking index
within that.
The heaviness of smoking is a subsection of the
Fagerstrom test, and he says, My experience tells me for
addiction -- for when we're going to treat someone for
addiction, the answer to two questions matters most:
How quickly does he smoke in the morning.
If he smokes
first thing in the morning we know he's fulfilling a
nicotine need that has built over the night.
Number two is:
How much has he smoked.
This man smoked for more than 50 years at a rate
greater than a pack a day.
Both of those put him in the
heavily addicted category.
He was asked about the DSM-IV-TR, which you'll
hear more about later, but he says we use it, it's a
tool.
We use it as it's warranted.
It's one
measurement used.
We do not typically use it, and I did
not use it here because some of the questions require
that an interview to take place.
And if you remember, some of the questions
conceded by their expert could not be answered unless
you actually interview the person, because you have to
know what their expectations were when they began to
smoke.
If you don't know what their expectations were
when they began to smoke, I mean, how soon did they 3269
think there going to stop; well, you can't do that in a
case of a person deceased for approaching 20 years and
began to smoke before World War II.
So he said, I used the standard way I would do it
if I were doing it in the clinic that I operate.
He said that the things he looked to, he continued
to smoke.
Another one he said was very serious, and he
gave you some examples:
How, when someone is facing a
serious health-related issue and they continue to smoke,
that is an indication of how addicted they are.
He even told you about people who continue to
smoke even when they are on transplant lists.
In Dr. Hurt's testimony, he explained to you that
this man, Mr. Bowden, after carotid artery surgery, and
a heart attack, while on the patch, still continued to
smoke.
And according to his family members, smoked
until he could no longer physically engage in the act.
We know that he tried unsuccessfully to quite many
times.
We know that from the testimony of family
members.
We know that he tried -- he would say he was
going to quit, and then what else would he tell them?
He would finally tell his only children:
Don't pick
them up because if you do you can't put them down.
And in his own way, using his common sense, he
several times said I can't quit because I'm addicted. 3270
And that was a message he gave to his grandchildren and
children because I can't quit because I'm addicted.
We know that it interfered with aspects of his
life.
His wife, Mrs. Bowden at some point said we're
not going to smoke in the house anymore, and he agreed.
And he did, as wise of all husbands as she said, and he
continued to smoke outside, so much so that when he
would watch football games, he would smoke on the
outside while the TV was through the sliding glass door
or window on the inside.
When guests would come over to the house,
including his daughter-in-law and her husband Gary Cook,
they would spend most of their time on the outside.
Why?
Accommodating his smoke.
When he would go visit his children in Atlanta,
his grandchildren and son in Atlanta and North Carolina,
every hour they had to pull over to have a cigarette.
And when they got there, he smoked in the garage because
he wasn't allowed to smoke in the house around his
grandchildren.
We know that he -- we know that he, even going on
a short trip as Silver Springs, I think it was Silver
Springs and Disney World, he would pull off at the rest
stops and he would have to take a smoke because she did
not want him to, and he honored her request that he not 3271
smoke in the car when she was in the car.
Those were Dr. Hurt's opinions.
He wasn't just
addicted, he was heavily addicted.
Now, they brought a Dr. Kaplan, Dr. Eric Kaplan.
And for a moment I think, because you will see in a
moment why I stress this, so please don't take it as he
-- I don't have any personal attack on anyone whatever,
but I want this to be noted in weighing out the experts.
Dr. Kaplan is not board certified in addiction
medicine.
He's not a member of the Florida Medical
Association or the American Medical Association.
He's
never performed research related to any aspect of
tobacco or nicotine addiction.
He's never published one
article related to tobacco or nicotine addiction.
He
currently doesn't have hospital privileges anywhere.
He's never been a reviewer for the Surgeon General.
He's never asked to be a reviewer for a peer-reviewed
journal.
He's never taught any classes anywhere, or
lectured on nicotine addiction or tobacco abuse.
His testimony was that he has a one-man practice,
and by one-man practice, if you remember the billing
exchange that took place, he means one man, it's just
him, in Lutz, Florida.
And his practice involves not
more than 1 percent involving patients who are seeking
help for nicotine addiction. 3272
And if you reverse that, what it means is
99 percent of the people he sees, he sees for things
other than nicotine addiction.
He's never been involved with an institution where
the focus was on nicotine addiction.
He's never
testified in any proceedings prior to his having met
Mr. Reilly on an airplane, at which time he
determined -- they determined they would meet again and
he would be interviewed by other attorneys for the
tobacco industry, at which time he's now provided
testimony in some 15 or 16, even more, Engle cases
alone.
He's made over $1.1 million as a result of
actually meeting Mr. Reilly and being accepted as an
expert with the credentials we've just outlined.
And what were his opinions?
Well, there were
several that are interesting.
First of all, he doesn't
find that the American Psychiatric Association's
position -- he doesn't find their position
authoritative.
He doesn't find the American Cancer
Society's position authoritative.
He doesn't find the
position of the Surgeon General of the United States
authoritative.
The reason why?
At least as to the
Surgeon General, they disagreed, and they've disagreed
since 1988. 3273
He does not find addiction to be a cause of any
disease.
He doesn't find addiction to be a cause of any
disease, unless the person suffers from cognitive
deficiencies.
In other words, unless the person has a
mental cognitive deficiency, he believes addiction does
not ever cause disease, despite the findings of the
Surgeon General and others.
He does not -- he used the DSM-IV criteria despite
the fact that, of course, some of it he admits required
an interview.
And he assumed -- even when assuming
Mr. Bowden met the criteria for lung cancer -- for
addiction, excuse me.
Even when he assumed, when he was
asked by his counsel, I want you to assume he was
addicted, did the addiction cause his lung cancer?
No.
Based on the testimony of Dr. Kaplan, be sure of
this:
There may be cases where he's found addiction at
different times, I think is what he said, but he's never
found that addiction causes disease.
Based on the position of Dr. Kaplan, unless you
have a cognitive deficiency, unless you have a mental
disorder, you would never be a class member under the
Engle decision.
Now, you've -- you're going to be instructed on
this, but this is what an expert -- how you should judge
an expert's testimony. 3274
First of all, you can accept it, you can reject
it, or you can take it in part.
You may accept such opinion, reject it, or give it
weight -- the weight you think it deserves, considering
the knowledge, the skill, the experience, the training,
or the education of a witness, the reasons given by the
witness for the opinion expressed, and all the other
evidence in the case.
Dr. Kaplan tells you that nicotine is not a
powerful drug.
The Surgeon General holds to the
contrary since 1988.
But the interesting thing is he
must not have read the internal documents of the tobacco
industry, because they have held for years that it is a
potent pharmacologic agent, and we'll see that in a
moment.
Using that scale, tipping it this way, the
question I submit to you is this:
In looking for an
expert, would you go to the Mayo Clinic, find a person
who ran the program, who had been published nationally
and had received international awards for the history of
his work, or would you go to Lutz, Florida, and find a
person who treats 1 percent of his patients for
addiction?
Where would you look in a genuine effort to
find expertise?
There are a few things on addiction and disease in 3275
this case that you learned that I think are important.
Long-term heavy smoking causes -- long-term heavy
smoking of cigarettes causes lung cancer and death.
7,000 chemical compounds and 69 carcinogens identified
within cigarettes.
15 to 20 percent of all smokers get
lung cancer and die.
90 percent of all lung cancers or
greater are caused by smoker.
50 to 60 of all long-term
smokers die of a smoking-related disease.
And 450,000
Americans die each year from a smoking-related disease.
We had Dr. Burns.
Dr. Burns was here, and I won't
spend much time because I don't think anybody would ever
assail the credentials of Dr. Burns'.
For a moment, Dr. Burns' credentials are that he
has spent his entire life in nicotine, literally since
he went to work for the CDC, the Centers for Disease
Control, the National Clearinghouse for Smoking and
Health, and as a young doctor began to author the 1975
Surgeon General's report.
Dr. Burns publishing,
researching, reviewing, he's done it all.
Dr. Burns said, without hesitation, the cause of
Mr. Bowden's death was squamous cell carcinoma caused by
cigarette smoke.
In fact, you recall there was a slide show.
He
went through in great detail with you the actual process
over time, how it takes a dose response:
The more 3276
smoke, the more damage.
The more damage over time --
for some people it's a different rate, and for some
people the rate doesn't occur, but for those that it
does, ultimately it results.
The carcinogen attacks and
the process takes place.
And as the carcinogens attack,
lung cancer is caused and then spreads and results.
And he tells you that actually in this case the
kind of lung cancer of squamous cell lung cancer, in the
location, was he had very little prospect from the
moment he was diagnosed, which as we know he died four
months later.
He was asked about:
What about family?
There's a
lot of family members.
He said well, one problem with a
lot of family members who have had illness from cancer
is that everybody in the family smoked, and they smoked
a lot.
But if I set that aside for a moment and I look at
it, I want you to understand -- and he tried to -- he
said just follow me.
It is a vulnerability.
The carcinogen has to come from somewhere.
Some
people may have a vulnerability.
If you remember, he
actually gave the malaria analogy, and he said
ultimately some people got malaria and some people
didn't, but when we got rid of the source, nobody got
it. 3277
That's the same thing going on here.
And he
said -- he told you 90 to 95 percent of squamous cell
lung cancers caused by smoking, less than 2 percent is
identified to have a genetic component.
Dr. Wolfe, the treating physician, Dr. Wolfe says
yes, there were two possible causes, but this is very
clearly what he said.
He says:
Can you tell us,
independent of Mr. Bowden's risk factors, what the cause
was with a reasonable degree of medical certainty for
his lung disease.
From the information presented today, the patient
had two distinct risk factors that are both real, the
family history of tobacco abuse.
Just statistically,
the tobacco abuse is known to cause squamous cell
carcinoma of the lung.
That's all the information I
have.
That being cigarette smoking?
Based on the fact
95 percent of squamous cell carcinomas of the lungs are
caused by tobacco smoke, does that lead you to the
opinion his lung cancer was caused by cigarettes?
Based on that information, yes.
He looked at them both.
He's the treating
physician.
He said, I'll acknowledge it looks like
there's a family issue here, but the cause of this man's
squamous cell carcinoma was cigarette smoking. 3278
Not another doctor, not a pulmonologist, not an
oncologist, not another doctor has come into this
courtroom that said Dr. Burns or Dr. Wolfe are wrong in
their opinion.
It is unrebutted that he died from cigarette
smoking.
And once we've determined that he smoked
cigarettes and it was caused by his addiction, we are a
long way toward answering the first question.
Remember, nicotine is the most important chemical
that keeps the tobacco companies profitable.
If you remember Dr. Teague saying, many, but not
most of those who would like to stop smoking are able to
do so, meaning most are not.
Most are not able to do
so, and that's not from somebody we brought in here.
That's from a person who worked his life in the tobacco
industry for R.J. Reynolds.
Nicotine is important, and how do we know it?
Because Philip Morris said without the chemical compound
nicotine -- without chemical compound, referring to
nicotine, the cigarette market would collapse.
Philip
Morris would collapse, and we would all lose our jobs
and our consulting fees.
And R.J. Reynolds said we cannot be comfortable
selling a product which most of our customers would stop
using, if they could.
What is to say if the exit gate 3279
for our market should suddenly open, we could be out of
business almost overnight.
And folks, that's all this
was ever about.
So, what do we have?
Mr. Bowden was addicted.
He
was addicted according to your common sense.
He was
addicted according to our expert testimony.
He was
addicted to cigarettes for 50-plus years.
He could not
stop despite his efforts, and he died of lung cancer
caused by cigarette smoking.
So the answer to Class membership is yes.
That being the case, once you find Class
membership, there are some instructions which I told you
all the way back to opening statement dictate much of
where we are.
You will be told the following:
That the Engle
decision that the Florida Supreme Court as held, and
this Judge will instruct you that you must find:
Cigarettes cause lung cancer, cigarettes are addictive.
Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds placed cigarettes on the
market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous.
Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds concealed or
omitted material information not otherwise known or
available, knowing the material was false or misleading,
or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the
health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes 3280
or both.
Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds agreed with other
companies to conceal or omit information regarding the
health effects of cigarettes, or their addictive nature,
or both, with the intention that the smokers and the
public would rely on the information to their detriment,
and Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds were negligent.
So, from that we will know the following:
First,
you're going to be asked on the Verdict Form if he's a
class member, you will be asked were they negligent?
You are instructed they were.
You're going to be asked did they -- are they
strict -- did they put a defective product on the
market?
You have an instruction, they did.
Additionally, I want to talk a little bit about,
just for a few moments about the conspiracy.
You heard
about it.
It started in 1953.
They signed the Frank
Statement right after the meeting.
They agreed and they
continued throughout, and we'll go through it quickly,
that they will continue to mislead the public, that they
would create a false controversy, that they would create
doubt where none existed, and they would reassure the
public constantly by saying if we ever find anything
we'll take it out.
From the beginning, we know that the scientific 3281
directors when they were first faced with a problem,
they said it's fortunate for us cigarettes is a habit
they can't break.
That's not something we said, that's somebody
tobacco said in 1953.
Boy wouldn't it be wonderful if our company was
the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette.
You don't
need a cancer-free cigarette unless the one you're now
producing causes cancer.
They knew what was going on.
There was no doubt
of confusion internally that cigarettes caused cancer.
You see the documents right here, but I think the one
you focus on is the Bates Statement.
This was the trip,
you remember, the tobacco individuals came over, they
met with the American Tobacco Company, they met with the
TIRC, they met with Philip Morris.
And on the way back
they wrote a memo, and they said:
The individuals with
whom we met with believed that smoking causes lung
cancer.
That was in 1958.
Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds and I'm not going
to go through all these documents again with you, but
you remember these people you see below, and you
remember the statements above, but I think the most
important one for a moment is this:
Doubt is our
product.
1969, Philip Morris. 3282
Doubt is our product, since it is the best means
of competing with the body of fact that exists in the
mind of the general public.
It is also the means of
establishing a controversy.
All they wanted to do was to give the -- as
Dr. Burns said, they wanted to talk to the addicted
smoker and make sure they knew it was okay, we'll keep
researching, you keep smoking.
They never found the
answer because they knew the answer, they just found the
questions, because the motive all along was keep them
smoking and keep selling those billions and billions of
cigarettes.
Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds committed two
major frauds in this.
One, it saved the market the
first time.
1953, the market was going like this
(indicating).
They were on their way out.
The
scientific results from all around the world, including
the mice painting, were hitting the market and it was
going like this (indicating).
They said a month later,
If we find anything we'll take it out.
Then the filter began.
Marlboro went from being a
little female, or woman's cigarette, and all of a sudden
it was a powerful/powerful cigarette aimed at a filtered
market.
Winston became the number one cigarette replacing 3283
Camel?
Why?
Because it had a filter.
The filter never
worked, but the public always thought I'm smoking safer.
Why?
It's a filter, a filter.
What do we do with a
filter?
It filters out something, that's what they
believe.
Now, we know in 1958 Congress said that's not
what's happening.
They're actually getting more tar and
nicotine.
The filter doesn't work, but they already
knew that.
In 1966 they talked about a new cigarette, and
they said look, the illusion of filtration is just as
important as the fact of filtration.
It was the
illusion that was important to them in marketing their
product.
They committed a massive fraud against the public
with the use of low tar and low nicotine cigarettes, the
so-called light cigarette solution.
You heard from Dr. Burns.
He believed it.
You
heard from the Surgeon Generals, they believed it.
And
then they saw the internal documents from the company in
1999, and they realized wait a minute, the way we've
been testing these on calibrated machines is inaccurate.
That's not how smoking -- smokers actually behave.
And
they found it from the documents, some of them 20 years
old from the tobacco industry.
The light cigarette was 3284
a fraud.
But people, including people today, thought hey,
it's light.
That must mean something.
It's filtered,
that must mean something.
Yeah, it did.
It kept selling cigarettes, and kept the growth of
cigarettes in America until the 1980 when they were on a
decline in 1953, but for the fraud of filtration, but
for the fraud of the light cigarette, but they say if we
had any thought or knowledge that in any way we were
selling a product harmful to our consumers, we would
stop business tomorrow.
1958, they knew it formed cancer.
Didn't stop,
did they?
In fact, let's play this, a little montage we put
together over how many times or how many years they
promised they would take care of it if there was a
problem.
(Video played:)
"So far we have found none that give us any cause
for concern.
If we do find any we consider harmful, and
so far we have not, we'll remove these from smoke and
still retain the pleasure of your favorite cigarette."
MR. SMITH:
1955.
"Well, obviously a filter takes out certain tar
and nicotine.
I don't think the industry admits there 3285
are any bad elements.
If there are bad elements,
through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General,
through the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope
we may find them, and if they are found they will be
removed."
MR. SMITH:
1964.
"We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous.
We don't accept that.
Because when, as and if, any
ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being
injurious to human life, we have confident we can
eliminate that ingredient."
MR. SMITH:
1972.
"Do you believe that cigarettes are safe?
Have
they been proved to be safe?
I believe they have not been proved to be unsafe."
"Take the controversy about cigarettes.
In the
91st Congress, the House testimony heard testimony from
leading experts on smoking and health.
The records
shows that many of the countries most respected doctors
openly challenged anti-cigarette claims."
"And I have to disagree with you in that we don't
know what causes the ailments that have been attributed
to cigarette smoking."
"Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or
no? 3286
It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer.
All right, sir.
It has not been causally established.
Cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between
cigarette smoking and emphysema?
Despite all the research to date, there last been
no causal link established."
"Okay.
The jury has not come in.
It may not be harmful.
You're not convinced?
It may be or it may not be, we don't know."
Yes, I may be convinced.
We don't know what
causes cancer in general right now, so I think that we
may find out what causes cancer, and we may find out
some relationship which is yet to be proven."
(Video concluded.)
MR. SMITH:
1994.
April of the year Mr. Bowden
died.
That's the fraud and conspiracy, and they made it
work beautifully.
And then there was this that nobody knew about.
They were manipulating the nicotine in a contest to
raise the pH so they could make the product get to the
brain faster.
Why?
Because that gave it more of a
kick, and they all were after more of a kick.
The youth
market liked the kick.
Adults and addicted smokers felt
the kick. 3287
These are the documents that were presented to
you.
I'm not going to read them all, but you know what
they say.
They say ultimately they were in a contest to
find the free based element, so that that would be the
most rapid delivery system of the cigarette and enhance
the kick.
And according to the tobacco industry's
rival, be it Brown & Williamson and RJR Company, the
sole of Marlboro which took over the market in the
1970s, the sole of Marlboro is controlled ammonia
processing of tobacco.
It wasn't just they had nicotine
in cigarettes, they found out a way to jazz them up, and
that's what they did and nobody knew.
Concealment is at the heart of this case.
To
understand concealment, you got to know it's an
intentional tort.
That means it's something where you
have to have a frame of mind.
The frame of mind that we
have in this case is real simple.
There's three documents I presented to you, all
three of which dealt with the issue.
One says if we get
results back with nicotine similar to those gotten with
morphine and caffeine, we will want to bury it.
Another says, back to the general counsel.
We do
not see or foresee any difficulty to remove certain
reports from research files once it becomes clear such
action is necessary for the successful defense of our 3288
present and future suits.
And finally, handwritten from T.S. Osdene, a
high-ranking official with the company.
What's he say
in film writing?
Ship all documents to Cologne.
Keep
in Cologne.
Okay to phone and telex (these will be
destroyed).
And then down there before you see notes,
important papers, we will destroy them.
That's concealment.
That's the state of mind of
concealment, and that's the state of mind of these
companies, and they keep the controversy alive.
And you know what?
We'll talk about it more
later, but they also in the evidence -- it's
interesting.
They came back, and not one time did they attack
the documentation we provided about youth smoking.
They
targeted teenagers because they knew the following.
They knew if you don't get them before they're 18,
there's only a 5 percent chance you'll ever get them.
And they went after 14-, 15-, 16-, 17-, and, in fact,
one document, 12-year-olds, and that was their
replacement document.
Now, it should have said something to us.
Why did
they need to have a replacement market?
Well, they had
to have a replacement market because they were losing 3
to 400,000 smokers every year. 3289
And they advertised to them, they appealed to
them, and they said, you know, people say advertising
isn't effective.
Well, this is what the FTC said:
Cigarette advertising reaches virtually all Americans
who can either read or understand the spoken word.
1967.
So pervasive is cigarette advertising that it's
virtually impossible for Americans of almost any age to
avoid cigarette advertising, and they didn't.
And what
happened to the advertising?
You know, they presented a number of very -- I
think Talman, he was Perry Mason all the time.
That's
a moving statement.
Yul Brynner's death, that's a
moving statement.
What did tobacco do?
They went off television
after those came out.
Why?
They would rather be off
television than have the Fairness Doctrine which allowed
one out of every four messages to be about public safety
and the harm of smoking.
And they chose to take their
250 billion, quarter of a trillion dollar investment
that they made in promoting and advertising their
product, and they took it off the TV and they put it on
race cars and they put it on tennis courts, and they
kept that smoking number.
(Video played:) 3290
"What cigarette do you smoke?
You'll be
interested to know how the doctors of America answered
that question.
Tens of thousands of doctors, doctors in all parts
of the country, in every state of the union, doctors in
every branch of medicine were asked, 'What cigarette do
you smoke?'"
"Luckys tastes better.
Lucky, fresher and
smoother.
Lucky Strike."
(Video concluded.)
You remember all those?
I just wanted to remind
you what it was like.
I still love the Bogart thing.
You have four more questions that you're going to
be asked to answer, and I'm going to put those up now.
I want to remind you of this evidence that we had,
and one other item.
You'll be asked about reliance.
Reliance can be inferred, and in this case we know that
Mr. Bowden was not immune to the forces that shaped his
time.
We know that he smoked Camels and Luckys when it
was the most popular.
We know he went to filters when
that was the thing to do.
We know he moved to lights.
We know that he was just like his generation of smokers.
This is what the company said when they were
telling people it wasn't injurious, they intended the
public to rely on the statements.
I want to remind you 3291
of this one:
(Video Played.)
"Throughout your tenure with American, it was not
only American's position, but your position that
cigarettes weren't injurious to health.
Is that
accurate?
Through my tenure?
Yes.
Yes, that is so.
That's something American Tobacco wanted the
public to believe; is that correct?
Yes.
It's a statement the American Tobacco placed great
reliance on?
We issued that statement, yes.
Certainly we
wanted them to believe that statement.
As far as you're concerned, a person is justified
in relying on that statement?
Yes."
(Video concluded.)
That ought to be all we need to know about
reliance, and we know that in 1994 they stood before
congress and they swore under oath that nicotine was not
addictive.
You have four other questions to answer.
I want 3292
to go to those questions now.
Question Number 2, I told you before:
State
whether Mr. Bowden's smoking of each defendant's
cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of his
lung cancer and death.
Well, if you found he is part of the Class, which
clearly he should be, then you've already received
instructions from the Judge, His Honor, you will receive
that they were negligent and they were -- they put a
defective product, so as to the smoking of their --
since the product was defective, that's a finding, and
they were negligent, that's a finding, we submit that's
an easy question to answer.
Next, please.
State for each defendant whether the concealment
or omission of a material fact about the health effects
or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both were a
legal cause of Mr. Bowden's lung cancer and death.
Guys, it's very simple.
They wouldn't tell a lie
for 50 years, maintain it under oath and spend a quarter
of a trillion dollars supporting it if they didn't know
the lie would change people's minds.
If they had told the truth about manipulation of
nicotine, if they told the truth about light cigarettes
or filters being a failure, if they had stood up once 3293
and said the Surgeon General is right, it would have
changed, and everybody knows that.
And finally:
State for each defendant whether the
agreement to conceal or omit a material fact regarding
the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive
nature of smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of Mr.
Bowden's lung cancer and death.
Remember with all of these, it doesn't have to be
the only cause.
They'll argue enjoyment, they'll say
choice.
Those things may be a factor, but if it was a
substantial cause, meaning it was not insubstantial,
that the information they held back, the agreement that
they used from 1953 throughout his life, to hide and
conceal what they were doing, how they were doing it, it
made a difference, and the answer to all these ought to
be yes.
At this point you get a break from me.
I want to
turn this over to my partner, Mr. Avera, and the good
news for you is he speaks a lot slower.
THE COURT:
Mr. Avera?
MR. AVERA:
Thank you, Your Honor.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
It's been a
couple weeks; a long time.
Sixty-one years ago a handsome young man asked a
beautiful young girl to marry him, start a family 3294
together, and live the rest of their lives together.
Their time when they got married in December of 1953 was
an American culture of cigarettes, a culture created by
the cigarette industry.
You couldn't turn sideways or
upside down and avoid seeing a cigarette ad.
They
appeared sexy or popular or cool, and they were
everywhere.
Athletes pitched them, movie stars made
them look alluring and sexy.
Junior Bowden and Gloria Bowden grew up during the
Depression and the Second World II.
You may remember
Tom Brokaw wrote a book, and he called them The Greatest
American Generation.
Their home was one that was rich
in love and closest to family.
Like so many blue collar
families of that era, Junior was in charge of working
hard, an honest day's work for an honest day's wage.
Mrs. Bowden kept the home, and both of them provided
unlimited love to their two boys and two girls.
They did everything together.
They were joined at
the hip.
And although most folks from that generation
were not very public in their displays of affection, we
know now how wonderful their relationship must have been
based on how their children speak of them.
Most certainly, some of Gloria's love for Junior
had to come from his decision to adopt his stepson, Ted
Bowden, and treat him as his own son for his entire 3295
life, and for Junior's emotional capability to treat Ted
as his own son for Ted's entire life and for
Mr. Bowden's entire life.
Over 41 years' remembrance by family, children,
birthdays, Christmas, laughter echoing through the halls
of the family home, the giggles of children, the touch
of a loving husband, and the sharing of a bed with a
husband.
Those memories, ladies and gentlemen, were
tragically tainted when Junior Bowden, loving husband,
wonderful father to Gloria's children died a horrible
death four days before Christmas 1994.
Over a period of four months from diagnosis to
death, she watched her husband, her protector, her rock
of over 40 years, waste away and die from lung cancer
caused by smoking.
He died from a 53-year addiction to
nicotine and cigarettes.
Nicotine that at various times had unknowingly to
Junior been manipulated to get the most efficient
nicotine kick, a long addiction and exposure to
carcinogens, things that the industry had promised that
they would take out if they ever identified them.
Those
things caused his inoperable lung cancer.
What you will likely not hear today is any
acknowledgment by these defendants as it goes to 3296
punitive damages, these purveyors of addiction and
death, that they did anything wrong.
They truly are
"addiction incorporated."
Paraphrasing Mr. Reilly's questions to a witness
in this case:
Do people choose to tell the truth?
Yes.
Do they do it every day?
Yes.
Do people choose to acknowledge their wrongdoing?
Yes.
Do they do it everyday?
Sure.
Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds have always raised
the shield, I'll call it the shield of personal choice
and freedom of choice, creating controversy when none
existed over the science, over the medicine.
Personal
choice.
When chasing each other, manipulating pH levels of
free nicotine to increase the effects of nicotine;
personal choice.
Even attacking the Great American Smokeout.
Philip Morris encouraged smokers to not stop smoking.
They were encouraging people to use their right of
freedom of choice when they knew their dosages of
nicotine addicted their customers, and long-term 3297
exposure caused cancer, including children.
Got to get
them when they're young, you have to get them early,
hook them early, hook them for life.
In their press release on the Great American
Smokeout, Philip Morris said the smoker's message is
freedom of choice.
Does that sound familiar?
It should
because you've heard it from them in this very courtroom
starting in voir dire.
Some would say that the word
"freedom" was a hollow word until our familiar founding
fathers crafted the Constitution of the United States of
America.
I looked up the word "freedom", and Merriam
Webster defined it as the absence of necessity, coercion
or constraint in choice of action.
Absence of
necessity, in choice of action.
When you're smoking and
you're addicted to nicotine, there's no absence of
necessity in your choice of action.
Your brain craves
nicotine.
It needs nicotine.
And their own folks told
them that they could not defend free choice in smoking
when the smoker was addicted.
How about absence of coercion of choice?
Anybody's common sense tells them that spending a
quarter of a trillion dollars in marketing and
advertising cigarettes leaves one with an absence of
coercion to smoke.
Is that the case?
No, there is 3298
coercion.
What about the Great American Smokeout, their
encouragement to smoke?
Freedom, ladies and gentlemen, should be a word
reserved for the true ideals of our country.
Now, I'm going to suggest to you that for as long
as a they have used the words choice or freedom in a
debate over the science and medicine, it has been their
cohort to wrap themselves in American ideals and the
American flag.
But their version of choice is a perverse one.
Their version contradicts our American values.
The
American values we should be focusing on are truth,
honor, character.
Remember growing up, our parents told us character
is a thing that you do when no one is looking?
We
should all be focusing on the real American ideals,
striving to be good citizens, good corporate citizens
that we do know harm.
How does it become in their eyes an American ideal
to manipulate the addictive qualities of a product that
contains over 60 carcinogens and thousands of additives
and not tell the truth about it?
How does it become an American ideal in their eyes
to allow greed and averist to overcome their 3299
responsibility, their corporate responsibility, the
executives personal responsibility to tell the truth and
to do no harm.
You see, in their view they get to do those things
as long as they point fingers and say the word "freedom"
or use the word "choice".
Now, if you have any doubt how strongly they wrap
those subtle messages of America and freedom into our
subconscious, just look at the hundreds of thousands of
kits they sent out on the day of the Great American
Smokeout.
Do you remember seeing that document publication
by Philip Morris?
But you may not have noticed as the
document came up what color those kits were.
They're
graphically designed in red, in white, and blue.
These folks at Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds
made those choices.
They don't get to shield themselves
from personal responsibility by hiding for decades in
laboratories and corporate boardrooms, knowing their
product addicts and kills people, while at the same time
promising they'll take out whatever is harmful.
You don't get to avoid personal responsibility by
choosing children as young as 12, getting them to use
your product without admitting to the child, the
adolescent, their moms, their dads, that it will addict 3300
them and one day probably kill them.
You don't get to avoid personal responsibility by
wrapping yourself in the American flag and yelling
freedom of choice or personal choice.
Gloria Bowden had years left with Junior.
Their
acts robbed her of those wonderful golden year memories,
and left her instead with her husband's horrible death
from cancer and wasting away.
They caused those harms,
they harmed her, and they must now make up for those
harms, and the only means by which we can do that in our
system is by money damages.
What they must pay is
commensurate with the amount of harm and hurt that they
have caused her.
Now, how do you measure that?
Now, some may
measure Mrs. Bowden's suffering and her mental pain and
anguish by what's been taken from her.
And in
evaluating that, you should ask this question:
What
kind of folks are these, Mr. and Mrs. Bowden?
They're
like our neighbors, our co-workers.
They have similar
dreams for themselves, for their children, for their
grandchildren.
They sought nothing more from life than
what they could get or earn from an honest day's work.
To understand fully the nature of mental
suffering, you have to consider components of that:
Grief, sorrow, worry, fear, loss of enjoyment, loss of 3301
companionship.
Mrs. Bowden lost her lover, her
companion, her confidant, her best friend of 41 years.
We have folks like you evaluate this because
there's no magic formula to figure out what's fair or
what the magnitude of her suffering is.
We all know
that broken hearts are far more difficult to fix than
broken bones.
Her legacy in losing Mr. Bowden is grief, is
sorrow, is mental pain and agony.
We all know that joy sure has a lot of friends,
and the only friend grief has is loneliness.
Grief
makes the heart sick and worry consumes it.
Now, a friend, a relative might pat Mrs. Bowden on
the back and encourage her to remember the good times.
That fails to recognize that she knows that those good
times are never to happen again for her or her husband.
Worry and fear are the types of emotions that can
consume a person and cause them immeasurable anxiety.
And although she comes from a generation, you can tell
when she was on the stand, that's fiercely independent,
there's little question from hearing her share her story
with us that she's scared that she lives alone.
She
never lived alone until she lost Junior Bowden.
She
didn't know that she was scared of the dark until she
lost him. 3302
It's really only here, ladies and gentlemen, in a
courtroom where grief, sorrow, worry, fear, only have a
small amount in terms of value.
To Mrs. Bowden the harm that they have caused made
all of those components a substantial part of her life.
And yes, 19 years have past, and we know the pain and
the suffering, the grief and the sorrow had to be much
worse 19 years ago, but for those of us using common
life experiences and commonsense know it's not really
true that time heals all wounds.
They're always there.
How substantial for Mrs. Bowden?
Look at the hole
that's been left in her life.
He was handy, he was
essential, he was her protector, her rock, her best
friend.
When she awoke in the middle of the night, he
was there.
Her life today is much different, much different
than 19 years ago when lung cancer struck.
They were
together in the mornings, the evenings, weekends with
children, vacations with children, spending time with
grand kids, ball games, church.
There were simple
pleasures, but what made them special was having him by
her side.
Now, in a few moments I'm going to suggest to you
an amount that we would suggest would be fair to make up
for the harm they caused her, but I want to chat a 3303
little bit about allocation of fault and how we do that,
what values are fair comparing the harm they've caused.
Let's begin with allocation.
You heard in opening that Mrs. Bowden stepped
forward to take some responsibility for her husband not
being successful in quitting.
Mr. Bowden started smoking before entering the
military at age 16.
Smoked for 53 years, not
withstanding all the things that Mr. Smith talked about
in his part.
So when you go back to deliberate, ask yourself
questions like this:
Where did he, Junior Bowden, where
did he cover anything up?
Where did he hide the harmful
effects of a drug delivery device used by about
85 percent of Americans at the time in 1953?
Did he
choose to misrepresent, to lie about this thing?
Did he
choose to cover anything up?
Did he sit in front of
Congress with a straight face and misrepresent the
addictive qualities of the component of that drug
delivery device?
You can't say any of those things about Junior
Bowden.
They did those things.
They didn't hesitate,
they didn't equivocate, it was all intentional.
Now, Junior Bowden cannot avoid some fault.
He
couldn't beat his addiction.
They, you, can think of 3304
him as weak and not being able to do that.
You can say
he didn't try hard enough.
You can fault him for those
things, but he didn't do what they did.
And all of you now know 100 times more about the
addictive qualities of nicotine and the power of that
addiction than Junior Bowden ever could have during his
lifetime.
He did not understand the power of addiction from
nicotine and the hold that it had on him, how it changed
the human brain.
And in so deciding these numbers on
allocation, in these numbers that we're going to address
in just a minute, I want to take you to Dr. Kaplan's
testimony, and you will remember his phrase about
motivation and commitment.
Everybody remember that?
He
talked about motivation, commitment.
Why do I want you to remember it?
Because it
applies, it applies to them, it applies to the
defendants.
I want you to look through all the documents.
You've seen only a few pages from the documents that you
have.
I want you to look through all the notes that you
have, and I want you to find one document, internal
document that expresses some concern, any concern about
an American consumer, about an American smoker, about a 3305
child, about an adolescent, them becoming addicted, or
them dying from a smoking-related disease.
You won't
find one, not one.
Do you think that one of the executives at one of
these companies could have had the intentional
fortitude, the motivation, the commitment to get up one
morning and look himself in the mirror and say to
himself:
Today I'm going to be motivated.
Today I'm
going to be committed, motivated and committed to
stopping the lie, the controversy over addiction and
smoking.
Maybe not today.
Maybe tomorrow.
Profits look
good this year, maybe next year.
Maybe next decade.
Maybe never.
Do you think for one second if one of those
executives had expressed to the American public or to
the Junior Bowdens of this country, in particular, that
the industry equated a smoker's addiction to nicotine to
a padlocked dog, or to a rat pressing a lever for a
nicotine hit, that that would not have made a difference
to the American public and to Junior Bowden on the
question of motivation and commitment?
Use your reasonable person's standard.
Use your
common sense and answer that question.
Of course it
would. 3306
Being motivated to commit to stop what they were
doing was not compatible with corporate profits.
Junior Bowden never understood the power nicotine
had over him and what they had done to optimize the
delivery of nicotine into his brain.
He didn't
understand addiction like you do, like we do today.
But there was a type of addiction that was
understood by the industry separate and apart from
nicotine.
They completely understood their addiction to
greed.
I want to suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, as
it pertains to the allocation of responsibility,
equating someone who believed the lie against those that
told it, the allocation of fault should be as follows:
35 percent to each of the defendants, and 30 percent to
Mr. Bowden.
I'm going to suggest to you a figure for what
Mrs. Bowden went through over those horrible four
months, and the 19 years since.
All the nights alone,
visiting the cemetery for the 10 or 15 years when she
could have Mr. Bowden when she didn't, that the sum of
$6 million would be fair.
Now that is a figure, ladies and gentlemen, that
you use your common sense on.
You use your life
experiences each of you have been through collectively, 3307
individually, to assess what would be fair and gist in
light of how they harmed her, Mrs. Bowden, how they hurt
her, what they have taken from her, and perhaps most
importantly what they have left her with.
I'm going to close by chatting about punitive
damages for just a moment, because one of the questions
you're going to be asked on this Verdict Form are
whether punitive damages are warranted.
And Mr. Smith has laid out for you the conspiracy,
the concealment, and we've talked about what would have
made a difference.
Because, remember, back on the
freedom of choice and personal choice issues, I want to
draw your attention to one -- well, a number of factors,
but one with this thought:
There was a time when
these -- this industry, these defendants had a choice,
and it was back in 1953, early 1954 when the Frank
Statement came out.
But remember, every day, every
week, every year they had the ability to change their
choice about this, and their choice was this:
When
faced with corporate profits, stocks declining like they
were when the mouse paintings came out, they had three
choices:
Somebody had to stand up and voice what was
right, but apparently no one did.
The three choices you maybe already figured out
are this:
One, they can tell the truth about what they 3308
knew internally.
They could agree with the scientists
and the medical doctors about what the science and
medicine was.
Or, they let be and just be quiet about
it, not say anything.
Leave it alone.
Or, lie about it
and create a controversy, create an open debate, the
question is still open, create doubt, and that's what
they chose to do, and they never changed it until five
to six years after Junior Bowden's death.
In considering whether punitive damages are
warranted, some things that you should consider:
Was
the conduct causing the loss to the plaintiff so grossly
flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life,
or the safety of the persons exposed to the affects of
such conduct.
We've proven that.
We tipped the scales,
ladies and gentlemen.
We've proved to you beyond and to
the exclusion of a reasonable doubt.
Or, two, the conduct showed such an entire lack of
care that Phillip Morris or R.J. Reynolds must have been
consciously indifferent to the consequence.
Can anybody reasonably argue that they were not
indifferent to the consequences of what they were doing?
Or, three:
The conduct showed such an entire lack
of care that Philip Morris and/or R.J. Reynolds must
have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and
welfare of the public; and go back and look for one 3309
reference to whether they internally were concerned
about the welfare of the public, the American people,
the children of those American families.
Not one.
Or, four, the conduct showed such reckless
indifference to the rights of others as to be the
equivalent of an intentional violation of those rights.
Of course.
If you find any of those, ladies and gentlemen,
punitive damages are warranted.
Now, in considering whether to award punitive
damages, you may consider any harm that these defendants
caused to Mrs. Bowden as a result of Junior Bowden's
death.
And in determining whether punitive damages are
warranted, you may consider similar harms suffered by
other persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing
the reprehensibility or wrongfulness of their conduct as
proven in this case.
That's everyone else, not just the
Junior Bowdens.
We met that burden, ladies and gentlemen.
It's
conduct that resulted in the death, according to
Dr. Burns, I think, of almost 20 million Americans.
They never thought that they would be before a
group of people, their peers, a jury answering for what
they did.
Well here they are. 3310
Today, all across America in courtrooms just like
this, jurors are listening to evidence, listening to the
law and the facts, applying the law to the facts in
determining what is right, what is right, and what is
just.
In 1861 in his first inaugural address, Abraham
Lincoln said:
Why should there not be a patient
confidence in the ultimate justice of the people?
Is
there any better or equal hope in the world?
He was speaking to every American of that time.
He was speaking to every American to come.
He was
speaking to all of us, he was speaking to you.
Thank
you.


MR. SMITH:
May it please the Court. 3429
Good afternoon.
It's worse to go fourth.
What I want to tell -- go back is just over a
few things that have happened today, and I want to
get us recentered what this case is about.
After having heard the arguments that were made
today by these very capable counsel, you would have
believed that the last five days we didn't hear
repeatedly about a company or companies that lied
and conspired and covered up everything from knowing
that lung cancer was caused -- and by 1958, they
knew that.
R.J. Reynolds got up today and said,
"Well, we -- we -- we disclosed a lot of stuff."
You-all remember when Dr. Burns was on the
stand.
When Dr. Burns was on the stand, I asked him
about, in 1964, a study by Dr. Rodgman from
R.J. Reynolds.
It was an eight-year study that had
started in 1955.
They had looked at the
epidemiology, the pathology, the biology, and the
chemistry that they could find in trying to
determine -- and Rodgman was their chief chemist, as
you know from other evidence -- making sure that all
of them consistently -- because they said it -- if
any one of those factors doesn't agree, then we can
argue that cancer is not caused by cigarette
smoking. 3430
In 1964, Dr. Rodgman concluded that it was --
and I love the terms -- "not inconsistent with the
causation of cancer."
Meaning that they knew, in
1964, within months of the Surgeon General's Report,
that an eight-year study that they had taken on
themselves, they knew that lung cancer was caused by
cigarette smoking.
They never told a soul during
his lifetime.
They never admitted it during my
client's lifetime.
Mr. Bowden, in 1994 -- do you remember some of
the letters -- I actually put a 1988 letter -- it
was called "Spock to Olson."
It's a letter -- it
was written to R.J. Reynolds and it got a -- a --
and it got a response.
R.J. Reynolds, when they get a letter, they
would write back a response, and what did they say?
They said, "It hasn't been proven.
It hasn't been
proven."
That's what they told every time.
So to say that R.J. Reynolds somehow, by having
this study -- and, by the way, don't forget the
green monster for one moment because what actually
happened, Dr. Burns said, yes, it was a fine
document.
"Dr. Burns was there anything missing in it?"
"Yes." 3431
"What's that?"
There weren't any -- Burns says there wasn't
any real research on what caused cancer or linking
cigarette smoking to cancer causation.
There were
many fine subjects in it, but that wasn't what it
was about.
Because, remember, they never wanted to get the
answer.
They started out, they had a controversy.
They started out, they had a doubt.
Doubt was their
product.
Not because I say it; because they said
it.
Controversy was their goal.
Not because I
suggest it; their documents show it -- showed it.
So the first thing that happened today was you
would act like this was -- this case -- that this --
there was nothing in this case that had to do with
the tobacco companies.
In fact, if we put up a timeline, the timeline
would read like this:
1953 to 1963, they lied about
smoking and addiction.
1963 to 1973, they lied about smoking and
addiction.
1970 -- you get the idea.
Until 1994, when
Mr. Bowden died, they were still lying about what?
Addiction and lung cancer causation.
So let's get this thing recentered for a 3432
minute.
This isn't a one-sided case.
It's not just
about his life.
It's also about the -- the acts
that they engaged in.
And we're going to get to
that in a moment.
I think a good place to go is -- let's start
with Question Number 1.
And I -- I hope -- because
I -- you-all take notes pretty religiously and
pretty well.
I hope you took the same notes that I
did when it was suggested just a few minutes ago in
argument by counsel for R.J. Reynolds -- "he didn't
have to be told.
He knew he was addicted.
He
recognized he was addicted."
That's what they said.
He didn't have -- Mr. Bowden didn't have to be told.
He recognized he was addicted.
Now, they're -- they're caught in a trap.
They
want to say, "We -- we concealed addiction but it
didn't make a difference."
So to say it didn't make
a difference, their answer is he knew he was
addicted.
When he told his wife he was addicted, he
knew.
When he told his grandson he was addicted, he
knew.
Way back when he told Ted he was addicted, he
knew.
When he said, "I can't quit.
I -- I -- I
want to quit, but I can't stop," when he told his
daughter, "Don't start because if you ever start and
you pick them up, you'll never put them down," it's 3433
right -- they're -- he's right, he did know he was
addicted.
And what do we know about addiction?
That if
you're addicted -- not because I say it, because
their own documents show it -- that once you have
established addiction, free choice is gone as an
argument.
But, folks, they can't let it go.
They -- they cannot let it go.
It's the argument
they've got to make.
It's his fault.
His fault for
believing us.
His fault for doing what we wanted
him to do.
His fault for smoking our product.
His
fault for believing in our advertising.
His fault
for believing our -- the statements we made.
His
fault for falling for our tricks.
His fault for not
knowing that filters weren't any better for you.
His fault for his not knowing that light cigarettes
were a scam.
Let's go to the first question.
Mr. Bowden was addicted to cigarettes.
That's
the first thing and I -- I actually think Mr. Reilly
made a good point.
You can actually break this down
as you suggested.
I believe my question was, was he
addicted?
Well, we know he was addicted.
But their
argument is -- and we just -- and -- and I -- I
don't want to move -- move away from this for a 3434
moment.
Dr. Hurt is recognized throughout the world for
his expertise in the program he operates.
We
brought you the pre- -- one of the preeminent people
in his field in the nation.
And he said he was
heavily addicted.
Yes, he used this, the Heaviness
of Smoking Index from the Fagerstrm test.
He said,
"That tells me the most as a clinician."
But he also said something else that none of
them mentioned today.
He said, "We used all of this
together.
But we meld it together and we use our
experience, our education, our background, our
training, and our practical experience of dealing
with people who are smokers and addicted smokers."
And he tells you, he -- from time to time,
people come to the clinic and he does not find them
not to be addicted.
This was an easy call for him.
He said,
"Because, in addition to the Heaviness of Smoking
Index, one of the things I also look to is how long
did they smoke and how -- how much did they smoke."
He smoked a pack and a half to two packs for 50-plus
years.
That's the evidence.
And they would have
you believe, "Well, he's an Uncle Charlie."
Well, wait a second.
The example "Uncle 3435
Charlie" was given by Dr. Hurt.
He said there are
those people and we find them from time to time.
And what did he say?
"This man's not one of them.
This man was addicted."
Why do he know that?
Because Uncle Charlie -- who can just put them down
any time he wants to -- he doesn't go to the ashtray
and dig out cigarette butts to light them up at
night when he can't find his cigarettes.
He doesn't
give up time with his grandchildren in Atlanta or
North Carolina so he can go out in the -- in the
garage and smoke a cigarette, having brought --
taking the trip to be with his grandkids, to be with
his son.
He was addicted.
As counsel said, he was addicted.
He didn't
have to have some special definition, nor did they.
Put up the addiction, please, for a moment.
I
want to put up the addiction documents just for a
second.
In 1959, they used the term "addiction."
Remember that?
1959, their term.
1964, they used
the term "addiction," their term.
Throughout the
'60s, they used the term "addiction," their term.
In the '70s, they talked about the addictiveness
internally.
Remember the document I showed you?
"That's 3436
not what we say to outsiders?"
Outsiders didn't get
to hear.
Philip Morris knew it.
They knew what
addiction was.
The primary motivation for smoking
is to obtain the pharmacological effect of nicotine.
The product is nicotine.
Why does one smoke?
Addiction.
They knew it.
You know it.
Now, there are people who smoke -- remember
this, the -- the numbers -- there are people who
quit smoking, yes.
But think of this.
After all
that we now know after we finally got the documents,
there are still as many people smoking as there were
in 1964.
That's the testimony.
There are still as
many smokers.
We know that, of the people who become
addicted, one of the great common centerpieces is
they start when they're very young.
We know from
the -- they -- they -- they -- you -- you --
Ms. Dampier couldn't have been clearer.
"I'm not
sure about this, but I know I was about six years
old.
He was nine years older than me, that would
make him 15.
He was smoking then."
We know when he came back from the war, he was
smoking then.
The only difference is, we know he
was smoking then and the brand he was smoking.
So what are they falling back on?
They're 3437
falling back on Dr. Kaplan, their expert.
And I
think we've tried to compare the credentials fairly.
If you will simply go back and -- and -- and take
one who's an internationally recognized resource and
a guy who is a small practice in Lutz, Florida, I
think that alone should tell you so much.
But I
think if you take the man who runs the preeminent
program in the country and compare him to a
psychiatrist who actually says that one percent of
his patients see him for nicotine addiction, he does
see people for addictions, some who smoke.
But the
primary reasons he sees those people -- not for
nicotine addiction -- that's not what he does.
That's why he's perfect for the 16 or 17 cases that
he's stood up and testified on behalf of tobacco
companies every time.
Go back to the first question.
Now, while we are on the addictive subject --
Please show me for just a moment the DSM-IV-R
criteria.
Now, remember, they showed you DSM-IV and they
used it today.
Do you remember my partner
cross-examined from it the other day?
And this is
the test that is given.
And then there is a -- and
my partner cross-examined Dr. Kaplan about it -- 3438
there is a guide and examples are given for people
who suffer from one or more of these situations.
Number 1, Tolerance.
Tolerance can be
defined -- and it says this:
"Examples:
Most
smokers escalate use to one pack a day, or more, by
age 25."
We know he did.
He was smoking two packs
in 1953.
"Absence of nausea, dizziness, et cetera."
We know that that had long since passed, if it ever
existed.
Go to the next criteria.
Criteria Number 2, "Withdrawal as manifested by
either..." -- and it says, as an example, "Many
smokers light up immediately after being in a
smoke-free area."
He would leave his own living
room to go outside to smoke.
He was -- if he was in
the car and she was with him, he wouldn't smoke
until he had -- they had to pull off the road at
the -- at the most convenient places so that he
could go and smoke a cigarette.
And when we talk about withdrawal, remember,
one of the things you'll -- you've -- you've heard
in the cross-examination, you don't even have to
have withdrawal, but he clearly -- one of the
examples, when he would be in an area where he could
smoke, do you remember the front of the store when 3439
he had the partnership with Gary Cooke?
The front
of the store and they said there was no smoking?
What did he -- what did we learn that he did?
He
smoked at the back door and, in fact, his daughter
noticed that he was smoking so heavily that she
actually talked to him about it because she noticed
what?
His smoking was going up so much that there
would be lit cigarettes in more than one location
while he was moving around doing his job.
That's a
person who's addicted.
Next one.
Number 3, "A maladaptive pattern of substance
abuse leading to clinically significant impairment
or distress."
And it says, "The substance is often
taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than
was intended."
Now, one of the reasons that we didn't have the
answer to that for him is he admits -- which is why
Dr. Hurt told you he didn't rely just on the DSM --
is because what?
He couldn't interview the guy.
And, really, to get the correct answer on this, he
would have to be the interviewer because you'd have
to know what his expectations were.
But the example given here is, most smokers do
not intend to smoke five years later.
But, in fact, 3440
70 percent continue to use.
Actually, what happened in this case, not just
five years later but 50 years later, he was still
smoking cigarettes.
Go to the next criteria.
"There is a persistent desire or" -- so stop
there.
Or "a persistent desire" -- how many times
did he tell family members he wanted to quit over
the years?
Every single family member that came in
here that testified on any substance in this case
said, "Yes, I talked to him about it.
He told me he
wanted to quit.
He told me never to do it.
He
wished he had never done it.
He wanted to quit."
Persistent desire.
Secondly, he did try.
He tried cold turkey.
He tried light cigarettes because they were better
for him.
And he talked constantly with his
parents -- with his family regarding his desire to
quit.
And, by the way, he smoked when he was on the
patch.
Now, we'll get to this in a moment.
Do you think that you smoke while you're on the
patch for the enjoyment of smoking?
Do you think
that you scratch through the butts in an ashtray for
the enjoyment of smoking?
There's something else 3441
driving you at that point.
That's what addiction is
all about.
Next one.
A great deal of time is spent in activities
necessary to abstain -- obtain the substance.
The
example they use is chain-smoking.
Let's talk about chain-smoking in this case.
Barbara Dampier testified that in the 1940s he
was a chain-smoker.
His daughter testified he was a
chain-smoker several times in his life.
His wife
talked about how he smoked and would light up one
after another.
That's chain-smoking.
That's having
two cigarettes lit in two different places in the
same office.
That was the evidence in the case.
He was a
chain-smoker.
That's what you're supposed to be
looking for as an element in criteria -- this
criteria, Number 5, and he meets it.
Go to the next one.
"Important social occupational or rec --
recreational activities are given up because of
substance abuse."
Look at this.
He would smoke outside watch- --
while watching football games or to watch
television.
His grandson said he couldn't make it 3442
through a show.
He had frequent rest stops for
smoke breaks while he was driving in the car.
He
would visit family members, including his children
and grandchildren.
He couldn't smoke around his
grandchildren.
He would go out and be alone in the
garage so he could smoke and be away from his
children and grandchildren, even though that's the
reason he went on the trip.
Why?
He had to smoke.
He meets criteria Number 6.
And what's the final criteria?
"Smoke compulsively despite harmful
consequences."
Folks, he had carotid surgery and a heart
attack, and he continued to smoke when he was on the
patch.
How much evidence would it take to convince
them he was addicted?
Never.
Because they know
they can't do it.
Why?
Because in 1980 they
confessed.
And what they confessed in 1980 was, "You can't
use the argument of free choice if a smoker was
addicted."
And their whole argument is always about
his choice, never about the addiction.
But the
addiction is as clear -- there's -- if -- if I gave
you these facts, if I told you this history, if I
told you a man smoked 50-plus years every single day 3443
of his life; that he smoked despite the fact that he
had a heart attack and carotid surgery; that he
smoked daytime, nighttime, first thing when he got
up in the morning; that he could never give it up
despite the fact that he did anything he could do
for his children and grandchildren; what kind of
character -- I think sometimes they want you to
believe that this is a character flaw.
Addiction is
a brain disease.
If you leave here knowing nothing
else, we know that now.
We know -- we've seen the autopsy photographs
of what it does to the human brain over time.
We
know that he was addicted.
He was addicted.
You won't get a definition, but you can't
hardly make up a definition that he doesn't meet,
including the one that they used.
All right.
The next part of Question Number 1,
and this is the one that surprises me the most, but
I -- I guess I should not be surprised at anything.
The argument apparently made today is the
second part.
And that is, we didn't prove that the
smoking caused the lung cancer.
No.
We brought in the only two doctors who
have ever made an opinion on that.
His treating
physician -- I mean, he doesn't work for us.
His 3444
treating physician, Dr. Wolfe.
Dr. Wolfe, who talks
about the family issue.
And what does Dr. Wolfe
arrive at as his conclusion?
He got small cell
carcinoma of the lung because of cigarette smoking.
What did he say -- remember what he actually
said, even when he gave the horrible news to the
family?
She looked at him, "What caused this,
Doctor?"
And the doctor went (indicating).
The
doctor knew.
It was cigarette smoking.
We bring in a pulmonologist who's one of the
recognized experts in the world since 1975.
looks at the file, he looks at the medical.
He
He
says, "Look, I can't tell you if there really was a
family disposition here, a problem of disposition.
Because everybody that I see smoked heavily."
So
that, alone, makes it very difficult to kind of
analyze independent risk.
But what I can tell you is this:
"That this
kind of cancer, small cell carcinoma of the lung, is
almost always attributable to cigarette smoking.
Almost always."
He said 1 to 2 percent.
But then
he says the following -- and we'll get to concurrent
cause in a moment -- because then he said, "Well,
look, if he had a family vul- -- vulnerability, it
would be a factor."
He said, "It's about a .5." 3445
Doctor -- I think Dr. Wolfe said it's about a 2- --
2- -- 200 percent.
Let's compare that with what the data is that
we know from both doctors.
The risk for lung cancer
from small cell -- excuse me -- squamous cell
carcinoma for long-term smokers is 2000 percent.
So
he says, "The other thing about a family disposition
is there are people who may get cancer easier."
We
know that.
There may be families that have that
vulnerability.
We know that.
But the carcinogens
still has to come from somewhere.
It doesn't
self-implode.
You don't independently -- and I
asked him the "but for" question.
"But for his
cigarette smoking, would he have developed lung
cancer, small cell carcinoma of the lung?"
And the
answer was "No."
Now, you know they found Dr. Kaplan.
Surely,
they could find another doctor.
If there was a
pulmonologist or an oncologist or anyone who would
back this theory somehow, a family predisposition, I
assure you, you would have heard from them.
But
they weren't here.
We have two opinions and two
opinions only in the case.
They both apply -- they
both are consistent and they both apply.
He died of lung cancer.
It was squamous cell. 3446
It was a bronchogenic cancer, and it was caused from
cigarette smoking.
That's the evidence from that
stand, from both doctors who looked at the rec --
records.
So I want to look to the third part of that
question.
And was it a legal cause of his lung
cancer and death?
Well, it was "the" cause, by the
way.
It was "the" cause, but it doesn't have to be.
Nor does his addiction have to be the cause.
It's a
cause.
Because, remember this.
Smoking cause of
addiction is a legal cause if it directly and
natural and in a continuous sequence produces or
contributes substantially to producing the death so
that it can be reasonably said that but for an
addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the
death would not have occurred.
Do you remember earlier I showed you the
sequence?
Nicotine addiction, smoking, body
reaction, cancer and death.
The beginning point is when you become addicted
to nicotine.
You bring in that nicotine, and it
goes to your brain rapidly.
But as Dr. Burns
explained, all the rest of those carcinogens, and
those 7,000 chemicals, they go here.
That's what 3447
causes it, and he outlined it perfectly for you.
So even if you believe that he had a family
disposition, it doesn't matter because smoking was
certainly a substantial contributing factor and
that's all the standard is.
And by the greater weight of the evidence, his
addiction and his lung cancer causation have been
established.
He is a class member.
Engle was
decided for people like him.
Now, before I leave that, one more thing.
It's
been argued that he enjoyed smoking.
And I -- I
think that we can all say that several people, all
of his family said, "Yeah."
I asked Dr. Hurt about
that, didn't I?
I asked Dr. Hurt about enjoyment.
Of course, he enjoyed smoking.
Every addicted
smoker enjoys smoking.
Why?
Because what did his
grandson say happened to him?
He said, "He'd get
fidgety; he'd get nervous; he'd get without focus;
he had to have a cigarette at the shop.
I remember
when he got a cigarette, it would calm him down."
When he was around -- when he had a cigarette,
he was calm and he was relaxed.
Why?
Well, we know
the biology, folks.
You saw it.
All of those
receptors that have been building in his brain since
he was 15 years old are getting fed, and that feels 3448
good.
What doesn't feel good is when they're not
being fed.
And so if you ask any smoker, I -- I
can't imagine that there would be an addicted smoker
in the world who says, "I don't enjoy smoking."
"Wait a minute.
You may want to quit."
We know from their own documents, and we know
from the Surgeon General they all want to quit.
We
know they have very low success rate.
Why?
It's
not about -- "I enjoy it so much, I'll keep doing
these things.
I'll act against the wishes of my
wife of 40 years, against my children and my
grandchildren.
I'll do that just because I want to
enjoy myself"?
Was he that kind of man?
No.
We've heard about his character.
When there
was a problem in his family, he took care of it.
And a daughter ended up being a deputy sheriff
because he took care of the problem.
And every
weekend he got in the car and drove down there.
He
had to work up here, but he went down there while
they were recovering from their problem.
Was he a weak person?
No.
He lost a son and
recovered from it.
What's the one thing we ask
everybody that he couldn't beat?
He couldn't beat
cigarettes.
It's not a character flaw, and it's not 3449
a choice.
It was long since a choice.
Now, it was suggested today, "Well, now, if he
had quit in 1979" -- wait a minute.
In 1979,
they've got a lot of nerve to raise that suggestion
because in 1979 they were in the middle of this
conspiracy of lying about everything of any
consequence to smokers.
But, more importantly, by
1979, he'd been smoking almost 30 years.
Ask yourselves this.
At what point, ever, did
either of these companies suggest to the public that
the product was addictive?
At what point did they
ever say that it will kill 50 percent of the people?
They ask today about this little -- you haven't
shown the information that we concealed.
Put up the concealed information for a moment.
This is just a quick run-through of things
R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris concealed.
They
manipulated nicotine and added chemicals such as
ammonia -- and urea actually should be on there.
R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris wanted him to
start smoking as a teenager.
We know that.
We
know -- you know, did you notice that they not one
time today addressed the smoking documents dealing
with their recruitment of children?
In fact, it
wasn't just a recruitment of children.
It came in 3450
the context that R.J. Reynolds upset.
Because,
guess what, Philip Morris was beating them in the
12-to-20 market.
Never denied any of that.
They know it's
there.
They wanted him to start smoking as a
teenager.
We know that because we actually put in a 1928
document.
Remember that document?
"School's out.
Summer school is here.
Make sure you've got plenty
of product to go see these high school kids."
They
wanted them to smoke.
They never told him that smoking is not a
choice, that nicotine in his -- in his cigarettes
was addictive, and it was as addictive as cocaine
and heroin.
They never told him that the Winston and
Marlboro filters that he switched to -- and I think
that the argument today is he switched about 1959,
which, by the way, I remember is -- was when
Dr. Kyriakoudes said it probably happened because of
the recollections of Ted.
They never told him at
that time that they didn't -- that they didn't
filter anything.
They never told him that he had a 50 percent
chance of dying once he became a regular smoker. 3451
They never told him about the statements of
scientists.
They never told him about the fact that in
1964, right after the Surgeon General's Report, they
got together and said, "You know what?
We have to
have" -- and you've seen the document.
"We've got
to give the smokers a psychological crutch and
self-rationale to continue smoking."
And what happened right after that in 1967?
Tiderock Corporation says, "We've got to reestablish
the controversy."
And you saw E.A. Horrigan, in
1984, say, "Not proven.
Not proven.
All the
research we're doing is still not proven."
Why?
The psychological crutch, the whisper to the
addicted smoker was, "It's okay to keep smoking.
They haven't proven it.
They really haven't proven
it, you know.
They really don't know what causes
lung cancer.
You know that, don't you?"
And it worked, folks.
It worked.
Cigarette
smoking went down briefly in 1964 for one quarter.
Remember that document?
And immediately went back
to 19- -- by 1966, they were back at previous rates
where they plateaued per capita, but continued --
total consumption continued to rise until the
mid-1980s.
Veritext Reporting Company 212-490-3430
3452 It wasn't like he was a special -- foolish
person for believing them.
A wide number of smokers
did just the same.
That's how we know what happens
in markets.
You know, they talked today about -- oh, they
also -- they told people that they expected them to
rely upon their lies and continue smoking their
addictive cigarettes.
You remember we had one witness --
Can you bring up Dr. Figlar, please?
This is the RJR Company rep in this case -- or
in some case.
I don't remember which case, but we
used this.
This is a --
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the
court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:
Specifically you think
it was reasonable for your customer, smokers of your
cigarettes, to believe what we said and rely on what
the public has said, including these advertisements?
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:
I would say that
it's -- that would be reasonable, yes.
That's why
they put them out."
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. SMITH:
That's why they put them out.
That's why they put them out.
That's why they put 3453
the statements out there.
Every time the Surgeon General would come up
with a finding, it was like point, counterpoint.
Before they even -- in fact, in one case, the day
before the report came out -- remember 1979?
The
day before the Surgeon General's Report came out,
they came out and said why it was wrong.
They were
geared every time, because they couldn't let people
get consistent messages.
The message always had to be doubt and
controversy.
Every time.
Not one time did they
stand up beside the Surgeon General and say, "This
time he's right."
Not during the lifetime of my
client.
Not during the time when he was suffering
from cancer.
That didn't happen then, because in 1994, just
a few months before, they did stand up.
And if you
remember -- we were reminded that we only played a
short clip, and the short clip we played was the one
that shows -- you remember, they all stood up, they
raised their right hand, they said, "I do not
believe it's addictive."
"I too do not believe it's addictive."
"I too do not believe it's addictive."
Remember that? 3454
So we then played you some more.
And you have
the CEO of these two companies talking to Congress
earlier in the meeting.
And they were still saying
what?
"It has not been proven."
Now, I could be
convinced, but I'm not convinced yet."
When?
In
1994.
I got to tell you one thing, if you get out of
this nothing else, these executives must not have
taken the Reader's Digest, because all they've done
for the last few days is throw the Reader's Digest
out.
Everybody in the world read it.
Everybody in
the world, except the tobacco industry.
And then they said, "And, by the way, the
Surgeon General warned you and warned you."
What
did they say every time the Surgeon General came
out?
"He's wrong."
And what did Heimann say?
Not
just wrong, but "dead wrong."
No.
What's dead is my client.
MR. REILLY:
Objection, Your Honor.
I'll
withdraw it.
THE COURT:
All right.
Proceed, Mr. Smith.
MR. SMITH:
They talk about reliance.
Reliance
is real simple, folks.
Some of the most serious
cases have to do with circumstantial evidence.
We 3455
don't always have -- 20 years after someone has
passed, we don't have eyewitnesses a lot of times,
in lots of kinds of cases.
We go to circumstantial
evidence.
That's how we prove many kinds of cases:
civil, criminal, administrative, all kinds.
Oftentimes, it's circumstantial evidence.
In these cases you're allowed to use what's
called inferred reliance, "inferred reliance"
meaning that you can infer from what occurred that
there was some reliance because nobody's going to be
able to go back now and say, "Oh, by the way, could
you please tell me the ad you saw in 1953, or in
1965?"
Who -- who could do that?
I can't remember
the ad I saw this morning.
But that -- can you remember which particular
statement -- which ad was it that convinced you?
We
know this:
The unrebutted testimony is that they
spent a quarter of a trillion dollars and that they
were the most heavily advertised product in America.
The most heavily.
Now, when voir dire was going on and you were
asked, do you think advertising works?
Everybody in
the room, if I remember right, said, yes.
Nobody
would buy a -- put a Clydesdale on the Super Bowl at
that price if it didn't work.
Remember that? 3456
But then when we asked particular people, "Did
it make you up -- make your mind up?
Did it make
you make your mind up?
Was that what -- "Well, no,
no, not me."
Folks, that's how advertising works.
That's
how public statements work.
That's how word filters
out.
You don't have to have seen the Frank
Statement.
There's lots of things I didn't see that
somebody told me about the next day.
I thought I
knew what they told me about the next day.
That's
just the way information gets out there.
That's it.
That's how information percolates up into any
society.
So the inferred reliance would be this.
We can
infer reliance if during the times when he -- when
Lucky Strike and Camels were the Number 1 and
Number 2 cigarette and most advertised product --
and that's according to Bates -- he smoked their
product.
Well, that's true.
He did.
He smoked
unfiltered Camels and Lucky Strikes.
Okay.
That's
inferred reliance.
But you say, "Well, it may have just been his
friends were smoking it."
Okay.
What did he do next?
He switched to filters.
According to counsel, he switched to filters in 3457
about 1959.
That would be a little earlier, I
think, but it doesn't matter.
Because we know this:
By 1958, the Congress was beside themselves trying
to tell folks, "It's a lie.
The filter is a lie.
It's being built up by advertising."
But, of
course, the Congress issues a report.
I can't tell you what a Congressional report
circulation is, but I can tell you what two -- what
$300 million a year of advertising in those days
would do.
Dominated nighttime television.
Remember
the document that I showed that said that every
single person during that January, February period,
in that year, was exposed to 5.8 ads a week?
That's
the science of what advertising is about.
It's
about exposure.
So he bought the filter.
He bought Winston.
He bought Marlboro.
Where do they rank?
Well,
Winston was first Number 1.
It was bypassed by
Marlboro, and he continued to smoke Marlboro all the
way up until the late 1980s and then maybe even
1990.
And where was Marlboro -- was -- you saw
the -- you saw the wonderful infomercial.
They led
the nation in their advertising effort and they --
when they went off television -- because they had to
get off television.
They wanted to get away from 3458
Yul Brynner and all that.
When they got off
television, they upped the ante.
They became
Number 1 in billboards.
Number 1 in street
advertising.
Number 1 in transit advertising.
Number 1 in points of sale advertising.
When you
went in the store, they were the best locations.
How do we know it worked?
Because Marlboro
remained the Number 1 product in the cigarette
industry.
And for all those years Mr. Bowden
followed it.
And then what did he do?
He started moving
towards lights.
Now, they said -- and I -- I read
the information.
They said that -- Mrs. Bowden
said, "I know he showed me an article and I remember
seeing the cigarette and the picture of the
cigarette saying, 'Why did you switch?'"
And he said, "Because they're better for me.
They're low tar."
Now, I suspect that's an ad, but it doesn't
matter.
Because who -- if it was advertisement or
an article, in the 1990s, who had fooled everybody?
Dr. Burns said, "They fooled me."
Surgeon General
said, "Now they fooled me.
We didn't realize light
cigarettes were a scam.
We didn't realize that they
knew internally what they were doing.
We didn't 3459
know it or we wouldn't have said some of the things
we said."
Dr. Burns is one of those people.
Said, "Had I
known, had I seen the internal documents, had I seen
what they knew, I'd have never said that it was
better.
It's not better."
Put up the pH regulation for a moment.
They, today, would have you think that Dr. Hurt
was the proponent of some absurd theory about
manipulation of pH.
Well, I want to go back and point out the
following.
Every single one of these documents came
from those companies that sit here today.
Dr. Hurt
didn't write a line.
Didn't write a word.
None of
Dr. Hurt's theory.
Every line up there was provided
by these companies.
A high pH smoke is strong due to a high
concentration of unbound or free nicotine in the
smoke.
Thus, as the amount of ammonia or the
ammonium salts in smoke increases above a certain
level, the smoke becomes less acidic.
More nicotine
occurs in free, volatile, rapidly absorbed form, and
the nicotine impact is enhanced.
Enhanced.
It wasn't enough that they had -- and I know
they used the word -- they said that I had used the 3460
word "kit."
Actually, let's go back and look at where the
word "kit" was used in the documents.
Can you pull that up for me, please?
I think
it's a -- it's a document that deals with child
smoking.
Yes.
This is -- they're trying to figure
out -- R.J. Reynolds is worried they're losing --
losing their audience among the -- they need a
larger segment of the youth market, which I think in
this document is 14 to 20.
Down at the bottom, look where it is still with
an old-style filter, "Any desired additional
nicotine kick could easily -- could easily be
obtained through pH regulation."
Folks, those documents weren't from Dr. Hurt.
He didn't write a word of that.
I think we -- I want to show you a couple more
documents to respond to things that were brought up
today.
This is what's interesting.
This was all
about -- although they were co-conspirators
throughout all of this, R.J. Reynolds is really
upset.
They're upset because Marlboro's doing so
well.
All evidence indicates that the relatively 3461
high smoke pH shown by Marlboro and other Philip
Morris brands and Kool is deliberate and controlled.
Deliberate and controlled by whom?
By Philip
Morris.
And do you remember they got up, and they made
all these points about, "Oh, it wasn't 6.5"?
Now, before I leave this, Dr. Hurt did not say
the Surgeon General was wrong in the way it was
applied.
Dr. Hurt is a reviewer of the Surgeon
General, a scientific reviewer for the Surgeon
General.
What Dr. Hurt said was, "In 1979, what we
thought we knew is no longer good science."
That's
probably true in any number of fields.
But what
he's saying is in 1979, that's probably what they
thought.
It's not true anymore.
But then we went to this document.
Remember
what was driving the argument?
There were the
documents that said that the market's share used by
high pH cigarettes translated to a larger market
share as you moved up with the pH manipulation and
the nicotine enhancement.
It was always about the money, folks.
Everything is.
This was always about the money.
That's why they got together to start with.
It was 3462
about the money.
But here's what we had.
This is -- isn't
Dr. Hurt's chart.
This is their chart.
And guess
what it shows?
It shows that free nicotine and
market share corresponded just like he said from
reviewing their documents.
The market share
expanded as the pH regulation went up.
That's not
Dr. Hurt's theory.
That was their practices, and
those are their documents.
I want to go to -- I think I'm almost done,
folks, and I know that's good news to all of you.
Oh.
You were shown -- it was -- it was
spoken -- there was a 1996 analysis, and it said,
"Oh, that market share document that we all did,
that turned out to be" -- that was in 1996.
And do you remember what I showed you on
redirect examination?
That document was issued by
RJR at a time when they still were hiding all their
documents, and it was issued for what purpose?
Legal and regulatory purposes.
I'll bet you they
weren't about to admit what they knew in those
documents in 1996 when they were preparing their
legal and regulatory response document.
If they
had had half -- if -- if they had been half sincere
with the Surgeon General's Office, they would have 3463
provided much of that information earlier than they
did.
They held it.
And one of the interesting things they said,
"Well, you know, TIRC" -- and I believe they said
"CTR and TI, those are all gone now."
They weren't gone voluntarily.
That's not why
they're gone.
Nobody voluntarily got rid of them.
And Dr. Burns told you that.
They talked about, "Well, there's been warning
labels."
Do you guys remember the 198- -- ah, -7 --
'67 and the 1981 FTC reports?
They didn't agree on
everything.
But you know what they agreed on?
Labels don't seem to have any effect on consumers.
Haven't had any effect on the customer.
They don't.
That's what they said.
Not because I found it, not
because what -- NY experts found it.
That's what's
the FTC, having reviewed, said, "It's not having an
effect."
It doesn't have an effect.
And it certainly
doesn't have enough effect, I submit to you, to
change the mind of an addicted smoker.
I want to go to reliance, please.
This is the instruction:
"As to each of the
plaintiff's claims, the conduct of Philip Morris
and/or R.J. Reynolds Company need not be the only 3464
cause."
That's true to every claim.
"The conduct of Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds
Tobacco Company may be a legal cause of death,
though it operates in combination with the act of
another or some other cause.
Even if you believe it
was enjoyment, and you know he was addicted, it
doesn't matter.
If" -- "if such other cause occurs
at the same time as the conduct, and the conduct
contributes substantially to producing the death."
You saw earlier, and you'll read and the judge
will read to you an instruction which says, "If it
is in regular" -- you'll see the language
essentially:
"If it is a regular sequence, and the
sequence ends up" -- that is written for this case
in so many ways.
He was addicted.
He smoked for 50 years.
He
smoked a lot of cigarettes.
He got lung cancer and
he died.
It was that sequence.
And that's the process I asked about earlier in
the case.
And every expert agreed that process is
that way.
Some talk about the beginning; some talk
of the end.
But you smoke the cigarettes so long
because you're addicted, so heavily because you're
addicted.
It causes the damage.
Smoke causes the
damage, and we lose a smoker. 3465
THE COURT:
Mr. Smith, you're getting close to
being out of time.
MR. SMITH:
I am ready to wrap up.
THE COURT:
Thank you.
MR. SMITH:
Ladies and gentlemen, I'll finish
with this.
This is an easy case.
Question Number 1 really
dictates Numbers 2 and 3.
But Mr. Reilly didn't
contest that.
The instructions of Engle -- once you
answer "Yes" to Number 1, the instructions of Engle
apply and they guide you through this, and you are
bound by them.
What I want you to also remember is this.
This
is a case -- the number you use for compensation is
yours.
This is a case where if anyone had ever told
the truth on this smoker, can you imagine?
If -- no
matter how addicted you were, if -- if the tobacco
company themselves came out and said, "Our products
will kill you.
Our product's addictive.
Our
product causes lung cancer."
But they couldn't do
that because the market wouldn't stand it, because
we knew what happened in 1953 when people believed
it.
This is a man who played by the rules his whole
life.
Grew up in the depression, went into World 3466
War II.
He came home.
He raised a family.
He
married.
He married once for two weeks.
Bless her
heart.
She doesn't even remember the date of the
marriage.
It was actually -- she says 1945.
He
wasn't back in 1945.
They married quickly.
It
didn't last long.
She doesn't recall much.
Then he married the love of his life.
He
worked hard.
He worked two jobs so she could be
with the kids.
He worked for the telephone company.
Worked for 25 years without retirement, kept working
every night.
When his children had a crisis, he
took care of it.
His kids and his grandkids loved
him greatly, and his wife loved that fact.
He
played his whole life by the rules.
By the measure of some people, he was not --
was not a great person; but by the measure of his
wife, by the measure of his family, by the only
measure that really counts in the end, he was a
great man.
And he died too young, and he died
because nobody had the courage on their side one
time to just come out and tell the truth during his
lifetime.
And now they want to blame it all on him.
It's
not their fault he was a sucker.
He believed us.
That's his fault?
No.
As my partner said, this 3467
case, when you measure the damages, you remember
this:
You're measuring one person who's guilty of
believing a lie, and two companies that are guilty
of telling it for a half century.
Thank you.