          MR. REID:  May it please the Court?
          Morning.
          THE JURORS:  Good morning.
          MR. REID:  Let me say the most important thing
    first, and that is all the counsel, all the parties,
    everybody connected with this case really appreciates
    what you do, what you're doing and what you're going to
    do in this case.
          Lawyers typically aren't on juries so I haven't
    been on one.  But I'm told that -- that jurors are
    amazed when they go back into the room.  You've heard
    the word synergy a few times over the last week or two.
    The synergy among the jurors, one will remember one
    point; one will remember another and you'll remember
    everything.  That's why this is the best way to resolve
    our dispute. 1       And I asked you about that in voir dire, if any of
    you minded coming and thought that perhaps we should
    settle the case, and we shouldn't have taken two or
    three weeks of your time.  I think you now understand
    why we had to because there are serious disputes in this
    case that only you can resolve.
          Excuse me.
          This case, first and foremost, is about
    Mr. Bowman.  It's about the choices he made in his life
    and the results of those choices.  And it's not
    surprising really, if you think about it, that -- that
    choice is closely associated with the whole idea of
    smoking.  You know, the -- the Surgeon General of the
    United States in 1977 called cigarette smoking a
    health -- that it could be called a personal choice
    health behavior.  And he said it again in 1982, talking
    about smoking behavior, personal choice behavior.  And
    then again in 1986, he said cigarette smoking is an
    addictive behavior, and the individual smoker must
    decide whether or not to continue.
          So when -- when I stand up in front of you at the
    beginning and throughout the trial and today and talk
    about choice, it's not something Ben Reid made up or
    R. J. Reynolds made up.  It's been a -- it's been a
    major concern or issue for the Surgeon General and for
    the entire community of people who have thought about
    these problems throughout.
          Now, plaintiff must prove in this case, as you've
    heard, that addiction was the cause.  I suggest the
    evidence suggests -- the evidence is that choice was the
    cause.
          The plaintiff must prove in this case that smoking
    was the cause of esophageal cancer.  I suggest to you
    that it was alcohol.  That's the evidence.
          And finally the plaintiff must prove that some
    concealment, something that Reynolds concealed about
    smoking and health that was not otherwise known to the
    plaintiff, was the cause of Mr. Bowman making smoking
    decisions.
          I suggest the evidence is that he was actually
    aware of the risks, and there was really nothing that
    the plaintiffs have been able to demonstrate that
    Mr. Bowman was not aware of regarding smoking and
    health.
          Now, I wanted to -- I was thinking about this idea
    of cause because while choice is an important word, so
    is cause in this case.  And I can -- and I was driving
    over the bridge.  There are a lot of bridges around here
    as we know.  And if you imagine two bodies of land --
    and let's imagine that this is Mr. Bowman on this side (indicating), and let's imagine that these are all the
    various claims that are made in this case, the -- the
    claims of addiction and the claims of defect and the
    punitive damages claims and all that.  It's the
    plaintiff's burden to somehow connect these two.  And
    how do they do that?
          Well, I'm going to call it -- I'm not a great
    drawer.  I'm going to call it the Bridge of Causation
    because that's really what it amounts to.  There has to
    be a connection in this case.  For every single claim
    that -- that you will consider, there has to be a
    connection between Mr. Bowman and the claims that are
    made.  There has to be a causal relationship.  And that
    to me captures the -- the burden that the plaintiff has
    in this case.
          Now, burden of proof, you've heard that, and
    you've heard it and you've heard it from both lawyers.
    You'll hear it from the judge.  I'm going to talk just
    briefly about it.  The plaintiffs have to demonstrate
    something that nicotine or cigarettes containing
    nicotine or something related to my client's action was
    the legal cause.  And legal cause means it has to
    produce, and in our case, where we have multiple
    possibilities, it has to substantially -- contribute
    substantially to producing.  And the -- this is from the
    charge that you just heard the judge read a couple of
    hours ago, directly and in a natural and continuous
    sequence produce or contributed substantially.  And then
    but for the smoking, his death would not have occurred.
          Now, "but for" really means without, if you just
    substitute it.  That's the language that the Supreme
    Court of Florida has said we're supposed to use in jury
    trials, but you can substitute without the smoking, his
    death would not have occurred.  A -- so your
    determination in this case has to be based on the
    causation as the judge pointed out.
          Now, it comes up two ways here.  If Mr. Bowman
    smoked for other reasons besides addiction, for
    instance, as a result of his choice, your decision would
    be that addiction is not the substantial contributing
    cause.  If you decide that something else besides
    smoking was the substantial contributing cause, that is,
    alcohol, your decision, again, would be that smoking is
    not the substantial contributing cause.
          And as Mr. Shields told you, Mr. Bowman -- Ms.
    Bowman, on behalf of the estate, has admitted to
    Mr. Bowman's contribution here, and this is from the
    pleading that -- the answer that was filed in this case
    to the complaint.  I'm sorry.  It's from -- it's in the
    complaint that was filed before the answer, and it 2 basically says that Mr. Bowman bears some fault, less
    than 100 percent, and they say it's because of the
    frequency and duration of his efforts to quit smoking.
          Well, we now know that there were none.  There
    were no serious attempts to quit except the time
    Mr. Bowman quit.  Now, if he'd ever tried to quit, if he
    had tried a couple times and he -- he went for two or
    three days or a week or a month and then relapsed and it
    happened again and again, that might make some sense in
    terms of saying it's a percentage or whatever
    Mr. Shields was talking to you about a minute ago.  But
    the fact is Mr. Bowman, by his -- by his admission,
    Ms. Bowman is conceding that Mr. Bowman's decisions
    about smoking, his choice, is the cause of his smoking
    and subsequently his injury.
          If his continued smoking was really due to
    addiction, as you've heard argued this morning, why
    would you even make that admission?  It's been admitted
    by Number 18 that smoking is a direct, substantial,
    contributing cause to Mr. Bowman and that's the
    definition of cause, and that's because there were no
    attempts to quit.
          Now, I want to talk to you a few minutes in the
    beginning about the findings.  Let me think.  You'll
    remember, we talked about them the day after Labor
    Day -- or the day after the day after Labor Day, I
    think, is when we first talked, and the two most
    significant findings that bear on this case are that
    smoking causes esophageal cancer and that's it's
    addictive.  And you didn't hear a single witness come in
    or by video or any testimony or any cross examination
    questioned by the lawyers.  No one on our side of the
    case has -- has disputed those two facts, not at all.
    Reynolds admits them and you'll see them on their
    websites -- if you haven't already, you'll see them
    today; I'm going to show them to you later -- for the
    past decade at least.  And we talked about that.
          The problem is that none of those findings answers
    the question that you're going to be asked to answer in
    this case.  Because this case is about Mr. Bowman, and
    those findings had nothing to do.
          The plaintiff must establish, must prove, must
    show the causal connection that Mr. Bowman's a member of
    the class.  And to do that, they have to show that
    Mr. Bowman was addicted and that the addiction was the
    cause of his smoking which led to his illness.  And you
    have to decide that without thinking about the findings.
    The findings don't deal with whether Mr. Bowman is in
    the class or not.  Mr. Bowman has -- Ms. Bowman has to
    prove that Mr. Bowman would have been in the class, meaning he -- that he was addicted.  And so you have to
    look at the facts of this case about Mr. Bowman.  And
    that's why we're here.
          Now, if you think about it, the findings do not
    mention Mr. Bowman.  I think we've made a slide of this.
    That jury that decided the case, that counsel said
    numerous times that we are required to agree and you're
    required -- well, that's absolutely true.  The findings
    you have to follow, but the findings, that jury did not
    hear any evidence about Mr. Bowman.  They don't mention
    him.  They didn't decide issues relating to him.  They
    didn't decide whether he relied on anything that my
    client did or said or didn't do or say.  They didn't
    decide he was injured.  They didn't establish whether or
    not I was responsible -- whether I, meaning my client,
    was responsible at all.
          You will need to decide those issues.  In fact,
    if -- if the findings decided any of those issues, you
    wouldn't need to be here.  You -- you wouldn't -- the --
    the system would not ask you to come in and sit for two
    or three weeks to decide issues about Mr. Bowman's case
    if the findings resolved it all.  So that's why I
    started by saying this case is about Mr. Bowman.  And
    that's the evidence I'd like to talk about today.
          Now, the plaintiff in this case, you can sort of
    group the complaints or the -- the things that the
    plaintiff points out as problems in this case or -- or
    blocks, you might say, that support the claim.  There
    are really four kind of general categories that I'd like
    to talk about as we proceed this morning.  There are the
    findings.  I've already talked a little bit about those.
    There are the advertising that you've heard about.
    There are documents that my company produced over the
    years.  And then there are what I -- there are things
    that I would consider to be half-truths, where you were
    told half of the information and only later found the
    full.
          Now, as to the findings, I've already told you
    about those.  The findings just don't decide the case.
          As to advertisements, they spent a lot of time
    with Mr. Gold- -- Dr. Goldberg showing you print ads,
    showing you TV ads, but Dr. Goldberg admitted that he
    could not tie any of these ads to Mr. Bowman.  There was
    no evidence to connect any advertisement that you saw in
    this case to Mr. Bowman.  Every family member that
    testified -- every time the family members -- whether
    you heard it or whether they told Dr. Werner or Dr. Hoge
    and they relied on it in their deposition, every single
    person that knew Dr. -- Mr. Bowman, not a single person
    ever said that Mr. Bowman smoked because of anything 3 having to do with advertising.  He didn't start smoking
    because of ads.  He didn't continue to smoke because of
    ads.  He didn't make decisions not to quit because of
    ads, nothing.  There is no connection between the ads.
          The third area, the findings -- the ads -- are the
    documents and we'll talk more in detail later about
    those.  But you remember the documents that were used
    were about -- there were about of 60 -- I counted them.
    There were about 65 documents that were related to the
    three -- the companies that -- Reynolds, American and
    Brown & Williamson.  Of all the documents in evidence,
    that's how many were internal company documents.  And
    I'd ask you to consider, as -- as counsel himself argued
    just a few minutes ago, these documents were written in
    a different world, in a different time, in a different
    context.
          There were press releases but you never saw a
    newspaper article where they actually appeared.  And you
    didn't see what the newspaper article said.  There was a
    planning document that you could never -- you'd never
    know if anybody ever did anything about it or not.
    There were internal documents that there were drafts,
    and you don't know what happened with the final
    document.  And there were public statements that were
    talked about, and there is no evidence in this case that
    Mr. Bowman ever was aware of any statement made by the
    tobacco industry about smoking and health.  And then
    finally -- and we'll talk in more detail about each of
    those.
          Finally here, though, what I call the half-truths,
    and I think the best example of that is CTR.  I realize
    some lawyer, 50 years ago or 40 years ago or whatever,
    used the word front to describe CTR and Tobacco
    Institute.  But the good news is you don't have to rely
    on what some lawyer -- how some lawyer described it 40
    years ago because you have evidence now of what CTR
    actually did, the 6,000 articles, cited by the Surgeon
    General of the United States numerous times.  Now, we'll
    talk about this more later.
          But ask yourself this -- Dr. Proctor said -- and
    Mr. Shields argued -- that none of that research had
    anything at all to do with smoking and health.
    Dr. Proctor said it was -- he called it distraction
    research.  Well, ask yourself this question:  Why would
    the Surgeon General of the United States include so many
    of those articles in reports that are -- the subject of
    which is smoking and health?  They obviously have
    something to do with smoking and health, or the Surgeon
    General would not have put them in.  That's the
    principal problem there.  And we went through those and we talked about them and we'll talk about them some
    more.
          The simple fact is you heard a lot of evidence.  I
    tried to count it up again today.  I did it in opening.
    I did it today.  There was virtually -- there was a
    small amount of evidence about Mr. Bowman, and there was
    massive evidence about everything else.  And I submit to
    you that in all of that other evidence, this bridge is
    never built.  There was never a causal relationship, and
    every one of the charges, jury questions that you have
    to answer, that the judge -- that counsel went through,
    every one has that word legal cause in there.  Every
    single finding that you have to make in this case is
    connected to a legal cause requirement, and that's why
    I'm talking about that.
          Now, I want to sort of divide what I want to talk
    about, the evidence, into -- into three areas.
          The first is Mr. -- the plaintiffs did not prove
    that addiction was the cause of Mr. Bowman's smoking.
    Secondly -- and actually, before I go there, that's
    because the evidence is that Mr. Bowman made the choice
    to smoke.  He was fully informed of the risks and
    choice, therefore, growing his behavior.
          Secondly, there is no evidence -- the evidence
    does not establish -- the burden is on the plaintiff.
    If it's equal, the plaintiff doesn't prevail.  The
    burden is on the plaintiff to establish that smoking
    caused or substantially contributed to cause the
    esophageal cancer.  And you -- you've heard the evidence
    about alcohol and we'll talk about that.
          The third area I'd like to talk to you about is
    concealment, and the evidence -- the plaintiffs have not
    proved that Mr. Bowman was unaware of any fact
    associated with -- the risks associated with smoking.
    The fact that it was addictive or it was hard to quit or
    it was risky or it could cause injury or death,
    Mr. Bowman knew all that and that's the evidence there.
          And then after I talk about -- those are the
    claims against Reynolds.  I'm going to talk about
    Reynolds' conduct because it relates to this claim that
    they have for punitive or exceptional damages beyond
    compensatory damages.
          So I'd like to start with addiction.  There -- the
    verdict form says this:  Was Michael Bowman addicted to
    cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was cigarette
    smoking, because of such addiction, a legal cause of his
    esophageal cancer?  That's the question you're being
    asked.  That's the question.  Is Mr. Bowman in the
    class?  If you answer that no, that would be -- your
    decision would be that Mr. Bowman does not qualify for 4 the class.
          Now, there really -- embedded in that sentence,
    there are really three questions.  There are three sets
    of evidence.  The first question is you have to -- you
    have to decide if Mr. Bowman was addicted by your
    definition and we'll talk about that.  Secondly, you
    have to prove -- they have to prove and you have to
    decide that the addiction was the cause of his smoking;
    it wasn't a choice or some other cause.  That's the
    second question.  And the third question is you have to
    say -- you have to decide that the smoking was the legal
    cause of his cancer and that's the alcohol versus
    tobacco.
          Three different questions are really -- we could
    have asked that by asking you three questions.  You have
    to say yes to all three.  You have to say yes to all
    three in order to answer that question yes.  And so I'm
    going to talk about those.
          On the question of addiction, the -- the
    uncontroverted evidence, there's -- there's no dispute
    in the evidence about Mr. Bowman's personality and about
    the choices that he makes.  The evidence unequivocally
    establishes that Mr. Bowman smoked because he chose to
    smoke, not because of some captivity in which he
    suffered from addiction and from nicotine.  He smoked
    because he chose to smoke.
          And what's the best evidence of that?  The best
    evidence of that is he quit.  He quit cold turkey, 1985,
    at dinner.  His -- his wife asked him the next morning,
    "I noticed you haven't smoked in the last few hours."
          He said, "I quit."
          He did it without any help for that first so many
    hours.  No withdrawal symptoms were identified during
    the first day of his quit over -- over into the next
    day.  Does that sound like someone who was -- who was so
    captured by nicotine, a person who just had no control
    over their decisions?  It doesn't sound like that
    person.  That's the person that plaintiffs have asked
    you to accept, that Mr. Bowman had no choice, that he
    was so controlled by nicotine.  That is not the person
    who was he described by Ms. Bowman and others on the
    night in which he quit.
          In fact, one of his daughters testified that he
    told her he did not want to quit.  And remember during
    the redirect examination of Ms. Bowman, Mr. Kalil
    said -- I had asked her whether he had ever used any
    of -- any of the techniques -- nicotine patches, drugs,
    going to doctors, medication, all that.  She said, "No."
          He said, "Well, were nicotine patches even
    invented then?"       And she gave very telling answer to that.  She
    said she didn't know, but then she added, "But if they
    had been, Mr. Bowman would not have used them."
          That's a very telling admission that Mr. Bowman
    did not want to stop smoking.  And finally, you now know
    that he was finally motivated on New Year's Eve 1985.
    Now, that ought to end the case.  That -- that answers
    the first question.  How can you say that someone is
    addicted if that individual never tried to quit,
    seriously?
          Now, Mr. Coyle said that there was some -- they
    used to bet and they used to joke about it.  They never
    threw away cigarettes.  They never went a whole day.
    But there was never a serious quit attempt, and even if
    you give that to Mr. Coyle, you're talking about from
    then on.  You're talking about before and after his
    family all said, never tried to quit ever.  How can a
    person say I'm addicted; I'm controlled by nicotine if
    they didn't try to quit?  Now, if they came in and said,
    I tried a bunch of times and it didn't work, that would
    be one thing, but if you never tried to quit, how can
    you ever say, I was addicted; I could not quit because
    of the nicotine in cigarettes?
          So we start with Mr. Bowman did quit.  We then
    move through the point that he never tried to quit, so
    how could anybody say he was addicted?  He told his
    sister-in-law that he enjoyed smoking.  He was exposed
    to facts about the risks of smoking from lots and lot of
    different ways, different sources.  You can -- you will
    be able to decide from evidence whether Mr. Bowman
    controlled smoking or smoking controlled Mr. Bowman.
    And that's really the bottom line when we talk about
    addiction.
          Remember his personality traits.  Remember his
    personality traits.  There was no dispute.  No one ever
    said that he didn't -- these weren't good, objective,
    true characterizations of Mr. Bowman.  Again, we're
    talking about is a person a captive of nicotine, or is a
    person making an independent choice?  When he made up
    his mind, he stuck to it.  And he didn't make up his
    mind to quit until December 1985.
          And we have some evidence that you heard about his
    views about when people would raise the question of
    smoking.  And, for instance, he told his wife, when she
    told him the cough -- they talked about his cough, his
    answer was, "Leave me alone."  When his daughter urged
    him to stop smoking, he said, "Yeah, yeah, I don't want
    to quit."  And when his other daughter told him that he
    was going to end up on oxygen or with cancer, he said,
    "I'm all right." 5       Is that a person who is striving to quit and who
    is unable to quit?  I don't believe so.
          So how does the plaintiff try to convince you?
    What evidence have you heard in an attempt to convince
    you that not withstanding all that I've just gone
    through, Mr. Bowman was addicted?  Well, first, they
    claim essentially that anybody who smokes a certain
    number of cigarettes over a certain period of time must
    be addicted.  And you've heard testimony that -- that's
    just not the case.
          So experts came in.  Now -- now, we -- we had
    experts in this case.  Everybody had experts.  Everybody
    paid a fee to the expert for their time.  But you'll get
    an instruction -- or you've had an instruction from the
    judge that it's up to you to decide what credit to give
    to each expert's testimony.  And so I want to talk to
    you about the addiction experts.  And I want -- I want
    to raise this question.  In evaluating the expert, did
    the expert reach a conclusion and then go around and try
    to put together pieces of information that somehow
    support a little -- a piece of information from this
    deposition, a piece from this witness and so forth to
    try to support the conclusion, or did the expert review
    every single piece of paper that was available --
    depositions, medical records and so forth -- and then
    arrive at a conclusion?
          Now, we have two experts in this case.  Dr. Werner
    did the former.  Dr. Hoge did the latter.
          Now, Dr. Werner had a couple of principal points.
    She said that -- on which she based her opinion.  One is
    that Mr. Bowman made numerous quit attempts and, number
    two, that he had significant withdrawal symptoms.  Now,
    remember she read about four depositions, family -- and
    that was it -- at the point in time when she decided
    Mr. Bowman was addicted.  That's all she read.  And when
    you look at those depositions -- you've heard the
    testimony -- at the time, not what was said later
    because there was a change.  At the time, those
    conclusions were not supported.
          As to the irritability, we know that -- you know
    now from evidence that that was a long-standing problem.
    Sometimes it was alcohol-related.  It's hard to know
    how -- it's hard to parse it out.  But Mr. Bowman was
    oftentimes an irritable person.  So if the irritability
    started before he quit smoking, doesn't have anything --
    it's not because of smoking.
          And the second was the weight gain.  And you saw
    the photographs.  You saw an '82 photograph with a group
    from the ship.  Then you saw the '84 photograph when --
    when he was -- had just stopped drinking but he hadn't stopped smoking.  And then you can see that he had
    gained weight.  Mr. Bowman had a weight issue.  It's not
    surprising that he would gain weight because once you
    get out of the Navy and you get out of that regimented
    environment, it's not surprising that he gained weight.
    Counsel -- plaintiffs want you to believe that he never
    gained any weight until the day after he stopped smoking
    and then he started eating candy and he gained weight.
    Well, you know -- you now know more about the case than
    you did before and you saw the photographs.
          Now, in Ms. Bowman's deposition, she never said
    that there was any withdrawal symptoms except for one;
    Mr. Bowman ate hard candy.  That's all she said.  And on
    that basis, Dr. Werner reached her conclusion.
          Then Dr. Werner called her up, and they had a
    telephone conversation, about 20 minutes.  And after the
    telephone conversation, Ms. Bowman came into court and
    testified.  When she was asked the question, were there
    any withdrawal symptoms, she immediately named five.
    Well, that seemed odd because laypeople don't think
    about things that way.  Maybe the psychiatrists do.  So
    when I asked about it, she said, "Oh, well, Dr. Werner
    told -- asked me if I -- there were withdrawal symptoms,
    and then she give me about five of the withdrawal
    symptoms.  And driving home, I said to my daughter, 'Oh,
    yeah, I bet those apply to your dad.'"
          So Dr. Werner suggested the withdrawal symptoms
    and then Mrs. Bowman came in.  And I read her testimony
    to you from before.  I said -- the testimony was any
    behavioral changes, eating candy, anything else?  "No,"
    under oath, before she talked to Dr. -- before
    Dr. Werner had that conversation with her and suggested.
    And Dr. Werner said, "Well, lawyers ask the wrong
    questions.  You can't ask open-ended questions."
          Well, if you remember, there were some questions
    about Mr. Bowman's alcohol use and changes in his
    personality after he stopped drinking.  No problem
    answering those with an open-ended question.  But
    Dr. Werner needed somebody to say, for her opinion that
    she had already reached, that Mr. Bowman was -- was --
    had these withdrawal symptoms.
          And -- and let me say this about withdrawal
    symptoms:  People do have them.  I don't mean to suggest
    that maybe he didn't have some withdrawal symptoms.
    Maybe he was a little irritable, headache.  But you've
    heard the testimony about that, that they're gone in a
    week or ten days so maybe he had those.  That is not a
    suggestion that a person is addicted because they have
    mild withdrawal symptoms.  Dr. Werner says it is but --
    but common sense tells you that that's just ordinary. 6 And there's no evidence other than a couple of these
    things.
          Now, as to all of these quit attempts that
    Dr. Werner relied on, that would be important testimony
    if it were true.  If you had serious quit attempts --
    and Dr. Werner agreed that the Surgeon General of the
    United States said to -- to count, to be considered as
    a -- as a real quit attempt, a person needs to stop
    smoking for 24 hours.  If somebody says, I'm -- at 10:00
    o'clock, well, I'm not going to smoke anymore and then
    they -- at 2:00 o'clock, they decide to have a
    cigarette, that's not considered by the scientists.  And
    Dr. Hoge says that and Dr. Werner agreed with that.  And
    it's in the Surgeon General reports if you want to thumb
    through them and find them.
          The point is the only evidence about quit attempt
    before New Year's Eve 1985 is Mr. Coyle.  And you saw
    Mr. Coyle.  And Mr. Coyle said, "We used to joke about
    it.  We used to see who could go the longest."  And
    every comment Mr. Coyle made about Mr. Bowman's smoking
    was always couched in.  "Well, I smoked thus and so and
    he smoked the same."  It was always, "We smoked," over
    and over, if you remember that deposition.
          There was no evidence of a serious quit attempt.
    But that's the testimony that Dr. Werner latched onto.
    She latched onto the withdrawal, the symptoms that she
    had suggested and she latched onto Mr. Coyle.
          Now, you heard from Dr. Hoge that there was
    another witness that all the experts had the opportunity
    to read depositions of.  That was Mr. Charlie Ball.  He
    was also on the ship with Mr. Bowman at various times
    and more importantly had remained a friend of his for
    the next 20 years.  You saw a picture of the four -- the
    two couples at a party.  Charlie Ball says, "I don't
    ever remember Mr. Bowman trying to quit."  That's what
    he told -- that's what Dr. Hoge told you was in his
    deposition.
          The family member said, "I don't" -- every
    daughter said, Ms. Bowman said, everybody said, "I do
    not remember Mr. Bowman ever."
          So even if you -- even if you want to call what
    happened to Mr. Coyle, that they joked about it and they
    bet and they went a few hours, they never threw away the
    cigarettes.  They didn't throw away the ashtrays, which
    is what experts tell you you need to do.  Even if you
    give them that, from back in the '70s on, there is no
    evidence from any witness in this case that Mr. Bowman
    ever tried to quit until the day he decided to quit.
          Now, Dr. Werner used something called the
    Fagerstrom test, and you -- you saw the -- an example of how that can be used.  You can assume somebody smokes
    three cigarettes in a day and get the same answers, find
    out that someone's dependent because of when you smoke
    and so forth.  Fagerstrom, it's a test used by
    researchers.  It's not used to diagnose.  And -- and you
    remember, the Surgeon General's report was up, and it
    said researchers use this for -- for research, not to
    diagnose.  And Dr. Hoge three times said, "Could we see
    the slide again; could we see the slide again; could we
    see the slide again?"
          He never saw it again until we got a chance to
    show it to him again.  So the point is that doesn't do
    it.
          And then Dr. -- Dr. Werner attempted to use the
    DSM.  And the DSM, as you remember from when you saw the
    actual language -- and we'll look at it in a minute --
    says it's not to be used as a cookie cutter.  You see,
    it says you have to -- you have to apply your clinical
    experience.  Now, in the ordinary case, if a doctor
    is -- is treating someone and is going to use those
    guidelines, the doctor would take a history and find out
    about the individual's condition and then look at the
    guidelines and then compare them.  So, in this case,
    obviously Dr. Werner couldn't do that.  So what's the
    next best thing?  It's to read every piece of paper that
    exists about Mr. Bowman, all the depositions, all the
    medical records, anything that you can find and then
    apply that using your clinical judgment.  She didn't do
    that.  She used it as a cookie cutter, that -- she went
    down that list.  Yep, yep, yep, yep, yep and that was
    it.  She did it exactly the way you're not supposed to.
          Perhaps the best example, though, of Dr. Werner
    being an expert who had a -- had a conclusion and then
    went out and looked for something to support it was her
    testimony that she said Mr. Bowman was addicted by 1960,
    1960, when they first met, before or about the time they
    first met.  And ask yourself this:  What possible
    evidence did Dr. Werner have about Mr. Bowman's smoking
    before 1960?  The answer is none.  You've not -- you've
    not heard -- other than he started when he was about 12,
    you haven't heard anything about how much or how long or
    you haven't -- you've heard nothing about it.  So -- and
    yet Dr. Werner was -- was able to say to you -- she was
    comfortable giving the opinion that he was addicted in
    1960, no basis for that and no basis for her later
    opinion as well.  It was a manufactured basis, I should
    say.
          Now, even she admitted that people smoke for a lot
    of reasons besides nicotine.  She calls the
    definition of addiction the lack of control.  Mr. Bowman 7 certainly had control, as you know from the evidence.
    And -- and she said Mr. Bowman always had the ability to
    quit.  She said he had the ability in the '60s and the
    '70s and in the '80s, up until he finally did quit.
          Now, you also heard from Dr. Hoge.  And counsel
    suggested Dr. Hoge wasn't qualified to talk about
    addiction and I will -- I will say this:  I think there
    was some confusion.  He did say he had only treated
    people or diagnosed people as addicted to cigarettes
    when it was the only complaint, one -- six times.  But
    he said he had a lot of people who have other problems
    and cigarettes.  Dr. Hoge -- Dr. Werner's the same.
    That's really not any different.  People typically don't
    go in to be treated just for cigarette addiction.  It
    usually -- all the doctors that do this, it's usually
    both but that's -- that's just a minor point.
          Dr. Hoge, you don't have to decide if he -- how
    competent he is and how to give his opinions, and you
    have to decide what did he base them on?  Now, remember,
    he drafted portions of the DSM, so you could hardly have
    a better expert to talk to you about what the DSM means
    than Dr. Hoge.  And more importantly, he spent the
    necessary time to get the clinical information to learn
    about Mr. Bowman.  He showed you all the depositions
    that he read.  He showed you the education.  He even
    went back and looked at his military records.  He looked
    at his employment records, and he looked at his medical
    records.  Because a lot of times there will be comments
    made, nurses notes or interviews with the doctor, that
    might bear on subjects other than the actual medical
    treatment or the -- or the employment or the military
    service.  He looked at every single piece of information
    that he could find, so.
          And by the way, just so it's clear, when
    Mr. Shields went through those -- the cookie cutter list
    with Dr. Hoge, he did not agree.  He did not agree that
    those, that -- Dr. Werner, that every one of those
    cookie cutter list things were met in this case.  But he
    didn't go through them that way because he wasn't doing
    it as a cookie cutter.
          And let's look exactly how it's to be applied.
    And this is in the book itself.  The specific diagnostic
    criteria included in DSM-IV are meant to serve as
    guidelines to be informed by clinical judgment.  That
    means talking to the patient or in our case, reading
    everything you can find about the patient and are not
    meant to be used in a cookbook fashion.  That's probably
    the clearest example of what Dr. Werner did and what
    Dr. Hoge didn't do because he looked at all the
    evidence.       And Slide 17, there's a lot of talk about where
    the comma goes, the clinically significant impairment,
    modify whatever.  But in all that conversation, nobody
    ever talked about this, a maladaptive pattern of
    substance use.  Dr. -- Dr. Hoge found in Mr. Bowman's
    case there was not a maladaptive pattern of substance
    abuse.
          Let's go to the next definition.  This has to do
    with the nicotine withdrawals.  You just saw it a minute
    ago.  You've the got to show that the -- those symptoms
    caused clinically significant distress or impairment --
    and I should have underlined the rest -- in social,
    occupational or other important areas of functioning.
    There's not a bit of evidence in this case that smoking
    falls anywhere close to that description.  Smoking did
    not interfere with Mr. Bowman's social, occupational or
    other important areas of functioning.
          They just don't apply to Mr. Bowman.  There was no
    effect on his family, his person.  He didn't get fired
    because he was smoking.  He didn't violate the smoking
    policies.  He had no problem at all because of his
    smoking.  And as a way to sort of help you understand or
    consider this, you actually have evidence in this case
    of exactly what they're talking about in these and that
    is the alcohol use, the alcohol use.
          Before but I get to that, let me -- let's go back
    to the night of quitting and -- and talk about that
    specific night and see if these definitions apply.  He
    went to dinner.  He looked down and saw the seven
    cigarettes.  Now, the dinner was to go to a movie.  You
    heard some testimony earlier that he never went to
    movies, but at least on this night, they were going to a
    long movie, Out of Africa, while he was still smoking,
    by the way.  They made the decision to go to the movie.
          So he finished dinner, didn't have a cigarette.
    He went to the movie, two hours and 40 minutes.  It was
    so boring, you heard Ms. Bowman say they fell asleep.
    Now, if -- if he were captured by nicotine and he's in
    this boring movie, why wouldn't he step out and have a
    cigarette?  He went home, didn't have one before bed.
    He woke up in the morning; he didn't have one when he
    first got up.  He didn't have one after he showered.  He
    didn't have one when he went into the kitchen, and
    finally Ms. Bowman noticed that he didn't have one and
    he said, "I quit."
          So after 30 years of smoking, his wife didn't even
    notice until the next day and he had quit.  If there had
    been significant withdrawal symptoms -- even Dr. Werner
    said it had to happen in 24 hours.  You saw that on that
    definition a minute ago.  Counsel didn't talk to you 8 about it.  But it says all that had to happen in 24
    hours.  Wouldn't she have remembered if it's suddenly,
    within the next day, right after quitting?  In fact, she
    had to ask him, what -- what happened?
          Mr. Bowman clearly did not meet the DSM-IV --
          Go back, two back, please.
          Mr. Bowman clearly did not meet DSM-IV, which if
    you consider the way it's supposed to be used, served as
    guidelines to be informed by clinical judgment, that's
    what Dr. Hoge did.  That's what Dr. Werner -- and I
    don't want to tell you that Dr. Werner's a bad person or
    a bad doctor or bad psychiatrist, but it just -- in this
    case, she just didn't have the facts.  And -- and
    sometimes you want to try to help, and you want to try
    to do a little more, and she just crossed over that
    line.  And then she tried to go back and confirm what
    she had already decided based on the four depositions.
          Now, the alcohol abuse, however, you've seen that,
    and -- and that gives you an example of what maladaptive
    behavior and clinically significant impairment and
    distress.  And I'm not going to go through all that.
    You know, I -- Mr. Bowman drank and he drank heavily and
    I'll talk about it later, about his cancer.  But as far
    as the social aspect, you heard all that evidence.  And
    Dr. Werner, by the way, agreed that all of that evidence
    about Mr. Bowman's behavior while drinking, she agreed
    that every one of those would be considered clinically
    significant.
          So it's -- it's the rare case where you have two
    sets of facts.  You're trying to decide what does the
    DSM mean?  How do you apply it?  And you have two sets
    of facts, and it becomes very clear when you compare
    what the DSM means.  It clearly is talking about
    something similar to the alcohol abuse and not smoking
    cigarettes.
          And so what I think happened here is that
    Dr. Werner just combed through all the cases she could
    find.  She took a look.  She found Mr. Coyle, a couple
    of comments there.  She suggested a few withdrawal
    symptoms.  She looked at other things and then she --
    all to support the conclusions she reached before she
    had read anything except for a couple -- or, I guess,
    four of the family depositions.
          If you think about whether or not tobacco is --
    whether addiction to tobacco caused Mr. Bowman's
    smoking, consider that 60 million people have quit.
    90 percent of those people quit cold turkey.  That means
    without any aids.  And these people smoked the same kind
    of cigarettes.  Some smoked longer.  Some smoked
    shorter.  No difference in advertising.  They were citizens in the country.  There's nothing special except
    for one fact about Mr. Bowman, and you heard the
    testimony that when people quit, oftentimes they relapse
    the first time, and then they have to try a few more
    times.  Well, Mr. Bowman was in that 5 percent who quit
    cold turkey, without aids, the very first time he tried,
    another suggestion that Mr. Bowman does not fall under
    some definition of addiction.
          Now, they also put on proof that nicotine has --
    affects the brain.  And you saw the slide this morning
    about the receptors and -- and you heard testimony about
    that.  Well, number one, that wasn't a surprise or a
    secret.  People have known that for 100 years, the
    effects of nicotine on the brain.  It's in the plant.
    God put it there.  It wasn't something that some tobacco
    scientist put into the cigarette.
          And most importantly -- and this morning you --
    you heard some talk about that there was manipulation of
    nicotine.  Well, if you consider reducing the amount of
    nicotine in the cigarette from nature or if you consider
    continuing to reduce the nicotine over the years, then I
    guess you could call that manipulation.  I think counsel
    meant it a different way.  I think he meant we were
    doing something with the nicotine to help people get
    hooked.  Well, the fact is nicotine, from the plant to
    the cigarette and then over the years, has gone down,
    down, down.  There's no manipulation of nicotine that --
    for which my client should be punished, as counsel says.
          And then the other thing they told you to try to
    prevail on this point was that nicotine's the same as
    heroin.  He told you that this morning again.  Well,
    even Dr. Werner said you can't compare nicotine to
    heroin.  Now, you might say they're similar, and the
    Surgeon General said they were similar.  But that means
    they're similar because they -- they have the same
    mechanism.  They have -- they work with dopamine.  They
    talk about they work on the receptors.  In other words,
    they -- they get their effect by the same vehicle, you
    might say.  There's -- there's some difference.
          But common sense, you get to -- you get to keep
    your common sense.  You know, we talked in voir dire
    about jurors should not know anything about the case,
    and you should be a blank slate and then just hear what
    you hear.  The one exception to that, what you get to
    take into the jury room that you brought here with you
    is common sense.
          Consider someone who is withdrawing from hard
    drugs or alcohol compared to someone who's withdrawing
    from using nicotine.  Consider the effects on people's
    lives, the criminality, the effect on the families. 9 Compare the difference of the DTs.  Cocaine, heroin have
    life-threatening withdrawals sometimes.  Common sense
    tells you that nicotine is not the same, and you might
    consider the possibility that the reason you're told
    that is to try to suggest to you that my client's doing
    something bad.
          And -- but you have some science.  You have some
    science.  Dr. Hoge, you didn't hear any science about
    this.  You heard from Dr. Werner, well, you can't really
    compare them but they're the same.  Well, this is
    actually science.  Remember?  Because the dopamine,
    that's the key.  The -- the -- it's the pleasure part of
    the brain.  You saw the slide earlier.  It's -- it's
    anything you do that's pleasurable.  If you've been
    sweating and working outside on a hot day, you drink
    cold water, dopamine.  If you like being on the jury,
    dopamine.
          Dopamine -- and this shows that -- they did this
    with animals obviously.  They don't do it with people.
    But dopamine -- that's the level of dopamine with
    cocaine, alcohol, morphine, nicotine and caffeine.
    That's scientific evidence that nicotine does not affect
    the brain the same way that those hard drugs -- and the
    suggestion to you that cigarettes and heroin are the
    same frankly is an attempt to get you mad at
    R. J. Reynolds.  That's -- that's the reason for that.
    No other reason because the science doesn't support
    that.
          Further, you've heard -- you heard more scientific
    evidence.  When you stop smoking cigarettes, every bit
    of the nicotine is out of your body in 48 hours.
    Remember, they talked about half-lives.  In 3 to 14
    days, if you have minor withdrawal symptoms, they're
    gone.  And there is an effect on the brain receptors.
    As Dr. Werner explained, they -- they change while
    you're using a certain drug.  Within a matter of weeks,
    they're back to normal.  And Dr. Hoge told you that
    nicotine does not create any permanent change or effect
    on the brain, on the physiologic -- physiology of the
    brain.  That may explain why Mr. Bowman, in his case,
    was able to quit so easily.
          Based on all of this evidence that we submitted
    and based on the evidence that they didn't submit, I
    will ask you at the end to answer that first question
    no, that Mr. Bowman's -- Mr. Bowman was not addicted,
    that the cigarette smoking was not the cause of -- the
    cigarette -- nicotine in cigarettes was not the cause of
    his smoking, and he's, therefore, not a member of the
    class.
          Now, the third question about the class is the medical question, was whether smoking caused or
    substantially contributed to causing the esophageal
    cancer.  And once again, the plaintiff has that burden
    to show.  When there are multiple possible causes, they
    have to show that it was a substantial cause.
          Now, this is where you can consider the level of
    the alcohol.  Ms. Bowman testified that when they got
    married, Mr. Bowman was smoking [sic] six beers every
    day.  And she testified that after their marriage, the
    level of smoking went up.  And you heard testimony about
    the effect, regularly falling asleep, multiple times in
    the month.  And you know about all the effects on the
    life, so you know what alcohol is doing in this case.
    Taking that into account, I would suggest that but for,
    without, smoking, doesn't work here.
          Now, Dr. Levy came in and Dr. Levy is -- is an
    epidemiologist and -- and he does a good job as an
    epidemiologist.  And what that means is that he looks at
    statistics, and he decides based on statistical
    correlation if there's a causal relationship.  He
    doesn't prove that anybody -- actually any injury is
    actually caused or any illness is actually caused by the
    substance.  He just looks at a whole population and
    says, well, more people got it who use the substance
    than didn't get it so there's a statistical relationship
    there.
          And he -- and the points he made, really most --
    most of what he told you nobody really disputes.
    Smoking can cause -- causes esophageal cancer.  Alcohol
    causes esophageal cancer.  If you combine them, the risk
    is greater than just -- just adding them together.  But
    one really significant thing Dr. Levy said and -- is
    that if Mr. Bowman had quit smoking in 1975 -- now,
    remember, that's -- that's a number of years after the
    warnings were on the packs.  If he quit in 1975, that in
    1996, when he was diagnosed, '95, '96 period, his risk
    would have been the same as someone who never smoked, if
    he'd quit in 1975.  He chose not to but if he had,
    Dr. Levy admits that he would have been the same as a
    nonsmoker.
          But the most amazing thing Dr. Levy said, Dr. Levy
    said that without smoking that alcohol would not have
    caused the cancer in this case.  There wasn't enough
    alcohol to cause the cancer in this case.  Now, I admit
    he, other times, said it did; it was contributing.  And
    he sort of went back and forth, but he clearly said --
    you know, we have the transcripts and we get to read
    them and so forth.  He clearly said that without the
    smoking, the alcohol would not have been enough.
          Now, that means you have to consider how much 10 alcohol a person drank.  And the testimony from the
    witnesses was unequivocal.  For the whole time, from
    1960 until 1984, the average amount consumed was a
    six-pack a day and more.  So Dr. Levy had to decide if
    a -- if you have a six-pack-a-day smoker, what are the
    chances.  And for the first time ever, he came in and
    said actually Mr. Bowman only smoked [sic] two beers a
    day on average.  And why -- "How do you say that,
    Dr. Levy?"
          "Well, he was at sea a lot," and that was his only
    answer.  You didn't hear a single other witness who knew
    Mr. Bowman, who -- and when Ms.  Bowman was on the
    stand, I asked her the same question because I didn't
    know what she was going to say now.  She said six-pack
    when it started, and it went up after that over the
    time.  Nobody else in this case said that Mr. Bowman
    only smoked two beers (sic) a day.
          See, Dr. Levy wanted to get it down so he could
    then say, see, alcohol really didn't have any effect,
    two beers a day.  Can you really believe that all of the
    problems that Mr. Bowman suffered in his life as a
    result of drinking happened because he had two beers a
    day?  Does that make sense to you at all?  Nobody
    supported that but Dr. Levy, and he did it so that he
    could look at statistics and say, ah, here, remember, 21
    beers a week versus six -- 42 beers a week.  That --
    that's a big difference.
          And that's how he can say alcohol didn't cause it
    because he was -- suddenly said it was two beers a day.
    You get to use common sense.  Not only does the
    testimony not support it but common sense doesn't
    either.
          Now, you heard from Dr. Harris, and counsel points
    out that he doesn't spend his life doing epidemiology.
    But he understands it and you remember his testimony.
    You decide if you think Dr. Harris, yesterday, when he
    was on the stand and he was asked all these questions
    about look at this study, look at that study and so
    forth, did he seem to understand, at least, the area of
    epidemiology?  He was able to answer all the questions
    about all the studies.  The difference is Dr. --
    Dr. Harris treats real cancer patients.  So he has the
    unique ability to look at the epidemiology.  In other
    words, what happens when you look at groups of
    populations and apply it to real people to see how that
    might play out in his office when he's treating real
    cancer patients?
          His opinions are very straightforward.  Probably
    means more likely than not.  The judge actually -- it's
    probable.  He said the alcohol -- he thought the alcohol had a greater effect, that the alcohol alone, contrary
    to what Mr. -- Dr. Levy said, the alcohol alone was
    enough at that level.  The cancer would have happened if
    he'd never smoked, and you -- therefore, you can't say
    smoking was the -- was the substantial contributing
    cause.  Those were his opinions.
          Now, the interesting thing is you remember
    Dr. Levy talked about -- and you saw the slide this
    morning -- smoking is four to nine times.  And alcohol
    is less, I think about five.  And when you combine them,
    it's 20.  Well, I don't know if you noticed this or not,
    but those numbers don't have anything to do with this
    case.  Here's why.  Those numbers are looking at studies
    where people are actually continuing to smoke and drink,
    and if you're an active smoker, that nine times, if
    you're an active drinker, nine times, and if you're an
    active smoker and drinker, 20 or 30 or whatever.  That's
    not our case.  It has no application because Mr. Bowman
    wasn't drinking and he wasn't smoking.
          That's why you have to look at what the doctors
    talked about as declining risks.  When you stop doing
    something over time, you have less of a chance of being
    sick or -- or getting whatever disease is associated.
    The longer you go, the less the risk is that you can --
    you can get that.  And there are those studies for
    people who smoke, who quit smoking, and there's those
    studies for people who quit drinking.  And you can look
    at those lines.  And Dr. -- Dr. Harris brought you six
    studies.  Now, counsel said he didn't bring in the
    thousands or hundreds or whatever.  Well, these are the
    studies that relate to this case.  Unlike Dr. --
    Dr. Levy, who had studies of people who still drink and
    still smoke, these are where people stopped.  And you
    can see there are different -- different things,
    different findings.
          But Dr. Harris looks at the epidemiology,
    considers the -- the clinical experience that he's had,
    and he came up with the conclusion that because of that,
    smoking declines at a different rate from alcohol.  And
    he drew a little map for you.  You know, I drew a map
    for you, and I'm embarrassed to show you mine.  That was
    one I drew in opening, if you may remember.  But
    Dr. Harris drew a better map.  And there it is.  You can
    see the difference in the two over time and they don't
    come together.  Smoking declines faster than alcohol.
    So at ten years out, you're -- the greater risk is
    alcohol, not smoking.  And -- and nobody -- nobody
    argued about that.  Nobody argued.  You see the studies.
    You see how the -- that's a summary of the studies that
    he did. 11       And so his conclusions after all this was that he
    had a history of both.  There was both primary risk
    factors.  Ten years after he stopped, risk of cancer
    drops after quitting faster than drinking -- I mean --
    yeah, cancer from smoking faster than for drinking, and
    the cancer would not have happened, even if he had never
    smoked, because of that.  That's the medical case.
          So now we've finished talking about class.
    Addiction, that question you're going to have to answer.
    Addiction, did addiction cause and did it cause a -- an
    illness that Mr. Bowman had?  And the answer to that
    first question ought to be no, and with that, that
    should end your deliberation.
          Now, I wouldn't dare to presume what you're going
    to do, so I need to talk about some more evidence that
    you've heard in this case.  And the third area I want to
    talk to you about is awareness.  Remember, the
    finding -- the finding said otherwise -- let's look at
    that slide.  This is the finding that -- it's a piece of
    the finding that you saw this morning, all those
    different findings.  This is the one about concealment,
    and the important language is whether you concealed it
    or it's not otherwise known or available.  That means
    that if you -- if Mr. Bowman knew a fact or had the
    ability to know the fact and just for whatever reason,
    he chose to not go and pay attention to it, it cannot be
    concealed.  What that means is there's no causal
    relationship.  Mr. Bowman's smoking decisions were not
    based on the fact that he didn't know something that he
    should have known.
          Now, the awareness, you've heard a lot of evidence
    about that.  And there's a -- there will be a question.
    We'll look at the verdict form later, but there will be
    a question on concealment.  And the answer to that
    question, I submit, based on the fact that Mr. Bowman
    had full and complete knowledge, should be no.
    Mr. Bowman had full and complete knowledge about the
    risks associated with smoking.
          Ms. Bowman testified that when he quit in 1985,
    his reason for quitting, she believed, was health.  So
    we start at that point.  Mr. Bowman's actual quit
    related to health considerations.  That's substantial
    evidence that he believed there was an association
    between his smoking and his health.
          But Mr. Bowman learned of the association in a lot
    of ways.  Aside from that, he learned from his own body.
    He learned from his close family members and he learned
    from outside sources.  Start with his own body.  Mr. --
    Mr. Bowman had this terrific -- this very serious cough
    for years.  And you've heard the testimony.  He was throwing up.  His wife said, though, when she mentioned
    it to him, he said, "Leave me alone.  I" -- he didn't
    want to be nagged about smoking.
          He told one daughter he was coughing up a lung.
    He used the word cancer stick and nicotine fit.  You
    don't use those terms unless you understand that those
    terms suggest that there's a health problem associated
    with smoking.
          You saw some of the movies and things.  It's a
    common way to describe the risk.  You know, Frank
    Sinatra, when he came into the bar in From Here to
    Eternity, he said, "Give me a nail."  Well, he meant
    give me a coffin nail.
          Rhett Butler -- not Rhett Butler.  I'm sorry.
    What's his name?  Who played Rhett Butler?
          THE CLERK:  Clark Gable.
          MR. REID:  Clark Gable.  Clark Gable said, "I'm
    not doing suicide," or something like that to Lee J.
    Cobb.
          So he had heard this.  His wife -- his wife's
    sister told -- he told his wife's sister -- he told her
    that it was from coughing.  There were lots of family
    discussions about smoking in this family that we've
    heard, among the parents and the daughters over the
    years.
          When his daughter, who became a nurse, as early as
    elementary school, 10, 12 years old, she came home and
    told her dad it was bad for smoking, he said, "Yeah,
    yeah, but I do not want to quit."  She told him again in
    high school.  She told him again in nursing school.  She
    told him he should never have started.  She told him
    smoking's addictive.  She told her sister that you can
    die from smoking so the family's talking about it.  She
    made fact statements and she told her father that they
    caused cancer and that they would end up on oxygen.
          The second daughter that you heard from was
    Kellie, and she said she was told throughout her
    lifetime that many smoking caused -- smoking was
    harmful.  She understood it, that it could lead to lung
    cancer, as early as 1984.  She felt that everybody knew
    that it was bad for you.  She associated her dad's cough
    with smoking in the '70s, and she believed that her dad
    was aware of the warnings.  The other daughter didn't
    testify but she gave her statements and -- and Dr. Hoge
    and Dr. Werner saw them and she said the same thing.
          Ms. Bowman stopped smoking in 1970 because of --
    she was concerned she was having a heart attack.  She
    had pains in her chest and he -- and he knew about that.
    Mr. -- Mr. Bowman told her it's a hard habit to break;
    it's addictive.  He knew that.  Both of Ms. Bowman's 12 parents passed away because of smoking -- what the
    family believed to be smoking-related conditions, lung
    cancer and emphysema.  Mr. Bowman had to know that.  And
    there was talk that his wife and his sister --
    sister-in-law compared his cough to the cough of their
    father who had lung cancer.
          So we talked about Mr. Bowman's body.  We've
    talked about the family, very close family.  He was also
    exposed to substantial information throughout his life.
    You heard evidence about that.  We saw his high school
    yearbook.  He was in high school in Iowa.  Then you saw
    some of the textbooks that were used in Iowa.  Now, we
    can't -- we don't know that Mr. Bowman actually used
    this particular textbook but you saw several.  And
    there's some evidence to indicate that excessive smoking
    is a contributory cause cancer of the lip, mouth and
    tongue.  Recent experiments indicate use of tobacco may
    result in real harm to the respiratory system.  Some
    evidence it may cause cancer of the lung.  This is in
    1946.  Mr. Bowman went all the way through school out
    there in Iowa with these kind of textbooks.
          You heard that Mr. Bowman liked to keep up with
    current events.  You heard that he regularly read
    Reader's Digest and a number of other magazines.  And
    you've heard a lot of talk about Reader's Digest.  There
    were -- it started in the '20s.  These are the ones in
    the '60s.  Started in the '20s, goes all the way up.
    They were given an award by the Cancer Society for
    helping to stamp out smoking, 30-some articles over that
    period of time.  Mr. Bowman was a -- religiously read
    Reader's Digest.  You heard that testimony.
          He read the local newspaper seven days a week
    back-to-back.  Those are the places where he lived.  He
    went -- he -- at some point in his life, he went to
    movies.  He went -- he watched TV shows.  Remember,
    Dr. Proctor said the Surgeon General's report was the
    health story of the decade.  And that was in Stars and
    Stripes.  And we know he read that.  That was the
    military magazine or newspaper.
          And finally, since 1966, every package of
    cigarettes Mr. Bowman picked up had a warning, and
    you've seen the warnings, the one in '66 and in '70.
    Remember, Dr. Levy said if he quit smoking in '75 when
    these warnings had been on the pack, first that and then
    this, he would have been -- he would have had the same
    risk of cancer as a nonsmoker, a never smoker.  But he
    chose not to.
          So there can be little debate in this case that
    Mr. Bowman was fully informed about the risks associated
    with smoking.  So those are the -- those are the three areas I was interested in talking to you about, the
    claims against Reynolds.
          If we could put that slide up, three issues back
    up, just to remind us where we've been.
          I talked about addiction versus choice.  I talked
    about alcohol versus smoking, and I've just finished
    talking about awareness.
          At this point, there is no evidence to support the
    claim that Mr. Bowman is a member of this class.  And
    your answer to that first question should be no.
          If you get to the concealment question, it should
    be no as well because there was nothing concealed about
    smoking and health from Mr. Bowman.  Remember, it's not
    enough to prove that something was concealed from
    somebody else or some other part of the world.  It has
    to have been concealed from Mr. Bowman, and if
    Mr. Bowman knew it, it cannot be concealed.  And,
    therefore, if he knew it, the concealment claim should
    go away by your answering no to that question, if you
    get to that question.
          Now, I want to talk a little bit about my client
    and what we did and what we said.  But before I do that,
    I want you to consider, given this problem with the
    evidence that I've been describing, that the plaintiff
    cannot prove the causal relationship, they tried one
    more way to do it.  And they tried to do it by bringing
    in Dr. Marvin Goldberg.  And you've heard talk about
    Dr. Goldberg a good bit this morning, about the ads that
    he showed you and the papers and so forth and so on.
    They're using Dr. Goldberg in this case to try to build
    this bridge, the bridge of causation.  They want to
    bring in Dr. Goldberg and have him talk about all these
    advertisements and documents and so forth to try to
    demonstrate that something that Reynolds did to
    Mr. Bowman was related to the claims in this case.  So I
    need to talk about Dr. Goldberg a little bit.
          Before I talk about it specifically, I want you to
    keep a couple of facts in mind.  Most of the -- most of
    the testimony -- well, Dr. Goldberg didn't know anything
    about Mr. Bowman.  But if you look at the testimony that
    he gave and the documents, most of the material and the
    ads and the things that he relied upon, even from a
    timing point of view, had nothing to do with Mr. Bowman.
    He showed you ads before Mr. Bowman ever smoked, back in
    the '40s, the doctors.  Remember, he showed you ads
    about youth marketing after he became an adult.  He
    showed you material after he stopped smoking.  He showed
    you material after he passed away.  And he showed you
    material when there was a serious debate among
    scientists about whether the cause had actually been 13 proved or not.  So a lot of what Dr. Goldberg showed
    you, just -- just based on that alone, has nothing to do
    with this case.
          But with that in mind, I'd like to turn to his
    specific opinions.  He didn't know anything about
    Mr. Bowman.  He cannot contribute any evidence that
    would be helpful to you in deciding why Mr. Bowman
    smoked, what he knew about the risks, why he only chose
    to quit one time in his whole life.  Basically
    Dr. Goldberg spent several hours demonstrating to you
    that he has very negative views about the tobacco
    industry.  The -- the judge read to you the charge about
    credibility and about believability, and you're entitled
    to evaluate witnesses to determine if they have an
    ulterior motive or if they have a bias that is shading
    their testimony or not.  And that's -- that's why we ask
    some of the questions that we ask.
          Now, I would say as a starting point, it was
    difficult to get a handle on exactly what Dr. Goldberg's
    position was.  I went back and read it.  And the very
    first question I asked right out of the box was -- I
    said:  "Are you here to tell the jury that ads are so
    overwhelming -- ads of public relations are so
    overwhelming that they overwhelm everything else in
    deciding whether to buy a product or not?"
          And his answer was:  "No."
          Okay.  So then I asked him the opposite question.
    The second question I asked him:  "Well, would you agree
    there are people who are not affected by these
    overwhelming ads who can resist it and not buy
    products?"
          And his answer was:  "No."
          So I don't know -- I'm not sure what -- what he
    means by that.  But I think what he means, if you look
    at all of his testimony, I think Dr. Goldberg is of the
    opinion that marketing and public relations and
    advertising is so overwhelming that really nobody can
    withstand it, that that -- that there's no other
    connection that they're -- they can't prove anything
    about Mr. Bowman, so they're going to say, well, there
    were a lot of ads out there, so Mr. Bowman must have
    been affected by them.  So let's -- let's test that a
    little bit.  Let's -- let's -- let's look at it.
          By the way, if Dr. Goldberg does believe that
    certain people can resist -- and he did say that
    sometimes.  He said it's multiple things.  And, well, if
    he did, then it really -- his opinions have no -- offer
    no help to you because he didn't know anything about
    Mr. Bowman's intelligence or his strong personality, his
    ability to withstand advertising.  He didn't know that Dr. -- that Mr. Bowman was fully aware of the risks of
    smoking.  He didn't know that every single witness who
    testified about it -- and this is where the bridge comes
    in -- not a single witness told you that Mr. Bowman saw
    a particular ad and that's why he smoked.
          Now, there -- there could be cases.  There could
    be situations where people say, well, I saw such and
    such an ad on such and such TV show, and that gave me
    the idea that this was a pretty good product.  Or maybe
    an ad said menthol is cool or something and they decided
    to get that.  None in this case.  There's not a
    single -- every single witness, every family member
    said, when they're asked, "Did your father ever tell you
    that he bought cigarettes -- did you ever talk about
    advertising?  Did you ever -- did he ever tell you that
    he bought cigarettes based on advertising?"  And the
    answer uniformly was no.  That's why Dr. Goldberg
    doesn't help you build that bridge -- help the plaintiff
    build that bridge in this case.
          And, in fact, you heard this morning that --
    that -- in a summary of Dr. Goldberg's opinions, that
    basically -- what he really said was there's all this
    advertising.  The company spent billions of dollars over
    the years.  They killed stories.  They -- they
    misrepresented stories.  They did all these things and
    the result of all this is that the people just couldn't
    resist it and that's why people smoke.  That's what he
    told you.  Counsel told you that this morning.  That's
    what Dr. Goldberg.
          Well, Dr. Goldberg, first of all, his testimony,
    his actual testimony, refutes that because he told you
    that in the '50s, about half the people smoked,
    50 percent smoked.
          Now, starting out, thinking about that, for
    some -- in some amazing way, those other 50 percent were
    able to withstand this onslaught and overwhelming
    advertising that he told you about.  So right there
    we've got a problem with saying that it's so
    overwhelming that people can't resist.  But then he told
    you going forward, he said now only 20 percent smoke.
    So I asked:  "Well, has there been a change in the
    advertising or what's the story there?"
          He said:  "Well, in 1971, when it -- when they
    went off the air, they continued to do other things."
    And he said after '71, it wasn't on TV anymore, but
    it's -- but it was even more pervasive, you know, race
    cars and thing like that.  So -- so there's been no,
    like, drop-off in advertising in his mind.  In his mind,
    the advertising's continued a pace throughout the whole
    period, and yet another 30 percent have now stopped 14 smoking.  They made the choice, not withstanding what he
    said is this tremendous pressure in the press to stop,
    20 percent now smoke.  He can't explain that.
          And, of course, you already know about the 60
    million who quit.  Somehow they were able to withstand
    this onslaught, this billion dollars of ads.  And then,
    of course, all the people who just chose never to start
    smoking in the first place.  Everybody in the country --
    see, that's why you can't take everybody in the country
    sort of stuff and apply it to this case because now
    we're down to 20 percent who smoked, and then we have
    the people who never even tried to smoke.  We have all
    the people that quit.  That's why you get to decide
    where does Mr. Bowman fall based on Mr. Bowman's
    evidence in this case, the evidence about his case.
    That's why Dr. Goldberg doesn't really help build this
    bridge of causation at all.  He just doesn't think a lot
    of the advertising and doesn't think a lot of the -- the
    company.  So -- so his testimony does -- refutes this.
          But there's more evidence that -- that establishes
    that what he said just isn't accurate, that people are
    not overwhelmed.  For instance, in 19 --
          Let's see the next slide, 33.
          -- in 1954 -- and this was -- have you heard or
    read anything recently to the effect that cigarette
    smoking may be a cause of cancer?  90 percent have heard
    that.
          Now, look at the next slide.
          Remember, we showed this to just give you an idea
    of what -- what it means to say that 90 percent of the
    people believe anything.  It's amazing.  Didn't know
    that Al Gore was vice president.  Didn't know that
    people were called Ms. instead of Mrs. or Miss, 90
    percent.  So that message is getting through.  So then
    they say, okay, people have heard about it but they
    really don't believe it.  Well, then we see the next
    poll, in '54.  Do you think it's harmful?  So this is
    what they call a belief poll.  Well, 70 percent believe
    that smoking cause -- is harmful.
          Dr. Goldberg, that doesn't jive with his testimony
    that the company is so controlling the flow of
    information in the media that people have no choice.
    And then he said it was drowned out, you know, the
    fulcrum and all that.
          Well, you saw this document used by the plaintiff.
    It says the accumulative evidence from all of these
    questions is that awareness of antismoking reports and
    commercials is high and that a sizeable portion of the
    public accepts them as authoritative.  That was in 1970,
    I believe.  It's hard to read, but I think -- so the message is getting through.
          And furthermore, we also have -- we also have the
    Roper surveys.  And Dr. Goldberg admitted that, well,
    the credibility of the speaker is important.  So they
    asked about this.  And it's clear that people do not
    accept the tobacco industry as somebody that -- who
    would say there's no connection between smoking and
    cigarettes.
          Let's look at the next one.
          In 68, it's the same.  Now it's the tobacco
    companies.
          Next one, 70, tobacco companies, and then the next
    one, tobacco companies, again, and then tobacco
    companies and the Tobacco Institute.  So that -- that
    refutes what Dr. Goldberg told you, that -- that the
    message was being so controlled by the industry that
    nobody knew that the message was getting out.
          There was another difference between Dr. Goldberg
    and the other witnesses that you heard in this case,
    which I think you can consider for whatever it's worth
    as to bias.  Dr. Goldberg, I think, clearly has a bias,
    and I think he tries to hide it.  And the first way was
    about his involvement in programs helping lawyers learn
    how to try lawsuits against tobacco companies.  For some
    reason, he was not very forthcoming about that.  The
    first time -- and I looked it up.  The first time I
    asked the question, I said:  "You've attended
    conferences put on by plaintiffs' lawyers for other
    lawyers."
          He said:  "No."
          So then I asked him a few more questions.  And
    then he said:  "Oh, yeah, yeah.  I did go to one in
    Boston.  It was -- it was sponsored by a lawyer who
    represents plaintiffs in tobacco litigation, and I was
    the only lawyer there."
          He remembered that one.  Then I asked him about
    another one, and then he said:  "Oh, yeah, there was
    another one."
          Another one.  And then he -- the one he didn't
    remember, he now remembered, well, I wasn't there.  He
    was on the program and so forth, but he didn't make it
    to that one.  Then I asked him the one about -- this is
    telling, I think.  I asked him one about San Diego, and
    he said he didn't remember that.  And then I read his
    testimony from another case some months ago in this very
    courtroom -- courthouse.  And the same question was
    asked:  "Did you go to a program in San Diego about
    teaching lawyers and so forth?"
          And he -- and in that case, he said:  "Yeah, I
    did." 15       Now, he told you he didn't remember that one.  And
    then the other thing he didn't remember was whether he
    signed an affidavit.  Imagine if you sign an affidavit
    and you saw the affidavit where it limits your ability
    to be a consultant for some period of time, if you
    signed that, you'd remember it.  Dr. Goldberg didn't
    remember whether he signed it or not.  So for some
    reason, there's a reason that he's trying to keep you
    from knowing the full extent of his involvement in -- in
    the antitobacco work that he had done.
          And, you know, this is another little thing.  As
    counsel said, everybody has to pay the expert for their
    time.  And most experts know that and the juries will
    know it and the courts know it.  And you remember
    Dr. Burns on the tape, they said:  "Now, how much have
    you made in your 20-something years?
          And he said a million point-something, million
    one.  He didn't quibble around about it.  Dr. Proctor, I
    asked him on the stand.  He said he thought he was about
    7- or 800.  I said:  "Is it to a million yet?"
          He said:  "No, it wasn't to a million."
          Dr. Harris said he received over the years, over
    ten years, about 200,000, all that.
          But when I asked Dr. Goldberg, he said:  "Well,
    it's about" -- I forget the number he said, 600 or 800,
    maybe 800,000.  But then he said he'd never really tried
    to find out.  It would be too hard.  He lost his tax
    returns.  That's sort of like the dog ate my homework
    when he was moving, doesn't have the ability to find
    out.  He said one time he did it by estimating a per
    charge and so forth, and then he said he'd given
    different amounts to different juries because he never
    really looked it up and it's always an estimate.
    That -- you can consider that.
          Was there some reason that -- that Dr. Goldberg
    didn't want to just come right out admit what every
    other expert in the case admitted?  Dr. Goldberg is a --
    is in a world where every single product that has
    risks -- fast food, alcohol and so forth -- every single
    product can advertise freely except tobacco.  Now,
    alcohol has warnings now but back when he was thinking
    about this, he believes that only tobacco should have
    the warnings, no other warnings.  He believes that
    consumers basically are robots, dumber than pigeons.
    You remember, he said it in one of these lectures.  But
    basically his point was that they go and buy the stuff
    without really knowing what they're doing.
          But you know the case -- the facts of this case,
    and that is that Mr. Bowman did not live in
    Dr. Goldberg's world.  He was intelligent, decisive.  He smoked because he chose to smoke.  He wasn't a robot.
    He quit because he chose not to smoke.  And finally,
    Dr. Goldberg's testimony has nothing to do with this
    case, nothing to do.
          Now, Mr. Shields -- oh, I did want to mention one
    other thing to you and I'll just mention it.
    Dr. Goldberg talked about youth marketing and -- and you
    saw some documents.  And I told you there would be
    documents that nobody can today explain in the reading
    of today's context.  But -- but as late as 1984, which
    is the last date that you saw -- and you saw a formal
    document that Reynolds produced to talk about planning
    for its marketing and so forth.  And during direct, they
    put that on the board, and they found a chart that --
    where it said 12 years old.  And Dr. Goldberg said, oh,
    there it is, the definition.  It's -- they're defining
    younger adults as 12 years old.
          So I went back to Dr. Goldberg on cross, and I
    said, well, look at the first, when it says the
    definition of younger adults is 18 to 24, legal smokers,
    in other words.  He said, well, it says that there but
    not on that other page.  And then when I went through
    the document, every chart, every -- almost every
    reference was talking about 18 to 24.
          And then he went back to that 12-year-old page.
    And then when we looked at, what we found out was, it
    wasn't Reynolds that was doing that.  It was the
    government.  Those were HEW statistics that they made on
    how much anybody smokes and that's why they were there.
    They weren't -- Dr. Goldberg kept saying because the
    number 12 appears, that means that that document --
    Reynolds is saying 12 years old.
          Now, I realize there were problems before and
    there's no doubt.  And we'll talk about going forward.
    But that's an example of trying to give you a
    half-truth, show you a document, tell you what it says,
    because the number 12 appears on it and then deny, deny,
    deny the rest of it.  So I just wanted to mention that
    in passing because it was mentioned -- it was shown on
    the screen today.
          But I want to talk to you now about the punitive
    damage question that Mr. -- Mr. Shields -- and this is
    the question that you'll have to answer.  Under the
    circumstances in this case, state whether by clear and
    convincing evidence punitive damages are warrant- -- are
    warranted against the defendants.
          Now, you'll only get to this point if you have
    awarded -- if you've answered yes to the other questions
    and you have awarded compensatory damages.  Punitive
    damages are different from compensatory damages. 16 Punitive damages are not designed to put somebody back
    where they were before the incident or to pay medical
    bills or to do any kinds -- there's no claim for that
    here.  But any kind of compensatory award, it's
    different.  It's on top of that.  It's on top of that.
    And these damages don't go to the government.  They
    don't go to cancer prevention organizations or anything.
    They go to -- to -- to the plaintiff in the case, to
    Ms. Bowman.
          And if you decide that there's -- that -- in this
    phase, you're going to just decide if conduct warrants
    it, and then if you say yes, we'd have another --
    another trial that the judge told you about yesterday.
          There's some differences, though.  The standard of
    proof is different now.  The judge told you that it's a
    matter of the greater weight of the evidence for the
    rest of the case, which you know is different from the
    criminal.  Well, punitive is by clear and convincing
    evidence.  And there's criteria that the judge has
    instructed you this morning.  This is what you have to
    find.  You have to find that Reynolds' conduct was gross
    and flagrant, that it was -- that there was a reckless
    disregard for the rights of Mr. Bowman, that there was
    an entire lack of care; there was conscious indifference
    to Mr. Bowman; there was wanton or reckless disregard
    for the safety and welfare, reckless indifference,
    intentional violations.
          It's a pretty big standard but the bridge of
    causation still applies.  You still have to show that
    Mr. Bowman was injured by this conduct, and the judge
    will tell that you that you cannot -- and has already
    told you actually that you cannot award damages for harm
    to somebody else.  Those people get -- if they have a
    lawsuit, they get to bring it someday.  It has to be
    harm to Mr. Bowman, so you have to show that --
    something about the punitive behavior, the conduct that
    they say warrants it, goes over that bridge to the
    claims made here.  And that's the -- that's the standard
    that you'll use.
          Now, there's a lot of talk.  In fact, the case
    started by Mr. Shields standing up and telling you about
    this meeting at the Plaza Hotel, about the secret
    meeting which he said begins the conspiracy.  Well, as
    you now know from the evidence, the Justice Department
    was advised of that meeting.  The -- the Justice
    Department received the documents about the formation of
    the groups, the TIRC and the GOLD and what they were
    going to be doing.  It was reported in the New York
    Times.  It's hardly the way to start a secret
    conspiracy.       But you don't have to accept Dr. Proctor's
    testimony that it was a secret conspiracy that began a
    50-year conspiracy because you now have substantial
    evidence about what Reynolds did or didn't do over the
    50 years.
          And he put up The Frank Statement.  And
    Dr. Proctor said that's the statement.  That's the thing
    that describes the conspiracy, the falsehoods.  It's the
    misleading parts of that.  And from that point on -- so
    I thought it would be helpful to think about the
    evidence that you've heard about my client in the
    context of The Frank Statement.  So -- now, counsel said
    it doesn't matter whether The Frank Statement's true or
    not.  That's the remarkable admission at this point in
    the trial, when they've been talking about this the
    whole trial.  And Dr. Proctor said it is the -- sort of
    the Magna Carta of the conspiracy, I think he may have
    said.  But I want to talk to you about The Frank
    Statement in the context, and I made a board here so we
    could keep it up and talk about it.
          Now, what I've done, you see these things in
    yellow?  Those are the ones that Dr. Proctor agreed to.
    He said those are true.
          "Recent reports on experiments with mice have
    given a lot of publicity to the theory that cigarette
    smoking is somehow linked to lung cancer.  At the same
    time, we, the industry, feels it's in the public
    interest to call attention to the fact that eminent
    doctors and research scientists have publicly questioned
    the significance."  He said that was true.
          "Medical research of recent years indicates many
    possible causes of cancer."  He said that was true.
          We have believe the products we make are not
    injurious."  He said that's what the companies believed
    at that point.
          "For more than 300 years, tobacco has given
    solace, relaxation and enjoyment.  At one time or
    another during the years, they've been held responsible
    for every disease."  He agreed with that.
          One by one, these charges have been abandoned.
    Can't say whether he agreed or disagreed because he
    didn't say what these other charges were.  So that --
    that's -- if they were tobacco-related, he said it
    wasn't true, he said they were something else.
          "Regardless of the past, the fact that cigarette
    smoking today should even be suspected as cause of
    disease is a matter of deep concern."  He said that was
    true.
          "Many people asked us what we were doing."  He
    said that was true. 17       And Number 2, "For this purpose we're establishing
    a joint industry group consisting initially of the
    undersigned.  This group will be known as the TIRC."
    That was true.
          Now, I want to look at those other things in
    the context of some evidence that you've seen in this
    case.
          Starting with recent reports on experiments with
    mice that he says is true, obviously that's the
    epidemiology.  And you saw the list before and it was
    the mouse skin painting that was done that you heard
    about.
          Then Number 2 he disagrees with.  "Although
    conducted by doctors of professional standing, these
    experiments are not regarded as conclusive in the field
    of cancer research.  However, we do not believe that any
    serious medical research, even though its results are
    inconclusive, should be disregarded."
          Now, what evidence did you hear about that?  Well,
    you heard about the four tests, the four epic studies,
    Dr. Doll, Levin, Schrek and Wynder.  But you know what
    Dr. Levin said about it?
          Let's look at Slide 51, please.
          Dr. Levin, who did one of the tests, said there's
    still a question.  "The published literature on the use
    of tobacco and its possible association fails to show
    clear-cut, consistent observations.  Reviews of the
    literature from the past 20 years reveal that it was
    often conflicting, and it consisted for the most part of
    studies which are inconclusive, lack of adequate
    samples" -- and so forth and so on.
          So even though he's one of the tests, he thought
    there was a question.  In other words, doctors.  In
    other words, there's a -- there's a disagreement.
          Let's see Slide 52, Dr. Schrek.  Dr. Schrek said
    the same thing.  He wrote one of the -- one of the
    studies.  And he cited some.  "For every expert who
    blames tobacco for cancer, there's another expert who
    says tobacco is not the cause."  So Dr. Schrek thought
    there was a question.
          And then you also heard testimony about Dr. -- Dr.
    Wynder with the mouse skin painting, saying that --
    saying that what happens on the back of a mouse is
    different from a lung, and so we've got to do more
    research and so forth.
          So you heard evidence that this one is actually
    true, and the -- the two best examples are the very two
    people who did the study, plus the other evidence that
    you heard.
          The next one at the same time he agrees is true. So let's go down to the -- to Number 2, that "There is
    no agreement among the authorities regarding what the
    cause is," and then the next one says "There is no proof
    that cigarette smoking is one of the causes."  And it
    goes on to say:  "The statistics purporting to link
    cigarette smoking" -- I'm just reading from the small
    one here but it's Number 4 there -- "The statistics
    purported to link cigarette smoking with the disease
    could apply with equal force to one of many other
    aspects of modern life.  Indeed the validity of the
    statistics is questioned by numerous scientists."
          Well, what evidence did you hear about that?  You
    heard that there was a substantial debate about this
    throughout the '50s and really into the '60s.  Over
    time, it expanded beyond just does smoking cause cancer
    to what is the effect on -- of nicotine addiction,
    whether the warning and -- and whether there should be
    warnings or not.
          Let's look at Slide 53.
          These names came from evidence that you've seen.
    You saw them through the testimony of Dr. Proctor.  You
    saw them through one of the scientific-perspective
    documents.  These are -- every one of these people at
    one time or another, during the period that we're
    talking about, raised questions, raised doubts about
    some aspect of the -- of the smoking and health
    controversy.
          Now, that's not it say that they didn't ultimately
    reach different conclusions.  But during the time
    between 1942 and 1968, those are the -- that's the time
    frame, you have heard evidence that -- and most of it
    came through Dr. Proctor, and then some came through
    Dr. Figlar and Dr. Cook, the documents they looked at.
          Those people have all been involved.  These are
    people like the National Cancer Institute, the
    government, the public health service, major cancer
    centers, Dr. Wynder, American Cancer Society, Mayo
    Clinic, United States Government.  There was a debate
    going on.  Dr. Proctor would have you ignore all of this
    and say, well, they might have said that, but you should
    have taken a different position, Reynolds.
          Let me give you some other examples that I think
    you saw.  For instance, Dr. Heller and this is when he'd
    gotten into whether there should be -- advertising
    should have warnings.  Dr. Heller, the head of the
    National Cancer Institute, said:  "Newspapers, radio, TV
    have done an excellent job covering this problem, very
    objective.  This is an exceedingly valuable way of
    informing the public."  That was in 1957.
          Let's see the next one.  Dr. Burney, the Surgeon 18 General, says the same thing.
          Let's see the next one.  "You can stand on the
    rooftop" -- this is Daniel Horn in 1968 -- "shout
    smoking dangerous at the top of your lungs and would not
    be telling anyone anything they did not already know."
          So when you're deciding whether or not there was a
    dispute during this time period, at the time this was
    written, there was.  And that -- that -- no agreement at
    this point would be true.  No proof would be true
    because there was a disagreement.  You have to -- they
    were still working it's way.  This was not -- this is
    not today and that's the key.  This is the '50s when
    this was going on, and the -- and the documents that you
    saw from my client were in the '50s, at the same time
    this was being published and at the same time all of
    this was going on.
          Basically, plaintiffs are arguing that my client
    should be punished, should be punished for taking the
    same position that a lot of those scientists took during
    this same period of time.  And remember, counsel talked
    about the AMA, and he said there was some "foolduggery"
    that went on with the AMA.  Well, you heard evidence
    from Dr. Proctor that not the AMA but doctors in the
    field, in 1960, a third of those doctors accepted that
    there was a causal relationship.  In other words, they
    believed the scientific epidemiology, but a third didn't
    believe it, as late as 1960.  That's not the AMA because
    of something that some scientist did.  That's the
    doctors out there in the field who would have an ability
    to know that.
          Now, you -- you might argue that Reynolds -- maybe
    we were too late.  Maybe -- maybe we should have --
    maybe we should have jumped on one side or the other
    later.  But you can't say that what we were doing was
    wanton and reckless and complete disregard because we
    were taking, during this time, the same position, the
    same position that many, many leading scientists were
    taking in this country.
          The next one that he disagreed with -- and really
    Number 4, I should put a T there because that's all part
    of the same.  2, 3 and 4 all relate to the same
    discussion that was going on.  And there will be more
    about that in a few minutes.
          But the next one says "We accept an interest that
    when they" -- "we accept an interest in the people's
    health as a basic responsibility."  Well, what was
    R. J. Reynolds -- while this debate was going on, what
    was R. J. Reynolds doing internally?
          We start with the Teague survey.  Now, Dr. Teague
    wrote several documents, and there seems to be some confusion about what each document was.  The Teague
    survey was done when Dr. Teague had first arrived at
    Reynolds with his doctorate in -- in chemistry.  And he
    was actually sent out in the world and said find every
    piece of paper you can find in the public records about
    this subject.
          And he did.  And he wrote a report.  And there's
    76 -- you -- if you look at it back there, there's 76
    items in the bibliography.  Every single one of those
    was available to any scientist or any person in the
    world who wanted to go to the various libraries and pull
    them down.  It seems to me you can say that was a
    prudent thing -- when this debate was just beginning,
    that was a prudent thing to do for a company to see what
    the science is that's out there, and you saw a couple of
    pieces of summary.  Dr. Teague was merely pointing out
    what these articles were saying, and a lot of the
    articles were showing the debate.  Some were showing --
    some were on one side; some were on the other.  But the
    part he didn't show you is where Dr. Teague said these
    studies were inconclusive and that sometimes there was a
    -- they were theoretically giving rise to carcinogenic
    substances.  He was just summarizing what was out there
    in the public domain.  It -- it can hardly be said to be
    a punitive behavior when you send somebody out to find
    out what's going on.
          Now, just as an aside, those planning documents
    that Dr. Teague -- let me make it clear what I said.
    I've been accused of saying some things today.  He was a
    scientist and -- and he was a chemist.  He was not in
    the marketing or the -- the department.  And he -- I
    didn't just say he was some scientist.  I said what he
    did.  But I said those were written as part of a
    master's program.  He was getting a master's in business
    at a university nearby, and those were written as part
    of his schoolwork.  And as you can see, they weren't
    sent to and from, and they didn't show you a single
    document to suggest that anything was ever done about
    those particular documents.  And Dr. Proctor admitted
    that that's what Dr. Teague had said under oath about
    those.
          So I just wanted to clear up that I didn't say
    that they were written by some scientist.  I explained
    through Dr. Proctor -- he actually explained based on my
    questions.
          But it wasn't just what -- it wasn't just what
    Dr. Teague was finding.  You heard about Dr. Rodgman and
    this is an example of the -- what I call maybe the
    half-truth or not showing you the whole thing.
    Dr. Rodgman was a scientist and he was -- while the 19 debate was going on -- see, Dr. Teague figured out what
    the debate was and told him.  While the debate was going
    on, Dr. Rodgman was in the laboratory trying to get
    answers.
          Let's look at 58, please.
          This is the document of Dr. Rodgman in 1956.  He
    points out that "The interest in the presence of
    polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in cigarette smoke
    condensate is that many of these compounds are known to
    be carcinogenic" -- and he cites something that's known;
    in other words, that's a -- that's an article about
    somebody out there in the world -- "to various species
    of animals."  You see, at that point, they weren't
    sure.
          "The current controversy concerning the influence
    of cigarette smoking on the increasing incidence of
    cancer of the human male has not yet been settled."
    Okay.  So that -- that was the state of science then.
    And then -- but he said "It is recommended that
    investigations on the reduction of the content of the
    polycyclic aromatic carbohydrons [sic] in cigarette
    smoke be initiated."
          You haven't seen that before.  So he -- he
    acknowledges that people were out -- remember, this was
    the time it was hard to figure out what was in tobacco
    smoke because they didn't have the -- the fancy machines
    they have now.  But what did he say, let's -- let's do
    research to find out about it.
          Then in nine -- and then in '59, he wrote another
    one that you saw, and this one describes what's going
    on.  It's probably harder for you to see.  He said "We
    confirmed earlier" -- "confirmed that extended earlier
    published findings about polycyclic hydrocarbons --
    hydrocarbons initiated lengthy research to develop
    methods to lessen."
          They're trying to take the carcinogenic substances
    out.  Counsel keeps telling you that it's inappropriate
    for somebody from the tobacco industry to go on TV and
    say if we can find out what's in it, we can take it out
    if we can.  Well, that's what Dr. Rodgman was trying to
    do in 1959 and before.  And they he went through whole
    series of approaches, extraction process, variations of
    filter tips, variations of paper, use of additives, use
    of cigarettes and so forth.
          And then he goes on to say that "The experimental
    variations were over 120 separate experiments involving
    almost a half million cigarettes.  Our experimental
    evidence indicated each of the approaches cited above
    have some merit."
          And Dr. Burns, remember Dr. Burns?  He's no friend of tobacco.  On the TV, when you heard him, he said that
    the research that Dr. Rodgman was doing was a great idea
    and he commended that.  And Dr. Burns also told you
    they -- counsel makes it sound like this was a secret,
    that only Reynolds knew that there was possible
    carcinogenic substances in smoke.  The Surgeon General
    knew about it.  Dr. Burns told you that before he wrote
    the '64 report.
          So that's one of the things that R. J. Reynolds
    was doing, trying to improve the product from a safety
    point of view.  They also were involved in something
    called the Tobacco Working Group.
          Let's look at Slide 60.
          THE COURT:  Let's -- hold on just a second.  Let's
    take a ten-minute break.
          MR. REID:  Take a break?  Sure.
          THE COURT:  Then we'll come back and let you
    finish up before lunch.
          MR. REID:  That's fine.
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, if you'll step
    to the jury room.  Start back in ten minutes.  And then
    we'll let counsel finish, and then we'll bring your
    lunch in around 12:30, 12:40.
          (Short recess.)
          (Jury present.)
          (The following proceedings were held in open court
in the presence of the jury:)
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Thank you, Mr. Reid.  You may
    continue.
          MR. REID:  No problem.  Thank you, Your Honor.
          We were talking about Item Number 4.  "We accept
    an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility
    paramount to every other consideration in our business."
    And I had been talking to you about what was going on in
    the early days at Reynolds when the -- when the
    epidemiology first came out.
          But I wanted to say one thing.  Counsel said to
    you that the only scientific research that he thought
    would make sense and be worthwhile -- he was talking
    about the CTR and so forth -- was epidemiology.  Why
    didn't we try to reproduce the epidemiology?  Well,
    there's no evidence one way or the other about that, but
    the point is epidemiology just gives you an association
    based on populations.
          The next step is to go into the laboratory and
    find out what's actually causing the relationship and
    that's what we did.  I showed you the two, Dr. Rodgman's
    and -- and you'll see others.  And you'll see lots of
    articles cited in the various Surgeon General's reports
    written by Reynolds' scientists.  So that's one thing we 20 were doing.  We were in the laboratory, trying to found
    out what's in smoke and how can you deal with it, and
    are there other scientific -- let me remind you of
    something.
          The -- some of the things that Dr. Rodgman was
    studying, polycyclic hydrocarbons, those were all
    mentioned in a Reader's Digest article.  They were all
    laid out in the Reader's -- so there was no secret about
    that.  It wasn't something that the company was keeping
    from Mr. Bowman that would cause him to make smoking
    decisions.
          The next thing we did was something called the
    Tobacco Working Group, and -- and this was a joint
    effort by the tobacco company scientists, the federal
    government, National Institute of Health scientists and
    the public health community scientists.  And it went on
    for ten years, and its goal is to try to find a safer
    cigarette.  And we work closely and we work on these
    areas jointly with all of these other groups.  Modifying
    the tobacco itself, working with farmers, expanded
    tobacco, filter designs, additives, reconstituted and
    paper porosity.
          Now, I want to say something.  There's -- there's
    a lot of talk about this reconstituted tobacco, and the
    suggestion was, well, you just did that to save money.
    Well, the Tobacco Working Group made up of all these
    groups looked at that carefully and studied it.  And, in
    fact, the Surgeon General commented on this and in '79
    the report, it basically says that that reconstituted
    tobacco resulted in less tumorigenic -- that means pure
    tumors, pure -- less cancer than standard cigarettes.
    And then it also complimented -- or commented on the
    fact that the paper porosity had something -- was an
    improvement.
          So when they tell you they we did it just to save
    money, well, sometimes saving money also might have a
    health effect, and the Surgeon General conceded that --
    that Reynolds did that.
          As you know, the Tobacco Working Group is shut
    down, as Dr. Proctor told you, because it became
    politically untenable for the federal government to say
    they were working with the tobacco industry.  So the
    search for a safer cigarette that went on ten years was
    cut off by the federal government.  But Reynolds did
    more over the years to work on the question of health.
    They reduced the tar and nicotine in all their
    cigarettes.
          You see, if you can't take out specific things,
    then -- then let's -- let's reduce the tar because
    that's where all the -- the smoke comes from and that's the bad stuff.  Let's reduce that.  They did that.  They
    lowered the yield of carcinogenic substances in the
    smoke, that's helping.
          They worked -- Dr. Proctor told you they spent
    billions on something called Premier and Eclipse, those
    are cigarettes that heated tobacco, not burn, and the
    idea was to make a safer cigarette.  Because, remember,
    when you burn the tobacco, that's when you get the smoke
    that cause -- that has the carcinogenic.
          Reynolds identified many, many, maybe more than
    half of the constituents in tobacco smoke.  Our
    scientists did that and we gave it to the Surgeon
    General in the early '60s, before the '64 report even
    came out.
          And when counsel says we didn't do anything about
    nicotine or less addictive or whatever, he forgot the
    testimony about a product called Carlton, which Reynolds
    developed and it was a very low nicotine cigarette.  And
    it's out there, you can buy it even now.  That's what
    Reynolds was doing over the years.
          And as -- as to this question of did we remove
    enough of the carcin- -- why didn't we remove things,
    remember Dr. Proctor's testimony.  Some of these
    constituents, there are 5,000 things, constituents in --
    in smoke.  And some of them are in -- in microgram or
    picograms, all that, some are so small you can't even
    see it with a -- with a big scanning electronic
    microscope.  And many of these you get when you burn
    hamburgers or when you burn lettuce, any -- any kind of
    vegetable kind of product, you get many of the same
    things.  So it is very difficult to move -- to remove
    one little tiny thing out of the -- out of the smoke but
    Reynolds was working on it all the way back into the
    '50s with Dr. Rodgman.
          So the fact is, if that's true, Reynolds has done
    and continues to do many things over the years which try
    to make cigarettes safer, try to -- to -- to modify the
    cigarettes based on the science as it was developing.
          The next one, he agrees it's -- with the next one.
    The next one says, "We have cooperated with those whose
    task it is to safeguard the public health."
          Well, I've already told you about the Teague --
    Tobacco Working Group, that was a ten-year project where
    we worked with -- 62 -- you saw that already, that --
    that was -- I told you about very Premier and Eclipse,
    that was another thing that we did in this thing.  I
    told you about the constituents of smoke.
          Look at slide 63.  I'm sorry.  Did you get ahead
    of me or did I get ahead of you?  Let's look at -- let's
    go -- that's right.  That's the one I meant. 21       This is the letter that was written by Reynolds,
    the memo about the Tobacco Working Group, and the boss,
    Mr. Sankus wrote down to Mr. Galloway, "In cooperation
    with others, you should push the work concerning smoking
    and health.  You should prepare a plan to foster any
    relationship with the government personnel in the quest
    for mutual understanding of facts ultimately to gain
    their cooperation in proper research on the subject.  If
    there is a safer cigarette, let's continue and increase
    our efforts in this program.  Please prepare a plan."
    That was -- those were marching orders for people that
    were going to go into this Tobacco Working Group and
    start working on developing a safer cigarette.
          If we look at 63, those are all the scientists and
    all the Surgeon General's reports that cited multiple
    scientific research papers and tests and so forth done
    by Reynolds' employees.
          The Surgeon General felt that obviously that
    Reynolds was making a contribution to the smoking and
    health, and obviously the Surgeon General, you know what
    his view is about it, he thought that Reynolds'
    scientists were making observa- -- were making
    contributions and those people's articles were cited by
    the Surgeon General in his report.
          Reynolds continues to publish papers in a
    variety of scien- -- you heard this from Dr. Cook and
    Dr. Figlar on the tape, if you remember, that was a long
    time ago, I realize, seems a lot longer ago than it was,
    but they continue to publish scientific papers in a
    variety of journals, they continue to make presentations
    to groups such as the FDA, the FTC, the Canadian
    government.
          You've heard substantial testimony that Reynolds
    has been involved intimately over the years with the
    public health community and with the government and in
    the whole scientific.
          The next one is true, and I've told you that about
    the charges, we're not sure.  The next two.
          So now we're -- now we're down to the pledge to
    aid -- pledging aid and assistance to the research
    effort into all phases of tobacco use and health.  This
    joint financial aid will, of course, be in addition to
    what we're already contributing.  He believed -- he
    agreed this is true, that we were going to establish
    TIRC.
          And then the last one, "In charge of the research
    will be scientists of unimpeachable integrity and
    national refute.  In addition, there will be an advisory
    board of scientists disinterested in the cigarette
    industry, a group of distinguished men from medicine science education will serve on the board."  He says
    that isn't true, and that gets us to the discussion of
    the CTR.
          Even Dr. Proctor agreed that the research that CTR
    funded was good research.  There were future Nobel war
    aids.  It was published in the top journals.  It was
    done by the top medical schools and -- and another
    health, it was -- many times it was co-funded by the --
    by the National Cancer Institute and it was included in
    many Surgeon General's reports.
          Now, Dr. Proctor, notwithstanding all of that,
    told you that nothing that they funded had anything to
    do with the real question of smoking and health.  And he
    actually called it distraction research.
          So I say, okay, out of the 6,000 articles, how
    many have you actually looked at?  And he couldn't
    remember exactly but he thought about 100.  So then I
    pulled out about 7 -- about 10, I think, and we went
    through them and he has never -- he has never looked at
    any of those.
          And I -- this is a terrible slide, okay, it's
    got -- it's -- it's busy and it's got lots of big words,
    but these are the ones that I went through and he
    admitted that these do, in fact, deal with smoking and
    health.  And you can -- you can tell from part,
    physiologic basic for prohibition against smoking, serum
    cholesterol in the administration of nicotine, ciliated
    mucous, he talked about the cilia and the lungs and so
    forth and the effect, on -- cigarette smoke's effect.
    Bronchial epithelium, same thing, related to smoking,
    chronic nicotine administration, dietary nicotine,
    addictive aspects in heavy cigarette smoking and then
    something called depressed interferon synthesis, lung
    cancer patients.  He admitted that he had not ever read
    any of those and all of those would be -- would not be
    distraction research, if you will.  Dr. Proctor, for
    whatever, that's one area that he just hasn't done
    enough research in.  He just said it's a distraction
    research and that's it.
          If you look at what the -- what resulted, the
    summary, $300 million, 1650 scientific projects, 1200
    independent researchers, that's what the CTR funded.
    And the only criticism is Dr. Proctor coming in and
    saying, I've looked at 100 maybe, I haven't looked at
    the ones that really relate to smoking but I think it --
    it's all distraction research, it has nothing to do with
    smoking.  But he could never explain then why does the
    Surgeon General include them in a report on smoking and
    health?  If they have nothing to do with smoking and
    health, why are they regularly cited in the -- in the 22 Surgeon General's reports?
          The -- the industry also funded the -- the big
    thick green book.  And it -- and it's called -- they
    were called the Green Monster.  And right up front they
    acknowledged that it's funded in part by the Tobacco
    Industry Research Committee.  There was nothing secret
    about who -- about receiving the funding.
          The Surgeon General had a comment about this book.
    He referred to it as the book compiled from more than
    6,000 articles, published in 1200 journals, a basic
    reference source.  He didn't say there was anything
    wrong with it.  Dr. Proctor didn't like it, as you
    remember.  That's what the Surgeon General said about
    it.  And Dr. Burns, on his TV, said it was a
    non-discriminate -- non-discriminating collection of
    writings about tobacco, meaning that it -- meaning that
    it showed both sides.
          Remember we had that whole discussion with
    Dr. Proctor, his only criticism was that they -- that
    they showed both sides.  Dr. Proctor would only agree
    that the Green Monster was a worthwhile contribution
    that the tobacco -- CTR made to the science.  He would
    only agree that it was worthwhile if you took out every
    single article that disagreed with him and you left only
    the ones that he agrees with and you said -- and you
    published the book, then he would say it's worthwhile.
          Dr. Proctor felt that it was inappropriate to put
    both sides of the story, as you've seen from those --
    those lists of all those different articles and people
    that wrote the articles covering both sides.
    Dr. Proctor didn't think that was worthwhile because it
    frankly didn't agree with him.
          The -- down on Number 3 now, so that's true, that
    tobacco -- all phases of tobacco.
          And as I said, I just showed you a handful of
    unpronounceable topics but that gives you a sense.  If
    Dr. Proctor thought that this was distraction research,
    he should have brought in some articles and shown them
    to you and pointed out, look at this, it has nothing to
    do with smoking and health.  Look at this, it has
    nothing to do.  He didn't do any of that.  We showed him
    articles.  We talked to him about the articles.  That's
    important in determining whether or not the -- the
    tobacco companies have been acting appropriately in --
    in funding studies.
          Now, the -- the next one talks about that -- that
    the head of the committee will be a scientist of
    unimpeachable integrity and it talks about the
    scientific advisory board.  Well, you heard evidence the
    head person was Dr. Clarence Cook Little.  He was the president of the University of Maine, he was the
    president of the University of Michigan, he was the head
    of what became the American Cancer Society, so he's --
    that's the person who was appointed that -- that they're
    talking about.  And then you heard the scientific
    advisory board was made up of scientists at universities
    and medical schools all over the country.  That's the
    board that made up the -- the scientific advisory board.
    So that's true.
          So counsel said you shouldn't pay attention to
    whether anything in this is true or not.  But now you've
    heard the substantial evidence in this case that
    validates each one of those paragraphs that -- that
    Dr. Proctor talked.
          So really I told you there were -- or the judge
    told you and I'll repeat it, there are two reasons for
    punitive damages.  One is to punish people and one is to
    keep them from doing something in the future to change
    their behavior.  Well, I want you to ask yourself this
    question:  The claim must be shown to be by clear and
    convincing evidence, would you -- do you really think
    the company who began research in the '50s and carried
    out -- carried on throughout, who worked with government
    and public health officials for all those years, who
    discovered or identified most of the constituents in --
    in smoke, who provided that information to the Surgeon
    General in as early as 1960, '61, who spent a billion
    dollars developing -- trying to develop a safer
    cigarette, the Premier and the Eclipse, who reduced the
    tar and nicotine of its products over the years
    substantially, who reduced the -- the effect or the --
    the amount of the car- -- some of the carcinogenic
    substances, who -- and who agreed with the attorney
    general about the definition of addiction, that I'll
    talk about next, does that really warrant punishment?
    That would send clearly the wrong message that what the
    company was doing to try to solve this problem was
    inappropriate.  And that's the answer -- that's the
    question you have to answer in this case.
          Now, plaintiff also claims as part of its punitive
    claim that -- that Reynolds took the wrong position
    about addiction.  Once again, you've heard testimony
    about that.  Over the years, there's no doubt, it's not
    disputed, Reynolds took the position that smoking
    cigarettes was not addictive.  And if you'll look at
    slide 69, you'll know why.
          In the 1700s, look -- let's put 69 up.  Go back to
    that one, please.
          In 1964, the Surgeon General discussed addiction
    versus habituation.  And the Surgeon General made the 23 determination that cigarettes do not fall into the
    category of an addictive substance.  That came out of
    the World Health Organization.  That was the accepted
    view of people who thought about this problem for years.
    So in other words, they want to get punitive damages
    because Reynolds agreed with the Surgeon General of the
    United States.  And as you know, that position was held
    by the Surgeon General for about two decades.
          Now, let's look at 68.
          And -- and this really gets to what you have to
    decide in this case.  There's no definition of addiction
    that -- that binds a jury.  In this case, it's really
    the behavior that you're talking about because the
    definition has changed.  In the early days, you remember
    Columbus and John Quincy Adams and all and before that
    it was called an addiction sometimes, it was called a
    habit sometimes, but in 1964, the Surgeon General said,
    we're going to -- we're going to use the word "habit"
    because it doesn't meet the addiction criteria, it
    doesn't have intoxication, it doesn't have serious
    life-threatening withdrawals and so forth.
          So for two decades Reynolds and the Surgeon
    General were on exactly the same page.  So when counsel
    says that we didn't tell the truth because we've denied
    that our cigarettes were addictive, there it is.
          And you remember that clip of the -- of the
    chairman standing up and raising their hand on -- in
    congress, remember the one person who tried to explain
    this was Mr. Johnston, the chairman of Reynolds, when he
    tried to explain that there was a definition and the
    congressman just said -- or the senator, I guess, it
    was, he just said, well, I'll take that as a yes and
    let's move on.  That's what he was talking about, that
    and the other slide about what the attorney general --
    Surgeon General said.  He wasn't allowed to say that.
          If an expert witness had come in in the '60s or
    the '70s and done an evaluation and had exactly the same
    behavior that you've heard today, her -- her conclusion
    would be the person's not addicted because it didn't
    qualify under the definition accepted.
          But in 1988, the Surgeon General changed the
    definition, decided to require that -- to get rid of the
    requirement of intoxication and Reynolds didn't change
    for about ten years.  Again, maybe we could have done it
    sooner, maybe we did -- didn't do it soon enough, but
    the point is it's not reckless, wanton, punitive
    behavior, as the plaintiff suggests, to have said all
    those years that cigarette smoking is not an addictive
    behavior.
          It's not enough just to say that somebody's addicted.  You have to look at the facts.  And the
    punitive facts in this case are the same as the facts
    for all the other claims.  You must show that something
    about the facts created this.  That Mr. Bowman's
    knowledge, that something was concealed, that -- that
    some of these facts that they're arguing about now, the
    fact about addiction or about smoking being risky and
    all, if Mr. Bowman knew it cannot -- it cannot have been
    concealed.
          So all the discussion we had about what Mr. Bowman
    knew and how he made the decision applied the same to
    punitives as it does to the rest.  You just have a
    higher standard of proof.  Now, it's not criminal but
    it's a higher standard of proof.  So -- so that's kind
    of the punishment side.
          Now, I want to talk about the deterrent side.  The
    punitive damages also are designed, if they're needed,
    to cause companies to do something different going
    forward.  And you have had evidence in this case about
    whether or not R. J. Reynolds needs to be deterred.  I
    believe the evidence is clear that it does not need to
    be punished.  When you balance all of the things that
    were going on, it does not need to be punished.  Does it
    need to be deterred?  There's no debate in this case,
    there can be no debate that Reynolds is a different
    company today from the '50s or the '60s.
          And I told you I couldn't explain some of those
    documents and nobody can, that they were written in a
    different time, when there was a different view about
    this whole subject and even counsel conceded that this
    morning when he talked about his client smoking in a
    different era.  The world's a lot different today than
    it was in the '50s and the '60s.
          Most importantly, though, those documents that you
    saw have virtually nothing to do with Mr. Bowman.
    Nothing to do with Mr. Bowman.  Mr. Bowman had full
    knowledge of what he needed to know to qualify in this
    case.
          Now, what -- what's different today?  Well, number
    one, there have been warnings on the packs since 1966
    and they continue to be on the packs as we speak.
    Everybody who wrote those memos and did those studies
    and -- and worked at Reynolds back then and made
    decisions, they're all gone.  They're all gone.  They're
    not at Reynolds anymore.
          And today you've heard evidence what of what
    Reynolds is doing right now, Premier and Eclipse, trying
    to develop a safer cigarette.  Dr. Burns -- Dr. Proctor
    said he thought a billion dollars had been spent.
    Imagine -- imagine -- imagine what a tremendous 24 marketing advantage it would be if you could actually
    find the -- the answer to this and -- and create a safer
    cigarette that was different from all the other
    cigarettes.  Imagine, why wouldn't a company want to do
    that?  It's very difficult.  But Reynolds continues to
    work.
          I've told -- I've talked to you about what we're
    doing now in studying the constituents of tobacco smoke
    and that gets more and more sophisticated and we learn
    more and more about it as time passes.  I've talked
    about the studies that Reynolds is publishing and
    sharing its information with the public, with the
    scientific community, with the government and with the
    public health community.  Reynolds placed millions of
    its documents on the website so that people can access
    and read them.
          And the rest -- and Reynolds now has a way of
    citing it and you can read this.  "Cigarette smoking is
    a leading cause of preventable deaths in the United
    States.  Significantly increases the risk of developing
    lung cancer, heart disease, chronic bronchitis,
    emphysema, and other serious diseases."  That's what
    Reynolds -- now, the -- so you don't need to do
    something to make Reynolds do this.
          What else does -- does Reynolds say?  "Nicotine
    product is addictive.  It is not considered a threat to
    health."  And the last sentence, "The best course of
    action for tobacco users is to quit."  There is a lot
    more.  These are in evidence, you can look at the pages
    and you can see what we're telling customers.
          See, this second part, this deterrence means you
    have to look at Reynolds today and decide do you need to
    award money to cause them to do something different
    going forward, to deter them from doing what was in the
    past?  Today they're doing nothing in any way, shape or
    form that looks like what you saw in documents in the
    '50s or the '60s.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Reid, you've got about 25 minutes
    left, would you like to save it for after lunch or would
    you --
          MR. REID:  No, I'm going to finish in --
          THE COURT:  Sure.
          MR. REID:  I didn't know I had that much.  I don't
    have that much more to say.  Then everybody claps.
          I think it's clear that the plaintiff has failed
    to carry the burden by clear and convincing evidence
    that Reynolds has worked in this wanton, reckless and
    intentional way toward Mr. Bowman.  And it's you
    answer -- if you get to that point on the verdict form,
    should be -- should be no as to whether or not punitive damages.
          Now, we'll look at the verdict form and go through
    quickly.  I've already talked about the first question.
    If you -- if you believe that they have to prove that
    Mr. Bowman was addicted, that the addiction was the
    cause of his smoking and that the esophageal cancer was
    caused by smoking, your answer would be no to that
    question.  Meaning Mr. Bowman is not in the class and
    the case would end.
          Now, obviously I've talked about the whole verdict
    form.  The negligence -- let's look at the next two -- I
    know you can't get it on the page as all that, let's go
    to the next one.
          These two have to do with product defect.  And
    there has been no evidence in this case that the -- you
    heard the findings, once again they -- they rely on the
    findings about the product, but there's been no finding
    in this case, no evidence in this case about what defect
    caused any injury to Mr. Bowman.
          You see, they still have to prove that the defect
    was the legal cause and the -- and the previous
    question, the negligence, the legal cause, that's the
    bridge.  No -- no one has come in and given you
    testimony about is this particular -- this is what
    caused Mr. Bowman's cancer or something else.  You heard
    no evidence about this at all.  So I would say the
    answer to those questions would be no because they
    haven't proved -- there's been no evidence about the
    cause of any defect, what the defect is and what the
    cause -- how it caused.
          The next question is the concealment.  Did R. J.
    Reynolds' concealment or omission of a fact about the
    health effects or the addictive nature which was a legal
    cause.  And that -- that's the same question I talked
    about.  If Mr. Bowman knew it, if he otherwise knew it
    or could have known it.  If he knew it, the answer has
    to be no to that question.  And the evidence in this
    case, I would suggest to you, respectfully, is
    overwhelming that Mr. Bowman was fully aware of the
    risks associated with smoking and the fact that it was
    hard to quit and so forth.
          The next one, please.
          This -- this is -- this just mirrors the previous
    question.  Civil conspiracy.  And it's the same, to
    conceal.  They still have to show that something was
    concealed from Mr. Bowman in this case.  It's not enough
    to say that maybe they made some agreement to conceal
    something from somebody, it has to be concealment from
    Mr. Bowman in order for you to answer that yes.
          And this is the percentage of fault.  And you read 25 what they said in their answer, in their complaint,
    that -- that they said that his -- he accepts fault
    because of the duration and extent of quit attempts and
    there were none.  So he has admitted that the answer to
    that question ought to be substantial, a high percentage
    on Mr. Bowman.  Plus when you consider he smoked for
    another -- let's see, '66, '76, a lot of years after the
    warnings were on the pack, he had full knowledge of the
    situation, he never tried to quit, those are all of the
    kinds of things that would go into this.  And -- and
    also the question of whether the -- if you believe that
    smoking was -- that alcohol, rather, was more likely
    than smoking, all of that would go into deciding what
    percentage of fault, if you get to this question, would
    be assigned to Mr. Bowman.
          Damages.  I should say this.  They've asked for a
    lot of money.  And that's -- lawyers have nothing to do
    with what you decide but I know that -- I know that
    sometimes in cases if I didn't say anything about it,
    you might hear a lawyer come back and say, well, Ben
    Reid must agree we're entitled to the millions of
    dollars because he didn't say anything.
          So I want to make it perfectly clear that our
    position in this case is that Reynolds, is this
    particular case, the facts do not support liability on
    the part of Reynolds, for all the things I've been
    talking about, but most importantly, going all the way
    up to question Number 1, Mr. Bowman cannot prove that
    addiction was the cause of his smoking.
          So I'm -- I'm -- I'm not going to give you some
    other number, an alternative or anything like that.  I'm
    just going to say that -- and -- and when we talked
    about this during voir dire, everybody understood that
    the two sides had two positions here and that that's why
    you're having to decide this case.  And -- and so now,
    you know, I could perhaps say that, you know, it's --
    that's a lot of money when you consider like
    Dr. Goldberg's testimony, they're asking you for
    millions of dollars because of his testimony, which --
    which has some real problems, but that's obviously for
    your decision.  Our -- my suggestion is that you will
    not get to this because the evidence in this case is
    clear that Mr. Bowman was aware and chose to smoke.
          I'll end where I started.  This case is about
    Mr. Bowman.  With everything that he knew, everything
    that he was told throughout his life, there's no reason
    to believe that anything Reynolds said or didn't say or
    did or didn't do would have had any effect on
    Mr. Bowman's choice to smoke that would have made him
    stop smoking.  If you think about it, the physical problems that he suffered, the coughing and the -- over
    his entire life, that wasn't enough, that couldn't cause
    him to quit.  His wife's health scare.  His wife's
    telling him about the risks of smoking, that couldn't
    cause him to quit.  His daughters, all three daughters
    telling him regularly that he should quit, that couldn't
    cause him to quit.  His friends could not cause him to
    quit.  The direct warnings on the package could not
    cause him to quit.  All the information you read in the
    media and all the different magazines and TV and -- and
    things that he read could not cause him to quit.
          Mr. Bowman quit when he made the decision to quit,
    and that is perfectly consistent with Mr. Bowman's
    personality that you've learned about through this case.
    Mr. Bowman smoked, he drank, when he chose to do those
    activities, and he stopped both the one time he decided
    that he was motivated to stop and that's when he
    stopped.  He did not smoke because of any addiction that
    controlled his life.  He smoked because he made the
    choice to smoke until he made the choice not to smoke in
    1985.
          Now, this is the last time that I get to talk to
    you.  Thought you might clap again.  I will say this:
    Counsel gets the chance, because he gets the burden, he
    gets to come back.  I can't imagine what he might say.
    I don't ever get a chance to respond.  You can imagine a
    lawyer who's been involved in a case for all these
    weeks, who has to sit down and you can never stand up
    and -- and -- and say, wait a minute, that's not right
    or I didn't say that or the evidence -- there's this
    other evidence.  So I'm going to ask you to do this, I
    hope that you've listened to me in a critical way.  When
    I've -- when I've suggested evidence, I hope you've
    thought about it and remember whether you think I've
    told you what the evidence would be.  I've tried to tell
    you the evidence that -- that actually came in, exactly
    as I told you what would come in in the opening.  I
    think it's pretty consistent.
          So you might just say to yourself as Mr. Shields
    gets up here, if Ben Reid had a chance to come back,
    what would his question be about that?  I think that's a
    fair way to -- to think about it in a critical way
    because you don't have to do that to me because he gets
    to come back, so I'd ask you to do that.
          You know, the reason the jury system works here
    is -- is that we really have a pack between the jurors
    and the parties.  And we each made -- you didn't know
    you had entered into this agreement.  But the agreement
    is this, jurors -- we -- the parties agree that when you
    go into that room after everything's over and you start
    deliberating, it's entirely up to you.  No one will ever
    criticize you.  No one will say how did you possibly
    reach that result?  You have the total ability to make
    the decision in this case, that's -- we give you that as
    part of this.
          But you give us something.  You agree that you
    will only decide it based on the evidence.  You won't
    decide it based on -- on the fact that it's a big
    company or somebody doesn't like smoking or somebody
    doesn't like other things about the defendant.  You'll
    decide it on the evidence and that's the pack that we
    have with each other and that's why it works.
          And so I know that we each have our duties and our
    duty was to bring you the most evidence we could so that
    you'd have a valid basis to decide.  And now your duty
    is to go back and to decide the case based on that
    evidence.  And I would -- the only thing I could ask you
    to do is to do your duty.  And I know you will.
          And on behalf of my client and the folks that
    worked with me during this case that you've seen, thank
    you for your attention.
