                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          THE COURT:  Do you need to take this down?
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  Yes.
          THE COURT:  Do you need the easel?
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  No, I do not.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Gerson, would you take
     your board, please?
          MR. GERSON:  Yes.
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  May it please the Court.
          THE COURT:  Yes, sir.  Mrs. Brown.
     Counsel.  Good morning.
          Well, again, I find myself in the position
     of beginning by agreeing with Mr. Gerson.  I
     echo his words about your jury service.  You
     know, in our country -- our country wouldn't
BROWN VOL15
1625 work unless people made sacrifices, some large,
     some small, ranging from the ultimate sacrifice
     of the folks enshrined in Arlington to the
     simple sacrifices of paying your taxes every
     year.
          Jury service is somewhere on that
     continuum.  And Mr. Gerson is right and the
     judge is right when he said that at the
     beginning of the trial, that the system could
     not function without you.  You've been
     attentive and once again that's all either of
     us and our clients could ask.  So whatever
     happens verdict-wise, thank you and you all
     should be proud of what you've done.
          Mr. Gerson -- excuse me, Mr. Gerson in his
     closing talked a lot about Mrs. Brown.  And
     well he should.  But if the issue was sympathy
     for Mrs. Brown we wouldn't be here.  She
     suffered a horrible loss.  She suffered the
     loss of her helpmate, her soulmate.  And as if
     the issue were sympathy we would have no issue.
          But that's not the issue in this case.
     Mrs. Brown is not the issue in this case.
     Mrs. Brown's name will not show up on most of
     the verdict form in this case.  The name on the
BROWN VOL15
1626 verdict form for the question of the legal
     cause of his injuries and the question on the
     verdict form for allocation of responsibility
     is Roger Brown.  And that's what I'm here to
     talk about in my closing.
          And as Mr. Gerson said, he gets a chance
     to come up here after I'm done and spend some
     time telling you why he thinks I'm wrong.
          I'd ask you to, when you go back -- for
     one of you to be my advocate in the jury room
     after you've heard his arguments and respond to
     them as you think I would -- I might respond to
     them.
          But yesterday I started or I wound up
     telling you that as far as this lawsuit goes at
     heart, this lawsuit is about not sympathy but
     money.  And now in this phase, at this time,
     you as the representatives of the people of
     Broward County are going to have to decide
     whether to award behavior such as you saw from
     Mr. Brown.
          The man who willfully ignored all the
     warning signs of the world around him, on the
     TV screen in front of him, on the side of every
     package of cigarettes that he smoked for the
BROWN VOL15
1627 last 30 years of his life, warnings from his
     daughter, and warnings from his wife.
          And when we look at the questions that
     you're going to have to answer on the verdict
     form, whether it's from the perspective of
     whether anything Reynolds did was a legal cause
     of Mr. Brown's injuries --
          And by the way Mr. Gerson made it sound
     like he doesn't even understand why that's an
     issue in the case.  Well, there's a reason it's
     on the verdict form.  There are instructions
     regarding it that Judge Streitfeld will give
     you when we are both done arguing to you.  And
     you'll see that there's a reason it's on the
     verdict form and a very important reason.
          But what does it mean?  It means that --
     the question is did Reynolds do anything that
     affected Mr. Brown.  Did the plaintiffs meet
     their burden of proving as I mentioned to you
     yesterday, that those railroad tracks somewhere
     intersected, that something that Reynolds did
     affected or harmed Mr. Brown.  And it's their
     burden of proof to prove that it did.
          And then there's a question you'll have of
     how much responsibility you'll allocate to
BROWN VOL15
1628 Mr. Brown, it's called comparative fault.
     Mr. Gerson showed you that portion of the jury
     verdict form.
          And whatever question you address on that
     verdict form, whether it's legal cause or
     whether it's allocation of responsibility, one
     person's personality dominates and that person
     is Roger Brown.  Because nothing that Reynolds
     did affected Roger Brown because, of course as
     you've heard for two weeks now, nothing that
     anybody did affected Roger Brown.  He did what
     he wanted, when he wanted, just because he
     wanted.  And there is not one shred of proof to
     suggest otherwise on anything.  In this case,
     the tracks don't cross.  The tracks simply
     don't cross.  And they don't cross because
     Mr. Brown headed in the direction he wanted to
     head in, regardless of what anybody else said
     or anybody else did.
          No one knows why he smoked.  Nobody knows
     why he chose the brands he smoked.  Nobody
     knows why he switched from one brand to another
     or when he switched from one brand to another.
     He kept those reasons to himself.  He made his
     decisions by himself.  And he never sought out
BROWN VOL15
1629 anybody's advice on anything.
          Mr. Brown never let the conduct of others
     affect his conduct.  And the notion that
     there's something that Reynolds did that
     affected Mr. Brown's conduct is truly --
     there's no evidence of it in this record.
          And if you're searching for the one fact
     in this trial that kind of makes this point,
     sort of the silver bullet that proves this to
     you, the one fact that shows you there's no
     connection whatsoever between anything that
     Reynolds did and Mr. Brown's actions that
     breaks the chain of legal causation and proves
     those tracks never crossed, let me suggest to
     you that it's this:  We saw the briefest of the
     videotapes up here that was presented by the
     plaintiffs, and I mentioned a couple of times
     and I will mention it again, was the videotaped
     testimony of former Reynolds CEO, Jim Johnston.
     Not only was the substance of his testimony not
     challenged in this trial, but as a matter of
     fact it was the plaintiffs, as you recall, who
     made the point of playing the clip.
          And the uncontradicted testimony of
     Mr. Johnston was that from the 1950s to the
BROWN VOL15
1630 1990s Reynolds lowered the tar and nicotine in
     its cigarettes by 400 percent.
          Now, you heard from Dr. Benowitz in
     Phase I that Mother Nature put the nicotine in.
     You heard from Mr. Johnston in Phase I that
     Reynolds took it out.
          Now, you've been read a binding finding
     that says that the resulting product, even
     after this happened, was still defective.  And
     I'm not arguing with that at all.  That's
     binding on you.  It's binding on us.  That's
     the law for purposes of this case.
          But what this issue does tell you, what
     this piece of evidence or proof tells you, is
     that this is what the R.J. Reynolds' track on
     our railroad analogy was doing.  It was
     lowering tar and nicotine every year for 40
     years.
          What was the Roger Brown track in our
     railroad track analogy doing for 40 years?  And
     the answer is, nothing.  Nothing.  He got lower
     tar and nicotine every year he smoked.  And he
     did nothing.  Cigarettes were less addictive
     every year he smoked, and he did nothing.  And
     there's the proof.  He did nothing.
BROWN VOL15
1631 There's the evidence that anything
     Reynolds did had absolutely no affect on
     Mr. Brown.  Reynolds took some actions,
     Mr. Brown did nothing.  And certainly nothing
     that Reynolds did harmed Mr. Brown.
          The Judge will instruct you as he did
     before, on the greater weight of the evidence.
     The greater weight of the evidence means the
     more persuasive and convincing force and effect
     of the entire evidence in the case.
          Now, in this case, there is absolutely no
     evidence at all, nowhere, of any connection
     between anything Reynolds did and anything
     Mr. Brown did, other than he was their
     customer.
          The greater weight of the evidence is that
     nothing that Reynolds did affected or harmed
     Mr. Brown.  And if all you do is find that
     Mr. Brown was Reynolds' customer, a customer
     buying a legal product, then you should check
     "no" here, and here on the verdict form.
          Now, when you get the verdict form -- you
     had a sneak peak before -- if notwithstanding
     the fact that our railroad tracks never met you
     should find that Reynolds somehow is a legal
BROWN VOL15
1632 cause of Mr. Brown's injuries, you're going to
     have to apportion responsibility.  It's called
     comparative fault.
          And there will be three options for you,
     the options that Mr. Gerson showed you, R.J.
     Reynolds, Roger Brown and other cigarette
     manufacturer.  And I want to start talking
     about other cigarette manufacturers because
     that's where Mr. Brown started.
          Now, I mentioned this in the first closing
     and it's still important today.  And it's true
     today that we have no idea what brand of
     cigarettes Mr. Brown started to smoke.  No
     proof.  None from anybody.
          And even though we are at the end of this
     trial, and we've spent two weeks on the issues
     here, the fact that there's no proof of that
     still matters.
          Now, you may remember back -- it's not
     that long okay; it seems like a long time
     ago -- that Mr. Gerson in his Phase I rebuttal,
     that's the argument that he gets to talk that I
     don't get to answer, that Mr. Upshaw didn't get
     to answer, he said in that case in that
     instance I was asking you to speculate because
BROWN VOL15
1633 I pointed out there was no proof of what
     Mr. Brown started smoking, what brand, by what
     manufacturer he started smoking.  He then
     invited you to make an inference that it was
     Camel because that's what he was smoking when
     he met his wife.
          Well, one man's inference is another man's
     proof -- another man's speculation.  But what
     it's not is proof.  And proof is what's
     required to make your decisions in this case.
     The judge is going to instruct you, you should
     not speculate on matters outside the evidence.
     You shouldn't speculate that it was Camel
     because he smoked Camel later.
          The evidence is there is no proof of what
     brand he started smoking.  No proof.  The
     burden of which is on the plaintiffs.  The
     plaintiffs have the burden of proof of telling
     you that.  They didn't give it to you.
          Now, Mr. Gerson said that Mr. Brown was
     brand loyal, really.  He smoked for about 40
     years.  In those 40 years he smoked four
     different brands as well as roll-your-owns.  So
     that's about one brand every ten years.
          Guess what?  The period that we know
BROWN VOL15
1634 nothing about is about ten years.  Between
     1939, if you believe the family folklore that
     he started smoking at age 12, from about 1939
     to 1949.  Continuing our history lesson, from
     the time that Hitler's tanks rolled into Poland
     to the time the North Koreans came across the
     Yalu river almost to start the Korean War.  No
     idea what brand he smoked.
          Why is this important?
          In Phase I you found Mr. Brown was
     addicted to cigarettes manufactured by
     Reynolds.  But you didn't find that he became
     addicted to cigarettes manufactured by
     Reynolds.
          In fact, if you follow the testimony of
     the man that Mr. Gerson had represented as
     being the foremost authority in the history of
     the world on nicotine, Dr. Benowitz, you
     couldn't find that.  Because he said that
     you're addicted -- the final stages of
     addiction come when you're a regular smoker.
     And by the time he met his wife he was a
     regular smoker.  There's no issue there.  So he
     would have been addicted by the time he met
     Mrs. Brown.
BROWN VOL15
1635 And you may not have found that Mr. Brown
     was addicted only to Reynolds cigarettes.  I
     remember in his rebuttal, although I didn't get
     to answer, Mr. Gerson invited you to make that
     conclusion based on what the Judge's
     instructions would be.
          So the other cigarette manufacturers on
     this form, it's an entity that may bear
     responsibility for Mr. Brown's injuries.  We
     don't know what brand that was or what
     manufacturer that was in Phase I.  We've come
     to the end of Phase II and we still don't know.
     But whatever brand it was, according to the
     Benowitz standard, it's the brand that started
     his addiction.  And whatever that brand it was
     it may be the brand that started his disease
     process.  It may well be that that other
     manufacturer deserves to bear all the
     responsibility for Mr. Brown's injuries, but
     certainly a large part.
          We didn't know who it was then.  There was
     a failure of proof then.  There's a failure of
     proof now.  It matters and it makes a
     difference.
          Now, the judge is going to instruct you
BROWN VOL15
1636 and Mr. Gerson just talked about the fact that
     Mr. Brown is going -- admitted being
     comparatively negligent.  And the question for
     you is going to be how much responsibility to
     assign him for his own actions.
          When I was putting this together
     yesterday, I remembered -- people my age may
     remember -- a Crosby, Stills, and Nash called
     Teach Your Children.  And people my age are
     familiar with it.  You heard from Mrs. Brown
     with a little bit of reminding of what
     Mr. Brown taught his children.  He tried to
     teach his children the need for responsibility,
     correct?  And then he tried to teach his
     children about taking responsibility for the
     choices they made.  And the answer was, yes.
          Now, there are no shortage of reasons that
     you should hold Mr. Brown responsible for his
     own actions and not reward him for the choices
     he made.
          You've heard mostly yesterday but also in
     Phase I that Mr. Brown lived in a world of
     warnings.  He ignored them all.  Warnings in
     the world around him, warnings that were
     brought into his home on television, warnings
BROWN VOL15
1637 from his family, warnings on cigarette packs
     for about almost 30 years of him smoking.
          Dr. Martinez painted for you a picture of
     Broward County in the 1950s and beyond, and it
     was a world that flashed warning signs about
     smoking.  Long before the warning went on the
     pack.  Mr. Gerson told you studies were
     published in scientific journals for scientists
     and scholars to read and that's true.  But it's
     equally true when we showed you that those
     studies showed up in the newspaper right here
     in Fort Lauderdale, right here in Broward
     County, and people could read about and as
     important for people to talk about.
          Now, before I begin our walk through the
     information that was available to folks about
     smoking and disease here in Broward County, let
     me talk a minute to answer some of this stuff
     that Mr. Gerson said about Dr. Martinez.  He
     said it yesterday and he said some of it here
     today in his closing.
          First, Mr. Gerson suggested that the
     slides that we showed you somehow -- the slides
     of articles, somehow only showed one side of
     the story.  You know, we were picking out
BROWN VOL15
1638 quotes from those articles that favored the
     defense case and weren't showing you perhaps a
     comment by industry spokespeople or somebody
     whose comments would help the defense case who
     tried to rebut the studies.
          We've offered and the Judge's admitted
     into evidence every article, the entire article
     of every article you saw up on the screen.
     Everything you saw on the slide has been
     admitted into evidence.  Every single one in
     its entirety.  And you'll get those back in the
     jury room as evidence.
          I would urge you to take a look at these
     things, all of them, some of them, however many
     you want to look at.  Because when you do
     you're going to find out that the message of
     these articles, the overwhelming message of
     these articles is not a mixed message, but a
     clear message.  Messages that smoking causes
     disease; if you haven't started don't; if you
     have started quit; but if you're trying to quit
     it may be hard, and there's help available.
     That's the message of the articles that was
     portrayed to the people of Broward County in
     the '50s, '60s, '70s, and '80s.
BROWN VOL15
1639 And when he cross-examined Dr. Martinez,
     Mr. Gerson asked questions like, well, did you
     ever see an article where somebody said
     something like more studies needed or some
     industry statement that would tend to rebut the
     study that was being reported on.  Dr. Martinez
     said yeah, well, maybe I saw some somewhere.
          But once again, you know, we talk about
     failures of proof in this case.  There's no
     proof of what Mr. Brown started smoking.  And
     when he was being cross-examined then and today
     to you, did Mr. Gerson show Dr. Martinez a
     single article with any of these supposed
     comments by the industry?  Did he show you any
     article with a comment by this exposed industry
     spokesperson?  No.  Did he show you any today?
     No.
          The best we heard about yesterday was a
     thing called the Frank Statement to smokers.
     It ran once, once.  It didn't even run in Fort
     Lauderdale.  And look how it started.  It
     reminded people of the studies about mice.
     Now, if you're an industry person that's a
     pretty stupid way to start your ad.  But it ran
     once and it didn't even run in Fort Lauderdale.
BROWN VOL15
1640 That's the best he could do.  If he had
     articles with all these industry statements, he
     would have shown them to Dr. Martinez and he
     would have shown them to you.  It's just a
     another failure of proof in this case.  Not
     speculation.  A failure of proof.
          But what did Dr. Martinez show us?  He
     showed us right here in Broward County the
     newspapers kept its citizens well informed on
     the developments of smoking and health.  It
     covered the developments from Britain.  It
     covered developments from mouse skin painting
     in the United States, the one that Mr. Gerson
     was talking about.  It covered studies in 1954
     from the American Cancer Society.  It covered
     studies in 1957, front page, banner headline
     from the American Cancer Society in 1957.  It
     covered studies where many agencies, National
     Heart institute, the Cancer Institute, the
     American Heart Association, the American Cancer
     Society, they all got together, pooled their
     resources to study the issue, and the results
     of that were reported in Broward County.
          Were people paying attention?  George
     Gallup says so.  In 1954, 90 percent of the
BROWN VOL15
1641 public had heard or read anything that the
     affects of smoking may be the cause of cancer
     of the lung.  In 1957, 77 percent happened to
     hear about the report of the American Cancer
     Society, the one that was reported here in
     Broward County.  George Gallup said that this
     was an extraordinarily high number.  Now,
     that's everybody.  What were the smokers --
     were smokers paying attention?  You betcha.
     82 percent of smokers, higher than the average
     public, were paying attention to articles like
     this.
          Now, as I told you before, there's a
     difference between speculation and reasonable
     inferences.  And it is not speculation, I would
     suggest, to conclude that if something was a
     topic of interest, not just nationally but
     internationally, I mean, Fort Lauderdale,
     Florida is reporting studies that happened in
     London, England.  An international and national
     issue would be of discussion -- would be an
     issue of discussion in the country, would be a
     topic of discussion locally as well.
          Dr. Martinez told you how people get
     information, how things could be passed by word
BROWN VOL15
1642 of mouth, could be passed on to people who
     don't read or write.  He asked an interesting
     question when you think about it.  Think about
     how much we know that we didn't learn by
     reading it.  That we learned from friends or
     family or in the workplace, or just the word on
     the street.  People didn't have to have the
     written word in addition, because it was pumped
     into their homes on television.
          In 1955, which is a history lesson, the
     year the Brooklyn Dodgers won their first world
     series, Edward R. Murrow in See It Now was
     piped in homes all across the country.  One of
     the most popular shows in America.  And on that
     show Dr. E. Cuyler Hammond, you've seen his
     name before, he was the statistical director of
     the American Cancer Society, and a man who was
     a coauthor of many of these studies Mr. Gerson
     put in evidence, and that were reported in the
     Fort Lauderdale News.  This is -- you saw this
     yesterday.  This is the advice that Dr. Hammond
     had for people and their smoking in 1955.
          (Thereupon, the videoclip was played and
     taken down to the best of the reporter's
     ability:)
BROWN VOL15
1643 "In my opinion, people can be warned of
     the dangers and they are being warned.  What
     they then want to do, whether they wish to
     smoke or not, is their own business."
          People should be warned and they are being
     warned in 1955.  And then it's up to them.
     It's making a choice.
          That was the world of Broward County in
     the 1950s that Mr. Brown smoked in.  To the
     extent that there were warning signals in the
     1950s, he ignored them.
          So we move into the 1960s.  Did
     information on smoking back off?  It did not.
     It actually became far more intense.  In the
     1960s we had smoking and health developments
     again from across the Atlantic, studies in
     Britain being reported in Fort Lauderdale,
     Florida, not in the New York Times, but in the
     local paper.  We had studies from the American
     cancer -- sorry, the American Medical
     Association, Dr. Hammond's name here, telling
     people of Broward County that if you smoke
     you're running a risk.
          And in Broward County as elsewhere, you
     saw yesterday, there was anticipation about the
BROWN VOL15
1644 1964 Surgeon General's Report.  People were
     waiting for it to be issued.  And this is one
     where we didn't do ourselves justice by showing
     you this slide yesterday.  Because if you look
     at the articles themselves, and I urge you to
     do it, every one of these stories is front
     page.  Front page of the Fort Lauderdale News.
          Now, why is that a big deal?  Look at the
     dates.  All of the dates on all these were
     about six weeks after President Kennedy was
     shot.  Six weeks after a national trauma like
     that.  Now, folks on the jury who are my age
     probably remember where they were when Kennedy
     was shot.  People younger, think 911.  That's
     the kind of national trauma the assassination
     of John Kennedy was.  But yet here, only six
     weeks later, the editor of the paper thinks it
     important enough to put on the front page
     stories -- not about the Surgeon General's
     Report, those come a few days later, stories
     that it's coming.
          Now, again, I ask you to use your common
     sense.  And I think you can draw a reasonable
     inference that the reason these things were on
     the front page of the local newspaper three
BROWN VOL15
1645 times was that people were talking about it.
     This was a subject of discussion in Fort
     Lauderdale, in Broward County.  Again, beyond
     the written word, people were talking about it.
          And when the report came out, again, front
     page news.  Front page news.  And not only on
     the newspapers, the evening it was released
     Harry Reasoner had a report, there was a report
     on ABC, there was a report on NBC.  If you were
     watching television you couldn't avoid it.
     When it was reported in the newspaper it was
     reported on television.  Piped into everybody's
     home.
          A few years later the first warning label
     went on cigarette packs.  In 1966.  Was the
     warning label big news in Broward County?  You
     bet it was.  Again, discussion in the
     newspapers about the warning label, would it be
     there if people weren't talking about it, I
     suspect not.
          The label changed in 1969.  And also in
     about the late '60s you began to see public
     service announcements on television, again that
     brought the stop smoking message into people's
     homes.
BROWN VOL15
1646 Let's just take a look briefly at the two
     you saw yesterday.
          (Thereupon, the videoclip was played and
     taken down to the best of the reporter's
     ability:)
          "The moment you stop, in most cases the
     effects of smoking will begin to reverse
     themselves.  To your lungs you are nice and
     clear again."
          "Do you know what would happen if you
     stopped smoking cigarettes right now, right
     this minute?  Well, I will tell you what would
     happen.  Your lungs would immediately start to
     repair themselves.  Even if you've been smoking
     for years and years, once you stop assaulting
     your lungs, it's only a matter of time before
     they're healthy and in the pink again.  Now you
     have every reason in the world to stop smoking
     cigarettes because now you know what will
     happen if you do, and what will happen if you
     don't."
          These messages were piped into people's
     living rooms and messages like this one that
     not only told you that smoking was harmful, but
     told you the benefits of quitting and how you
BROWN VOL15
1647 could improve your health by doing it.  These
     were messages that were ignored by Roger Brown.
          In the 1970s we heard yesterday cigarette
     ads went off TV.  In the 1970s we heard that
     the warning label went into cigarette ads.
          We heard in the 1980s the warning label
     changed again, four of them.  And again, I call
     your attention to one of those labels, quitting
     smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to
     your health.
          Quitting reduces risks to your health was
     not news to the citizens of Broward County
     because its newspaper had been talking about it
     for years prior to this label.
          Nor was it a fact -- a secret to the
     people of Broward County that there was help
     available to achieve this goal if you wanted
     it.  Articles in the newspaper over a period of
     years about stop-smoking clinics being set up
     across the county.
          Now, you might have noticed that, you
     know, with the ashtray and the Larry Hagman ad
     and articles about the benefits of stopping
     smoking, this last article about the
     availability of help if you wanted it, I showed
BROWN VOL15
1648 you yesterday the 1982 Surgeon General's report
     that talked about as soon as you stop your body
     begins to repair itself to where within 15
     years you're approximately the same as a
     nonsmoker.
          In the 1980s the stress on the country as
     a whole was we want you to stop smoking and if
     you do you begin to get better.
          That was in the country as a whole and as
     you saw from the newspaper here, Broward County
     in particular.
          And for the first time in the 1980s that
     message that had been on newspapers and in
     public service ads and on TV shows worked its
     way in a very personal way into the Brown
     household.  Because it was in the 1980s, while
     Mr. Brown was ignoring all these warnings,
     Mrs. Brown and her daughter were not.
     Mr. Brown then built this wall around him.  We
     saw some of the quotes about it in Phase I
     where people dared not talk to him.  Mrs. Brown
     wouldn't talk to him about his smoking in the
     house even though she hated the smell of smoke.
          His daughter Catherine for a 10-year
     period since she learned in high school about
BROWN VOL15
1649 the risks of smoking wouldn't talk to him
     because she just didn't do that to your father,
     you didn't do that to this man.  He built this
     wall.
          But in 1984 the family finally got the
     courage, perhaps by messages like these, to
     breach that wall.  And they talked to him.  And
     they said, Roger, dad, you need to stop this.
     You're hurting yourself.  You can get better.
          And his response was as predictable as it
     was characteristic, you saw this quote before,
     "He didn't pay any attention to you, did he?
     You asked him to stop smoking but he ignored
     you, right?  Yes."
          Nothing that his family said affected
     Roger Brown.  And he ignored the family just
     like he ignored everybody else who talked to
     him during the course of his life.
          So you have all discussion about quitting
     and the question is why is quitting such a big
     deal here.  And I talked about this in opening.
     Dr. Benowitz talked about it in his testimony.
     Dr. Cummings talked about it in his testimony.
     The Surgeon General, as I showed you yesterday,
     talked about it in the 1982 report.  And since
BROWN VOL15
1650 1985 it has been on every package of cigarettes
     in the United States.  When you quit, you get
     better.  When you quit, the risk of disease
     goes down, after 15 years, to that of a
     nonsmoker.  When you quit the nicotine
     receptors in your brain go away.
          All those benefits were there for Roger
     Brown for the taking.  All of them.  Whether he
     got that message on the street, whether he got
     that message on TV, whether he got that message
     from his family in 1984, all those messages
     were there for the taking.  But he never took
     them.  If he had, according to the Surgeon
     General he might have avoided the diseases that
     killed him.  If he had not refused over and
     over and over again to do what his loved ones
     wanted him to do.
          Now, from the 1940s to the 1950s I don't
     think there's any dispute Mr. Brown on this
     issue was obstinate.  He ignored the warning
     messages around him, including those from whom
     he held dearest.
          And when you sift through the evidence,
     the evidence, not the speculation, the
     evidence, you're going to find, whether it's in
BROWN VOL15
1651 identifying the legal cause of Mr. Brown's
     injuries, or assigning responsibility for them,
     the central figure in all this, there is no
     avoiding the central figure in all of this is
     Roger Brown.
          He taught his children to accept personal
     responsibility for their actions.  Now it's
     time for Roger Brown to accept personal
     responsibility for his actions.
          Thank you for your time.  Thank you for
     your service.  Thank you.
