MR. REILLY: Well, good afternoon everyone.
THE JURY: Good afternoon.
MR. REILLY: Did everybody have a good lunch.
THE JURY: Yes.
MR. REILLY: Now, I would like to begin my closing argument by also thanking you for your service as jurors. I want to do it on behalf of Lori Schultz, myself, Philip Morris, and, frankly,
on behalf of everybody involved in this lawsuit, because we have asked you to leave your homes, you jobs, your families, and to come here and spend, what, two and-a-half weeks with us. Right? That's a long time.
And at the very beginning of this lawsuit I said your service is what makes our civil justice system work. Right? Of course, it requires that you pay very close attention to the evidence as it comes in in the case, and you did just that. It's exactly what we as parties of the lawsuit hope that you will do. You did it. Thank you very much.
I want to remind you of one other duty that you're going to hear from instructions that I think you have yet to receive. You're going to get a few more instructions from Judge Bowden.
One of them is that you have to resolve this dispute without any consideration of sympathy or an other emotion. And I think it would be reasonable for folks to be impressed, for example, by the accomplishments of the Brown family. I think that's very reasonable. But in considering the issues of this case it's your obligation as jurors to set those kinds of things aside and focus just on the issues that we have, the evidence that you receive.
And I know you will all do that.
Now, when this case began I said to you -- and this time you're going to see that I use a lot of boards instead of the overhead. That overhead just drives me crazy. I think I'm too old for it. So if anybody can't see the boards just let me know.
But I showed you a slide then that said although you won't see this on the verdict form what this lawsuit is really about is two words, control and responsibility.
Who was in control of Mr. Brown's decisions regarding how he lived his life, and in particular of course what decisions he was going to make regarding smoking, whether he was going to begin to smoke, continue to smoke, quit smoking, reduce his smoking. Who was in control of that, and whether o not anybody else was in control of it, including Philip Morris, of course.
Then I said, when you hear all the evidence in the case and you learn all about how Mr. Brown live' his life, then you'll be able to answer the second word on this board, and that is responsibility.
Who -- and Mr. Shields' has already indicated of course Mr. Brown had responsibility for how he live' his life. But who, if anybody else, had
responsibility for how Mr. Brown lived his life, ho^ he dealt with his own body.
Now, I said you wouldn't see these two words o: the verdict form, and in fact you won't. You won't.
We actually have the verdict form that you're going to be receiving. This is the verdict form.
It's multiple pages, but you'll see that you receive instructions on the verdict form as to what you're supposed to do each step of the way. Right?
And the first question that you're going to be asked to resolve -- and it may be the only question you need to resolve -- can everybody see that on th screen; yes, no?
A JUROR: Yes.
MR. REILLY: Okay. It says: Was Rayfield Brown addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was cigarette smoking because of such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer?
Now, that's actually multiple questions all in a row all at once, isn't it? The first step, you need to put periods at various points along the way
Was Rayfield Brown addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? That's a whole question all by itself, and obviously a great deal of time in this courtroom has been spent addressing that very issu
in this case. Right?
The second part of that question is: And if so, was cigarette smoking, because of such addiction, a legal cause of his lung cancer?
So Mr. Shields and Mr. Kalil and Mrs. Brown have the burden of proving not only that Mr. Brown was addicted, but also that cigarette smoking, because of such addiction, was the legal cause of his lung cancer. Those are the twin burdens really of this very first question.
So now you've been here. Let's deal with the first part, was Mr. Brown actually addicted? And a great deal of time has been spent addressing that issue in this case.
Let's just review briefly what the smoking history was. And there is, I think, little question that no one knows when Mr. Brown smoked his first cigarette, because no one was there. Did he start smoking as a teenager? I think that's pretty clear. How old was he exactly? We don't know. We know he's a year older than Kaiser Thomas. We know thai Kaiser Thomas started -- I can't remember whether h was 13, 14, or 15. Somewhere in that timeframe. S( was Mr. Brown 14, 15 or 16? If he was born in 193( that would put him beginning smoking sometime in
'51, '52, or '53. Right?
I did all that math before I got here, otherwise I wouldn't know.
All right. So Mr. Brown begins smoking. At least when Kaiser meets him he's smoking, buying cigarettes at four cigarettes for a nickel, getting those cigarettes and smoking about one a day.
Now, how long does that continue? We don't know exactly, but at some point, maybe he's a junior, maybe he's a senior, we don't know exactly when, he begins to buy cigarettes by the pack, and he's smoking, a pack is lasting him 3 or 4 days.
Right? So is he smoking 4 or 5 or 6 cigarettes a day? Somewhere in that neighborhood.
Now, after he gets out of high school he joins the military, and presumably -- although no one is really there with him in the military, we don't know how much he's smoking, but let's assume he's smoking more than 3 or 4 or 5 cigarettes a day. And it's really -- at this point it really doesn't much matter.
Nobody, nobody is calculating or counting how many cigarettes Mr. Brown is smoking really ever in his life. Never. No one can give an accurate history of how many cigarettes Mr. Brown was smokin
at any point in his life.
What do we have that is documented, really documented, that shows how many cigarettes he ever smoked? Well, you're going to get the medical records. I guess they're not up here, but you'll get them in the jury room, and you're going to see some medical records towards the end of his life,
'93, '94, '95, where some physicians are writing their summaries of their care and the treatment of him, and they're going to talk about a pack a day.
You're going to see -- there will be two forms, one from June of 1995 and one from July 1995, withi a day or two of his death. Now, these are preanesthesia records, in which the first one in June Mr. Brown himself signs it, presumably he filled it out, and it actually says what his recollection is as to his -- his smoking, and he says he was a half-a-pack-a-day smoker. There's a later one, as I said 2 or 3 days before he dies, and actually it has his name on it, but I believe you'll see the initials from Mrs. Brown, obviously he wasn't in any condition to be filling out a preanesthesia record at that point, and I think it says two packs a day. But I think if you look at it, Mr. Brown himself tells you in June, about six
weeks before his death, that he was a half-pack-a-day smoker.
Does it matter for all practical purposes in this lawsuit whether he's a half-pack or a pack-a-day smoker? No, not really. Not really.
How long does he smoke regularly? One thing w know is that he was never viewed by anybody as a chainsmoker, or something of that nature.
Did he smoke before 19— before 1983 or thereabouts? You know, did he smoke at whatever kind of activities he was engaged in? Sure. There was no limitation on that. His family hadn't asked for a limitation on that, and he hadn't created a limitation on that.
But you know as of about 1983 when his daughte has this -- actually I think she has probably several conversations. Based on what she's receiving in her educational classes at school she probably had several conversations with him whereii she says, hey, Dad, I'm learning in school -- she's in grade school, and she says, I'm learning at school that cigarette smoking comes with a risk of cancer. I don't want you to get cancer. Please don't smoke.
And we know as of that date, whenever it is,
she says, you know what, from 1983 on I never have recollection of ever seeing my father smoke. Ever. And that's rather vivid.
No one came in and disputed it. Mrs. Brown took the stand, and she didn't say, oh, my daughter is wrong, he was smoking in front of my daughter al the time. No one said that.
From 19 -- roughly 1983 on, for a dozen years, for the remainder of his life Mr. Brown never smoke in front of his daughter. Not once.
From 198- -- Mr. Shields took issue with 1987. Ladies and gentlemen, I don't care whether it was 1986 or 1987. Either 1986 or 1987 Mr. Brown stops smoking in front of his entire family and his closest friends, Kaiser Thomas, Kaiser's wife. He stops, and they never see him smoke again. Never see him smoke again.
How many years is that? If it's 1986, he lives until July 1995, it's 11 years -- nine years.
Sorry. I told you I was bad at math. Nine years.
If it's 1987 it's eight years. That's 365 days a year for nine years, 365 days a year for eight years.
That -- those are the facts of the smoking history. Those are undisputed. Undisputed.
All right. Now, let's stop for a minute and ask ourselves, how many physicians came here and actually described the characteristics of an addicted and a non-addicted smoker? Well, in fact, there were three. Three. And here they are. Dr. Burns, Dr. Frazier, and Dr. Rosman.
Dr. Burns. You just heard Mr. Shields talk about Dr. Burns. He's this -- he's the guru of tobacco. He's the guy that authored all those Surgeon General's reports, or reviewed them, or -or participated in them in some way.
I asked Dr. Burns to please describe for me in detail the characteristics of a non-addicted smoker, of a non-addicted smoker, and he did. And I'm goin to show you his actual testimony.
Dr. Frazier of course you saw last Friday, and Dr. Rosman you saw just yesterday.
Where is the alignment on the characteristics of the non-addicted smoker? I'm going to show you that in just a minute.
Mr. Shields criticized Dr. Rosman; said he's a nobody. He's a board certified psychiatrist with a board certification in addiction psychiatry. That is not a nobody. That is not a nobody. I'm sorry.
In fact, all three of these people agreed on a
number of things:
Not all long-time smokers are addicted. I asked all of them. Lori asked Dr. Frazier that on cross-examination. All three of them said, you know what? Not all long-time smokers are addicted. They gave different percentages of addiction using the Diagnostic & Statistical Manual, or whatever methoc and they all agreed with that.
Their percentages may vary, but it doesn't much matter, because, you know what, we're not dealing with percentages in this lawsuit, are we? We're only dealing with one smoker in this case, aren't we?
This is not a class action. This is not a case about the American public or percentages of smokers This is a case about one person and one person's smoking history. That's all. That's it.
Each one of them acknowledge that, hey, just as a -- you know, just a point, that you could be a two-pack-a-day smoker for 20 years and not be addicted. You know, that's an arbitrary number, but I just thought, you know what, this is a good way of identifying for you guys that just because somebody smokes a lot of cigarettes over a long period of time does not mean they're addicted. You have to
look deeper than that.
And all three of them agreed, whatever name you want to use on it, occasional, social, situational smoker, they are not addicted. Not addicted. Never have been. Are not addicted. And they all agreed.
Now let's talk a little bit more about Mr. Brown's smoking.
Did Mr. Brown enjoy smoking? You know he did. Everyone that addressed that issue agreed that Mr. Brown enjoyed smoking. He enjoyed inhaling. H enjoyed -- Mrs. Brown said her husband found smokin relaxed him. Jennifer Brown said he liked to smoke in social situations. Kaiser Thomas, through his video, and Barbara Brooks through Dr. Rosman describing her testimony from her deposition, they all said that Mr. Brown enjoyed smoking. Every one of them. Barbara Brooks said he loved his cigarettes.
I got the impression listening to Mr. Shields talk about Mr. Brown's smoking history that he was virtually conceding that after 1983, or thereabouts, he was not addicted. Remember he said, let's look at the important period of time. The important period of time is when he's going to get his lung cancer.
There isn't a doctor who came here and told you what smoking caused him to get his lung cancer. No doctor said if he smokes -- that the cigarettes he smoked all throughout his life didn't matter. No doctor came and told us that.
So what I had Dr. Rosman do was to walk throug all aspects of his entire smoking history. And you saw this same board yesterday. Dr. Rosman walked you through it. He said, look, when I'm evaluating I want to know the whole history of the patient. I don't want to know just the last few years of his history, I want to know the whole history of the patient. When I know the whole history -- I mean, I can't imagine a physician that would say, gosh, I don't want the whole information. But Dr. Rosman said let's look at the whole picture of the smoker, because there are certain red flags, there are certain characteristics that are signals to him.
So let's look at some things that I ordinarily identify as being connected with or indicative of an addicted smoker, because we don't have a whole lot of information about Mr. Brown's ability or desire to control smoking, because he never does anything until Jennifer comes along in 1983 about smoking. He just smokes. He smokes as much as he wants
whenever he wants. He makes no effort at quitting smoking, no effort at reducing his smoking, until Jennifer has the conversation with him.
So here is what Dr. Rosman looked at and said, these are flags for me. Is he the kind of guy that, you know, couldn't sit through a whole movie? Now I realize he went to the movies, sometimes went to drive-ins, but could he sit through a whole movie? Yes, he could sit through a whole movie. There was no question about that. Could he sit through a whole church service, no matter how long it was? Yes, he could.
When he went to a non-smoker's home, you know somebody that said, you know what, I don't like you smoking in my house, did he leave, did he say, no, I can't go over to their house because they don't allow smoking over there? No.
If he was in a non-smoker's car and they said, gosh, I don't like you smoking in my car, Mr. Brown would he not ride with that person? No. He just wouldn't smoke in their car.
This is not disputed.
Some smokers smoke in bed. Some smokers get i in the middle of the night to smoke. Some smokers are described as chainsmokers. You know, you see
them, they never have a cigarette out of their hand. Right? They never have a cigarette out of their hand. They might get burned by it, but they never have a cigarette out of their hand. Signs, indications of people who are addicted. Right?
Signs of someone who is addicted. They struggle with their smoking. They try to stop, they can't stop. They try to stop, they can't stop.
They struggle with their smoking. There was no indication of that by Mr. Brown.
And now let's go to 1983. Same board as Dr. Rosman, and this isn't disputed. There's nothing on this board that's disputed. Not one thing.
As of approximately 1983 Jennifer said, I never saw my dad smoke again. I thought he quit. I never saw my dad smoke again.
That is a major alteration, ladies and gentlemen, in someone's smoking behavior. Could Mr. Brown control his smoking? Can you imagine somebody who -- every morning up until this point it time Mr. Brown liked to get up and have a cup of coffee and smoke a cigarette. We learned that he wasn't much of a breakfast eater, so he liked to get up in the morning and smoke a cigarette with his coffee. Now, no more. If Jennifer is in the
kitchen where they have breakfast, wherever they have breakfast, no more smoking.
Mr. Brown picks Jennifer up at school and takes her to her activities. What did we learn about her. We learned that she took piano, she played basketball. Piano, basketball, Jack-n-Jill. There were a couple other things. No smoking. No smokii in the car, no smoking at the event.
How do we know no smoking at the event? Because she said, I never even smelled smoke on my dad. Never even smelled smoke on my dad. No sm< in the car.
When they go home what happens? Now, this is man who -- and this is -- and let me stop right here and say this is no criticism of Mr. Brown. None whatsoever. When he got home he liked to have -after a day's work he liked to have a cold beer or two from the -- what did they call it -- the beermeister in the den. There is absolutely nothing wrong with that.
But up to this moment in time in 1983 he would do that, but now if Jennifer is home, no smoking.
No smoking. Out on the back patio, no smoking if Jennifer is home.
Now, Mrs. Brown said, oh, he continued to smok
on the third story of their house in the bedroom.
May well have. But wherever Jennifer is, no smoking. Dinner table, no smoking. After dinner TV, Jennifer there, no smoking. Weekends, Jennifer home, no smoking. Vacation, Jennifer home, no smoking. No debate, no dispute.
Dr. Rosman said, you know what, that is a clear indication of someone who is able to control their smoking.
And Mr. Shields just put up the 2010 Surgeon General's short list of things to look for, and the number 2 item on -- the number 1 item was compulsi use. The number 2 item was uncontrolled smoking behavior; right? Uncontrolled. Does Mr. Brown demonstrate control, or is he the kind of person that has to have a cigarette?
Let's go to -- and how many years does this go on? If this is 1983, we're going to go from 1983 to 1995. That's a dozen years. 365 days a year for a dozen years. That is something around 3000 days. That's a lot of control.
As of 19- -- I'll put '86. That's all right.
1986.	October 1986. That's fine. October of 1986. That just makes it another year. Right? That makes it nine years instead of eight that Mr. Brown, after
this event, this event in '86 or '87 where he has something wrong with his throat and the doctor says you ought to quit, he stopped smoking on any occasion when any family is around ever again -- and Kaiser Thomas -- ever again.
So Dr. Rosman took you through this list. No smoking around his wife, children, or best friend.
No smoking at the house in the mornings with coffee. Never again. Never again. No smoking at the house weekdays, afternoons, evenings, after he comes home from work. No smoking if he drives anywhere with his family. No smoking with beer in the den. No smoking all day on weekends with the family and Kaiser. No smoking all day on holidays with family, or if he's with Kaiser. No smoking in the car with family or Kaiser.
Granted, there is a 2- or 3-day exception in 1988 with his son Michael. But guess what happens when he gets -- when the car door opens here in Jacksonville no smoking with his family.
No smoking on cruises. You remember they went on two cruises, one in 1991 and one in 1994. However long a cruise is, there is -- this was testimony from Kaiser Thomas. The Thomases and tl Browns were on a cruise. No smoking.
No smoking with Kaiser at bars and during golf. He played golf with Kaiser, he went to bars with Kaiser, went to nightclubs with Kaiser. Drinking.
No smoking with drinking.
Now, Dr. David Burns was not given the medical records or the depositions in this case. But let's see, based on his testimony, where he would have come out about whether Mr. Brown fit the category o: an addicted smoker or a nonaddicted smoker.
This is his trial transcript, Page 841, Lines 13 through 19.
The court reporter takes down every word that's spoken. Everything I'm saying right now she's taking down and it will be put in a booklet, and every sentence, every line will have a page and line number given to it. So this is right out of the trial transcript.
Dr. Burns was testifying and he said:
Certainly someone who is free to smoke whenever th want and wherever they want, I mean, if he smokes four cigarettes on Monday and doesn't smoke again until Thursday, and smokes five cigarettes -- and look at these numbers, four cigarettes, five cigarettes on Thursday, then smokes another four or five on Sunday, that individual pattern of smoking
wouldn't meet my criteria of someone who was seekii nicotine based on addiction.
Mr. Shields says people don't smoke except for addiction? Here is his own expert, Dr. Burns, the guru, saying this is somebody who smokes not based on -- wouldn't meet my criteria for someone who is seeking nicotine based on addiction.
Of course people smoke without being addicted. Not to say they're not smoking because they enjoy the effects of the nicotine, but they're not smoking because of an addiction based on nicotine. And this is his expert, not mine.
I said to Dr. Burns -- trial transcript. My question was: It's your opinion that people who are smoking five cigarettes or less a day, or five every day, generally speaking, aren't addicted, are they?
Now, Dr. Burns didn't give any one-sentence answer, but read the whole answer: There is considerable scientific controversy about that. As we have discussed in the past, it is my own belief, my own belief that the amount of nicotine that people are ingesting, and commonly the pattern of smoking for folks who smoke less than five cigarettes a day doesn't suggest that they are seeking nicotine.
Five cigarettes a day. Let's look at Mr. Brown's smoking behavior after 1983 and after 1987.
1987.	Yeah, he's smoking, because we know that in 1988 to 1992 he meets with Sammy Jones five or six -- on average five or six times a month, and they go have lunch, and after lunch they have a cigarette or two.
Okay. Sammy says, I'm not counting. Of course they don't know how many cigarettes he was smoking Who's counting. But how many cigarettes do you ha1 after lunch before you have to go back to work?
And then -- but you've already seen five cigarettes on Monday, five cigarettes on Wednesday, five cigarettes on Saturday. That's not an addictive pattern. Here's five cigarettes every day, or less than five cigarettes every day. That's not an addictive pattern.
Here is Dr. Burns again. Trial transcript.
He's talking about these occasional smokers, these social smokers, these situational smokers, whatever label you want to put on them. He says: They may be seeking nicotine because it has a stimulus effect, and that's what they're seeking when they have four or five cigarettes, you know, sitting at
home with friends, or sitting at home with someone some other justification, but they aren't then translating that into the next circumstance -- and this is key -- I need another cigarette, and then they need another cigarette an hour later, and then they need another cigarette an hour later.
That's their expert, ladies and gentlemen, describing an addicted smoker's behavior. I'll have a cigarette now, I'll need a cigarette an hour later, I'll need another one an hour later, I'll need another one an hour later.
You don't leave your personal experiences at the door, or your common sense. But this is Mr. Brown -- I'm sorry -- this is -- this is the plaintiffs expert, the guy who writes all the Surgeon General's reports, describing for you who i an addicted smoker. I have to have one an hour later, and then they need another cigarette an hour later.
Think about Mr. Brown from 1983 on, from 198 on. Is he demonstrating that he has to have another cigarette an hour later and an hour later and an hour later? Absolutely not.
Mr. Shields talks about relapse. Relapse. I asked Dr. Burns, what is relapse? At what level
does a smoker return to if they truly relapse.
Right? And so this is what he said. Again this is -- I'm going to have to -- I apologize, I ran out of space.
This is what Dr. Burns said about relapse. And I asked him: And to what level do they resume smoking. This is a smoker who is addicted, they've quit, and now they're going to relapse.
At whatever level they resume smoking, usually they start smoking one or two cigarettes within their relapse, and then they are very rapidly, within several days, way back to their previous smoking behavior.
Previous smoking behavior. Is that what Mr. Brown did? Ask yourselves is he describing Mr. Brown, and is this a relapse for Mr. Brown, or is Mr. Brown doing exactly what Dr. Burns just described, somebody who has a couple cigarettes today when he's with Sammy Jones, a couple of cigarettes maybe later in the week if he meets with Sammy Jones again? Maybe he goes and plays golf a goes to the 19th hole with Sammy Jones, and he drinks with Sammy Jones, but he doesn't drink with Kaiser Thomas.
Just to clear up any question as to whether or
not -- I haven't even talked about Dr. Rosman yet. Right? Who am I talking about here? This isn't even my expert. This is their expert.
But now I'm going -- the idea that Mr. Brown went from being an addicted smoker to a nonaddicte smoker, that wasn't accepted by any physician who came here.
Here is their expert, Dr. Frazier. So once an addict, always an addict is your opinion? Yes, ma'am. That's what she said to Lori Schultz. Once an addict, always an addict.
No physician came here. Here is Dr. Rosman.
He said: You don't go from being a regular addicted smoker to being a chipper. If you can reduce your smoking or change your behavior that radically and sustain it over a number of years that means you were never addicted in the first place.
This is right out of the trial testimony. No debate.
So please don't be confused by the idea that Mr. Brown -- that somebody came here and said Mr. Brown was addicted in the 50's, 60's, and 70's, and then all of a sudden in the 80's, when he controls his smoking behavior, the way that Dr. Burns says you're not addicted, that all of a sudden
he overcame his addiction and became a chipper, because no physician has supported that concept. No physician.
Dr. Rosman took you through the Diagnostic & Statistical Manual, and Mr. Shields criticizes the DSM, but, frankly, ladies and gentlemen, it's the very same test that his expert, Dr. Frazier, used.
They both walked through the same criteria.
I don't want to take the time to walk through every detail of it, but just look at some of these features.
Their expert, as well as Dr. Rosman -- Dr.
Frazier and Dr. Rosman both agreed, for example, that when Mr. Brown reduced his smoking, when he reduced his smoking he had no withdrawal symptoms any significance whatsoever.
What are the withdrawal symptoms? Depression, insomnia, irritability, frustration or anger, anxiety, difficulty concentrating, restlessness.
Nobody measures your heart rate. Increased appetite or weight gain.
The folks that created the DSM criteria say, you know what, you need to have four of these in a 24-hour period.
But you saw the description. Jennifer Brown
said, I never saw a change in my dad. I never saw change in my dad. And she lived with -- she lived with him until his death.
I mean, this is not -- these are not the recollections only of someone who is in grade school. This is all the way through. Right? All the way through.
And Dr. Frazier admitted he doesn't meet this criteria. She said, well, I think he meets this criteria, the same or closely related substance is taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.
Ladies and gentlemen, 1983 and 1987 he's less and less and less and less. That's not relieving withdrawal symptoms of somebody who needs a cigarette every hour after every hour after every hour like Dr. Burns talks about.
Substance is often taken in larger amounts over a longer period of time than intended.
We know that Mr. Brown enjoyed smoking.
Mr. Brown is now -- '83, '87 -- '86, '87, he's now reducing, reducing, reducing something he enjoyed doing. Right?
Persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control the substance.
My goodness. If anybody controlled his
substance use, that is Mr. Brown. Does he have to quit to demonstrate control? Absolutely not.
The whole DSM, the 2010 Surgeon General, it's uncontrolled smoking. It doesn't require you quit.
It's all about control. Right?
A great deal of time spent in activities necessary to obtain the substance, to use the substance, or recover from its effects.
That's usually referred to as a chainsmoker.
You know, someone who has always got that cigaretl in their hands. Not Mr. Brown. As a matter of fact, what's he doing? He's taking less and less and less time.
How about: Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or reduced because of substance use.
Absolute opposite for him. His daughter doesn't want to see him smoke. Boom, he doesn't smoke. His family doesn't want to see him smoke. Boom, he doesn't smoke.
This last one: Substance use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurring physical or physiological problem -- and this is key here -- that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by the substance.
We know that that event in 1986 or '87, we've been told repeatedly that is not the result of his smoking. Repeatedly.
Now, how about -- how about -- so of course he didn't do that in connection with that event. No question about it.
So then how about the '93 diagnosis with lung cancer, or the recurrence in 1995? You know what? I frankly don't know whether we truly know that he continued to smoke in that timeframe.
Look at the medical records and decide for yourself. If he never smokes around his family does he have virtually any time to be smoking with them not around? You know, he's going to go through surgery, he going to go through the treatments, he's going to go -- and Sammy Jones isn't around anymor He quit seeing him in 1992. That's what Sammy Jon said. 1988 to 1992.
So do we really know whether or not Mr. Brown actually even smoked any cigarettes after his diagnosis?
But even if he did, Dr. Rosman explained to you that, you know, sometimes people say I understand where I am, and he's going to continue to smoke a little bit.
All right. So let me stop right there. That's the evidence that we have. And what I just showed you right here about his smoking behavior all those years is not in dispute. Nobody came here and said -- Mrs. Brown didn't say, yes, I saw my husband smoke. Yes, she may well have smelled smoke on him or she may have tasted smoke on his mouth when she kissed him when he came home. We know that he is smoking with Sammy Jones.
So is that a surprise? That is no surprise.
We know that he is occasionally, maybe once or mayb twice a week. That wouldn't surprise anybody, I don't think, that if once or twice a week when he came home she either tasted or smelled smoke on Mr. Jones(sic) from 1988 to 1992.
But remember what Dr. Burns just said. You can smoke four or five cigarettes today or Wednesday or Saturday, you're not addicted. You can smoke less than five cigarettes every day and you're not an addicted smoker. You're not. And if you are not addicted now, you weren't addicted before.
Just imagine, just the concept of it, that the day before Jennifer has this conversation with him, Jennifer Brown has this conversation with him, the day before that he was addicted, but the day he
stopped in front of her forever he stopped being addicted. Or he was addicted up to the point in time he went to the hospital with his throat problem, and then the next day he's not addicted. That defies common sense.
All right. So the way this question is structured, if you find that Mr. Brown, based on the criteria of Dr. Burns, the criteria of the Diagnostic & Statistical Manual, and the agreemenl between Dr. Burns and Dr. Rosman about what an addicted smoker looks like then you can stop right here. If your answer is no right there, he was not addicted, just check no right there and you're done.
If you look at all of this and you say, gosh, no, I don't see it like Dr. Burns, I don't see it like Dr. Rosman and Dr. Burns, I think he was addicted, then you have to figure out, well, just how strong was his addiction. In light of his ability to control like this you still have to find that: And if so was cigarette smoking, because of that addiction, a legal cause of his lung cancer.
Was smoking because of that addiction a legal caus of his lung cancer? You have to figure out of the strength of that addiction in light of what kind of control he can have, or he demonstrates.
And if you determine that he isn't continuing to smoke because of addiction, but because of all the enjoyment that everybody agreed he had, then yo still answer the question no.
And by the instructions on this verdict form, if your answer to this question is no, then you proceed no further, and sign this document, and your work is done.
Now, I realize after two and-a-half -- almost two and-a-half weeks that may seem anticlimactic, but that's exactly what you guys are here for, to resolve this civil dispute, to take the evidence in this case and answer the questions without passion. Without sympathy, without any emotion whatsoever. Just look at the evidence and the law that Judge Bowden gives you and answer these questions. That your job. That's your sworn oath in this case.
All right. Now, because I can't be sure, if you answer that question yes then you have to go on an answer Questions 2, 3, 4, 5 -- 4 and 5. And they all relate to the behavior of Philip Morris, negligence, defective product, concealment, or omission of material fact, that's fraud, and then conspiracy to conceal, or an agreement to conceal or omit a material fact.
They all require that the conduct of Philip Morris have some -- be a legal cause, a legal cause of Mr. Brown's -- oh, by the way, before I leave that first question let me mention a couple of other things. I'm sorry that I...
When we talk about addiction and the strength of the addiction, could Mr. Brown have quit smokinj You know what? We asked everybody that question Very quickly.
Here's Dr. Burns: Nothing about addiction that prevents people from quitting, deciding to quit.
All addictions can be broken. All addictions have people being successful in breaking the addiction, and nicotine is no different. That's Dr. Burns.
Dr. Frazier: You testified earlier that both addicted and nonaddicted smokers can quit smoking right? That's correct.
Here is Dr. Rosman: Did Mr. Brown always hav the ability if he had been sufficiently personally motivated, not from a request by a doctor, or his wife, or his children, that he wanted to quit smoking, with this level of this behavior was Mr. Brown capable of quitting smoking if he truly wanted to quit?
Answer. With the level of control he
exhibited, absolutely.
So that goes into what I was just describing as you have to decide what was the strength of the addiction. Was it so strong that it compelled him to go on, and not the enjoyment he got from smoking
All right. Each of those questions, 2, 3, 4 and 5, all require that Philip Morris be -- or the conduct of Philip Morris be a legal cause, legal cause, of Mr. Brown's lung cancer and death.
Now, I will tell you that Judge Bowden said that these things are written in plain language. No way.
You're going to see a instruction on legal cause. Law students study for three years to try to understand legal cause. It's hard. But I hope that this little background helps you get a sense of what the requirement of legal cause is; and that is there has to be a direct connection between whatever it is they're complaining about Philip Morris having done It has to have had a substantial impact on Mr. Brown's, in this case of course, his decisions regarding smoking.
How substantial? Well, you're going to see in the instruction that talks about legal cause it says that it has to have been what we call a but for
clause. So important that if Philip Morris hadn't done it that he wouldn't have gotten -- that he wouldn't have smoked, and he wouldn't have gotten lung cancer, and he wouldn't have died. That's how important. That's what makes it a legal cause.
Okay. So now let's see what the evidence was regarding Philip Morris and Mr. Brown, because again this is not a class action. This is a lawsuit about one gentleman and one gentleman's smoking only. On gentleman's decisions about whether he will or won't smoke. Just one.
What do we know? We know that you heard from every member of the Brown family, and you heard fro his very best friend, Kaiser Thomas. You heard from another friend, work associate of his, Sammy Jones.
Nobody said that Mr. Brown was unaware of the health risks of smoking. No one. Nobody said Mr. Brown was ever confused, no one, about the health risks of smoking. Nobody said Mr. Brown didn't know the risks that he was taking when he smoked. No one came here and said it.
You've heard from the whole family. The whole family. Nobody came here and said Mr. Brown even heard or saw or read a single statement by Philip Morris or any other cigarette company.
You know what? Mr. Shields gets to get back up after I sit down. He can show trial transcript just like I am. He can show a statement by Mrs. Brown ii which she said that he said, that Mr. Brown said that he was fooled, or unaware, or confused. But can you imagine that in this family? Can you imagine it in this family really?
Let's take a quick walk -- I am not going to -I'm very sensitive to your time. I know I've already taken 45 minutes or so, but I want to take a quick walk just through -- I told you in my opening statement that I was confident that the evidence was going to turn out exactly what I told you it would be, and I said I'm going to use the same demonstratives, the same board. This was on the screen, but now I've got it on a board, same thing, this is what the evidence is going to be, and it is.
I'm not going to walk through this in tremendous detail like I did at the opening, but you know that from the very first moments that Mr. Brow ever smoked a cigarette, whenever that was, he was already being told by his mother and his aunt, and by the time he meets Kaiser Thomas, by Kaiser's mor don't smoke, smoking is bad for you.
Now, if they start in the early 50's -- you're
instructed by the court if they start in the early 50's there is no conspiracy of any kind going on until the end of 1953. And if he is starting in the 50's timeframe, look, this is -- this is their expert, Dr. Proctor -- remember Dr. Proctor, the gu; from Palo Alto, from Stanford -- I asked him: Starting in the 1950 timeframe there begins a literal avalanche of information being communicate to the American public about the scientific advance linking smoking with lung cancer; correct?
And he said: The figurative avalanche -- he didn't like my literal, he wanted to use figurative -- the figurative avalanche is actually the opposite of literal, but I get your point. I get your point.
That's his expert. Mr. Shields said I wouldn't get up here and talk to you at all about this issue.
I am getting up and talking to you about this issue.
He has to show that what Philip Morris said or did, or failed to say or do actually substantially impact -- in direct connection with Mr. Brown, substantially impacted Mr. Brown to the point that he would have made a different decision about his smoking than he did.
Ladies and gentlemen, that is the same as
saying that there was some point in time when Mr. Brown was waiting to hear from Philip Morris to make a decision.
Now, you get to use your own personal experience and you get to use your own common sens Does it make any sense that Mr. Brown was waiting tc hear from a cigarette manufacturer about making decisions, when based on his own expert, Dr.
Proctor, there is a literal avalanche of information coming out about the health risks of smoking?
And did anybody -- again, did anybody come here and say -- I've got it behind here. Did anybody say -- did anybody come here and say that Mr. Brown was waiting to hear from Philip Morris to make a decision about smoking? No one came here and said that. Who would have said that under this situation, really and truly?
You know about all -- all of the coverage in the newspapers, magazines, television, radio, about all the advances in medical science that are occurring in the 50's, the avalanche that Dr.
Proctor talked about.
Well, is there any -- we know that Mr. Brown loved to read the paper, he loved to get magazines. Kaiser Thomas told you he went to their house, they
were filled with that stuff.
You know from Dr. Goldberg that he was provided by plaintiffs counsel in another case with a CD of hundreds of articles from -- he called it the Jacksonville Courier. Well, there is no Jacksonville Courier. Anybody living here knows we don't have a paper called the Jacksonville Courier, but we do have one called the Florida Times-Union. Right?
So of course there are hundreds of articles that appeared in the Florida Times-Union addressing the issue of smoking and health. In fact, we have put in evidence not hundreds, but just as examples we have put in evidence -- and you can look through, if you choose to -- articles from the 50's, the 60's, the 70's, all about smoking and health.
Was there an avalanche right here in Jacksonville? Of course. Jacksonville wasn't some backwater where nothing filtered in.
Life Magazine, Time Magazine, Newsweek, U.S. News and World Report, three channels, ABC, CBS, an NBC. Of course there was coverage.
Mr. Thomas told us that were they being told from their very earliest cigarettes not just that it was bad for you? Mr. Shields said just that it was
bad for you. No, no, no, no, no. Kaiser Thomas told you -- here is his exact testimony. Exact testimony: I think we just heard it from some of the older people around us calling them that, like, what are you boys doing with those cancer sticks.
Earliest cigarettes. Cancer sticks.
And you heard that in high school when you wer both in high school?
I would say I heard this in the old pool rooms and the concession stand when someone saw a youn kid with a cigarette between his fingers.
How about addiction? Were these guys hearing that smoking was addicting?
Did any of those coaches ever tell you that cigarettes were addictive?
The coaches didn't, but other than that, we have heard it from other people.
When you were kids?
Right. Right.
This is their witness, Kaiser Thomas. From their very earliest cigarettes they were being told these are cancer sticks and they're addictive.
Now, this is not a class action and this is not a survey of what percentage of the population in the United States was paying attention to the
information that was coming out. This is one lawsuit about one person, and that's Mr. Brown, Rayfield Brown's personal experiences, personal smoking decisions.
Well, here is Dr. Goldberg. He acknowledged -if you want a survey, he acknowledged that by January 1954 the polls indicated that 83 percent of the Americans, American population, had heard abo smoking may be a cause of lung cancer. Right? Ani he said, I do know that they heard. And the operating word is heard.
Somehow they got that message; right? That's January of 1954? Right.
Why do you think the moms were telling them don't smoke? The moms were bright ladies too. An of course the coaches told them don't smoke.
Let me get back to my timeline here.
Television. I have one short clip from the 50's for you. Actually I guess it's going to appear on your monitors. This is going to be from -- this is a several-hour long program that was on television. Just an example of the kind of television coverage that was occurring in the 50's on this topic of smoking and health, smoking and lung cancer. The idea that Mr. Brown is going to
wait, anxiously wait to know where Philip Morris stands on this issue is, quite frankly, not credible.
But if we can just see that.
(The video clip in its present quality was played for the jury and interpreted and translated by the reporter to the best of her ability as follows.)
This is See It Now. Produced by the partnership of Friendly & Morrow. Tonight the first of two reports on cigarettes and lung cancer.
In 1952 Drs. Hammond and Horn of the American Cancer Society began an extended study of the smoking habits of American men. Here is Dr. Hammoi reporting on the results of the first two years.
It is now established in my opinion beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer.
In my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers, and they are being warned. What they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business.)
(Following the video clip.)
MR. REILLY: There you go. 1955. Now, this is a two-hour program. I think it was on two different
nights.
Did they interview somebody, a researcher from Philip Morris, to say what they're doing about trying to figure out what's in cigarette smoke?
Sure. I'm not going to pull a punch. Yeah, they did. No question about it. He said, we haven't found anything yet that causes us problems, the cigarette company.
But here is the head of the American Cancer Society saying the American population is being warned. They should be warned, they are being warned, and now it's up to then to decide what they're going to do.
1955 is the same year that Mr. Brown goes in the Army. He's in the Army from 1955 to 1958. We have put copies of the Stars & Stripes -- he's in Germany. There's an English-language paper providt by the Department of Defense called the Stars & Stripes. He got it. He can read it. We know he's an avid reader. It has articles in it, and it doesn't have any message from the tobacco industry. Dr. Proctor even acknowledged that.
All right. Let me just hurry through this because the avalanche gets heavier and heavier and heavier. We have an article in the paper from the
very famous Dr. Ochsner coming right here to Jacksonville for a kickoff of a school drive to tell everybody that smoking causes lung cancer.
Let's go to the 60's.
I know this is going a long time, and I apologize.
They meet in '58. They get married in 1960. Mrs. Brown is a college student. She's going to go on to become a teacher. She's going to get her master's in business education.
These are very bright people. These are very capable people. They keep abreast. You heard Jennifer say, we had discussions at the dinner table literally every night on current events. Every night.
1964 Surgeon General's report. Mr. Shields just showed you about -- I think it's like a minute and-a-half of an interview from a guy that was on the board of directors of Philip Morris, and he was on a tobacco merchants -- worked for a tobacco merchants company, organization, saying, I don't think it's been proven yet, or I don't think the industry accepts that there's anything bad in cigarettes.
But here is the Surgeon General. Look at your
monitors. Here is the Surgeon General telling the American public what to think about smoking and disease.
(The video clip in its present quality was played for the jury and interpreted by the reporter to the best of her ability as follows.)
This is a CBS news extra on smoking and health, the findings of the Surgeon General's committee. After long and exhaustive deliberations the committee has reached the overall judgment that cigarette smoke is a health hazard of sufficient importance to the United States to warrant remedial action. This overall judgment was supported by mar converging lines of evidence, as well as by data indicating that cigarette smoking is related to higher death rates in a number of disease categories.
More specifically the committee states on Page 61 of the report, and I quote, in view of the continuing and mounting evidence from many sourc it is the judgment of the committee that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from certain specific diseases, and to the overall death rate.
That was Dr. Luther Terry, the Surgeon General.
Almost from the moment cigarettes were introduced they were attacked, but the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report by the Surgeon General's committee. This in summary is what the committee says: Cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men, an data on women smokers points the same way. Cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of larynx, and probably the most important cause o chronic bronchitis. Cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases. Male smokers have much higher death rate from heart disease, although it's not proven smoking is the cause.
On the question of filters, the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but didn't exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed.
In short the committee said, if you smoke cigarettes you increase your chances of dying early The sooner you start, the more you smoke, the mor you inhale, the worse your chances are.
In this kind of a country it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. No one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it's good for him
either. The decision is his; the decision and the health that may depend on it.
This is Harry Reasoner. Goodnight.
(Following the video clip.)
MR. REILLY: There you are, ladies and gentlemen. Nine years apart.
In 1955 you saw E. Cuyler Hammond, the head of the American Cancer Society, say exactly the same thing. 1955. Here it is 1964. Harry Reasoner saying the very same thing to smokers: Make up you mind, do what you want to do, but it's your decision.
All right. 1966, the warnings go on every pack: Caution. Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health.
Is there any evidence in this case, did Mrs. Brown take the stand and say, my husband didn see the warnings, my husband didn't understand what this was all about, did she say my husband was confused? No. There is no testimony in this case like that. None.
He goes to work for the post office. 1968. On every postal truck for the month of February, or some portion of the month of February, there was a big sign on every postal truck: 100,000 doctors
have quit smoking. Maybe they know something yo don't.
Did Mr. Brown come home and say, gosh, look at all these trucks. I wonder what this is all about? There is no testimony like that in this case. None.
Let's go to the 70's. 1970. Mrs. Brown becomes a teacher. That's the same year that Florida enacted that Drug Education Act. Every school child -- Dr. Proctor told us that school kids here in the state of Florida have been taught about the health risks of smoking way back even before the 30's.
But now as of 1970 every school child is -every school has to teach every school child, regardless of the grade, grade school, junior high, and high school has to be taught about the health risks of drugs, including tobacco. Every child.
She's a new teacher.
I asked Dr. Proctor, I said, you know about that statute, don't you? He said, I think I do. I said, do you know whether or not in 1970 every school child in every grade, grade school, junior high, and high school, was obliged to receive education about drugs including tobacco? And Dr. Proctor, their expert, said, yeah, I think I heard
that.
So if you're involved with the educational process of students here in this state in the public school system you're going to know about that, aren't you?
Yes. That's correct.
Did Mrs. Brown come in and say, gosh, you know what, I didn't know about that, I never heard about that? No, she didn't say that. Of course not.
1970. The new warning goes on every pack: The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health.
Did anybody say Mr. Brown didn't see that or didn't understand it or was confused by it? No, of course not.
All ads go off television and radio in '71. In 1972 the warning goes on -- this warning goes on every ad, billboard, magazine, you name it.
What was Mr. Brown smoking? You know what? am not critical at all of Mrs. Brown not remembering what brand of cigarettes her husband smoked, having made a mistake on the early question. You know, we're asking her to go back, gosh -- 1958, '68, '78,
'88, '98 -- we're asking her to go back 50-something years and try to remember the brands that her
husband smoke.
The fact that she originally thought he smoked Camels for 30 years, I don't care. It just goes to show how hard it is to remember the brand of cigarettes.
She didn't like her husband smoking. She bought him cigarettes apparently though for some period of time. Okay. She did. She remembers having bought him Multi Filter cigarettes. Okay.
We know from Kaiser Thomas that Kaiser specifically remembers in 1972 that Mr. Brown was asking for Benson & Hedges cigarettes. Okay. I'm not disputing it. I'm not standing here saying that's wrong. They're both made by Philip Morris.
Did anybody come in here and say that Mr. Brow thought that by smoking Multi Filter cigarettes that he was reducing his risk? No one came here and sai that.
Did anybody come here and say that Mr. Brown decided that he was going to smoke Multi Filter cigarettes because of an ad for Multi Filter cigarettes? No, no one said that.
Did -- did -- did Mr. Brown choose Benson & Hedges for a reason? No. We just know that he asked Kaiser to please bring him Benson & Hedges
cigarettes. He must have liked those best. And that's what Kaiser brought him. You get to choose.
All right. This is a reference to the general statements about where he did and didn't smoke. Nothing too remarkable there.
Let's go to the 80's. And I'm not even going to go through the 90's. You guys have been very patient with me.
Around 1983, sometime leading up to this, Jennifer Brown asked him to stop smoking, so he stops in front of her. We know that. In 1985 the warnings change on the packs. And what does Mr. Brown do in response to that, if anything? Any indication that he didn't see this? No indication that he didn't see this.
We do have a little bit of information from Kaiser Thomas that he may have smoked cigars for a little tiny while, not to quit, but to reduce the number of cigarettes he was smoking. Changing cigars for cigarettes. And he said he thought he remembered sometime when he was on a boat with hi and some guy got in his chest. Mr. Thomas was goin, to put 260 pounds in his chest. Something about that, but that's about it until we get to either
1986	or 1987 when he has the experience at the
hospital. The doctor tells him to quit. And that's it.
Was there ever a moment -- well, here is -here is Jennifer Brown's quote right out of the trial transcript. This is the conversation she had with her dad: As I got into my upper elementary years I was in public school. During that time the school would bring someone from the Jacksonville Sheriffs Office to talk about drugs. I remember learning more about different kinds and what they could do, and as I got older I just would say,
Daddy, I just really don't want you to smoke. You can get cancer from them. He understood that. He understood that. He told me that.
And he told you, I understand, you're right, I shouldn't?
Yes, he did.
Was there any indication that Mr. Brown didn't know about the health risks that he was undertaking by smoking cigarettes? Here is his daughter remembering from sometime around the early 80's conversation with her dad. That's 30 years ago.
But she specifically remembers the conversation sh had with her dad, and he understood what the risk was.
This is not a lawsuit about a group of -- about some member of -- some segment of the American population. This is a lawsuit about one person's smoking behavior. And none of this testimony com( from Philip Morris. It all comes from family and friends of the Brown family.
Here is another list of things that Mr. Brown never said. He never felt he had been deceived about the risks of smoking. He never said that. No one came here and said that. He never said someone else was responsible for his smoking decisions other than himself. He never said that. He never said that he regretted smoking. He never said that he blamed Philip Morris. He never said any of those things. Never.
So when it comes to a need to prove -- and there is no burden of proof on Philip Morris, there is only a burden of proof on the plaintiff -there's an obligation to prove legal cause, legal cause, legal cause, and legal cause. For each one of those questions there is an obligation on the part of the plaintiff to prove to you that something that Philip Morris said or failed to say, something Philip Morris did, caused Mr. Brown to make the decisions that he made. And there is no evidence of
that in this case. None whatsoever.
How about that -- how about talking about the cigarettes that Philip Morris made? Well, I asked Dr. Burns about cigarettes.
I said: There isn't a cigarette that's more or less dangerous, or more or less addictive around the world, is there?
He said: That we don't know. What we do know given the current state of the science, no brand has been defined as -- no brand -- no brand in the world has been defined as more toxic than another for disease risk or addictive than another. There is biological evidence and chemical evidence to sugges that that might be possible, but it has not been determined -- demonstrated as of this date.
That's their expert.
Dr. Proctor, their expert, said: So the range of nicotine -Mr. Shields said: Well, cigarettes are designed, they're highly engineered and devised to deliver nicotine, they're designed to provide an addictive level and sustain an addictive level of addiction -- nicotine to sustain addiction in smokers; right?
I asked him: So the range of nicotine in
tobacco used in manufactured cigarettes here in country has really been virtually the same ever since cigarettes became popular in 1900 or later; right?
He said: Well, it's true, there's been a -it's true. There's been -- they -- if they -- if they don't have nicotine they tend not to sell.
And I said: And in fact it's the nature of the consumer product, whether it's cigarettes and the level of nicotine, or it's wine, or it's scotch, these all come with a fairly narrow band of whateve the substance is that makes people have a reaction to it, a physiological reaction to it; right?
He said, that's right.
Cigarettes, wine, beer, scotch, they all come within their own narrow range of what it is that consumers want, and this is true around the world.
And you heard Dr. Burns say: No cigarette around the world is any more dangerous or any mor addictive, no brand any more dangerous or addictiv than another.
All right. So what is the answer to these questions, 2, 3, 4 and 5? I would suggest to you that if you even get that far the answer to each one of those questions is no.
Two of them, 4 and 5, talk about reliance on the part of Mr. Brown on something that Philip Morris said or did. There is not one shred of evidence in this case that Mr. Brown ever even heard something from Philip Morris other than he went to an event at the armory and was handed a four-pack -a package of four cigarettes, a sample pack. That's it.
There is no evidence in this case that Mr. Brown ever said to anybody, hey, look, I'm relying on anything Philip Morris or any other cigarette ever said or failed to say about the health risks of smoking. Ever. Look for the testimony. So those questions should be answered no. And then you can see that you don't go on from there.
Now, if for some reason you find that I'm wrong, that they have actually proven that Mr. -that something that Philip Morris said or did, or failed to say or do actually made Mr. Brown make a decision for himself, actually substantively influenced him, then guess what, you have to go on and you have to apportion the responsibility between Philip Morris and Mr. Brown.
Now, Mr. Shields said when Mr. Brown gets up ii
the morning, or when he looks in the mirror sometime during the day and he's deciding whether he's going to have a cigarette or -- you know what, he said Mr. Brown isn't even in the mirror. He said all the responsibility for the decisions made by Mr. Brown ought to be on the shoulders of Philip Morris. Can you imagine that? Mr. Brown isn't even in the mirror.
You get to use your own personal experience, your own common sense in deciding whether or not w is responsible for the bodies that we are given?
Who makes our decisions as to whether we're going to have a glass of wine at the end of the day, or we're going to have a cigarette, or we're going to have three or four or five? Who makes that decision for us? The cigarette companies, the wine distiller -or the wine -- what do they do? I guess they -vineyards, we'll call them vineyards. Who makes that decision?
But for Mr. Shields, he says that Philip Morris is the only person in the mirror, or virtually the only person in the mirror. But I leave that to your sound discretion. I leave that to your sound discretion. You guys decide. I think you can figure out -- if you get this far I think you can
figure out who makes the decisions about how each person lives their life. Who makes the decisions whether we drink, or we smoke, or we -- what we ea
I realize that Dr. Goldberg described us all as going to the fast food stores, we can't stop ourselves, we're all going to become grossly obese because we just can't stop ourselves because advertising makes us go there.
He somehow escapes it and makes his burgers at home because he's a idiosyncratic anecdote. I had great difficulty knowing what that was, but he is one. Okay fine. But all the rest of us like autotons have to go find where's the beef. Right? Got go find where's the beef.
All right. If you get this far you have to assign dollar figures for damages, and, ladies and gentlemen, I am not going to talk to you about damages. I just don't do it. I won't do it. You guys are all -- you have great common sense. Every one of you came here and were selected because you have great common sense, and I think if you get this far you'll figure it out.
That leads me to -- and you can tell I'm coming to the very end. If you get to Question 8 you have to decide whether or not Philip Morris deserves to
be punished. But something you have to know that' in the instructions is you can only -- this is right out of the instructions: You may not seek to punish Philip Morris for any harms suffered by any persons other than Mrs. Brown as a result of Mr. Brown's death. You may not punish -- and you may punish Philip Morris only for those harms suffered by Mrs. Brown as a result of Mr. Brown's death which were caused by Philip Morris' punishable conduct.
Okay. This is still about Mr. Brown and his decisions. That's what it's about. That's what that instruction -- they say that the language is clear as a bell. It's not, but that's what that means. It has to be about Mr. Brown and whatever you've learned so far about any connection between the conduct of Philip Morris, good or bad. And I told you from the very beginning of my opening statement that I wasn't going to stand here and support Philip Morris' clinging too long to the notion that smoking hadn't been proven to cause lun cancer. I'm not going to do it. But this is a lawsuit about Mr. Brown. This is a lawsuit about his decisions, and nobody else.
And for this one you have to be convinced by evidence that is clear and convincing. You'll see
on the verdict form that the standard for the burden of proof here is even higher than the greater weighl of the evidence. Clear and convincing evidence differs from the greater weight of the evidence in that it is more compelling and persuasive. Clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction about the matter in issue.
That's clear and convincing. I don't know how there can be clear and convincing evidence if there is no evidence that Mr. Brown's decisions were impacted by Philip Morris, or any other cigarette manufacturer. There is no evidence in this case that Mr. Brown was waiting to hear from Philip Morris.
Mr. Shields put up a board of the things Philip Morris didn't say. There is no evidence in this case that Mr. Brown was waiting to hear any one o those things in making his decisions about whether he would or wouldn't smoke in light of the avalanche.
And you're going to see from the exhibits -they're labeled. They're labeled on a binder that say exhibits of Philip Morris. You're going to see
all these newspaper articles, magazine articles.
There are CD's in there. I don't think there's a mechanism by which you can watch CD's, but you'v seen segments of them.
All right. I'm done. I greatly appreciate your attention. I'm going to sit down.
Mr. Shields, because he has the burden of proof in this case, gets to get back up again and talk to you some more. He has another -- I think another hour that he can spend with you.
I apologize for having taken an hour and 25 minutes of your time, but it was important, and I appreciate your time.
I would just ask you to do one thing. As Mr. Brown -- as Mr. Shields catalogs criticisms of Philip Morris ask yourself where is the evidence that this connected with Mr. Brown and Mr. Brown'i decisions. That's all. Thank you very much.
