         MR. REILLY:  Thank you, Your Honor.  And I'm
    going to ask Dan Gardner to assist me with the poster boards.
         Good afternoon, guys.  You can see I've got a
    lot of boards and so I'm going to ask Dan to come
    sit here and help me manage the boards, if that's
    all right, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  That's fine, Mr. Reilly.
         MR. REILLY:  All right.  Well, good afternoon.
    I hope everybody had a good lunch.
         Let me begin my closing argument the same way I
    started my opening statement and that is by thanking
    you guys for your service.  I know -- Hassia and I
    know that we've taken you away from your
    retirements, your jobs, your normal lives, and we've
    asked you to come in here and stay because for two
    weeks now and I know that that is not just an
    inconvenience, that's actually a true sacrifice on
    your part.  So let me begin by saying, just as I
    began my opening statement, by staying thank you for
    your service.
         Second, I promised you that, in opening
    statement, that Hassia and I would use your time
    economically because we know what a sacrifice it is.
    And so you saw that we made -- presented our
    evidence in this case through our cross-examinations
    of the witnesses.  I mean, we, Hassia made a presentation at the end of our -- I read a little
    tiny bit of a deposition that was taken from Mrs.
    Brown yesterday, but other than that, we presented
    all of our evidence through our cross-examinations
    of the witnesses and the plaintiff put on its case.
         And third, I told you that I was going to be
    using the very same boards in my closing argument
    because what I put on those boards and what I
    presented to you in my opening statement was what
    the evidence was going to show especially in
    relation to Mr. Brown and Mr. Brown's history, Mr.
    Brown's story, Mr. Brown's smoking.
         And how could I say that?  I could say that
    because we had already been here.  We had already
    heard it.  And so we knew that unless people changed
    their testimony, by putting my boards together, I
    knew exactly what people were going to say.
         And sure enough, of course, Kaiser Thomas
    didn't change his testimony.  He was on videotape,
    right?  There's no change there.
         And other than Mrs. Brown altering her
    testimony a little bit -- and I told you, look, if
    anybody changes their testimony, I'm going to point
    it out to you.  And so there were a few times during
    Mrs. Brown's testimony that I had to, what we call, impeach her with her prior testimony from the
    earlier trial.  Remind her what she had already
    testified to.  And you guys saw that.  Played out
    right here in front of you.
         So I'm going to use the very same boards and I
    told in you my opening statement I will fill in the
    blanks.  I will would actually show you the true
    testimony that was given during the course of this
    trial.  And so that's exactly what I'm going to do
    right now, okay?
         I started with this board.  What are the issues
    -- you guys have to decide the issues in this case
    based on the evidence that you heard in this
    courtroom and the instructions that Judge Jay gives
    to you, has already given to you, and the final
    instructions he's going to give you after I sit down
    and after Mr. Shields has his second opportunity to
    talk to you.
         And then you've got to go back in the jury room
    and decide collectively -- each one of you is your
    own independent judge.  And you guys have to make
    your own decisions and then you have to collectively
    see if you can collectively come to conclusions on
    these two questions.
         And what are those two questions?  Can everybody see that?  Can you see that?
         So the first question is, determine the amount
    of compensatory damages and the second question is,
    under the circumstances of this case, state whether
    by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages
    are warranted against Philip Morris.
         And then in my opening statement I said, so
    let's walk through these two questions and see what
    the questions really are.  And now I'm going to not
    only remind you what the questions really are, but
    I'm going to show you exactly what the evidence was
    and what it all means.  So let's start.
         First question, determine the amount of
    compensatory damages.  And this is the same board
    that I showed you in my opening statement.
    Compensatory damages come in two types.  Economic
    damages and non-economic damages.  And in my opening
    statement I said, look, Hassia and I, on behalf of
    Philip Morris, have already stipulated to the exact
    dollar amount of the economic damages.  I told in
    you my opening statement that number was $375,277.
         And now, when you go back into the jury room to
    deliberate, you're going to get a verdict form and
    it's going to look just like that.  And on it,
    preprinted, are going to be those -- these numbers, $123,240, $137,750, and $114,287.41, total.  I guess
    I should add 41 cents.  Total, $375,277.
         So, please, I don't think you even have a
    choice anymore, please give that amount of money to
    Mrs. Brown.
         So what's left?  What's left on this first
    question?  Well, it's the value of the non-economic
    damages.  That's Mrs. Brown's loss, the emotional
    losses of Mrs. Brown, and Jennifer Brown.  And, of
    course, they have had emotional losses.  There's no
    question.  You lose a spouse, you lose a dad, you
    have emotional losses.  No debate about it.
         So the only question then is, and the Court has
    instructed you, that you are to assign a just and
    fair dollar amount.  Now, that's where the -- that's
    where your work comes in, right?  That's where your
    work comes in.
         Because that's all Judge Jay is going to tell
    you.  There is no formula for determining what that
    value is.  He doesn't give you any other guidance on
    how to determine what is a just and fair amount.
    There is no question that the Browns were a close
    family.  There's no question that Mr. and Mrs. Brown
    had a successful marriage.  There is to doubt that
    Mr. Brown was a fine dad for his daughter. There is no doubt that Mrs. Brown and her
    daughter Jennifer achieved great success in their
    professions.  No doubt about that.  Mrs. Brown rose
    to the very top of the education system here in
    Duval County and her daughter already is in early --
    probably not supposed to say her age, but in her
    early forties.  She's already risen to the same
    level as her mom.  So, yes, they've achieved a lot.
    So did Mr. Brown.  No question about it.
         I said to you in my opening statement that
    there is, of course, no amount of money that's going
    to bring back Mr. Brown.  There's no amount of money
    that will take away the loss the family's
    experienced.
         And Mr. Shields mentioned in his closing
    argument that they've put in evidence these life
    tables.  And those life tables really point out
    something that is so true for all of us in all of
    our lives.
         And what's that?  In any marriage, except in
    some extraordinary circumstance, one spouse is going
    to lose the other at some point.  In every
    parent/child situation, the natural course of events
    is the child is going to lose the parent.  That's
    the normal thing.  And that's what those tables actually point out.
         I think Mr. Shields indicated, and I believe
    that when Mr. Kalil was reading them to you, he said
    Mr. Brown had a life expectancy in 1995, it was 22
    years, slightly over that.
         Mrs. Brown is much longer and of course
    Jennifer Brown is much longer than that.  So that
    really points out the fact that this is no different
    than the normal situation in the sense that at some
    point Mrs. Brown was most likely going to lose her
    husband.  At some point Jennifer Brown was most
    likely going to lose her dad.
         But, so what you guys have to do is figure out,
    okay, that time frame, because of his death in 1995,
    that extra time, was abbreviated.  So you guys have
    to figure out what's the just and fair way to
    calculate it.
         And each of you -- you may have -- each one of
    you may have a different conclusion as to that.  Mr.
    Shields came up with a dollar figure for Mrs. Brown
    of 7 and a half million dollars.  That's a ton of
    money, obviously.  Ton of money.  And for Jennifer
    Brown, 5 million dollars.  Another ton of money.
         If you stop and think about it, if the average
    family in Florida earns $50 a year, that's 150 years of the average income in Florida.  For Jennifer --
    that's for Mrs. Brown.  For Jennifer it's something
    like --
         MR. SHIELDS:  Your Honor, I object.  The
    question here, of course, is the loss, not comparing
    it to what someone else makes.  That's not the
    measure of damages.  Inappropriate comparison.
         THE COURT:  I will sustain as to the average
    family.  I don't know that we've heard that in this
    courtroom.  The --
         MR. REILLY:  I'll do it differently, Your
    Honor.
         THE COURT:  The multiplication, the Court will
    allow, Mr. Reilly.
         MR. REILLY:  I'll just withdraw it.
         All right.  $50,000 a year.  Significant sum of
    money.  7 and a half million dollars is $50,000 a
    year for 150 years.  $500, (SIC) that's 100 years.
    These are enormous sums of money.
         So -- and keep in mind that the purpose of
    compensatory damages is not to punish Philip Morris.
    It's to compensate Mrs. Brown and Jennifer Brown.
    That's what it's here for.
         And you guys have to decide, what is a just and
    fair amount?  We know you're already giving Mrs. Brown $375,000 so I'm just going to suggest to you
    that this is also a very large sum of money.  But
    round it up to a million dollars.  Round it up to --
    I know that's a big number.  But fair and just, you
    guys decide.  For Jennifer Brown, half a million
    dollars.
         These are very large sums of money.  You guys
    have to decide what's fair and just.  That's what
    I'm telling you.  All right.
         Let's go to number 2 because we could have
    presented all the evidence on that first issue in
    two hours in this whole trial.  So the rest of the
    time we spent here together was in an effort by Mrs.
    Brown and her legal team to try to convince you that
    they could satisfy their burden in connection with
    this punitive damage issue.
         So what's that question again?  Under the
    circumstances of this case, state whether by clear
    and convincing evidence punitive damages are
    warranted against Philip Morris.  Well, that, as I
    told in you my opening statement, that doesn't
    really tell you what the issue is, does it?
         But there's another instruction that Judge Jay
    has given you.  And sure enough, it's the exact
    language that I put on my board.  You can tell that's the board I used because it's still marked
    on, right?
         And so what is this question?  The question is,
    punitive damages may be warranted against Philip
    Morris USA based only on your finding by clear and
    convincing evidence that conduct in furtherance of a
    conspiracy between Philip Morris USA and other
    tobacco companies to conceal material information
    regarding the health effects or the addictive nature
    of cigarettes was a substantial cause of him getting
    lung cancer and dying.
         Who is the focus, seriously now, who is the
    focus of that question?  It's Mr. Brown and Mr.
    Brown's decisions.  I'm not blaming Mr. Brown.
         Mr. Shield said I'm blaming Mr. Brown.  This
    question is about, is there something that Philip
    Morris and these other companies did that was truly
    a substantial cause about concealing information and
    it was truly a substantial cause of Mr. Brown's own
    death?
         And I said, well, how are you going to know --
    in my opening statement, I said, how are you going
    to know the -- there's a lot of legal verbiage here,
    how are you going to know what to look for to try to
    answer that question?  And I put this board up. I said, well, first of all, who has the burden
    of proof on this point?  Mr. Shields in his closing
    argument spent -- talking about Mr. Brown.  This is
    about Mr. Brown's decisions about smoking?
         Mr. Shields spent the last five minutes talking
    about the proof that he had on this point, talking
    about Mr. Brown.
         What's the burden of proof?  The plaintiff has
    it.  There's no burden on Hassia or me.  The burden
    of proof is by clear and convincing evidence.  Well,
    what's clear and convincing evidence?
         Clear and convincing evidence, this is what the
    Judge is going to -- he's already read it to you,
    but each one of you has a set of these instructions
    and it's in there.  And it says clear and convincing
    evidence differs from the greater weight of the
    evidence in that it is more compelling and more
    persuasive.  The greater weight of the evidence,
    that's just the standard burden, greater weight of
    the evidence means that the more persuasive and
    convincing evidence and effect of the entire
    evidence in the case.
         But in our case on this issue, what's the
    burden?  The burden is to prove clear and convincing
    evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it
    produces a firm belief or conviction about the
    matter in issue.
         What are those operative words?  Precise,
    explicit, lacking in confusion.
         You know, during voir dire we all talked about
    when you guys have to be very precise, down to the
    penny, painting perfectly.  You know the difference
    between precision, exactness.  You know that.  It's
    not supposition.  It's not inference.  It's not the
    possibility.  It's explicit.  It's precise.
         What else did you have to know?  You had to
    know what were the acts of the conspiracy.  We'll
    talk about that in a little bit, what the evidence
    was.  You're going to have to know when did it
    start?  When did this conspiracy start?
         And sure enough, I said you're going to find
    out that their claim is the conspiracy started in
    December of 1953.  You're going to have to learn
    when did Mr. Brown begin to smoke?  Did he begin to
    smoke as a result of this conspiracy, this
    agreement?
         And I said to you, it would be unequivocal,
    precise, explicit.  Absolutely not.  Not even a
    claim that he did.  Why?  Because if the conspiracy starts in December of 1953, Mr. Brown started
    smoking as a 13 year old, a 14 year old.  That's
    what Kaiser Thomas told you on the video.  He was
    born in 1936.  He's 13 years old in 1949.  He's 14
    years old in 1950.
         So is there any earthly way that Mr. Brown was
    influenced to begin smoking or even to become a
    daily regular smoker because of this agreement?
    Absolutely not.
         As a matter of fact, Mr. Shields isn't even
    claiming it.  I'll show you that in just a minute.
         Well, what's left then?  You know he began to
    smoke before it.  You know he continued to smoke
    before it.  He became a regular daily smoker before
    it.
         What's left?  What possible way did they have
    any hope of trying to convince you?  Let me just put
    this down.  What had to be the focus of their
    evidence to try to prove that by precise, explicit
    evidence that whatever it was, that Philip Morris
    and the other companies did in connection with this
    agreement to conceal information, was actually a
    substantial cause of why Mr. Brown developed lung
    cancer.
         The only thing left was that whatever it was that they're complaining about, that it prevented
    him from quitting smoking in time to avoid getting
    lung cancer.
         Mr. Shields actually acknowledged that at the
    very end, of the last tail end of his closing
    argument.  That's all they had left.
         And so now the question is, did they present to
    you during the course of this trial precise,
    explicit, evidence lacking in confusion, I mean,
    really compelling evidence that Mr. Brown was
    prevented from quitting smoking because of Philip
    Morris not agreeing with the Surgeon General or
    Philip Morris not acknowledging that smoking caused
    lung cancer until 2000.
         And that's why I said, was Mr. Brown waiting to
    hear something from Philip Morris that prevented him
    from quitting smoking?  That's what this boils down
    to.
         So where was that evidence?  Well, who did
    plaintiff bring?  Mrs. Brown and her lawyers brought
    three witnesses:  Dr. Proctor, Dr. Burns, and
    Dr. Goldberg.  Now, what did they all have in
    common?
         Well, one thing they all had in common is they
    had been paid enormous sums of money, right?  4 million, 3 million.  Dr. Goldberg was a little
    trickier, though.  He couldn't remember how much
    money he had really been paid.  Some issue about did
    I earn 700,000 or 300,000 or 400,000?  I mean, they
    had been paid enormous sums of money.
         In this case alone, Dr. Burns, $50,000;
    Dr. Proctor, $50,000; Dr. Goldberg, well, I don't
    know how much I've been paid in this case.  Well,
    how many hours do you have in it now?  I don't know,
    could be this, could be that.  I don't know.
         But one thing they all had in common in this
    case and what was that?  They didn't know a thing
    about Mr. Brown.  Not one fact about Mr. Brown.  And
    yet, who is this case all about?  Mr. Brown and Mr.
    Brown's decisions, right?
         I mean, that's what's on the verdict form.
    Nobody else.  This is not a case about the general
    public.  This is not a case about Americans in
    general.  This is not a case about addicted smokers
    in general or some generic -- -- this is not a
    generic case.
         This is a case about -- you have to make a
    decision about whether or not Mr. Brown was
    prevented from quitting smoking.  That's what you
    have to ask yourself. They didn't know anything about his decisions,
    his awareness, nothing.  They didn't know anything
    about Mr. Brown.  They didn't know when or why he
    started smoking.  They didn't know when he became a
    regular smoker or why he continued smoking.  They
    didn't know what Mr. Brown knew about the health
    risks of smoking.  They didn't know if Mr. Brown saw
    ads or statements from Philip Morris or other
    cigarette companies.  They didn't know anything.
    Didn't know anything.
         And here's an instruction that Judge Jay is
    going to -- has already given you and that is that,
    just so you know for sure, that December of 1953 is
    the beginning when they claim this conspiracy
    occurred.  Plaintiff has not made a claim for
    conspiracy to conceal information regarding smoking
    and health or addiction before December 1953.  It's
    in the Court's instructions.
         So what were the acts of conspiracy?  They said
    that the cigarette companies concealed their true
    belief about whether or not smoking really caused
    lung cancer and other diseases or not and they
    concealed their true belief that smoking was
    addicting.
         They said that they did it through advertising. Was advertising really an act of a conspiracy or was
    it something that was done in a very competitive
    way?  This was Dr. Proctor.  I asked him.
         "The companies used their advertising in a very
    competitive way, didn't they?"
         "Yes."
         "They each wanted to obviously sell as many
    cigarettes as possible."
         When you're in the business, that's what you're
    doing, right?
         Design of cigarettes.
         "So the companies weren't sharing how they went
    about making their cigarettes or what their design
    parameters were, were they?"
         "Generally that's true.  They were competitive
    so they would each have their own suppliers of
    papers, suppliers of chemicals.  You know they were
    buying all the chemicals for additives.  It's a
    small -- fairly small set of suppliers but as you
    say, the formulas are secret."
         But really, wherein lies the answer to the
    question of whether or not Mr. Brown was really
    waiting to hear something from Philip Morris or some
    other cigarette manufacturer about whether or not
    cigarettes cause disease, whether or not cigarettes are addicting.  You got to go to Mr. Brown's own
    personal life story.  That's where the answer must
    lie.
         And so that's why I created this timeline and I
    said, you need to know what Mr. Brown knew.  You
    need to know what Mr. Brown already knew.  So that
    you could decide -- and what decisions did Mr. Brown
    make in connection with smoking?
         Did Mr. Brown make a decision about quitting?
    Did Mr. Brown -- as a matter of fact, for decades,
    did Mr. Brown give any indication that he had any
    interest in quitting at all?  And that he was
    prevented from doing it by something?
         So let's just walk again back through the
    evidence that we know that you heard during the
    course of this trial.  Mr. Brown began smoking at
    age 13, 14.  Where did that evidence come from?
         Let me explain to you how this works.  Down
    here it says TR.  That's trial transcript.  Every
    day, just like she's doing right now, this court
    reporter takes down every word that occurs in this
    courtroom.  And that's a phenomenal talent, right?
    One that I certainly don't have.  But she has the
    ability to take down every word, every question,
    answer, and then this gets typed up into a booklet every day.  Every day.  And so we know exactly what
    was said.  And every page is numbered and every line
    is numbered.  It's like reading a book that every
    page is numbered and every line of every page is
    numbered.  So when you see that, it means that's the
    page, that's the line.  This is right out of the
    trial transcript.
         Kaiser Thomas, he's the guy that was on video.
    He was Mr. Brown's very dear friend.  Earliest
    person we heard from, right?
         "When did you start smoking?"
         "At a very early age.  I would say about 13,
    14, maybe it could be 15.  It's hard for me to say
    because I didn't just start off -- "
         "You were experimenting.  Did Mr. Brown start
    smoking?"
         Oh, yes.  We were all about the same time."
         Talk about precise, explicit evidence, that's
    the only evidence that exists in this case as to
    when Mr. Brown began smoking.  Period.  That's it.
         And now you know on the timeline, that's either
    1949, 1950, or if it was 15, he says, could be 15,
    that would be 1951.
         When do the plaintiffs contend that this
    agreement began?  December of 1953.  Years later. So now you know.  There is no question.  There
    is precise, explicit evidence that Mr. Brown did not
    begin smoking or become a regular daily smoker as a
    result of any agreement in December of 1953.
         Regular smoker.  Kaiser Thomas, again.
         "Now, in these early years when you were
    experimenting with cigarettes, you know about how
    many you and Mr. Brown would smoke during the day?"
         "Maybe that four."
         You remember he put his nickel up and he would
    get four cigarettes for a nickel.  So here he is in
    these experimenting days smoking maybe those four,
    so before December of 1953.
         Now, why did I talk to you about the
    information that Mr. Brown was receiving from his
    mom, his aunt, his coaches, all those folks?  Why
    did I present that to you?  Because it tells you
    what Mr. Brown knows and it tells you, even with
    that knowledge, what decision does Mr. Brown make
    regarding whether he's going to quit or keep on
    smoking?
         That's what you need to know, right?  So here
    was the evidence.  This is straight out of the
    transcript from Kaiser Thomas's video testimony.
         "And your mother, Ms. Thomas, and Mr. Brown's mother, Mrs. Brown, both told you and Mr. Brown not
    to smoke, didn't they?"
         "They did."
         "While you were growing up, right?"
         "Right."
         "And they gave you a big talking-to, a certain
    talking-to about it, didn't they?"
         "Yeah.  That was about the extent of it."
         "Well, in fact, they talked to you about
    smoking more than ten times over that period when
    you were in high school, didn't they?"
         "Yes.  I would say more than ten."
         "Did they punish you or punish Mr. Brown when
    they found those residues -- "
         Remember in his pocket the little bit of
    tobacco in his pocket.
         " --  or other telltale signs of smoking while
    you were in high school?"
         "Not that I could say punish us but we would
    get a stern talking-to about it and what it probably
    would lead to."
         "This is before December of 1953.  Mr. Brown is
    already saying, you know what?  I know my mother
    doesn't want me to smoke, I know Kaiser's mother
    doesn't want me to smoke, I know my aunt doesn't want me to smoke.  There's his aunt, Ms. Queen
    Brown's mother, he also had an aunt that was on his
    case, right?"
         "Yes.  She was on our case."
         "And she was on your case about smoking, too,
    wasn't she?"
         "Yes, she was."
         "Like your mom and Mr. Brown's mother, she told
    you both you shouldn't smoke, didn't she?"
         "She did."
         "She was on your case about smoking, about
    discipline period.  She was more of a strict
    disciplinarian than Queen was.  Did she ever speak
    to you or Mr. Brown about smoking?"
         "She spoke to us about smoking and a few
    Budweisers that we had, too."
         That's a heck of an aunt, right?  How about
    coaches?  Why did I tell you about coaches?
    Because, look, Mr. Brown is learning from his
    mother, his best friend's mother, his aunt, and now
    his coaches, you shouldn't be smoking.  And yet what
    decision does he make?  He continues to smoke,
    right?
         "But when you did smoke, you hid your smoking
    from your coaches at school because you knew that wasn't something you should be doing, right?"
         "Right."
         "And you didn't even take cigarettes to school,
    did you?"
         "No, we didn't."
         "Did you have to hide the smoking that you did
    from Coach Small and Coach Montgomery?"
         "Definitely.  We had to.  Definitely didn't
    want them to see it."
         "Did they ever catch you or Mr. Brown smoking,
    the coaches, Coach Small, Coach Montgomery?"
         "Coach Small and Coach Montgomery have caught
    several of us doing it and he would bench you.  You
    wouldn't play."
         "I think we just heard it from some of the old
    -- "
         Oh, this is about cancer sticks.
         "Does Mr. Brown -- has he already heard that
    smoking cigarettes can cause cancer while he's still
    in school?"
         You bet.
         "I think we just heard it from some of the
    older people around us calling them that.  Like,
    what are you boys doing with those cancer sticks?"
         "And you heard that in high school?  When you were both in high school?"
         "I would say I heard this in the old pool
    rooms, in the concession stand when someone saw a
    young kid with a cigarette between his fingers."
         All right.  How about addiction?  Mr. Shields
    said I don't know why Mr. Reilly pointed out that
    people over 150 years ago were referring to tobacco,
    use of tobacco and nicotine, and all of that.
    Because it's no secret, ladies and gentlemen, that
    people were smoking for nicotine because there was
    nicotine in tobacco.  This is no secret.
         That's why I showed it to you.  And it hasn't
    been a secret for forever.  That's why I showed you
    Reader's Digest.  That's why I showed you all that
    stuff so, you know, take the mystery out of it.
         Because sitting here today, not one of you was
    around in the thirties or the forties.  So we have
    to take you back in time and show you what people
    were talking about in that time frame in Mr. Brown's
    life.
         Not just in general, not to the American
    public, but specifically, precisely, explicitly in
    Mr. Brown's life.
         "Did any of those coaches ever tell you that
    cigarettes were addictive?" "The coaches didn't, but other -- we've heard
    it from other people."
         "When you were kids?"
         "Right."
         Addictive.  And yet Mr. Brown continued to
    smoke.  He wasn't waiting to hear from Philip Morris
    or some other cigarette manufacturer that cigarettes
    were addictive.
         Is there any explicit, precise evidence that
    Mr. Brown would have quit smoking if Philip Morris
    had only said, hey, these are addictive or these are
    cancer sticks?
         Is there any evidence, I mean, not just
    precise, and explicit evidence, is there any
    evidence in this case that he was going to quit if
    that had happened?  Of course not.  There is none.
    Much less precise and explicit evidence.
         That's why I presented you with Dr. Proctor
    saying "there's new information available to the
    American public for over 100 percent -- nicotine is
    the major reason why people smoke.  Nicotine feed,
    nicotine fit."
         "Yeah, you certainly find that.  In fact,
    nicotine was identified in tobacco almost 200 years
    ago.  That's when it was first organically identified."
         I asked that to Dr. Proctor.
         Here's Dr. Burns.  "Yes, it's been known for
    quite sometime that once you start using tobacco
    regularly it can be very hard to stop."
         "Whether you call it an addiction or a habit,
    whatever.  If we were to go back in time 150 years,
    regular citizens refer to the use of tobacco in
    cigarettes addicting.  Well, they used -- the use of
    tobacco as being addictive.  It was pipes, cigars,
    and chewing tobacco way back 150 years ago, but,
    yes, if you substitute tobacco that would be
    correct."
         All right.  So now, let's bring ourselves --
    let's go back to our time.  Here we have Mr. Brown,
    Mr. Thomas, in pool halls, smoking, smoking, hearing
    that their cigarettes are cancer sticks, that
    they're addicting, and here in 1950 that's when that
    avalanche of information begins.
         That's what Dr. Goldberg agreed it was.
    Dr. Proctor is going to tell you that.
         "Will you acknowledge that there was a little
    avalanche of information flowing to the American
    public as of 1950 regarding the ill consequences of
    smoking, correct?  You will acknowledge?" "I will."
         Here's Dr. Proctor.  "You talked about the
    beginning of the 1950s as sort of a watershed for
    medical science and linking smoking with lung cancer
    and other diseases?"
         "That's right."
         "With the five simultaneously published
    epidemiological studies linking smoking to cancer.
    That was no secret to the American public?"
         "No.  It was published."
         "It was published.  And not only published, but
    big news as well.  It was in newspapers and
    magazines.  It was well covered."
         Why do you think Mrs. Brown, Mrs. Thomas are
    telling their sons -- there's no evidence that said
    wait until you're 18.  They said, don't smoke.
    Smoking is bad for you.  That's Kaiser Thomas's
    testimony.
         The mom's are -- Mrs. Brown said my husband was
    very intelligent.  Is there any reason to believe
    that his mother wasn't?  That she -- Mrs. Brown said
    my husband was very up to date on what's going on in
    the world, current events.  Avid reader of the
    newspaper, avid reader of magazines.  Any reason to
    believe that his mom wasn't? All this information, this little avalanche is
    coming out and Mrs. Brown and Ms. Thomas are telling
    their boys, don't smoke.  And yet Mr. Brown and Mr.
    Thomas are deciding they're going to smoke.
         Here's Dr. Proctor again.  "But in terms of --
    was the American public aware that the science is
    coming out?  That was no secret to the American
    public, was it?"
         "Well, it was in the newspaper.  You can't just
    say that what's in the newspaper was a secret by
    definition.  This was big news, right."
         This is Dr. Proctor saying:  "This was big
    news, right."
         "I mean, it was in hundreds, if not thousands
    of thousands of articles.  It was big news.  I mean,
    it's arguably the news story of the century."
         Is there some reason to think that Mr. Brown is
    not paying attention, that he's unaware?
         You know, I have no burden of proof.  I didn't
    have any burden to prove this stuff.  The burden is
    on the plaintiff to prove by precise, explicit,
    lacking in confusion evidence that Mr. Brown would
    have quit and quit in time to avoid getting his lung
    cancer.  That's the burden.  And there's no question
    about it. "You testified about advertisements in response
    to Ms. Bryan's questions earlier this morning.  In
    fact, you don't have any idea when he started
    smoking his first cigarette, do you?"
         It wouldn't even matter because it's before the
    agreement.  It's years before the agreement.
         "And you can't say that Mr. Brown purchased
    anything because of something he saw in an
    advertisement, including those little four
    cigarettes that you used when you started smoking,
    right?"
         "Right."
         All right.  Let's go to -- you know that -- oh,
    the frank statement, January of 1954.  Mr. Shields
    didn't even mention it in his closing argument.  Is
    there any evidence in this case that Mr. Brown saw
    it?  None.  None.
         Was there any evidence in this case that Mr.
    Brown ever saw any of the speeches, any of the
    articles, any of the -- anything that Mr. Shields
    complained about in this trial?
         Was there one person who came here and said Mr.
    Brown never saw any of that, much less said Mr.
    Brown was influenced by it, Mr. Brown was prevented
    from quitting smoking by it. Was there one person who ever came here and
    said that?  Not one.  No precise -- no evidence,
    much less precise and explicit evidence.
         You know he joins the Army in -- oh, I talked
    to Dr. Proctor about the 90 percent of Americans who
    have heard smoking can cause lung cancer as of 1954.
         Is there some reason to believe that somehow
    Mr. Brown is in the 10 percent that didn't hear
    that?
         I mean, what you know about Mr. Brown and the
    success he had in his life, rising to the very top
    of the postal service here in this community,
    getting the accolades and awards and Mrs. Brown
    saying my husband was a very intelligent man, as
    well read as he was, is there some reason to believe
    that he falls into the 10 percent of Americans who
    haven't heard it?  Come on.
         "When you met Mr. Brown -- " which she does in
    1958.  This is Mrs. Brown's testimony -- "you didn't
    tell him not to smoke."
         "No, I didn't."
         "As a matter of fact, you didn't talk to him
    about smoking for the next 30 years, did you?"
         "No, I didn't."
         That takes you to 1988.  1987, 1988. So was there any evidence from Mrs. Brown that
    Mr. Brown ever said, I don't know about the health
    risk that I'm taking, I'm unaware that what I'm
    doing comes with the risk of lung cancer?  Was there
    ever any testimony from Mrs. Brown that her husband
    ever said, gosh, I don't know that it's possible to
    become addicted to these things I'm unaware that
    there's nicotine in these cigarettes?  Was there any
    evidence to that effect in this case?  Mrs. Brown --
         Mr. Shields gets to get back up again and he
    gets to do just what I'm doing.  If there's a
    passage, if there's testimony from Mrs. Brown that
    Mr. Brown didn't know, he ever said I didn't know,
    I'm unaware, or I'm waiting to hear something from
    Philip Morris, or I'm thinking of quitting but I'm
    not going to because I haven't yet heard from Philip
    Morris, or I read something from Philip Morris or
    some other cigarette company, he gets to put that
    testimony up.
         But there is none.  There is not any, much less
    precise and explicit testimony.  None.
         Now, Mr. Shields, I don't know whether he
    misspoke or whether he thinks he's right.  But
    Kaiser Thomas said that Mr. Brown, when they were
    together -- and by the way, Mr. Brown became an 18-year old, legal for him to buy cigarettes in
    1954.  Saying -- 1954.  Here when Mrs. Brown -- you
    said --
         "What did she say was his brand of cigarettes?"
         "Benson & Hedges."
         She remembers to this day that her husband,
    when she first started dating him, was smoking
    Benson & Hedges cigarettes.  Apparently he switched
    from Philip Morris to Benson & Hedges.  Why did he
    switch?  No one knows.  There is no evidence as to
    why he switched.  None.
         And she doesn't speak to him about his smoking
    for the next 30 years.
         Let's go to the sixties.  You know that they
    lived with Mrs. Brown, Rayfield's mother, from 1960
    to 1962.  You know Mrs. Brown said she still didn't
    like his smoking but he's continuing to smoke.
         Mrs. Brown is in school.  She's going to become
    a teacher.  She testified --
         "Are they current?  Do they stay up to date?"
         "Mrs. Brown was a daily newspaper reader."
         "To my knowledge Mr. Brown was a very
    intelligent man."
         "Yes, he was."
         "During your marriage he had a subscription to the Florida Times Union?"
         "Yes, we did."
         We put articles from the Florida Times Union in
    evidence.
         "You had a subscription to Reader's Digest
    beginning in 1962?"
         "I said yes."
         "You had a subscription to Good Housekeeping?"
         "I said yes."
         "Ebony?  Jet?"
         "Yes."
         "Life?"
         "Yes."
         "Newsweek?"
         "Yes."
         What magazine is missing from here?  Mr.
    Shields got up in his closing argument and showed
    you a copy of True, right?  And he showed you some
    article in True.
         Is there any evidence in this case that Mr.
    Brown ever read True magazine or read that article?
    None.  None.
         Is there any evidence in this case that Mr.
    Brown's doctors ever told him, hey, you know what,
    the cigarette industry tells me it's okay to smoke, smoking's not addictive?  No evidence of that.
    None.  Not precisely, explicit.  None.
         Generally -- this is Mrs. Brown again:
    "Generally throughout his working career he was home
    for the evening news and watched it?"
         "Yes."
         "You were both home and both watched the news
    together?"
         "Yes."
         Let's go to 1964 because that's the year of the
    famous Surgeon General's report, right?  And it got
    tremendous news coverage.  I'm just going to show
    you a little tiny bit just to refresh your
    recollection of the -- this is the CBS news
    coverage.  I'm not even going to show you the whole
    thing.  Just -- not even going to show you what I
    showed you entirely in the trial.
         (A video clip was played and transcribed by the
    court reporter to the best of her ability as
    follows:)
         HARRY REASONER:  In this time in the country it
    comes down to you, whether you like it or not.  No
    one is going to forbid an adult to smoke and it's
    now quite clear that no one is going tell him it's
    not good for him either.  The decision is his.  The decision, and the health that may depend on it.
    This is Harry Reasoner, good night.
         (Videotape ends.)
         MR. REILLY:  Now, just to demonstrate how
    powerful that news coverage was, Mrs. Brown actually
    remembers it.  That's 1964 and yet Mrs. Brown can
    remember it to this day.
         What was that?  50 years ago?
         I asked her:  "You were asked, and the jury has
    heard a lot in this room about -- "
         Now, this is one of the things I had to refresh
    her recollection on.  Called impeachment.  I had to
    take her back to her testimony in the last trial.
    And I said:  "The jury has heard a lot in this room
    about the '64 Surgeon General's report.  You saw
    that report on television, didn't you?"
         You asked which report.
         I said:  "The '64 Surgeon General's report."
         And you said:  "Yes."
         "Do you recall that?"
         And Mrs. Brown, reading her prior transcript
    said:  "I said yes."
         "It was big news when it came out.  You saw the
    TV coverage."
         "I said yes." "It was a big splash when it came out, right?"
         "I said yes."
         "It made headlines in the newspapers and on
    television."
         I said:  "You don't have to read it in the
    transcript, just tell me."
         She said:  "Yes.  Sure."
         Did that cause Mr. Brown to say I'm going to
    quit smoking?  I want to quit smoking?  Even think
    about it?  No.  No.  There's no evidence of that.
    None.
         Now, that's Mrs. Brown seeing it.  You saw that
    Mrs. Brown and Mr. Brown oftentimes watched the
    daily news together.  Did they present some precise
    and explicit evidence in this case that Mr. Brown
    didn't see it or didn't know about it or that only
    his wife knew about it?  No.  There's no precise,
    explicit evidence to that effect.
         You remember that the first warning goes on the
    packs of cigarettes:  "Caution.  Cigarette smoking
    may be hazardous to your health."  As of January
    1966.  That's still 50 years ago.
         I asked Mrs. Brown:  "Do you remember seeing
    the warnings on the packs of cigarettes in 1966?"
         "Yes.  The warning on the pack said May." She could remember the exact wordage, the exact
    verbiage from that warning from 50 years ago.
         That warning was only on packs of cigarettes
    for four years, and yet to this day, that's how
    powerful it was.  It was so powerful that people
    that were around then can remember the exact words.
         Think of any other warning for any other
    product that you've ever seen that you can remember
    the exact words of it.  I'll bet you there isn't
    one, to be honest, with you.
         All right.  Dr. Goldberg said:  "No, the
    message in the tobacco industry was drowning out all
    of this information.  By the end of the fifties, 10
    million Americans had quit smoking.  By the end of
    the sixties, more than 20 million Americans had quit
    smoking."
         That's some number.
         Here's her testimony, more testimony.  "But it
    was big news that a warning was going on every
    package of cigarettes, wasn't it?"
         "Yes."
         "And when the warnings went on the packs you
    didn't discuss it with your husband?"
         "No, I did not."
         Okay.  We've put in -- oh, you know that public service announcements began to run in 1967.
    Evidence showed that in 1968, 1,500 of them.  I
    think Dr. Goldberg said for every three cigarette
    ads, there was one of these anti-cigarette ads.
         Can we just show a little tiny bit of Bill
    Talman just to refresh your recollection what those
    things look like?  How powerful they were.
         (A video clip was played and transcribed by the
    court reporter to the best of her ability as
    follows:)
         BILL TALMAN:  This is the house we live in.
    That's Bailey.  He's great to have around.  Steve,
    home from college.  Marvine, looking after her
    brother Tim.  Debbie, who will soon graduate from
    high school.  Susan, our youngest.  And my wife,
    Peggy, who looks after all of us.  And that's me,
    Bill Talman, with a friend of mine you might
    recognize.
         You know, I didn't really mind losing those
    courtroom battles but I'm in a battle right now I
    don't want to lose at all.  Because if I lose it, it
    means losing my wife and those kids you just met.
         I've got lung cancer.  So take some advice
    about smoking and losing from someone who's been
    doing both for years.  If you don't smoke, don't start.  If you do smoke, quit.  Don't be a loser.
         (Videotape ends.)
         MR. REILLY:  Thank you.  Powerful ads.
    Powerful ads.  No question about it.
         Did that cause Mr. Brown to quit or even think
    about quitting?  Or say I'm going to quit or I want
    to quit or make any ever effort to quit?  No.
         1968.  We put in evidence an article from the
    New York Times.  I don't know what the number is.
    But we put in evidence an article from the New York
    Times showing that in February, March, 1968, Mr.
    Brown's gone to work for the post office in 1967.
         In 1968 every postal truck has billboard size
    ads on it that say:  "100,000 doctors have quit
    smoking cigarettes.  Maybe they know something you
    don't."
         Any way that Mr. Brown would have missed that?
    No way.  Every day he goes to work.  Every vehicle
    here in Jacksonville, every post office vehicle here
    in Jacksonville has that billboard on it.  Does that
    cause Mr. Brown to quit smoking or even consider it?
    Even try to quit?  No.
         Does Mr. Brown enjoy smoking?  I'm going to
    show you in a minute everybody who addressed that
    issue said Mr. Brown enjoyed smoking.  Mrs. Brown, Kaiser Thomas, his best friend and his wife both
    said Mr. Brown enjoyed smoking.  People enjoy
    smoking.
         You're going to see in just a minute that
    Dr. Proctor is going to acknowledge that there are
    people that know all about the health risks of
    smoking, rational, normal people and they decide,
    you know what, I enjoy smoking and I'm going to keep
    smoking.  My decision.  My body.  My life.
         Is this a criticism of Mr. Brown?  No.  These
    are the decisions -- we get to decide if we're going
    to smoke.  We get to decide if we're going to drink.
    We get to decide -- these are decisions we get to
    make.
         Big news.  The warnings going on the pack.  I
    asked when the warnings went on, you didn't talk to
    your husband.
         All right.  Let's go to the seventies.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
         MR. REILLY:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         We're all the way up to 1970.  I promise it
    will move a little quicker.
         Let's go to 1970.
         You know that the warnings changed on the packs
    as of 1970, and now they say -- sorry:
         Warning:  The Surgeon General has determined
    that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health.
         That's the same year that Mrs. Brown begins
    working as a teacher.  You know that we talked --
    Mrs. Brown and I talked about what it means to be a
    teacher here in Duval County and the instruction you
    give to your students about the health risks of
    smoking.
         Something you didn't know but the judge has now
    instructed you is that, after 1969 -- in other
    words, starting with 1970 and that warning, the
    warning labels of Philip Morris and other Engle
    defendants placed on cigarette packs complied with
    federal law, and Philip Morris-USA and other Engle
    defendants had no legal obligation to make no
    additional warnings.
         Mrs. Brown has made no claim for failure to warn after 1969.  You didn't know that until right
    now.
         What's going on with Mrs. Brown --
         What does this warning tell you?  Mr. Kalil
    asked a bunch of questions of Mrs. Brown about the
    meeting that occurred with the Browns when they ran
    into the old high school friend of Mr. Brown -- that
    we're going to talk about in just a minute.  He
    said, Well, did Mr. Green said that smoking could
    kill you?  Did Mr. Brown say that smoking was
    addicting?  Did Mr. Brown --
         That cigarette pack that they got for free had
    that warning on it, and the Court has instructed you
    that there was no legal obligation to make any
    additional warning, period.  Period.
         What does that warning tell you?  That warning
    tells you:  If you continue to smoke cigarettes,
    these things are dangerous for your health.  That's
    what it tells you.  And that happened in 1970.
         Did that cause Mr. Brown to quit cigarette
    smoking?  No.  Try to quit smoking?  No.  Have any
    interest in quitting smoking?  No.  No.
         What's going on in Mrs. Brown's life in
    connection with what's happening in 1970 when she
    becomes a teacher? "You became a teacher, a substitute teacher in
    '69 and a regular teacher in '70?
         "I did.
         "And part of the curriculum in Jacksonville, in
    the Jacksonville school system, is to ensure that
    school students in every grade, whether they're in
    grade school, middle school, or something called
    junior high or high school, they are getting an
    education about the health risks of smoking,
    correct?
         "We had the "Say No to Drugs" campaign.
         "And that included cigarettes, didn't it?
         "The Say No to Drugs campaign included all
    drugs.
         I said, Just so we're clear, that included
    cigarettes, didn't it?
         "Yes.
         "And so from your perspective, cigarettes were
    under the umbrella of drugs, correct?
         "Yes."
         And there was more.
         So each of the homerooms had an internal
    competition among its students, teaching them about
    the health risks of drugs including cigarettes,
    right? Right.
         And the students would do their own door
    decorations and whatever research they wanted to do?
         Yes, for that.
         And then on a school-wide basis, they would
    have sort of a competition among the homerooms as to
    who made the best presentations?
         That's correct.  The best door decorations.
         Now, Mrs. Brown said that she was in the
    Business Ed department, right?  And that this wasn't
    part of her personal responsibilities.  But look
    what she knew about them.
         And, yet, is there any -- this is in grade
    school, junior high, middle school, high school --
    everywhere.
         Is there any indication that her husband didn't
    know, a man as intelligent as he was, as well read,
    as well as up to date as he was, didn't know what
    grade school was doing?  Any reason to believe that?
         Is there any precise, explicit information to
    the contrary?  Any at all?  I mean, any at all?
         1971, the ban on advertising for cigarettes on
    television went into effect.
         You recall that there were bans on cigarette
    advertising on television and radio as of January of 1971?
         Mrs. Brown couldn't remember the exact date,
    but it was banned -- but I know it's in the '70s.
         "And it was big news that there was no longer
    going to be cigarette advertising on television,
    right?
         "Yes.
         "You didn't talk to your husband about that
    either?
         "No, I did not."
         Now let's talk about that social event where
    they ran into Mr. Brown's old high school friend,
    Ralph Green.  Yes, Ralph Green apparently -- of
    course, I wasn't there, but they said Ralph Green
    was handing out sample packs of Philip Morris
    Multifilters.
         What brand of cigarettes is Mr. Brown smoking
    at this moment?  According to Mrs. Brown he's
    smoking Benson & Hedges cigarettes, right?
         So here's a guy handing out -- a guy he went to
    high school with.  He's handing out free packs of
    cigarettes, and he hands two packs to Mrs. Brown and
    two packs to Mr. Brown.  They take them.  What do
    they have on them?
         "Those little sample packs Mr. Green gave you and your husband both carried that warning, label
    didn't it?
         "Yes, it did.
         "You said you examined those packages
    carefully, so you would have seen the warnings on
    the packs at the time they were given to you by
    Mr. Green?
         "Yes, as well as the lower in tar and
    nicotine."
         Now, I asked Mrs. Brown because there's seems
    to be a question -- I'm not even sure why it's
    important -- whether Mr. Brown thought they were
    lower in tar and maybe a little safer.
         Why is that important?  The real key, the real
    key is not whether he was thinking he might get a
    little smaller -- a little smaller dose of tar and
    nicotine.  The real question is was there any
    indication that Mr. Brown was going to quit?  Any at
    all?
         Was there any indication that Mr. Brown took
    those packages of Multifilters and smoked some of
    those instead of quitting?  Where is that evidence?
         I wrote down what Mr. Shields said to you in
    his closing argument.  He said, If he hadn't
    switched to Philip Morris Multifilter, he said, there's a much higher likelihood he would have quit
    earlier.
         Mr. Brown never quit.  You guys sat here
    throughout this trial and heard Mr. Brown never
    quit.  What was the basis for saying that there is a
    much higher likelihood that he would have quit
    earlier?
         He never said that.  He never said, I'm
    thinking of quitting.  He never said, I'm even
    thinking about quitting.
         I asked Mrs. Brown, Did you actually even talk
    to your husband about why he decided to smoke
    Multifilters?
         I said, You never had any conversation with him
    about why he decided to smoke Multifilters, did you.
         Her answer was:  I don't remember any
    discussion about it other than I gave him the
    cigarettes I had.
         Right.
         And the answer is:  No, I did not directly
    discuss it with him, no.
         Correct?
         No, I did not directly discuss it with him.
         Was there any discussion about Mr. Brown
    quitting smoking? None.  None at all.  Where is this precise
    explicit testimony?  There is none.
         "Did Rayfield request that you start buying
    Multifilter cigarettes?
         "No.  I started purchasing the cigarettes, and
    he smoked them, so he enjoyed them."
         That's what Mrs. Brown testified to as to why
    Mr. Brown smoked Multifilter.  So there's one
    statement that he enjoyed smoking.
         Here's another by Kaiser Thomas:
         "You mentioned previously he enjoyed smoking
    while he was drinking coffee, right, or socializing?
         "Yes.  Both of us smoked after a cup of coffee.
         "Did Mr. Brown ever tell you that he enjoyed
    smoking while he was a smoker?
         "He never told me, but he seemed to."
         That's one smoker to another.
         And here's that quote that I told you I would
    show you from Dr. Proctor.  Dr. Proctor, their
    $3 million witness.
         "And you would agree with me that there are
    millions of people who, with knowledge of the risks
    of smoking, have decided that they want to smoke for
    the pleasure of smoking, correct?
         "Well, I'm sure that's true in general, yeah. "Millions of people who, with knowledge of the
    risks of smoking, have decided that they want to
    smoke for the pleasure of smoking, correct?
         "I'm sure that's true in general, yeah.
         "And you don't know whether Mr. Brown was one
    of those folks?
         "Sure, I don't."
         Because he doesn't know anything about
    Mr. Brown.  But you do.
         So if you really want to know whether Mr. Brown
    was contemplating quitting, all you've got to do is
    look at what he does next.  After he switches to
    Multifilter and enjoys them, as Mrs. Brown said, for
    how long --
         I asked Mrs. Brown, Do you know how long he
    smoked the Multifilter?
         She said, I don't remember.
         I said, It could have been a year or two?
         She said, I don't know.
         And Mr. Kalil got back up and he said, Hey,
    weren't you buying them at Publix for him for a
    number of years?
         "Yes, a number of years."
         Whether it's a year or two or four or five, it
    doesn't really much matter because you know that Kaiser Thomas is bringing him what he really likes
    the best, and that's Benson & Hedges, right?
         And then what does he do?
         Instead of quitting, he smokes Benson & Hedges
    again.  And he's going to keep on smoking Benson &
    Hedges until, as far as we know, the end of his
    life. Mary and
         Here is Kaiser Thomas:
         "But you're sure that, at least up until the
    time when Mary and Jennifer asked you not to bring
    cigarettes to Mr. Brown anymore, from 1972 or '3, up
    until that point, the only brand that you brought
    Mr. Brown was Benson & Hedges?
         "That's right.
         "And that's the only brand, to the best of your
    knowledge and recollection, that he was smoking?
         "Right.  At that time."
         This is Kaiser Thomas:
         "But Mr. Brown never told you why he started
    smoking and Benson & Hedges?
         "No, he didn't.
         "And he never told you exactly why he started
    smoking Benson & Hedges?
         "No, he didn't.
         "All you know is that in 1972 or '3, when you offered to bring cigarettes down from Fort Jackson
    to Jacksonville --"
         This is the very same time that this social
    event is occurring.  '72 or '3.
         "When you offered to bring cigarettes down from
    Fort Jackson to Jacksonville to Mr. Brown, that was
    the brand he asked you to bring, right?
         "That's correct.  That's correct."
         Is there any evidence that Mr. Brown would have
    quit smoking if he hadn't gone to that social event?
         Was there any evidence in this case that he was
    thinking of quitting before going to the social
    event?
         No.
         Was there any evidence that he was thinking of
    quitting after the social event?
         No.
         Here's Michael Brown, the son:
         "And so the first brand you actually remember
    your father smoking is Multifilters?
         "Right.
         "You don't know why he smoked Multifilters,
    isn't that true?
         "That's true.
         "And then at some point he switches to Benson & Hedges, correct?
         "That's true."
         There you go.
         And so I asked Mrs. Brown:
         "And, in fact, you heard your son today say
    that at some point your husband switched from --
    stopped smoking the Philip Morris Multifilters and
    was only smoking Benison and Hedges.  Do you recall
    that?
         "Yes, I do.
         "And he's correct about that, isn't he?
         "Yes, he is."
         So where in the world is this evidence that
    Mr. Brown was prevented from quitting smoking
    because he switched to Multifilter and smoked some
    Multifilters along with Benson & Hedges?  And then
    ultimately switches back entirely to Benson &
    Hedges?  Where is that precise, explicit evidence?
    There is none.  He has no interest or makes no
    effort at quitting smoking in the '70s.
         The public service announcements are continuing
    on throughout the '70s.  And we put them in
    evidence.  I don't know if you have a viewing box.
    I don't know if you have any interest in watching
    old antismoking commercials, but they're in evidence.
         By 1980, 30 million Americans have quit
    smoking.
         Let's go to 1980.  Stuff happens in the '80s
    here.
         1981.  This was Dr. David Burns.  This really
    and truly sums it up, it seems to me.
         This was their $4 million expert.  $4 million
    expert.  This was a quote from Dr. Burns in January
    of 1981.  Here's 1981, Dr. Burns.  He's from
    San Diego.  This is the San Diego paper.
         He was quoted as saying:  It isn't that smokers
    don't know the risks.  In fact, 95 percent of them
    are thoroughly aware of the health dangers and
    90 percent realize that their health could be
    affected, according to Dr. Burns.
         Now, look, is there some reason to believe that
    Mr. Brown fits -- smart as he was, successful as he
    was, that he fits in the 5 percent that don't know?
    Or the 10 percent that don't believe?
         That defies -- it's so far beyond common sense.
    That defies any kind of logic at all.  Here we're
    dealing with an incredibly successful, incredibly
    intelligent, incredibly well-read gentleman.  To put
    him in the 5 percent that aren't thoroughly aware of the health risks or the 10 percent of the ones that
    don't think it applies to them?
         What he is, obviously, with that much
    intelligence and knowledge -- I'm sorry.  I can't go
    back to it, but he's one of those people that
    Dr. Proctor said, Look, there are millions of people
    who understand the risk they're taking, that it
    applies to them, and, yet, they decide, for the
    pleasure of smoking, that they're going to continue
    to do it.
         Here's the conversation he has with his
    daughter Jennifer in 1983.  Right there.
         Hassia asked her:  When you would tell him that
    smoking could cause cancer, you didn't want him to
    die from it, he acknowledged what you said to him,
    didn't he?
         "He did.
         "He didn't disagree with you when you told him
    the information you were learning in school?"
         She's what?  '83, she's 12 years old, something
    like that.  11 years old.
         And so she's telling him, Dad, I'm learning in
    school cigarettes cause cancer.  They can cost you
    your life.
         "He didn't disagree with you when you told him the information you were learning?
         "No, he didn't disagree."
         Of course he didn't disagree.
         In fact, what he said was -- in fact, what he
    said to you was, I hear you, right?
         "He did."
         He said, I understand.  You're right.  Isn't
    that what he said?
         "He understood what I was saying.
         Of course he did.  He's certainly in the
    95 percent that are fully aware of the health risks
    of smoking and the 90 percent who know it applies to
    them.  Has he given any indication that he has any
    interest in smoking?  None.
         But that's what they have to prove, that if
    Philip Morris and the other cigarette companies
    simply hadn't entered into that agreement, that he
    would have quit and quit in time to avoid getting
    his lung cancer.  But they have to do it by precise
    and explicit evidence, not by suggestions or
    surmise.
         Okay.  Mrs. Brown sometime in the mid-'80s
    starts to talk to her husband about his smoking:  I
    don't want you smoking in the bedroom.  I don't want
    you smoking -- I want you to limit your smoking to the den.  I don't want to be exposed to your
    secondhand smoke.
         "What was his standard response?  I have to die
    from something; didn't he?
         She said, I don't know if it was his standard
    response; but, yeah, he said that to me.
         Does Mr. Brown in the mid-'80s understand that
    smoking comes with a risk?  Of course he does.
         And how about the event in -- Kaiser Thomas
    thought it was '86, Mrs. Brown thought it was '87 or
    '88.  It doesn't match matter.  What's the point?
         Mr. Brown has some sort of breathing problem.
    Takes him to the emergency room.  In the emergency
    room, they hold him overnight.  The doctor talks to
    him.  He's not there because of smoking, but he's
    there because he has a throat problem, a breathing
    problem.
         And so one of the doctors caring for him has a
    conversation with him in which he says, Look, you
    should quit smoking.  You need to quit smoking.
         So he gets out of the hospital, he sees
    Mrs. Brown, and they have a conversation.
         "And when you had the conversation with him, he
    told you about a doctor having a conversation with
    him in which the doctor said he should quit? "That's what he told me.
         "That's when you had a follow-up conversation
    with him, and you told him, Yes, you should quit?
         "Yes, I did.
         "And he agreed?
         "He did."
         And here's Mrs. Brown.
         "And to your knowledge, that's the first time
    your husband ever agreed to quit smoking, isn't it?
         "To the best of my knowledge, yes.
         "That's the first time he ever gave any
    indication he had any interest in quitting smoking,
    isn't it?
         "We never discussed this.  So to the best of my
    knowledge, yes."
         How could they possibly prove that Mr. Brown
    had some interest in quitting smoking before this if
    Mrs. Brown, his wife, never spoke to him about it
    until this moment?
         He never made any quitting-smoking gesture.  He
    never did -- they never even talked about it.  So
    where is the explicit and precise evidence that he
    was prevented from quitting smoking because of some
    agreement?
         Michael Brown. "And you know of no time where your father had
    ever tried to quit smoking before the time you no
    longer see him smoking, correct?"
         I'll talk to you about that in just a minute.
         "Correct.
         "And now you've described your dad as a -- he
    was never an I've-got-to-have-a-cigarette-right-now
    type of person, right?
         "Right.
         Right.  So when is that time that Mr. Brown
    expresses an interest in quitting smoking?
         Well, after that hospitalization -- you
    remember, he and Kaiser Thomas talked about the fact
    that the doctors told him this and that you've got
    to quit smoking.  And Kaiser Thomas said, We entered
    into a pact.  We said we would quit.  I, Kaiser
    Thomas, did; Mr. Brown did not.
         Now, where was the evidence that Mr. Brown
    didn't quit because he was waiting to hear something
    that was concealed by Philip Morris or some other
    cigarette company?  Where is that?
         Nowhere.  He just had a conversation with his
    physician who said, You need to quit smoking.  He's
    talked his wife, he's talked with his best friend,
    and, yet, he still doesn't quit smoking. Whether he's addicted or not, addicted smokers
    can quit smoking if they want to.  I think you and
    Mr. Shields talked about, through the present day,
    there's something like 50 or 60 million folks who
    have quit smoking?  He said 50 or 60.
         This is Dr. Burns:
         "As we have discussed previously, I've never
    seen a number that's up to 60 million.  It's about
    54 million at this point in time.
         "That's a big number.
         "Sure.
         "In your opinion, the vast majority of those
    folks are addicted?
         "Yes.  A large fraction of them -- I'm sorry --
    certainly were.  I mean, 80 percent.  But you have
    to want to quit."
         Dr. Burns was asked about his concept of
    cognitive dissonance.  You remember that?
         He said, Well, this is why smokers don't quit.
    It's because they have cognitive dissonance.
         They have the idea in their mind that they --
    they really are taking a health risk because they're
    smoking.  On the other side of the coin, they enjoy
    smoking, you see they enjoy smoking, and so they
    don't quit. And so I said, Well, Doctor, would you please
    explain to the jury -- to you guys -- use exercise.
    Explain what cognitive dissonance means in
    nonsmoking terms.
         He said, I get up in the morning, say to
    myself -- I get up in the morning and say, you know,
    I really need to go to the gym, you know?  And then
    I look at my e-mail and I say, Oh, boy.  No, I
    really need to do that, handle his e-mail.  Maybe I
    don't need to go to the gym; maybe I ought to do
    this.  And so I don't go to the gym.  That's an
    example of how you have these competing needs in
    your head and one of them wins out.
         And he went on to say:  And what would happen
    if my wife came in and said, You don't need to go to
    the gym today?
         And then he said, Oh, but she would never say
    that.
         That was Dr. Burns and cognitive dissonance.
         That's how we human beings function.
         Mr. Brown continued to smoke.  The evidence you
    heard was that, even after this pact, even after the
    agreement, even after Mrs. Brown, Jennifer Brown,
    Kaiser Thomas no longer see him smoke, they know
    he's still smoking. How do they know he's still smoking?
         The son said, I found cigarettes in his -- in
    the console of his car.
         Mrs. Brown said, I could still smell smoke on
    him from time to time.
         Okay.  He continued to smoke.
         They have to prove to you that he would have
    quit and quit in time, by precise, explicit
    evidence, except for this agreement.  How can that
    be if he's had a conversation with his doctor, he's
    made a pact with his best friend, he's agreed with
    his wife, and, yet, he still doesn't quit smoking?
         All right.  Let me bring this to a -- I don't
    know -- a conclusion.
         Kaiser Thomas.
         I asked -- I didn't ask, but he was asked:  Do
    you know whether he ever read any materials from a
    tobacco company that discussed smoking?
         "That I could not say.
         "Did he ever tell you that a tobacco company
    withheld information from him?
         "No, he didn't.
         "And I think we talked about that.  You don't
    know what, if any, advertisements on TV, radio, or
    print Mr. Brown saw for cigarettes, right? No."
         Mrs. Brown:
         "He never mentioned cigarette advertising on
    television to you?
         "We never discussed it.
         "He never mentioned billboard advertising for
    cigarettes?
         "We never discussed it.
         "He never said to you that cigarette ads
    influenced him in any way, did he?"
         Now, look at this, this last question and
    answer:  He never said to you that cigarette ads
    influenced him in any way, did he?
         "We never discussed it."
         So how can there be precise, explicit evidence
    in this case?
         Jennifer Brown:
         "And in all the conversations you had with him,
    he never mentioned cigarette advertising, correct?
         "No conversations about that either."
         How about Michael Brown --
         These are all the people that knew him.  This
    is everybody that came to this trial that knew
    Mr. Brown.  That covers his best friend, his wife,
    his son -- here's his son, his daughter, in talking about ads:
         "You weren't suggesting that your father ever
    smoked any brand of cigarettes because of any ads
    that you might have seen with him, correct?
         "No.
         "And your father, in talking to you, never
    mentioned any particular cigarette ads, correct?
         "That wasn't something he talked about."
         The evidence that was not presented to you by
    plaintiff, who has the burden of proof, evidence
    that was not presented:
         No one ever came here and said that Mr. Brown
    was unaware of the health risks of smoking.  No one
    came here and said that.
         No one told you that he was waiting to hear the
    cigarette companies agree with the Surgeon General.
         No one told you he was influenced by Philip
    Morris or other cigarette companies.
         And no one told you that cigarette -- that knew
    him -- no one told you that cigarette advertising
    played a role in his decisions.
         What you did learn in this case, what the
    evidence did show you was that he was told from a
    young age that smoking was bad for him, that it
    could cause cancer, and that it was addicting.  You learned that Mr. Brown enjoyed smoking.
         He showed no interest in quitting in the '50s,
    '60s, '70s, or the '80s, really.
         When asked to quit in the '80s, he said, You
    got to die of something.  And you know that he never
    quit.
         So that brings us back to these two
    questions -- or this question and this instruction.
    And this is what this all boils down to:
         Punitive damages may be warranted against
    Philip Morris only on your finding by clear and
    convincing evidence that conduct by Philip Morris
    and other cigarette companies concealed on any
    material information regarding the health effects or
    addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was a
    substantial cause of Mr. Brown's death.
         And what was left?  It wasn't beginning.  It
    wasn't becoming a regular smoker.  All that was left
    was they had to prove that to you, by precise,
    explicit evidence, that he would have quit and quit
    in time to avoid getting his lung cancer.  There is
    no evidence to support that, much less precise,
    explicit evidence,.
         Period.
         Now, that does not mean -- so what's the answer to this question on the verdict form?  The answer is
    no.  There's no question about that.  But that does
    not mean that Mrs. Brown and her daughter don't get
    any money in this case.  It doesn't mean that.  I've
    already told you, please, you're going to give them
    the $375,000, and I've asked you to give them more
    money than that.  You guys decide the just and fair
    amount.  I'm not to go back through that again.
         But on the verdict form, when you're given that
    opportunity, collectively if you guys can decide on
    a number for each of them, do that.  If you can
    decide on that collectively.
         If you answer this question no, your work is
    done -- after you figure out a couple of numbers, if
    you can.
         If you answer this question yes, then you have
    more evidence, more argument, more.
         But with all this evidence, really and truly,
    isn't the answer to this question -- in light of
    this instruction, isn't the answer no, really?
         All right.  That concludes my closing argument.
    I'm sure you're happy about that.  I've gone on long
    enough.
         But Mr. Brown -- I mean, Mr. Shields gets to
    get back up again.  Why?  Because he has the burden of proof.  He has this burden of proof.  And he gets
    to address you again to try to convince you that in
    fact he has satisfied this burden of proof.
         And I don't know what he's going to say, but I
    just want to leave this thought with you:  Where was
    this evidence about Mr. Brown -- not the general
    public, not America:  Mr. Brown?
         Thank you.
         And thank you.
