MR. REID: Thank you, Your Honor, may it please the Court.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
I should thank you again, for we're getting closer. And there may be, depending on what happens, some more witnesses, but we're getting close and we're all working very hard to finish.
I would suggest to you that the most important concept for this phase of the trial is the concept of causation.
Now I will not insult you by bringing my drawing out again that I made of the bridge. Because it wasn't very nice and people made a lot of fun out of it. But that's the point.
They have to connect something that the companies did, the evidence that they put in, with the claims made by Ms. Calloway in response -- in representing for her husband. There has to be a causal connection.
You've seen documents. A number of times Dr. Proctor and others would pull a document out, read it and say: Well, Dr. Proctor, was that document ever shared with the public? And he would say no, and that would be the end of
it, and they would move on, because Dr. Proctor could not connect anything he said to Mr. Calloway.
Now when counsel began talking about the case, he told you that we were here to decide what the damage or what the responsibility should be to Ms. Calloway. If you remember I commented at the end of Phase I there was this real rush to get to Phase II. Now there's a real rush to get to the end of this form, the numbers on the verdict form, the damages. There's a lot that we have to talk about between those two points. And that's what I would like to share with you today.
Every claim in this case, compensatory damage claims, the liability claims, the fault, the punitives -- everything has to cross that bridge. There has to be a causal connection.
In fact, when the Judge first read to you those findings this morning in his instructions, the very next thing he said, the very next thing he told you about was the charge about causation. So those two are intertwined. There's liability, and there has to be a causal connection.
Now there are really four general areas that the plaintiff has used throughout this Phase II to try to solve this problem, that is to try to prove that something that the companies did had an impact on Mr. Calloway's decisions to smoke and his decisions never to try to quit seriously except one time.
The first of these four would be the findings. You heard -- the Judge instructed you. They read them to you in opening. They read them to you this morning again, kept showing them. Kept talking about them. No one is contesting any of those findings.
But as I reminded you in opening and as the evidence that is borne out, that jury never knew Mr. Calloway. They didn't know Mr. Calloway's story. That jury could not have decided the next step. And if you think about how much time was spent in this trial with the plaintiffs trying to prove something that's not in dispute. All the discussion about whether or not there is a carcinogenic substance in smoking; whether smoking is addictive. All the findings, whether it's defective -- all that is admitted. There was no reason to do any of
that. There was no reason, because that's not an issue in this case.
The Judge instructed you that you're bound by those findings.
But, without evidence connecting Mr. Calloway somehow to those findings, those findings have no meaning in this case. You have to have the causal connection.
Now the second point or the second summary of their evidence had to do with advertisements. You saw them through two or three or four witnesses, Dr. Proctor,
Ms. Calloway, Mr. Frank Calloway, this morning and so forth. In fact, Dr. Proctor even told you that somehow an ad in a magazine in color would completely wipe out anybody's understanding of the risk of smoking which might be contained in a black-and-white article in the same magazine.
And you have an example of that over here in the Ebony Magazine. Ten Things That are Bad For Your Health. Dr. Proctor would have you believe that once somebody saw that ad, they forgot everything they ever knew about the risk of smoking.
Now nobody has suggested that there wasn't advertising around throughout Mr. Calloway's life. The question is not really whether he saw it; it's whether the ads caused him to make a decision. Is there a causal relationship between any of the advertisements and his decision. And the answer to that is if you look at all of the evidence together, the overwhelming weight of that evidence is no. Mr. Calloway did not talk about ads and did not make smoking decisions based on ads.
As you heard from his daughters and other witnesses, Mr. Calloway's sole reason for smoking, for choosing, was price. And you heard that over and over. There is occasionally someone may have said: Well, we saw some ads together. But there is no evidence that Mr. Calloway made a decision. There is no causal relationship.
The third thing that you've heard a lot about are the documents. And I'll talk about documents that belong to Reynolds, and you may hear some other discussions.
In fact, of all this pile of evidence,
out of the whole 60 million pieces of paper that are out there on the web that Dr. Proctor told you can be searched, leisure-like, they offered 36 documents that have anything to do with Reynolds or any of the other two companies that are related. 36. They didn't bring you any testimony from any Reynolds employee to talk -- explain or to talk about them. You did hear some testimony, but you didn't hear anything about them. They were put into evidence without any explanation.
And I suggested to you in opening that when you see these documents, it's a good idea to maybe think about what is the connection with Mr. Calloway. And the answer, as you now know, is none. No connection. Mr. Calloway didn't see these documents. It had -- they had no effect on Mr. Calloway. And I want to talk in more detail about them later. But they had -- the first step, the causal connection, just isn't there.
Think about how they used them.
Dr. Proctor was on the stand a long time, a day and a half, I think, altogether. And he would pick a sentence or two out of a document and
sometimes they would show you a sentence or two from a document and that's it. And remember how many times Dr. Proctor would say -- he would be asked a question about some topic and he would say: Well, the documents show ...
I tried to count it up. It was many, many times. Well, why didn't he show you the documents that he said over and over and over showed something?
He was just satisfied to say: The documents show.
And there are two or three that I thought I would look at right now that really make this point better than anything I could probably say. If you remember there was a document by Dr. Alan Rodgman, and this is the one I used.
And you remember when it was shown to Dr. Proctor there were two highlighted portions, and that's really all they discussed with you.
And what we find out is, on the second page of this document there is substantial information about the very topics of this case.
And basically, if you remember Dr. Proctor said, there were four kinds of evidence:
epidemiological, pathological, biological and chemical studies. He said those were the four areas of study that you would have to look at to find out what the relationship is between smoking and health. And he went through every one of them and he gave the pro and the con.
For some reason it was decided not to talk about the rest of this document with you.
All you saw was the heading and one sentence saying: The amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. But they didn't show you the rest. That's an example.
Another document that they talked to you about was another Dr. Rodgman, and this was in November 2nd, 1959. Again, you remember they put it up on the Elmo, and they talked to you about this, which talks about there are some carcinogenic substances that had been found in smoke. And then they talked about there is no evidence that they will produce cancer in human beings. And then one sentence on the back, the physiological requirements.
Once again, Dr. Proctor didn't testify about the middle paragraph. Eight of the
polycyclic hydrocarbons isolated from the smoke are known to produce cancer in mice, another five or six were suspect and cancer-producing agents in laboratory animals.
Now the significance of this document is this is an example. Because after talking about this, typically they would say to Dr. Proctor: Well, was this ever sent to Mr. Calloway? Was it shown to Mr. Calloway. Did Mr. Calloway know about this document? Well, what you found out is, if we look at slide 2, the very same information was contained in the 1959 Reader's Digest article. Hardly a secret.
That's an example of how they're trying to use these documents.
You also heard from Dr. Proctor about a document that Dr. Teague wrote. And Dr. Proctor said this was a secret document.
And the point of the secret document is that every time he would be asked that he would always say -- he would always be asked: Was this ever shown to Mr. Calloway? And the answer was: No.
And then the argument was made this
morning. Well, if that document had been shown to Mr. Calloway, he would have stopped smoking that day. You heard that argument today over and over and over.
Dr. Proctor said it was secret. Well, it was secret in the sense that it wasn't mailed to anybody.
But let's see what the document actually said. Let's look at the third slide. This was the document where Dr. Teague was a young chemist and they sent him out to the public libraries, medical libraries, open to everybody that wanted to read it, and he found 78 different articles, all about smoking and health that had been published since -- I think it goes back to the '30s. It's a publicly available list.
It wasn't a secret. Reynolds was in the early -- this was the early days of the study of cigarette smoking in the United States, and the first thing they wanted to do was find out what was out there. Who has done research? What does the research show? That's what Dr. Proctor agreed a good company would do.
Now, he also -- we went through the
document, and I pointed out several paragraphs to him and he agreed that they were all correct. Again, he doesn't discuss them until I asked him about it in cross-examination.
One of the things that he talked about with Dr. Teague was the effect of nicotine.
Let's see the next slide, please.
Dr. Teague wrote, in this document, made reference to something he said: That nicotine may be a sine qua non of tobacco products, and Dr. Proctor told you that was a secret, that the public didn't know about that. Well, 22 years before in Reader's Digest they said: Nicotine is an essential ingredient of tobacco.
It's what makes tobacco tobacco and not another weed. It's the same thing Dr. Teague said, and he said it's similar. So how can that be a secret when 22 years ago it was published in Reader's Digest.
But that's not all. If we can see the next slide.
Dr. Teague again: A tobacco product is in essence a vehicle for delivery of nicotine.
You heard a lot about that today, that a cigarette is a delivery vehicle for nicotine.
And that's part of what they contend to be the hidden fact that would have caused Mr. Calloway to change his smoking habits.
But again, 40 -- 30 years before that:
On the assumption that smoking tobacco is essentially a means of administering nicotine, just as smoking opium is a means of administering morphine. In 1942. Again, it wasn't secret.
You know, if you took a film of sports and you decided to film every shot that Michael Jordan ever missed or every strikeout that Babe Ruth had or every incomplete pass that Dan Marino had and you looked only at that, you would come away thinking: Not a very good baseball player, not a very good basketball player, not a very good football player.
But that is what is happening here.
They're pulling pieces of documents out -- and again, out of the 60 million pages, 36 documents -- and they're showing you two sentences in it and moving on. But fortunately you get to see the whole documents and you'll get an opportunity to review this.
Now that's the third. The findings, the
RJR documents, and the advertisements.
The last is what I will call half-truths.
Dr. Proctor spent a lot of time saying things to you that when you heard the whole story, you realized he didn't tell you the whole story when he was being asked questions on direct examination. For instance, he told you over and over, and he said it to me a number of times in cross, and you heard it today, that the filters, the use of filters, was a fraud.
You heard that this morning.
But on cross-examination, Dr. Proctor -we went through eight different sources, and they all said it saves, it cuts down on cancer. They do epidemiological studies; it's better for you.
And these aren't people who are friends of the tobacco industry. There were three Surgeon General reports, '79, '81, and '90.
Dr. Wynder, Dr. Russell. There is the '75 Surgeon General. And you heard of Dr. Karl Hammond and Dr. Auerbach. Dr. Proctor said those are all -- and every single one of those people had a study, and I read him pieces from it and every one he said: That's wrong, that's
wrong, that's wrong.
You will have to be the judge whether that's fraud or not. In fact, he even admitted at one point there were studies.
MR. HAMMER: Excuse me, Judge, can we approach?
THE COURT: What is the objection?
MR. HAMMER: They've been found guilty of the fraud.
THE COURT: Objection noted. It's overruled. This is argument.
Proceed.
MR. REID: He said, beginning of the '50s -- I move to strike counsel's comments, because that's incorrect.
THE COURT: Counsel, I ruled on the objection. Let's move on.
MR. REID: Now beginning in the '50s, the public health community advocated something along this line. Yes, some people in the public health. And there were studies to demonstrate that filters had an effect, weren't there? Well, I haven't discussed those. He didn't discuss those. But yes, there's some literature on that.
Well, you saw it there, eight different studies over the years.
That's the half. That's what I mean by half-truth. He told you that filters were worthless and a fraud. Yet when you heard the whole story, you found out many people disagree with Dr. Proctor.
Another half-truth was about the CTR,
Council for Tobacco Research.
Dr. Proctor told you that they funded -he called it distraction research. In other words, he said their research was not research trying to -- about smoking and health; it was about something else that had nothing to do with smoking and health. And in effect it's a front organization. That's what he was trying to say, that they got the money, they did all this stuff that didn't have anything to do with smoking and health, they patted themselves on the back.
Well, you know, on cross -- and by the way, he said he had read maybe 100 of the 7,000 articles, said he had read less than 1 percent of all the tobacco documents, but on cross I pulled out a selection of those articles, I
went through every one of those.
MR. GDANSKI: Your Honor, I object, not in evidence.
MR. REID: Cross-examined him about each of these.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection noted. Overruled.
MR. REID: Every single one of these.
And you can look at the titles. And he agreed those had to do with smoking and health. And you can see as early as '60, and so forth.
Now he told you there were none. I just pulled out ten at random. If he -- he also said that CTR only funded people who agreed with the company position, and they would not fund people who disagreed. If you remember, I went through these and read the titles, I read the conclusions, and virtually all of these were not something that would be considered friendly to the tobacco point of view. They were finding relationships as this science unfolded over the years.
Did Dr. Proctor show you a single article that was, quote, distraction research that was on something totally unrelated? Did he show
you a single situation, a single document proving that somebody's money was taken away after they read the results of this?
We're talking about some future Nobel Prize winners funded by CTR.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, objection, that's not in evidence. Move to strike.
THE COURT: Sustained.
Jurors, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
Proceed.
MR. REID: And the Surgeon General. When the Surgeon General does a report on smoking and health, you can assume that the topic is smoking and health. And 600 times the Surgeon General has included cites and references to research funded by the council that's in evidence.
MR. HAMMER: Objection, there's been no number.
MR. REID: Your Honor, may we approach?
THE COURT: The objection is noted. It's overruled.
Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. This is
counsel's closing argument trying to persuade you as to what's in evidence, as to his take on what is in evidence. You rely on your own recollection of the evidence. Thank you.
Proceed.
MR. REID: You can look at all the Surgeon General reports when you go back in and you'll find articles that are funded by the CTR 600 times.
Now why would the Surgeon General include cites and references to articles if they didn't have anything to do with smoking and health? Obviously that doesn't make sense. The topic of the volume is smoking and health. It cites 600 times.
That's what I would suggest to be -- that you could consider as half-truths.
Now I would like to talk a little bit more in detail about some more of this evidence that you've heard.
To start with, in the very first paper that was filed in this case way back when this case started, by counsel for Ms. Calloway,
Ms. Calloway admitted that Mr. Calloway was at fault partially for his smoking decisions. And
specifically -- can we see slide 9, please.
MR. GDANSKI: I object. Please take it down.
MR. REID: Take the slide down.
MR. GDANSKI: May we approach?
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
THE COURT: What is the objection?
MR. GDANSKI: Pleadings are in evidence --This is the third time.
MR. REID: It's an admission by a party, by the representative of the party. And they have talked about it. They have recited it. They've characterized it. And they show what they actually pled. They talked about it extensively in their closing today.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection is sustained.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. REID: You will recall that it has been discussed today that Ms. Calloway has conceded at least some fault based on the frequency and duration of Mr. Calloway's attempts to quit.
Now this really amounts to -- you heard the charge about cause and so forth. This really amounts to an admission that Mr. Calloway's negligence or his fault was a legal cause of his death. And you have to determine what that means.
And I would suggest to you that if Mr. Calloway was completely unaware of the risks of smoking, if that were a fact, if there had been evidence to support that, there would never have been an admission that his decisions regarding frequency and duration of quitting is a legal cause. They are admitting essentially, Ms. Calloway is admitting through her lawyers, that Mr. Calloway should have quit, and more importantly, that he had the ability to quit.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, objection. That's not the case at all. Improper statement.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection noted. Counsel, overruled. This is argument. This is defendant counsel's take on the evidence.
Thank you.
Proceed.
MR. REID: If Ms. Calloway through her lawyers believed that it was impossible for
Mr. Calloway to quit, there would be no admission that he was even partially at fault.
By admitting that he's at least partially at fault, that's an admission that he had the ability to quit and didn't.
Now, they've asked you to look at percentages and all that, and we will talk about that later.
But if you think about frequency and duration, what evidence has there been about that? And you saw a slide in the first phase.
Can I see slide 10? That slide tells you why this admission was made. Because from 1948 through 1972, there were no attempts to quit. That's frequency.
The next four years there were two or three, some years. That's duration, because they only lasted a short while. And finally, between '80 and '90, there may have been two more. That's the reason for the admission.
That slide right there tells you that Mr. Calloway's frequency and duration of quitting is a legal cause of his injury and subsequent death in this case. Because there was no frequency and there was no duration, now
that you've heard the evidence.
So when this case started, before anybody had filed any responses or anything,
Mr. Calloway was the only -- Ms. Calloway through her lawyers, that was the only admission as to the cause. 100 percent at that point.
MR. HAMMER: Judge -MR. REID: So now what has happened -MR. GDANSKI: Whoa, whoa, whoa. Excuse me, Judge. Objection. Jury instruction states exactly what -MR. REID: Judge, we shouldn't have speaking objections.
THE COURT: Objection noted. It's overruled, Counsel. This is closing argument.
All right?
Proceed.
MR. HAMMER: Could we approach a minute, Judge?
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
THE COURT: Counsel, I'm sorry, this is my problem. I'm tired of all these sidebars.
There are so many sidebars it's ridiculous.
It's interrupting closing arguments. You both do it. I'm tired of it. Okay?
MR. HAMMER: Judge, I agree.
THE COURT: So let me rule on the objections.
MR. HAMMER: The only problem, Judge, is if the lawyer is going to state the law, you've got to state it correctly. The law is the instruction you gave in this case with regard to fault. And he's misquoting the law. It's a law in this case that you gave to this jury.
He's misquoting the law. It's improper.
MR. REID: I'm talking about the date the complaint was filed before the first answer was filed. That was the only thing of record.
That's what I'm talking about. I'm going to now move into the trial and balance. We start there.
MR. HAMMER: In the complaint it says "in combination." It wasn't 100 percent fault. It was in combination. So it's a misstatement of the law you gave this jury. It's directly in contradiction to the law.
THE COURT: Anything else?
MR. HAMMER: No, sir.
THE COURT: Objection is overruled.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. REID: So what I would like to do is talk about what evidence the plaintiffs have offered in this case to try to shift a percentage or a portion of that responsibility or fault that they concede to the defendants.
Now again, the principal witness that you heard in Phase II was Dr. Proctor. And I hesitate to do this again. Dr. Proctor gets paid. He's made more than all the other experts probably that you heard during the first phase combined, over a million dollars.
He doesn't even have to do anything; he just comes in and gives his testimony. It's the same story that he has told to jury after jury after jury across the country.
He's on the faculty out at Stanford, but you found out what his real job was, it's doing what you saw here today, for $4800 every single day, a sign-up bonus, and e-mails to colleagues when a plaintiff wins a case, victory.
So that's Dr. Proctor.
And he knew nothing about -- you would
think if -- knowing -- and everybody understands that there has to be some causal link between all of the things he talked about and Mr. Calloway, he would have been interested to at least read Mr. Calloway's -- or Mrs. Calloway's deposition or the children's deposition to learn about Mr. Calloway. He doesn't do that. He gets paid for showing up and going home, and that's all.
He doesn't have time, and he said he wasn't interested in the individual plaintiff.
So what he tried to do is, he pulled snippets of documents out, as we talked about a minute ago, and he had no proof that Mr. Calloway -- that he's had any connection.
So his fallback position was: Well, the public did, and Mr. Calloway is in the public, so he must have.
Well, he's wrong on both counts, based on the evidence.
The undisputed evidence is that Mr. Calloway, as well as the general public, were fully aware of the risks associated with smoking, the effect of quitting or not, addiction, habituation, whatever you want to
call it, for many, many years. That's the evidence you've heard.
Now I told you at the beginning some of the evidence from Phase I, we talked about different topic, would also apply in Phase II.
So that's where I'm coming to. In Phase II the question is whether or not Mr. Calloway was aware of the risks associated with smoking.
And you've seen some of these before, so I'm not going to dwell on them. But long before the warnings, long before any of the later things that happened, Mr. Calloway told his son, Harry, when he blew smoke in 1964, he told his son: This will kill you.
And then his brother Frank talked about the media blitz, remember, the media blitz in the '60s, and he told him about the same thing.
And then his brother said also -- his brother quit about '70. He said: I told him before and after quitting. You've seen that testimony before. He told his brother what it was doing to his body and that it would kill him. Again, after he -- before we got to the later times.
You heard his wife -- I didn't use the
word but somebody said "nagged," regularly, over time told him. He told his daughter during a car trip not to smoke, it wasn't good for her. He told his other daughter, even when she said -- when counsel this morning showed the slide that said: See, he thought lights were better for him. He just then completely ignored the second part, which was the word from his small daughter that it's still a cigarette.
So he got a warning from her. Even when he said something about lights, he immediately got a warning, a very personal warning from his daughter.
Every time -- can we see slide 16 -- over the years from 1966 on, every time -MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object. It's not in evidence.
MR. REID: It's an appendix to the 1989 Surgeon General's report.
THE COURT: Objection noted. Overruled.
MR. REID: Every time he picked up a pack starting in '66, he was warned. He was warned by the manufacturer of the product. In '70s, it changed. In '85, until his passing, there
have been four different warnings.
300 and -- I count it up. If you assume he smoked about two packs a day, that was
350,000	specific warnings about -- warnings or cautions or hazards about smoking and health. Every time he saw -- we talked about all these advertisements.
After 1972, every advertisement had a warning on them. And after his heart attack in 1991, his doctors you heard told him he should stop smoking, as did his wife. Remember the testimony from the daughter that she was very upset when she heard he started smoking again.
So he had direct personal knowledge. He was also surrounded by family members who also had personal knowledge. Personal knowledge.
And I guess I skipped over the one just to give you a little summary.
Let's see 11 again.
And that's surrounding personal knowledge of Mr. Calloway, where he had personal knowledge. And remember you heard today if he had only known smoking was bad for him, he would have quit. How many times did you hear that said this morning? How many times? Well,
ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is that he did know, and he didn't quit.
Let's go back to the other one, the family.
Thank you.
So that's the warnings that Mr. Calloway personally. But you heard testimony from Dr. Proctor about the worldwide -- the nationwide awareness for years. He told you that he had studied the personal -- people's attitudes about smoking and what the polling showed about smoking and so forth.
Starting in 1949, you remember he showed you -- he talked about a poll -MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object, polls have never been placed in evidence.
MR. REID: Demonstrative.
THE COURT: Objection's noted, Counsel. Overruled.
Proceed.
MR. REID: 1949, 52 percent. And Dr. Proctor, after he looked at each of these,
I said: Is that consistent with your personal research into the history of smoking? And he said yes every single time. He didn't tell you
that in direct. He told you people didn't know.
Let's see the next one.
90 percent had heard. Remember there were polls where you were asked have you heard about something as opposed to do you believe it. This was a Have You Heard poll in 1954.
Now this is to put that 90 percent in perspective. When you see all the things, more people knew -- had heard about smoking being a problem than knew that Al Gore was vice president or new that Ms. was the new term for Miss or Mrs.
Let's see the next one.
This is a Do You Believe poll. Do you think it's bad. And there it's 70 percent. So you see the difference. More people have heard, but 70 percent believe.
And is there a another one there?
And then this was in the Surgeon General's report that the plaintiffs put into evidence, and it's a summary of polls going back to the '70s, up through the '80s, about ten years. And you see it went from '90, and this is "smoking is harmful." It's '90 to '94.
How can it be said that Mr. Calloway did not know that smoking was harmful? And if he had known, he would have quit, and we wouldn't be here today. You heard that numerous times this morning.
Then Dr. Proctor talked about some other things. He talked about 1492, Christopher Columbus, addiction; John Quincy Adams; Mark Twain; the Florida Health Notes in 1906. Smoking was banned, he told you, in the teens and the '20s.
He also talked to you about whether the knowledge of smoking was available in the public domain and other places, and he talked about the Reader's Digest. And you remember that that was the award they got because it's November of '24 -MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object this is not in evidence.
MR. REID: It's a demonstrative.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection's noted. Overruled.
MR. REID: Actually, it is in evidence.
We put it in with -THE COURT: I overruled the objection.
MR. REID: Profound influence in creating public awareness. Remember, Mr. Calloway, it's admitted, read Reader's Digest.
You saw movies. Dr. Proctor said if it's in a movie that's humorous, that's making fun of smoking. But the reality is sometimes humor sends a message better than seriousness. Leave It To Beaver, for instance, when you saw that clip, I suspect that that clip would have more effect on a young person than a written document.
But you saw, nonetheless, regular use of the -- the regular information about the risks of smoking.
You've heard the song, Smoke Smoke ... but that was in 1947. You heard about slang terms.
Now moving into the '50s, you saw the Wynder and Graham. Now we are into Life Magazine, which I think Dr. Proctor said that's the pictorial version of the Reader's Digest.
And then we saw coverage of newspapers. Everywhere Mr. Calloway lived. You didn't see any evidence from the plaintiffs that contradicted any of this. Everywhere he lived,
Hattiesburg, Chicago, Fort Lauderdale. You're going to see some from Fort Lauderdale and Miami. And remember, Mr. Calloway read the newspapers cover to cover. You see these articles.
Remember, Dr. Proctor said: Well, the articles sometimes would have the tobacco side of the debate in them. Remember he talked about the kite and the tail. Well, the kite is the big part, smoking is dangerous, and then at the end, the tail, it might say somebody from the tobacco company said thus and so about this. Even Dr. Proctor, the kite was the story about the risk of smoking. Mr. Calloway read those papers cover to cover.
And you also heard what the various public health officials said in the '50s.
Remember Dr. Burney, the Surgeon General. This is testimony from Dr. Proctor. Do you recall him saying that the public had been informed through excellent coverage of the press, radio and TV?
And then the next one was Dr. Heller, who was the director of the National Cancer Institute. There it is: Newspapers, radio, TV
have done excellent job covering an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public.
And finally, Dr. Horn, Daniel Horn.
Dr. Proctor told you he was one of the most important American cancer researchers. He said: Do you recall Dr. Horn saying that you could stand on a rooftop and shout "smoking is dangerous" at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know in 1968.
Notwithstanding -- and you also saw a series of public service announcements. One had the guy from Dallas, JR, and others. You saw those. It was everywhere, and you saw no evidence to contradict that except there were some ads.
Now, the argument was made today that, well, all that's fine and good, but why didn't the tobacco companies say something about this'
And here's why. As Dr. Proctor explained, even -- there were comments from the tobacco company, as he talked about the tail on the kite. But there have been studies of what people -- how people receive messages about health from various entities.
And the first one, the Roper Poll,
3	percent said who would you be most apt to believe. Counsel says if a tobacco company had said smoking is risky, smoking causes cancer,
Mr. Calloway would have stopped smoking that very day and never smoked again if a tobacco company made that statement. Well, you know now that there were statements such as that,
Dr. Proctor told you about them. They didn't make any difference.
1968, the tobacco companies, most reliable sources. 1970, the same. '72,
4	percent. And then 3 percent, and even Tobacco Institute was specifically mentioned.
So what you have here is, this question, all of this evidence relates to whether Mr. Calloway was -- what his contribution was to his illness.
Could I see the verdict form, the third question? We've got to look at a couple of these, and I thought we would look at them as we go along.
That's where you will get to decide if Mr. Calloway's level of knowledge about the risks of smoking and his decisions based on
that knowledge not to quit, what percentage that should be.
You know, when counsel says if the tobacco companies had merely said:
Mr. Calloway, our products are risky, he would have stopped. Is that common sense? Is that supported by the evidence? Mr. Calloway's brother couldn't get him to stop; his son, his daughters, his wife, his doctors.
All of the information that Mr. Calloway had caused him to try to stop. You remember we counted it up 30, maybe 30 -- parts of 30 days out of the 15,000 days that he smoked. Is it believable that if there had been a letter from R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company to Mr. Calloway that said: Our product is risky, that that would have overridden everything he knew, everything else? Would have made any -- if those people couldn't get him to stop, it's hard to understand how a defendant or a company could get him to stop.
And furthermore, perhaps the argument -we heard a lot of Phase I today about addiction and all that. But counsel said something interesting. He was talking about the period
in the '70s, Mr. Calloway was not, as he called it, hopelessly addicted yet. He said: If we had given him some information earlier, when he was smoking less than a pack a day -- that's the statement was made -- if we told Mr. Calloway something about smoking being risky when he was smoking less than a pack a day, when he was, as counsel said, not hopelessly addicted, it would have made a difference.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, from 1948 until 1972, when he was divorced, he smoked less than a pack a day, throughout that entire period. Now counsel just told you he was not hopelessly addicted. So the question we ask is: Why didn't he try during that period?
There was no dispute. There was never a single solitary attempt to stop smoking between 1948 -- you heard testimony from his first wife, Evelyn Calloway, from 1948 to 1972. And we now know it really wasn't until '75 or '76 when he tried.
Now if he wasn't hopelessly addicted, as counsel admits, why didn't he try? Because we know that he knew all about how to try to quit.
He knew people who quit. He knew all about the risks.
So I would suggest, going back to the verdict form, that the correct way to fill that in, when you consider all the evidence, coupled with the fact that they haven't shown any connection between anything Reynolds said and did and Mr. Calloway, I submit that Mr. Calloway's number should be 100 percent.
He knew it was bad for him. He chose not to, he wasn't hopelessly addicted, and the whole world knew it was bad for him.
So that is Question 3.
The reason I say zero for the others is they haven't crossed that bridge of causation.
They haven't shown you that Mr. Calloway smoked because of something the companies did, other than sell cigarettes, and we're allowed to do that. That's a legal product. It's not been banned. Congress has said you can do it.
So short of taking cigarettes -- as counsel suggested to you today that we should have stopped making cigarettes, we should have told our customers don't buy cigarettes, short of that, there's no way. That's why I say a
zero to those, because they haven't crossed the bridge.
Now the next series of testimony, or evidence I would like to talk about, has to do with concealment. The claim that's made here is that the tobacco companies, the defendants, concealed facts, didn't inform Mr. Calloway of the risks of smoking and health or the risks associated with smoking or the addictive quality of cigarettes, and so forth, we didn't advise him of those.
Now in the instructions the Judge gave you, he told you that this relates to information which is not otherwise known or available.
Could I see that slide, please? This is in your package, when you read the finding about concealment.
So you have to decide if there's a fact, you have to decide it's not just that Mr. Calloway didn't know it; it's was it not otherwise known or available.
And that's why we talked about all of these facts about smoking and health. Was it available or was it otherwise known? And the
evidence so far has been that it was.
Dr. Proctor told you, number one, unlike what you've heard here today, that people don't get all of their information about smoking and health from tobacco companies. The suggestion made here today was that we're the only source of information, and that Mr. Calloway would have believed the tobacco companies, instead of anything else he heard in his life.
Or it needs to have a relationship. He admitted there are a lot of ways people get information about the risks of smoking. And you're seeing those in your deliberation.
Dr. Proctor also said -- and this is, he said, was common sense: You can't say something is a secret if somebody knows it. You can't conceal what is already known.
If Mr. Calloway -- if you believe Mr. Calloway knew that smoking was risky, that smoking was hard to quit or could be addictive, that smoking could kill him, if he knew all of those facts, it doesn't matter where they came from. He cannot claim or his widow cannot claim that something was concealed that would be recoverable in this case.
Let me see Verdict 4 through 7, please.
These are the questions you have to answer. Was there a concealment or omission of material information by each defendant? And the reason for the difference is you'll have to look and see. If you believe there was something concealed, you have to figure out when it was concealed. That's why you have the two dates. You may decide that something was concealed, say in 1975, and that nothing was concealed after 1982. That's your -- for you to decide.
But remember, if it's known or otherwise available, it can't be concealed. And that's why the answer to that question ultimately should be no.
Let's just look at Number 7. This is just the last one. It's before and after, before and after.
Now Dr. Proctor elaborated further on this. And I have to say, I quote him because he is obviously not a friend of the tobacco industry. He earns the majority of his livelihood writing books and going around and testifying. But even Dr. Proctor had to admit
some things that you just can't avoid.
Look at slide 38. Dr. Proctor said: On the question of public statements, would you agree that, say, between '50 and '94 you're not aware of any statement or any time where Reynolds asserted publicly that smoking was not addictive? He said: That's correct. And he said: The Surgeon General had a different view and so forth.
And I said: But I'm talking about all the way back from '50 to '94, never a public statement by Reynolds that cigarette smoking is not addictive? And he couldn't find one. This man can do laser searches through the 60 million pages of tobacco documents that are available and he couldn't find one.
He also -- look at 39, please. Talking about TIRC. Because you saw a lot of evidence about the Tobacco Institute which was part of TIRC at one point.
Would you agree with me that you've never been able to find any evidence, empirical evidence, that any statements by TIRC created ignorance about the risk of smoking? He said: Well, yeah, there's no -- you know, you
don't -- you can't go from one mind into another, in a sense. You're right, you can't, you know, prove a direct link.
That's Dr. Proctor saying there was a concealment. There wasn't -- the tobacco company, TIRC, was not changing people's minds and hiding the fact that smoking was risky.
The last one, 40. On the question about secret company knowledge versus knowledge that was out there, is it fair to say that in the '64 Surgeon General's report that you are unable to identify any fact pertaining to smoking and health that was not known internally -- I'm sorry, that was known internally by Reynolds that was not otherwise known in the published scientific literature?
That's as of '64. And he said: That's sort of true.
The problem with the question, there's so many things published that it's not always possible they're out there. But I think that's generally true. And I said: Based on your research? And he said: Yeah. The things you've done, everything you did for this case, you can't identify anything. He said: Right.
So all these secrets, in his testimony -all these secrets, by 1964, he can't find any time that the Surgeon General said there's some secret in Reynolds' documents that's not out there somewhere in the public.
And I showed you the example of the Reader's Digest. I showed you the example of Claude Teague, 22 years ago in Reader's Digest, 30 years ago in The Lancet. That's what he's talking about.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, objection, can we approach again, please?
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, counsel has made a general statement that there was not -- that they did not conceal or omit any information from the public. That is a finding in this case. It's improper, contesting the findings.
They are not permitted to do that. The jury should be instructed that it's improper to do that, to even make a statement challenging.
That's what this argument is doing. He wasn't talking in general that the tobacco
companies did not admit anything. It was all out there. They've already found to have concealed material information that was not otherwise available.
THE COURT: Wish to be heard?
MR. REID: Yes, sir. This is not at a particular point in time. It's his testimony from '64 back. Find it could be related back to something after '64. I don't know what they found. But this was his testimony under oath.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection is overruled.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. REID: Now, so I submit to you the answer to those concealment questions ought to be no because there's no evidence there was anything that was not known or otherwise available to Mr. Calloway.
Now I want to talk about punitive damages. As the Court instructed you, these are different from compensatory. If you award damages in this case, you will have fully compensated the plaintiffs for the injury they claim in this case. Punitive damages are
damages beyond that.
They don't go -- they go for the plaintiff. They don't go to any government or public health; they go to the plaintiff personally.
And the criteria is, as the Judge told you, a new standard. It's not just preponderance of the evidence. It's now clear and convincing evidence. You've got it with your packages, so I won't dwell on it. But it's a much stronger, tougher kind of requirement than preponderance of the evidence.
And the kinds of things that you have to find, look at slide 42, those are all contained within the instructions that you have. Those are the kinds of behavior that you have to find. I'm going to talk about the evidence with regard to those behaviors as we continue right now.
Now the two reasons that you can award punitives, one is to punish somebody, and one is to make sure they don't do it again.
Punishment and deterrence. Counsel talked to you about that today.
You still have to show causal connection.
You can't show damage to some other person. It's got to be something connected to this particular plaintiff. What punitive act you believe happened, you have to show it caused this plaintiff to either smoke or not to quit or so forth.
Now, Dr. Proctor told you that the magna carta of the conspiracy was the Frank Statement. And that means it is -- and Dr. Proctor was not particularly kind about what the Frank Statement said. The impression that you probably had is that there was just nothing true about it. It was the magna carta, it was the entire conspiracy.
Well, number one, Mr. Calloway never saw the Frank Statement. There is no causal connection between the Frank Statement and Mr. Calloway. It is not proof that Mr. Calloway's injury was caused by anything the tobacco companies did.
So beyond that I would like to talk about it because Dr. Proctor didn't go through the whole thing. He put it up, he told you it was the magna carta, you saw two or three up today, and that was all he did. Counsel argued that
companies should be punished starting with this document.
So I've taken the document and I've marked it up a little bit based on what the evidence has been. Everything in yellow, everything in yellow, Dr. Proctor on that witness stand said is true. Everything in yellow.
And when you go back you can look at -there will be a copy of this in evidence. But these experiments are not regarded as conclusive in the field of cancer research. He said that was true. Eminent doctors have questioned it. He said it was true and so forth. So that's the first step.
So none of those statements could warrant punishment, none.
So let's look at the ones -- these two right here, Dr. Proctor said that there will be no agreement among the authorities regarding what the cause is, that there's no proof that cigarette smoking. Dr. Proctor told you that was slightly misleading. Slightly misleading. That's the best he could do.
But then he agreed that there was a
dispute. It's fair to say, at least up to the middle '50s, there is a legitimate debate about the causal relationship. Depends on who you're talking to. In general there are some honest scientists who disagreed with the consensus.
And there was a debate going on, and there was -- people were arguing the point both ways. I want to show you a slide that I've prepared. In the record, when you go back, look through the documents, you'll see some documents. You heard testimony. Every single one of these names you will find back in the period of time between' 42 and '68, every one of these people raised a question about whether or not there was a causal link between smoking and bad health.
Now this morning counsel said to you that in 1953, when the mice studies came out, we should have just written letters to all of our customers and said: Don't buy our product anymore.
And yet every one of these people, everyone -- and you see where their organizations are. Many of those are in the public health community. Some are
universities. Every one of those folks had questions. Questioned the connection between smoking and health.
And you can't say that all those people are friends of the tobacco industry. You can't say that. These are independent scientists who Dr. Proctor admits this debate went on. Only he didn't take it far enough.
He told you there were these epidemiological studies in 1950. But what he didn't tell you was what those same doctors said about smoking and health. Let's see the first one.
These are Drs. Doll & Hill. They said:
It must be concluded there is a real association, not necessarily to say that smoking causes lung cancer.
Let's see the next one. Dr. Levin, again, he found an association statistically but said it does not establish a causal relationship.
Dr. Schreck, he found associations statistically. But he said there's a wide disagreement on the relationship between smoking and cancer.
So when Dr. Proctor says these are slightly misleading, the fact is they are not misleading at all. They're absolutely true based on that.
The next one says there is no proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes.
I'm sorry, Number 4, the statistics purporting to link. This one he says is false.
Dr. Levin had something to say about that.
Dr. Levin said: Some other unidentified common factor, a leading scientist in the field.
This says that the statistics about cigarettes could be applied to other things.
Dr. Levin agrees.
The one about we accept ... Dr. Proctor said: I can't tell if that's true or not. So you have to consider some evidence.
We accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to others.
So what did my client do over here?
Well, you've heard some of this evidence already. I won't repeat it. You heard about the $300 million CTR funding, 7,000 studies, many cited by the Attorney General, seven future Nobel Prize winners. You heard about
all that. That's one thing they did.
You also read that these studies were published in the most important peer-reviewed journals in the United States. You heard these studies were co-funded by the federal agencies.
Obviously the federal agency would not work with a scientist who was doing distraction research, and many of these were included in the Surgeon General reports. It's not distraction research. That's one thing they do.
What else?
Well, they begin to monitor the public health literature. You saw Dr. Teague's survey in 1953. That was the first thing. And Proctor admitted it was a good summary of the research. He says it's fraudulent because it wasn't mailed out. But he admits it was well done.
Dr. Rodgman in 1962. You saw that document earlier. This tells you what the company is going to be doing trying to find out the answer to the question.
Remember, at the time he wrote this, people hadn't decided the question yet.
Look at slide 55. That was in 1959,
Dr. Rodgman. That's the one I showed you before. We -- can you see? All those things, half a million cigarettes, 120 separate experiments, trying to solve the problem.
That's another thing we did. Research into what causes cancer.
There's more. The product development.
I will just show you a couple of these, but all those scientists that I had on that chart, the eight sources saying that filters work, well, we can see some of these. Dr. Wynder said it. Dr. Russell said it. Smoking filtered cigarettes have shown ... there are eight of those. I won't go through them all. Eight of them.
All Dr. Proctor could say was: I don't agree. I don't agree, I don't agree. But he never showed you a single piece of paper from all these documents he has, all his books, he never showed you anything during the evidence that contradicted that at all.
Reynolds was working hard to find out how cigarettes would be made safer.
Then you heard the testimony about the
tobacco heating instead of burning, Premier and Eclipse. And that testimony came from Dr. Farone, who was a competitor of Reynolds, former Philip Morris.
And he said that Premier was a safer cigarette. And he said it was as close to the ideal cigarette as there is. This is the one that has a little pouch and it heats the tobacco so you don't breathe -- you don't get the carcinogenic things.
You also heard testimony that it was the most significant advance in cigarette history and the closest thing to a safe cigarette.
You heard that Eclipse, which was the second -- that was a complete failure. So instead of packing up and going home, Reynolds continued to spend millions and millions and maybe billions of dollars on Eclipse. And he said he knew they were still working on Eclipse.
That's what Reynolds was doing. You heard all that testimony in this case. To say -- you saw a lot of documents -- not a lot.
You saw a handful of documents written by corporate people back and forth and politicians
and public relations people.
What I'm showing you now is what is actually happening in the laboratories of R.J. Reynolds.
To assign punitive damages in a case you want to try and see if the people who actually took the actions should be punished. And these are the people that are doing this, and they should not be punished.
The next one: We believe -- let's see, where are we are up to: Now we believe the products are not injurious. Dr. Proctor wasn't sure that was true or not. But we know that at the time this was done -- remember, Dr. Proctor said you have to -- remember he called it "presentism." You can't judge this document or any of these documents based on what we know today.
At the time this was written in 1954,
Dr. Proctor had to admit that that was a true statement.
And then it talked about we will always have and will always cooperate. Well, you heard about the Green Monster, funding the Green Monster, with the Surgeon General.
Dr. Proctor didn't like it because it told both sides. He said: Well, they have articles in there that say smoking isn't related to cancer.
I said: Yeah, they have ones that say both. Remember those 20 or 25 doctors who disagreed back then.
But that was the Surgeon General, the
6,000	items that that book entails, plus three or four additional ones. That was to try to help the industry to help the government to help the public health community get to the answer of this question.
And then the designs of tar and low -low tar and filters. You heard testimony yesterday, after all that discussion about the machine smoking, what you heard on redirect was they used those machines because the government required them to use it, and they even had told the government they aren't like real smokers.
The government said use them anyway. That's why the machines were used.
So that's the punishment side.
Do you want to punish R.J. Reynolds?
Putting this up and telling you this is the magna carta and remember the Plaza. The
Attorney General of the United States was invited, his deputy, got the documents. It was written in the paper. It's an odd way to start a secret conspiracy, to invite the government to come in and meet with you. And this is what came out of it.
Dr. Proctor believes that this document is essentially false. And now you know that all of this is true, and there's evidence which contradicts Dr. Proctor's opinion about all of the things he marked up, that he said he couldn't say. He wasn't sure. And the two or three that he said he thought just wasn't -things that weren't true.
That's not a basis, ladies and gentlemen, for punishment when you consider what the company is doing, beginning in 1954, with this.
The other part of the equation is this deterrence. Do you want to make sure that the company never does something like this again.
MR. GDANSKI: Objection.
MR. HAMMER: Objection, wrong standard under the law.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection noted. Overruled.
Proceed, Counsel.
MR. REID: Reynolds is a different company today. You've seen from the documents and you've heard from Dr. Proctor. Most importantly, the world is different today than it was back in the '50s.
Presentism. Dr. Proctor told you at the very beginning he believed in that principle, and yet he proceeded to apply today's standards to everything that ever happened in this company over 50 years.
These employees aren't there anymore who wrote these documents. And I told you some of the documents, you're not going to like them.
They are not going to be documents that anybody would think about writing. It was a different world back then. Now we're talking about the -- is that behavior likely to happen again?
And the answer clearly is no.
First of all, we have an enormous transparency about documents, as you heard from Dr. Proctor.
MR. GDANSKI: I object, Judge.
MR. HAMMER: Can we take that down, please? Can we approach?
THE COURT: What is the objection?
MR. GDANSKI: We need to show Your Honor the slide.
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
MR. GDANSKI: I knew this was coming. There's no evidence to support that. Zero.
Highly prejudicial. Lacks any evidentiary support in the entire case for any defendant to say there's FDA regulation. It shouldn't come out before the jury to the slightest degree.
I'm not sure how it can be substantiated in closing. It would be inappropriate. It was excluded by Your Honor yesterday from Mr. Jupe,
I think his name is.
MR. REID: I thought Dr. Proctor admitted that there was -- because I asked him about President Obama signing it in 2009, and Dr. Proctor admitted there was FDA approval.
MR. GDANSKI: That's not my recollection, and that's not accurate.
THE COURT: Anything else?
MR. GDANSKI: That's it, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and
the following was held in open court:)
MR. REID: As you heard from Dr. Proctor, all of the documents have been assembled. They are searchable, they are available for the public. They cover all the tobacco industries.
It's word searchable.
So Dr. Proctor didn't have to limit himself to a handful of documents. He could have brought you anything that was ever written in the history -- in the last 50 years, and he didn't. He brought you a handful and then he only talked to you about a couple sentences in the handful that he brought.
Dr. Proctor told you that advertising was regulated by the Federal Trade Commission. And the most important thing that you heard going forward is a commitment to safer cigarettes.
Slide 77.
Going all the way back to the '50s,
Reynolds began the research into the carcinogenic substances that could be in smoke.
Remember, Dr. Proctor told you that there were -- that you have chemicals whenever you burn a leaf. And it's 5,000 chemicals, and he talked to you about the size of some of these,
the quantity. And he talked to you about how some of these chemicals are in things like coffee and tea and broccoli. He said if you burn broccoli, you get some of the same.
It was hard to do this. He admitted it's hard to remove. And the companies -- you heard testimony that the companies first tried to remove individual things and found out that some are so small you couldn't find them. So then they went to a general reduction to try to get a lot of things out, hoping that part of that would be -- you heard that testimony.
And that started in the '50s.
Dr. Rodgman in his article that I just showed you, talked about the research they were doing, the tests they were setting up to try to figure out what's in smoke. And then you heard yesterday that much of that information has been shared with the public health community, with the government. In fact, Reynolds invented some of the technology that allowed people to find out what was in smoke.
You saw evidence that the lower-tar and the filtered cigarettes were considered safer by some in the public health community, were
advocated. Reynolds worked with those folks.
Hundreds of millions of dollars.
Reynolds worked with the Tobacco Working Group. This was an organization that the National Cancer Institute put together, and it was public health community scientists, it was tobacco industry scientists and it was government scientists. It went on for ten years.
And you heard some of the things that they worked on. Filters, for instance, was one of the things they worked on. The paper and other types of topics. It was a joint effort for ten years by these three entities trying to figure out how cigarettes could be made safer. That's what Reynolds has been doing in recent years.
I submit to you that -- let's see Question 12.
THE COURT: Counsel, you're approaching your five-minute warning.
MR. REID: Thank you, sir.
I submit to you that when you get to that question, your answer should be no. Think about this for a minute. What would the effect
of a punitive damage award be in this case, considering punishment and deterrence, what effect?
Well, it wouldn't make smokers aware of anything they don't already know. It certainly wouldn't make cigarettes safer. It wouldn't decrease -MR. HAMMER: Judge, objection, that's not the standard for punitive damages.
THE COURT: Thank you, Counsel. This is argument.
Proceed.
MR. REID: It wouldn't decrease the number of smokers, wouldn't ban cigarettes, it wouldn't improve public health.
On the other hand, I want to ask you if you think it's really fair to punish Reynolds to do these things.
Let me see Number 78, please.
Should Reynolds be punished for working since the '50s, spending billions on cigarette design, developing cigarettes endorsed by the public health, working with the government and the public health community, hundreds of millions on an alternative style of -- should
Reynolds be punished for helping to fund
300,000	in research. 7,000 publications.
Should Reynolds be punished for providing part of the money to publish the Green Monster.
Let's see the next one.
MR. GDANSKI: I object to this, Judge.
MR. REID: Take that one down. I'm sorry. Take that one down. Let me have it.
You got it? Okay.
Should Reynolds be punished for all of the things that you've heard about? See, this morning all you heard about was a handful of documents at the highest level of the companies, from people that are no longer there. What you've heard about since lunch was what Reynolds was actually doing in the subject.
And you've heard about what Mr. Calloway actually knew. This morning it was all Mr. Calloway didn't know any of this, and if he had, he would have stopped smoking. So this afternoon we have talked about what Mr. Calloway knew, when he knew it, and what Reynolds was doing at the same time.
Because that's what ultimately answers
the questions.
Now I feel like I need to mention damages. I'll tell you why.
If I don't mention damages, you might hear a lawyer get up and tell you that we agree that the $25 million, I think it added up to,
24, is the right number.
Notwithstanding our position in this case that Reynolds should not bear responsibility, based on all the reasons that I've talked about, essentially what is happening here is that the plaintiffs are seeking $25 million because Mr. Calloway chose to smoke, chose to continue to smoke, and chose to never seriously try to quit.
And if you think of damages when someone's injured, you think of things like did they lose wages, did they lose medical, did they have money -- other expenses.
None of that is being sought in this case. The number you saw this morning is the number that a lawyer thought up and put on a board. Damages have to be fair, and they have to be just. They can't be based on the fact that somebody 50 years ago wrote a very
offensive memo. You have to look at all of the evidence.
You have to look at all of the evidence.
I can't tell you what the number would be, if you get to that point, which I have made it perfectly clear the position of our company is when you look at all of the evidence a damage award is not warranted.
But I did want to talk about it because that number -- for instance, there is a claim for support and services. Well, there has been no evidence of that. There's been -- that means if you have to now hire somebody to do something, that's what that means. There's no evidence. Those numbers are just completely made up by lawyers. They don't -- there is no evidence about that.
You don't even know what Mr. Calloway made. You don't know what he spent money on. It's just numbers.
So I would ask you to consider carefully what kind of message that sends to say that when someone has -- with the complete and total knowledge that you see in Mr. Calloway's case and the complete and total refusal, ever, to
try to quit, does it make sense, is it common sense, to say with that kind of evidence and the fact that there's no evidence connecting what companies did, the causal connection, that all the things you've heard, Mr. Calloway didn't see or rely on, or rely on any of them.
Is that -- does it make sense? Is it common sense? Is it fair to say that as a result of all that, somebody should be awarded 25 million dollars?
I will tell you this, I won't get to talk to you again, we talked about that before. I really do appreciate your attention and your time, and I look forward to your decision based on all of the evidence that you've heard.
Thank you.



MS. GALLAGHER: Thank you.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. I want to start at the same place Mr. Hammer and Mr. Reid did, and that is to say thank you for your service. We've been here for a very long time now, longer than we all expected, and I
know you have made sacrifices to be here. So on behalf of myself and more particularly on behalf of Philip Morris, thank you very much.
Through the course of this phase of the trial you've heard a lot about documents and things that tobacco company executives said. And I'm not going to try to defend those. A lot of what you heard in today's context and back then is just wrong. But that's not what this case is about.
It's about Mr. Calloway. You heard Mr. Hammer talk about the findings. That's part of this case, but it's not what this case is about because this case is about Mr. Calloway.
In order to get from the documents, from the statements, from the findings over here to Mr. Calloway, you have to go over that bridge that Mr. Reid was talking about. And that bridge is legal cause. Because you have to have a connection between the two.
Mr. Hammer told you, Mr. Reid told you, this is about Mr. Calloway's decisions, his decisions about why he started to smoke, his decisions about why he continued to smoke. His
decisions about why he did not quit.
And so to get from here to the other, you have to have that bridge of causation, legal cause. Did what the tobacco companies do or say over here have a substantial and direct impact on the decisions that Mr. Calloway made over here?
Now Mr. Reid talked to you for about an hour and 15 minutes, and I agree with what he told you, and I'm not going to go back through all that.
What I want to do is focus today, in the time I have, which will be a lot less, on Philip Morris and the evidence that you heard specifically about Philip Morris.
And one of the questions you have, because on the verdict form there, is a question for each defendant. And so I want to focus my time on talking about Philip Morris, what Philip Morris has done as a company, what evidence the plaintiff has presented to you about Philip Morris.
And that is, did anything that Philip Morris said or did substantially and directly contribute to impact Mr. Calloway's decisions
about smoking?
MR. HAMMER: Judge, objection, that's not the standard. It's impact, did it legally cause his death. That's the question in every verdict question.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection noted. Again, this is closing argument.
Counsel, proceed.
MS. GALLAGHER: I agree with what Mr. Reid told you, that the plaintiff has not proved her case on these questions, the various issues that you have to answer on your verdict form. But I want to start with looking at the connection between Mr. Calloway and Philip Morris's products, its cigarettes.
You know that Mr. Calloway started smoking cigarettes in 1948. You're familiar with the story now how he went into his parents' bedroom and stole a pack of cigarettes. And Frank said: Well, if you have one, I want one too. So they got that and the two of them smoked their first cigarette together. It was a Camel cigarette. Philip Morris does not make Camel cigarettes.
Then you heard from Frank Calloway, his
brother, because Frank is a person who was around who can tell you what Mr. Calloway smoked from the time they had that first cigarette in 1948 until 1972, when other witnesses could tell you what they saw Mr. Calloway smoke. Frank Calloway is the only person who can tell you in that time period.
And what did he tell you? That he remembers that Mr. Calloway smoked Camels, Pall Malls, Kools, and Winstons.
Philip Morris doesn't make any of those cigarettes. So you know for the first 24 years that Mr. Calloway was smoking there is no connection between Philip Morris products and Mr. Calloway's smoking. There is no evidence that for the first 24 years of his life, of his smoking life, Mr. Calloway ever picked up a Philip Morris cigarette.
Now, we know from Mr. Calloway's second wife, Mrs. Calloway, and their children, Tamara Cartelidge and Starr Williams, that after 1972,
Mr. Calloway smoked all sorts of different cigarettes. And, in fact, Mrs. Calloway told you about, I think it was, 29 different brands of cigarettes that Mr. Calloway smoked.
And she listed all of these out pretty much in alphabetical order and said over the 20 years that they were together, these were the 29 different brands that she could remember that Mr. Calloway smoked. About seven of those are manufactured by Philip Morris.
Now what specific evidence do you have about Mr. Calloway's use of a Philip Morris product? You have one person, Ms. Williams, who says: I remember that my father smoked Marlboro, not because I remember him buying the packages, but because Uncle George smoked Marlboro, and I remember my father bummed a cigarette from him. That's the only specific evidence that you have about a Philip Morris product.
What you do know from Ms. Calloway's testimony, from Ms. Williams, from Ms. Cartelidge, is that Mr. Calloway was not loyal to any particular brand. In fact, not only was he not loyal to any brand, he wasn't loyal to any particular type of cigarette. He smoked menthol cigarettes, he smoked non-menthol; he smoked filtered cigarettes, he smoked unfiltered; he smoked regulars, he
smoked lights; he smoked longs, shorts, kings. He was not particular to any particular type of cigarette, and nor was he loyal to any particular brand of cigarette.
In fact, Mrs. Calloway told you he might smoke one brand for two weeks, he might smoke it for two months, and then he would be off to another brand of cigarettes. And that's important for something I will discuss in a minute.
So what is the connection between Philip Morris and Mr. Calloway?
There is very little connection, if any, in the product.
So what about the statements or conduct of Philip Morris? Now plaintiff is not claiming that any of the tobacco companies said anything wrong at the time that Mr. Calloway started smoking. Remember, the plaintiff's claim is that in 1954, the tobacco companies got together and that's when the plaintiff claims bad things started happening.
Mr. Calloway started smoking back in 1948. So these statements, these video clips, these documents that Mr. Calloway never saw,
obviously had no influence on his decision to start smoking.
Now what the plaintiffs want you to believe is it was ads, there were these ads everywhere, and that is what made Mr. Calloway start smoking.
The thing about the ads, though, is that the plaintiff wants you to believe, in fact they said several times: Everyone back then smoked. That's what everyone did.
Well, Dr. Proctor told you that's not quite true. Because what Dr. Proctor told you was that in the 1950s and '40s, 30 to 40 percent of men were smoking.
60 to 70 percent of the men in the 1930s and '40s, when Mr. Calloway started smoking, saw those same ads and made the decision not to smoke.
When Mr. Calloway started smoking, the majority of men were not smoking. And they saw the exact same ads that Mr. Calloway was exposed to.
So what else could be the reason for Mr. Calloway starting to smoke? Well,
Dr. DiFranza told you. Dr. DiFranza said that
if you are around people where smoking is acceptable, you're more likely to start smoking. Plaintiffs brought you a pamphlet that said: If one of your parents smokes, the child is twice as likely to start smoking.
What do you know about Mr. Calloway's parents? Both of them smoked. That's where Frank Calloway and Mr. Calloway got their cigarettes.
Now, the ads that you have heard about, first of all, Frank Calloway came in and identified several different ads and said, yes,
Mr. Calloway, his brother, Johnnie and I, saw these when we worked at the newsstand. I remember seeing these here or there. Not one of the ads that Mr. Calloway, Mr. Frank Calloway, showed you, plaintiff brought to you from the 1940s, the 1950s, or the 1960s, is a Philip Morris ad.
Not one. The ads that the plaintiffs brought you start later in the 1970s.
So what do you know about Philip Morris ads, supposedly the reason Mr. Calloway started smoking, is that Frank Calloway did not identify a single ad that he remembered of
Philip Morris from 1940s, '50s, or '60s, over the first half of Mr. Calloway's smoking life.
If Philip Morris ads -- and Philip Morris advertised during that time. But if Philip Morris ads, if they worked on other people, certainly didn't work on Mr. Calloway. Because he never purchased any Philip Morris cigarettes during that time period.
Think about when Mr. Calloway started to smoke. The first time he picked up a Philip Morris brand cigarette was in 1972 or later.
He was 40 years old. He had never responded to a single Philip Morris ad by buying a single Philip Morris product prior to that time.
And there's no evidence that Mr. Calloway ever really became a regular smoker of a Philip Morris product. There is no evidence from 1972 to 1992 that he was ever a regular smoker of any tobacco company's products.
We've got 29 different brands up there, and those are the ones Ms. Calloway could remember. We don't even know what else he smoked.
Now, what do we know between this time period when Mr. Calloway started smoking in
1948 until 1972?
During this time period when plaintiff's attorneys have told you that the tobacco companies were making these statements, what we do know is that Mr. Calloway himself was flooded with information about the health risks of smoking. Mr. Reid showed you a lot of that.
The newspapers, the things on the TV, his own family telling him that smoking was risky. And who can forget the story about his son, Harry, with the handkerchief, when he blew through the handkerchief in the early 1960s, and said:
This will kill you.
Clearly during this time period Mr. Calloway was exposed to and understood that smoking was dangerous.
So this brings us to 1972. And ask yourselves for a minute what kind of person was Mr. Calloway in 1972? Was he someone driven by advertising? Was he somebody who could be influenced by these things? Was he a gullible person? Somebody who would believe anything?
He was 40 years old at this time, running his own business, or about to start his own business; a person who was very into the news,
who kept up with world events; a person who was in charge of his own company.
And by the time he was doing all this, it had been about a decade since he had told his young son: Don't smoke, it will kill you.
Now, as I mentioned before, Mr. Calloway switched brands all the time. Two weeks here, two months there, back, switching, not only between brands, but between different types of cigarettes.
And Mr. Hammer told you that Mr. Calloway switched to lights or filtered cigarettes because he thought they were safer. And he says or implied that the tobacco companies were the ones that made Mr. Calloway think that these were safer. Let's talk about that for a minute because that's not what the evidence shows.
What the evidence shows is that Mr. Calloway bought cigarettes based on price. That was the thing that mattered to him when he went to buy a pack of cigarettes. What was on sale? What did he have a coupon for? That's what made him pick a brand or a type of cigarette, is what was cheapest.
And that makes perfect sense because it explains why he switched brands and why he switched types of cigarettes too.
If you're looking for the cheapest cigarette, you don't care what it is, you don't care what brand it is. That's not somebody who is buying a cigarette because of a brand loyalty to a particular tobacco company, and that is not somebody who is buying a cigarette because they believe something that had been said about that cigarette. They are buying it because it's the cheapest.
Where is the connection between anything Philip Morris did? Where is the direct and substantial impact on Mr. Calloway's smoking decisions?
It's not there. Because his decision was based on price.
Now, Mr. Hammer got up and said filtered were a fraud. They are not better for people, and Mr. Calloway smoked filters because he thought they were better.
Well, first and foremost you heard from Mr. Jupe yesterday. Mr. Jupe, who has spent his life designing cigarettes, and specifically
working on making cigarettes safer. Not making a safe cigarette. He explained to you that once you have organic material that is burned, it cannot be safe. It creates chemicals. And some of those chemicals are cancer-causing.
And so any time you burn something organic, you cannot make it completely safe. But he has spent the last 20-plus years of his life trying to make it safer.
And he told you that filtered cigarettes are safer. Mr. Reid showed you the studies that have been out in the public health community saying that filters are safer than non-filtered cigarettes; that low-tar cigarettes are safer than regular high-tar cigarettes.
You even heard it from Dr. Farone, the guy who was fired from Philip Morris and plaintiffs put on as their first witness in this phase. He was asked about the work he did at Philip Morris and working on trying to make a safer cigarette, and he said he was proud of that work, and that he thought he was working on a safer cigarette. By designing things, by filters, by lowering the tar, he was working to
make a safer cigarette.
Dr. Jupe told you -- excuse me,
Mr. Jupe -- told you of all the things that Philip Morris and that he specifically has been working on, to make a cigarette safer, to expose smokers to less of the harmful substances, less of the tar.
But regardless of the possible benefits of a low-tar, a filtered cigarette, which Mr. Jupe told you about, Philip Morris never said a filtered cigarette was safe. Philip Morris never said a low-tar cigarette was safe.
In fact, you've not heard the plaintiffs present a shred of evidence that any tobacco company ever said any cigarette was safe.
And you saw the warnings that Mr. Reid just put up, the different warnings that have been on since -- that were caution statements in 1966 and then went to warnings and then the warnings changed in 1985. All those packages of cigarettes that Mr. Schlesinger and Mr. Hammer had out here.
If you looked at them, they all have the same warning on them. Doesn't matter if they're filtered or unfiltered. Doesn't matter
if they are low-tar or regular. Every single pack of those cigarettes has the exact same warning on them.
Where is the connection between Philip Morris and Mr. Calloway? Where is the legal cause that shows some product, some ad, some statement of Philip Morris affected Mr. Calloway's decisions?
And it hasn't. Let's go back to the ads for a minute. Because the plaintiff hasn't shown you a single ad that's not before the '70s.
Every single ad that the plaintiffs showed you from Philip Morris had the Surgeon General's warning on it. They were all after 1971. There is no connection between Philip Morris and Mr. Calloway. There is no direct and substantial impact from anything Philip Morris said or did that led to any of Mr. Calloway's smoking decisions.
Now on the verdict form it says that the first two questions, the answers to Philip Morris, who I'm talking about, is no. But it's also to the other defendants for the same reasons, that there is no link. There is no
bridge of causation between the statements and the ads to Mr. Calloway's smoking decisions.
It's simply not there.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, objection, that's not the legal standard. It's cause of death. Not decisions.
THE COURT: Thank you, objection noted.
Proceed, Counsel.
MS. GALLAGHER: Thank you, Your Honor.
Okay. The next question goes as to the percentage of fault, and Mr. Reid covered that, so I'm not going to go back over that.
The only thing I want to say is that Mr. Hammer got up and said: Had Mr. Calloway known in 1953, he would have quit. Dr. Proctor told you about all the people who quit in 1953, after the Life Magazine.
There is no reason Mr. Calloway could not have been one of those people. Mr. Calloway knew from his son, Harry, in the early '60s, that smoking could kill you. He was not up to a pack a day at that point, and there is no reason he couldn't have quit then.
Dr. Proctor told you that after the Surgeon General's report 17 million Americans
had quit smoking. And there is no reason Mr. Calloway could not have been one of those 17 million.
He made the decision not to be one of those 17 million.
So let's turn to the next question.
You've seen those. Mr. Reid put these up for you. The documents -- or the questions dealing with concealment. Go ahead. I forget that we have seen this and you have not, except when we show it to you.
I'm talking about these questions here. Concealment or omission of material information. It's before and after May 5th and then agreement to conceal.
The next page is after May 5th. These are the questions I want to talk to you about right now.
Now Mr. Hammer has shown you a few documents. I didn't count them up. It's a handful of documents from Philip Morris over the course of 50 years. And I already told you I'm not going to try and defend those documents. People said some pretty inappropriate things in those. The clips that
you've seen of some of the executives, I'm not going to tell you that those were great.
But there's no evidence that that had any impact on Mr. Calloway. There's been no evidence that he saw any of those TV shows, and there's been no evidence to you that it had a direct and substantial impact on any of these decisions.
And that's what legal cause requires,
"but for." But for that one TV clip, would it have changed what Mr. Calloway did? And there is no evidence of that. There has to be a connection between Philip Morris and Mr. Calloway.
The question before you is not about the public, not about other smokers. It is about Mr. Calloway. So what evidence did the plaintiffs actually bring you about reliance? Something that they actually brought you a witness or brought you a document where there is some connection to Mr. Calloway?
Filters and low-tar cigarettes.
Mr. Hammer said that's why Mr. Calloway smoked them, was because of things the tobacco companies said. Well, what evidence did they
actually really bring you? It was from one person. It was from Frank Calloway.
Mr. Calloway, Frank Calloway, told you that he saw ads about filters and he saw ads about low tar, and that's what led to his conversations with Mr. Calloway, and that's why they switched.
And this was Frank Calloway's testimony on lights.
Now the reason that you switched and Johnnie switched over to lights. How did you hear about the fact that it was lower tar, and lower nicotine? Did you hear about it in the ads? Yes, it was in the ads.
And then he talks about talking to Johnnie about it. And he says: What were you relying on in switching? I'm relying on what I'm reading or seeing on television, hearing it on the radio.
In the ads? In the ads, yes.
What does Frank Calloway say about filters? Okay, and what was the conversation you had with Johnnie about switching to filters?
After seeing ads with filtered cigarettes
were more safer than non-filters ... and then he goes on to explain he and Johnnie talked and they switched to filters. When Johnnie said he was going to do something, he did it.
What about this testimony that tells you when it happened and what ads he's talking about?
Well, you know from Dr. Proctor that after 1971 there were no more tobacco ads on TV or radio. So when he's saying: I heard it on TV and radio, it's got to be before 1971. You also know it actually has to be before 1970. Because Mr. Frank Calloway told you that's when he quit smoking, and he would have no interest in ads, he would have no interest in low-tar or filtered cigarettes if this were after he quit.
So you know he's talking about ads from before
1971.
And what's important for that, from Philip Morris's standpoint, is the plaintiff hasn't shown you a single ad from Philip Morris before 1972.
So whatever ads Mr. Frank Calloway is talking about, it surely does not involve Philip Morris.
Now, what did Mrs. Calloway say about Philip Morris brands? This is the actual testimony that you have about Philip Morris and Mr. Calloway.
What brands -- this is in the context of Mrs. Calloway being asked by the plaintiff's attorneys about different ads from a specific magazine, and let's take a look at some of the ads that appeared in that one. Winston ad, yes. And what is the next one, Benson & Hedges Menthol 100s, yes. Is that one of the brands that Johnnie smoked? Yes, referring to Mr. Calloway.
Well, all that's saying there is an ad in a magazine that she's looking at and that he smoked Benson & Hedges Menthol 100s at one point, which is a Philip Morris brand. What does she say about why Mr. Calloway switched from brand to brand?
Do you know what came into his decision-making process in selecting a certain brand?
No, he was just trying to get that nicotine high. I understand it.
So there is no testimony as to what
Mr. Calloway was doing, what decisions he was making after sometime in the 1960s. The 1960s, is the only evidence that plaintiffs have presented to you as to why Mr. Calloway was doing something.
And even that's a little muddled because if Mr. Calloway thought filtered were safer, if he thought low-tar cigarettes were safer, like the conversation he had with his daughter,
Ms. Williams, where he was smoking a light cigarette, some unknown brand and she says: What is that? And he says: They're better for me. She says: It's still a cigarette. What did he say?
He didn't say: Oh, I'm smoking a cigarette that's safe for me. He said: I'm smoking a cigarette that is better for me. Not a safe cigarette.
And that, ladies and gentlemen, is information that he got back from the '60s, when he and his brother Frank Calloway were talking about filters and low tar. That is the only evidence in this record before you that actually links Mr. Calloway's decisions to something any of the tobacco companies did, or
said.
Mr. Calloway knew the risks of smoking.
Mr. Reid went through that in detail, and I'm not going to go back over it except to remind you that Dr. Proctor said you can't hide something from somebody if they already know it. Mr. Calloway knew the risks of smoking early on in his smoking career.
And one thing, Dr. Proctor talked a lot about messages. Dr. Proctor talked about a lot of things. And I want to remind you of something Mr. Schlesinger said in his closing of the last phase we were in, and that is:
Money is the root of all evil, and people do things for money.
And he told you you should consider that when considering experts, and I think you should do the same with Dr. Proctor.
Dr. Proctor, who is here because he wants cigarettes banned. Which, by the way, is not your job, and not one of the outcomes of this lawsuit. That's at a different level of government than what happens in the courtroom.
Dr. Proctor kept telling you about mixed messages. I don't know if there were other
people out there who got mixed messages, but you know Mr. Calloway did not. Because Mr. Calloway told his own son in the early '60s: Smoking will kill you; a message that he voiced himself. He was not getting mixed messages.
Now the next question on this verdict form is about damages. The next several questions.
And Mr. Hammer expressed a number to you that -- 25 million dollars. And he said, you know, these days athletes and movie stars, they get paid this kind of money, 15 million dollars, I think he said. I think we can all agree that that's a ridiculous amount of money that these people get for doing these things.
The damages that you are to award in this case, if you get that far, is to compensate.
To compensate. Not to make somebody wealthy; to compensate for the losses they have had.
And there is no way to put a specific figure on that.
Unlike support and services, which are two of these questions, Numbers 9 and Number 11. Support and services you can put a real
number on. Except you don't have the evidence for that, because support and services are things like lost income, what it would cost to replace services that Mr. Calloway provided. Help around the house. You just have no evidence of that. That is a number you can put things on, but you can't do it here because you have no evidence for it.
As to the other figures, I mean, that is up to your judgment, and I know you will do what is appropriate if you get that far. But I think you should be thinking in thousands rather than millions. This is compensation, ladies and gentlemen.
Now the last question has to do with punitive damages, and I'm going to talk a little bit about that and then I'm going to sit down. Let me just say that if there is a Phase III, there will be more witnesses.
Plaintiff may not call any, but the defendants will.
This is the last question. And one of the things that I want to point out to you is that it has a different purpose. It is clear and convincing evidence. And you have that
definition in your packet. But it says things like it must be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion. If you hesitate, if the evidence is confusing, then you are not to award punitive damages. It is a higher burden because it is not compensating somebody. It has a different purpose, which Mr. Reid told you about, and that is to punish and to deter.
It has a different purpose and a much higher standard burden of proof.
THE COURT: Five-minute warning, Counsel.
MS. GALLAGHER: Thank you, Your Honor.
And again, punitive damages have to have some relation to Mr. Calloway. Plaintiff's keep getting up and talking about the number of people who died due to smoking-related death. That's not what you're here to award money for.
If you get to this phase, which I don't think you will, for the reasons I'm about to talk about, it is not about the other smokers.
It is about Mr. Calloway. There has to be a connection to Mr. Calloway.
Now the standard, and Mr. Reid mentioned this a bit, is that the defendants must have acted with reckless disregard for human life,
conscious disregard, the equivalent of intentional violation of someone's rights.
Now you heard about inappropriate things -MR. HAMMER: Judge, objection, that is not the legal standard. There's an "or" in each of those paragraphs.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Proceed, Counsel.
MS. GALLAGHER: Thank you, Your Honor.
You've heard about some inappropriate things people at Philip Morris said or wrote.
All of these people are gone. They are no longer at Philip Morris. And I want you to think about what Philip Morris has done over the years when answering that question.
And Mr. Reid talked to you some about this because it is something that all the tobacco companies have been involved in for decades, and Mr. Jupe told you about these.
He told you that in the 1950s and '60s, or early '60s, Philip Morris and the other tobacco companies identified harmful constituents in smoke. And they didn't find these and keep them quiet. They gave them to
the Surgeon General. And they were acknowledged for that in the Surgeon General's report.
In the 1960s, Philip Morris identified ways to try to find these chemicals. Remember, it was a very different world. They didn't have all the machinery, all the technology that we have. So just figuring out how to find these chemicals took a while.
Philip Morris published on that. Philip Morris published on how to identify them and what they were. Philip Morris, as Mr. Jupe told you, tried to find ways to take those substances out. Remember selective risk reduction. The problem is, once you even identify them, you take one out, others can go up. You can't get them all out, and you don't know which combination of the 69 identified to date are actually the ones that cause disease in people.
He told you all about selective risk reduction. He told you about general risk reduction, things like expanded tobacco, reconstituted tobacco, the goal of which is to put less tobacco into the tobacco column so the
person who is smoking gets less smoke.
He told you about ventilation holes and permeable paper so that gas can escape and oxygen comes in from other places, again, so there's not as much tar, as much harmful stuff in each puff.
He told you about filters. He told you he's been working on filters for decades now, improving them. He got patents for them in the last couple weeks.
This has been an ongoing endeavor, an ongoing focus of Philip Morris, is to make the cigarette better, to make it safer. That is what Philip Morris has been working on for decades.
Now, I know it's hard to ignore things like some of the clips that you've seen several times now. But I'm going to ask you when you think about this punitive damage question, I want you to think about the old adage of do what I say and not what I do.
And I'm going to ask you to reverse that, and try to ignore what people said, a few people said decades ago, and focus on what Philip Morris has done.
Mr. Hammer said Philip Morris and the other companies haven't changed. They're the exact same company. You know that is not true. You heard Mr. Jupe talk to you about Philip Morris change in how it talks to the public about addiction and about disease and how the other tobacco companies do that.
Philip Morris and these other tobacco companies have changed. They are not the same companies that they were before. And I would ask you to think about that when you're thinking about this question.
We come back to Mr. Calloway, because I told you there has to be a link between Mr. Calloway and anything the tobacco companies said or did.
And it comes full circle back to him.
And from Philip Morris's standpoint,
Mr. Calloway didn't smoke many Philip Morris cigarettes, and there surely is no evidence in front of you that he relied on anything Philip Morris ever said.
Philip Morris -- I mean, Mr. Calloway knew smoking was dangerous. No one at Philip Morris ever told him it was safe. Mr. Calloway
made his own decisions. And nothing Philip Morris did had any direct and substantial impact on any of his decisions.
Once again, ladies and gentlemen, thank you so much for your time. We really do appreciate it.



MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: No, it will just take me a minute.
All set, Your Honor.
May it please the Court. Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. Let me introduce myself again in this phase to you, because you still haven't heard that much from me. I am Ann St. Peter-Griffith, and I represent Liggett.
As Dr. Proctor told you, my client is very small.
At the outset I would like to start again by thanking you for all your time and your careful attention that you've paid the evidence in this case.
Mr. Reid and Ms. Gallagher have already covered much of what you need to hear regarding plaintiff's failure to meet her burden of proof as to each of the elements of her claims, and Mr. Pedrosa will cover some similar points applicable to all the defendants.
I agree with what they said. But I'm not going to repeat and go over what they've said again, except to emphasize generally that the plaintiff did not meet her burden of proof in this case as to any of the defendants.
What I would like to focus on specifically is why plaintiff did not meet her burden of proof as to my client, Liggett.
Before I do that, I wanted to tell you that it's understandable to empathize with Mr. Calloway's survivors, with Mrs. Calloway and with Mrs. Williams. It's never easy to lose a loved one. But when we began this process, you were sworn in as jurors and you took an oath that you would follow the evidence and base your decisions upon the evidence. And I would like to read you what the Court is going to instruct you before you go into your deliberations.
In reaching your verdict, do not let bias, sympathy, prejudice, public opinion or any other sentiment for or against any party influence your decision.
Your verdict must be based upon the evidence that has been received and the law on which I have instructed you.
Despite your natural feelings of sympathy for people who have experienced loss, you must follow the Court's instruction. So let's talk a little bit about the evidence in this case concerning Liggett.
As I mentioned already, Mrs. Calloway failed to meet her burden of proof against Liggett. And I say Mrs. Calloway's burden of proof, because that's important. It's not my client's responsibility to prove Mr. Calloway did not smoke Liggett's cigarettes. Its Mrs. Calloway's burden of proof to come forward and demonstrate with evidence that Mr. Calloway used Liggett brands in a sufficient quantity to cause his bladder cancer and heart disease that led to his death.
While you've learned a little bit more about my client in this phase, you still didn't
hear much from me in Phase II, for a couple of years. First, again, plaintiff didn't introduce much evidence concerning my client.
Second, a lot of what I wanted to share with you about my client came directly from plaintiff's own expert, Dr. Proctor. And some of the very documents that plaintiff's counsel entered into evidence.
Now you remember first thing yesterday morning, first thing Monday morning, I asked some questions, I stood at the podium and asked some questions and Dr. Proctor's answers were read to you. As the Judge instructed you at the time -- what I shared with you is Dr. Proctor's cross-examination testimony. You are to treat that testimony as if Dr. Proctor himself was sitting on the witness stand.
Now while my examination of Dr. Proctor in cross-examination was fairly brief and his answers were fairly short, yes, or he always -generally had an affirmative response, that cross-examination actually had a lot of information about my client.
Now you will recall when I gave my opening for Phase II I told you in this phase
you're going to hear about the usage of cigarettes and company conduct.
So let's talk about those two things as they relate to Liggett.
First let's talk about the evidence regarding Mr. Calloway's use or non-use of Liggett cigarettes. Not a single witness came into this courtroom and identified that Mr. Calloway smoked a particular brand of Liggett cigarettes for a particular period of time.
In fact, Mrs. Calloway's counsel never even asked a question of any of the witnesses concerning how many Liggett cigarettes Mr. Calloway smoked or for how long.
The reason why this is important, ladies and gentlemen, is that you can't just assume that Mr. Calloway smoked a particular amount of a brand of Liggett cigarettes. The evidence of that use has to be put in by the plaintiff.
And as to Liggett, it just hasn't been. There isn't any evidence as to the amount of Liggett-brand cigarettes that Mr. Calloway used.
As the first questions on the jury
verdict form asked you -- I'm not going to show them. You've seen them. The plaintiff must prove, and it's got to be as to each defendant, that Liggett placed on the market a product that was the legal cause of Mr. Calloway's death and that Liggett's negligence was a legal cause of Mr. Calloway's death. Those are the first couple questions.
No witnesses came here and told you that Mr. Calloway smoked more than one Liggett cigarette, more than a pack of Liggett cigarettes, or more than 50 Liggett cigarettes manufactured by my client in his entire lifetime.
And certainly Mrs. Calloway did not show, through the evidence, that Mr. Calloway smoked Liggett brands in a sufficient quantity to cause bladder cancer and the heart disease that ultimately resulted in his death.
Plaintiff also did not put on any proof whatsoever that Liggett did anything, said anything, or that Mr. Calloway read, saw -read or saw anything published by Liggett; and that that caused him to smoke cigarettes, let alone that it caused him to smoke cigarettes in
a sufficient quantity to lead to the legal cause of his death.
So what does the evidence show about Liggett brands?
As Ms. Gallagher went over, there are really four witnesses who talked about Mr. Calloway's smoking usage. First, Frank Calloway talked about four brands, none of which -- none of the brands that he testified were Liggett brands.
Now Mr. Frank Calloway's testimony covers a long period of time, about the first 24 years. You've also heard from Tamara Cartelidge. Remember, Ms. Cartelidge testified that Mr. Calloway smoked many brands, the names of which she couldn't fully remember, because there were, quote, as she said, so many.
She testified that her father smoked a variety of brands and listed a number of them, including just one Liggett brand, Eve. Tamara Cartelidge never told you the quantity of Eve cigarettes she recalls her father smoking. It could have been just one that he bummed from Mrs. Calloway. Because when Mrs. Calloway testified, she testified that Eve was one of
the brands she smoked prior to her quitting in 1976.
Ladies and gentlemen, Eve cigarettes are thin cigarettes that come in pretty feminine packages. They are lady cigarettes. If you think about it, use your common sense, it's difficult to envision Mr. Calloway, an active concrete construction owner, who works outside, smoking pretty ladies' cigarettes. It's just not easy to imagine.
Now there was another, the third witness who testified regarding brand usage, was the person who was on the construction site with him. If you recall Harry Calloway's testimony. Harry Calloway testified that his father smoked, that he recalls his father smoked one brand, Kools. Again, not a Liggett brand and certainly not a feminine brand of cigarettes.
Finally, as you heard from Mrs. Calloway herself, there were four brands of the 29 that she listed off that were Liggett brands. Eves, Chesterfields, Larks and L&Ms. Now she also testified that she herself smoked two brands, Chesterfields and Eves.
Although it's difficult to imagine that
after 1976 her husband would have been bumming cigarettes from her. Because not only did she stop smoking, she was nagging him to stop smoking.
Now, keep in mind that as Ms. Gallagher referenced, those 29 brands were only some of the brands that Mrs. Calloway remembered.
There were many others that she didn't testify about.
As you will recall from Mrs. Starr Williams' testimony and Mrs. Calloway's own testimony, Mr. Calloway tended to smoke the cheapest brands. There's absolutely no evidence as to the pricing of the Liggett brands or that Mr. Calloway even purchased the Liggett brands, let alone at what price. And Mrs. Calloway made clear the Liggett brands were not Mr. Calloway's primary brand of cigarettes. He didn't have a primary brand of cigarettes, during the period of time that she knew him.
Mrs. Calloway did tell you, as Ms. Gallagher referenced, that she could not recall her husband smoking any one particular brand of cigarettes for a period of more than
two weeks to at most two months during their entire time together.
So based on Mrs. Calloway's own testimony, if Mr. Calloway smoked each Liggett brand for a total of no more than two months per brand, at most, he smoked eight months of Liggett brands for over 42-plus years. Just eight months over 42-plus years. That's at maximum based on plaintiffs' own testimony.
Now we know from Dr. Soloway, plaintiff's bladder cancer expert, five years of smoking history. Probably not enough to cause bladder cancer. In light of this expert testimony and Mrs. Calloway's testimony, we know that from plaintiff's own witnesses, smoking Liggett's brands of cigarettes for such a brief period of time, if it even occurred, because remember there is no testimony as to the amount, could not have been the cause of Mr. Calloway's death from bladder cancer.
If you remember the jury verdict form, you've got to make a finding as to each defendant separately. And the evidence just isn't there for Liggett.
Now, while Mrs. Calloway's testimony did
not give any specificity regarding the amount of Liggett cigarettes that were smoked, it is instructive for an entirely different reason.
As has been previously discussed, the timing of her testimony is for usage after 1970. That means that every single Liggett cigarette that she says her husband may have smoked came from a pack that bore a warning or a caution.
Because it was after 1966.
Now, as I raised in my opening, the other issue in Phase II of this case is company conduct. And what you've seen from the company conduct is that there's been a lot of talk about tobacco companies and what they did and what they said. But there's actually been very little evidence regarding Liggett.
You will recall that Mr. Frank Calloway testified about ads, and Mrs. Calloway testified about ads. None of the ads in evidence that they testified about relate to Liggett. They are not Liggett ads.
You will recall, just in his closing,
Mr. Hammer put up ads predating and postdating May 5th, 1982. None of the ads that he showed you were Liggett ads.
Now, there is one ad from a Life Magazine from 1953. You'll remember that this is the period of time that only Mr. Frank Calloway testified. But Frank Calloway never testified about this ad. In fact, no witness in this case testified that Mr. Calloway smoked a Liggett brand prior to 1970. And there's absolutely no proof that this one ad from December of 1953 was relied upon by Mr. Calloway in making his decisions regarding smoking.
There's no evidence, in fact, whatsoever that Mr. Calloway relied upon or saw any statement or any advertisement from Liggett that either caused him to start smoking cigarettes, encouraged him to start smoking cigarettes, or that he relied upon in his smoking conduct.
All we do know is that when he picked up a pack of Liggett cigarettes for the period of time that the testimony is that he smoked them, that pack of cigarettes bore a warning or a caution.
Thus, there is no evidence in this case and the plaintiff has failed to show that with
respect to Liggett either before May 5, 1982, or after May 5, 1982, Liggett concealed or omitted any material information concerning the health effects of smoking. That, as you saw, is going to be a question that is going to be asked of you.
Now you've heard several times during this case that Liggett is different from the other manufacturers. And let's talk a little bit about what the evidence has shown.
Dr. Proctor, plaintiff's own expert, confirmed a lot of very significant and positive facts for Liggett during his cross-examination. Dr. Proctor confirmed Liggett was never a signatory to the Frank Statement; Liggett did not attend the Plaza Hotel meeting. Liggett was never a member of the organization called TIRC when it was known by that name.
Liggett was never involved in the hiring of Hill & Knowlton; and Liggett, as Dr. Proctor himself explained, Liggett was only a member of the Council for Tobacco Research for a few years. He admitted from March 1964 to January 1968. And even Dr. Proctor concedes he doesn't
hold -- he's the plaintiff's expert, and he does not hold Liggett responsible for any CTR documents or activities outside that very brief time period in the '60s.
Which, by the way, was before Mr. Calloway ever smoked or was alleged to have smoked a Liggett brand of cigarette in this case.
Now, as you do know from Dr. Proctor's testimony and from Dr. Abramson's cross-examination, later not only did Liggett list the ingredients of its cigarettes on its carton, it also placed on its boxes of cigarettes a warning that said: Cigarettes are addictive.
You will recall Mr. Gdanski held up the Eve cigarettes and asked Dr. Abramson to read that particular warning. And as Dr. Proctor confirmed, Liggett's conduct in listing those ingredients on its cartons and his placement of the addiction warning on its packs of cigarettes was entirely voluntary.
Ladies and gentlemen, I want to direct your attention to the evidence table, because as you know, when you go back into that jury
deliberation room, what you're going to take with you is what you recall from the testimony and what is on that table. Not the demonstratives, not anything else. And what is on this table are documents that show that Liggett acted responsibly.
Dr. Proctor's testimony confirmed that immediately after the publication of the Wynder mouse skin-painting results -- test results, after those were published, Liggett undertook what Dr. Proctor called an honest response that was broad in scope.
Liggett consulted with Dr. Wynder and the U.S. public health authority. Now in doing that, that's not the conduct of a company that expects the whole thing would just blow over.
As you heard, Liggett engaged Arthur D. Little to assist in the undertaking of its work, and Arthur D. Little's team included Dr. Kensler, a Ph.D. from Memorial Sloan-Kettering, which is a large cancer center in New York.
Dr. Kensler and his team consulted with Dr. Wynder and tried to replicate Dr. Wynder's tests, which Dr. Wynder agreed needed to be
done. Dr. Wynder also thought and agreed that a fractionation study needed to be done, which is exactly what Liggett, with the assistance of Arthur D. Little, undertook.
And as you know, this is the nine-volume submission in Dr. Proctor's testimony that was described as being 10 inches thick. It's double-sided. So it's only about -- it's a double-sided copy, so it's only about 5 inches thick. It's a little easier for you folks to look at. You're free to look at this, when you take it back into the jury room, and see exactly how broad in scope Liggett's studies were.
And as Dr. Proctor confirmed, they were cited by the Surgeon General in the 1964 historic report.
And you know that in that report the Surgeon General thanked Liggett, Dr. Kensler, and Arthur D. Little for the substantial contributions that they made. You can find it written on Roman Numeral XIV in the 1964 Surgeon General report.
Dr. Proctor has confirmed, when he testified, that the documents revealed that
Liggett's investment in the research that it conducted for that nine-volume submission were larger than the rest of the tobacco industry combined.
Now you heard about another document from plaintiff called the L&M Perspective Review.
This was the document that was on Arthur D. Little letterhead. There is no evidence whatsoever. You didn't hear it from Dr. Proctor. You didn't hear it from any witness, that this document was ever seen by anyone at Liggett.
Plaintiff made a bit of a big deal that it referenced the fact, in the early '60s, that Liggett's research uncovered that there was a link between smoking and cancer carcinogens, and then plaintiff said that wasn't shared with the public health community. That's just flat-out wrong.
What plaintiff could have shown you were these two, the study and the Surgeon General report. Because everything in that L&M Perspective, are in there, are in those two documents.
Liggett wasn't hiding the ball.
And as Dr. Proctor conceded in its submission, Liggett reported its research that disclosed a link between smoking and carcinogens. This is in the early 1960s. And remember, it takes a little while to do these tests. Dr. Wynder's tests took two years, and to replicate that it's another two years.
What happened then? The Surgeon General report came out and then Congress went to work. And what did we learn happened? You learned it from Dr. Proctor. You learned it from Dr. Cummings. As Mr. Reid described and as he showed you, warnings and cautions were then mandated so that each and every pack of cigarettes, Liggett cigarettes that Mr. Calloway smoked, he would have had to have seen that warning.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, there is another document that plaintiff put into evidence -- plaintiff's document 247. You will be able to take it back with you. The type is a little small, so I'm not going to put it up on the Elmo because it's difficult to see.
Mr. Reid also went over that document.
Now plaintiff only showed you a portion
of that document. What I would like to point out to you is on page 5. I'm just going to read to you what that document said about my client, Liggett.
Liggett & Myers stayed out of TIRC originally because they doubted the sincerity of TIRC's motives and believed that the organization was unwieldy to work efficiently. They remained convinced that their misgivings were justified. Liggett felt that the problem was sufficiently serious to justify large-scale investment by the company directly in experimental research on smoke and cancer.
That's what that document says. They didn't show it to you. But you're going to be able to see it when you take it back into the jury room.
Now, what does all this mean? What does the trip report mean? What does this information mean? First, it explains why Liggett didn't go to the Plaza Hotel meeting and join the TIRC.
Next, it doesn't show that Liggett was hiding the ball or conspiring to hide the ball.
We know that because Liggett volunteered what
it actually had and gave it to the U.S. government, the Surgeon General, whose job it was to safeguard the public health.
Now, there are a few things that Mr. Hammer told you in his closing that are simply not supported by the evidence.
Mr. Hammer told you that Liggett joined the Tobacco Institute because it saw profits of other companies were soaring and it wanted in.
No evidence whatsoever was presented to support what Mr. Hammer told you concerning Liggett.
There's -- Mr. Hammer also showed you information concerning replacement smokers.
None of the documents that Mr. Hammer showed you are Liggett documents. There's absolutely no evidence in this case concerning Liggett's concern about finding replacement smokers.
What did Liggett do? It took enormous steps and made substantial investments in important work to identify what was harmful in cigarettes, and then took action.
Now as you adjourn for your deliberations, and I'm only going to take a few more minutes of your time, it's important to remember, as co-defense counsel told you, that
plaintiff accepts responsibility -- plaintiff accepts that Mr. Calloway was at fault in part for some of his injuries. When he smoked Liggett cigarettes, the evidence has shown that even as very small as that was, it was long after warnings and cautions were placed on Liggett cigarettes.
Mr. Calloway bears responsibility for the decisions to start and to continue smoking Liggett cigarettes, if he ever even did.
Accordingly, there is no evidentiary basis whatsoever to find that Liggett is responsible to the plaintiff for damages.
Ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of my client and myself and all the defendants, we thank you for your patience throughout this long journey of a trial; and I know it's been long, and we thank you for the careful attention that you've paid to the Court, to the evidence and to the defendants and all of the parties.
For the reasons that I have discussed here today on behalf of Liggett, we request that you answer no to Questions 1, 2, 4, 5, 6 and 7 on the jury verdict form as to Liggett
and all the defendants; to find that Mr. Calloway was fully at fault on Question 3; and to enter a zero percentage attributable to Liggett on Question 3 of the verdict form.
And finally, based upon the evidence that we've gone over, Question 12 must be answered in the negative, no, as plaintiff has not shown any entitlement to punitive damages by clear and convincing evidence. And, in fact,
Liggett's conduct over the years demonstrates that punishment damages are not appropriate here at all.
Thank you again for your hard work.



MR. PEDROSA: Thank you, Your Honor.
May it please the Court. Ladies and gentlemen, it was April 17th when you became the first jury ever to hear any evidence about Johnnie Calloway.
And when you made your Phase I decision in this case, you became the first jury ever and the only jury to ever decide any issues about Johnnie Calloway.
Now in Phase II you're going to the first jury that's ever going to decide and you're going to be the only jury that's ever going to decide whether there's any connection, to use Ms. Gallagher's word, or any bridge, to use Mr. Reid's word, between Mr. Calloway and these defendants.
And for me, I'm going to be talking about my client, Lorillard. You're the first and only jury that's going to consider whether or not anything my client did or anything my client could have done differently would have changed things, would have had an impact, would have made a difference in Mr. Calloway's life.
I want to thank you for the work that you've done so far. I know it's not been easy.
I know it's been longer than everyone thought it was going to be, and I know you all have been away from your jobs, you've been away from your families. You've been away from the things that you like to do in your life. And we all appreciate that. On behalf of my client Lorillard and as one of the last people to speak with you today, on behalf of all the lawyers, I want to say thank you.
You're here because during voir dire, you remember we had a big roomful of people. More people than are in this room today. And a lot of people had some strong opinions about things. You all are on this jury because you're the folks that said: I can put my opinions aside, I can put what I've heard before aside, I can put sympathy aside, and I can just listen to the evidence -- not guess, not wonder, not speculate -- but just decide this case based on the evidence I hear.
That's why you're there. That's why you made the decision in Phase I, which we appreciate and accept, and that's why you're
going to make the decision in Phase II.
Ladies and gentlemen, Phase II is about legal liability. Ultimately that's why we're here. It's an important question. It's a different question from what you decided in Phase I.
In this phase you're going to decide whether my client and really all of the defendants have any legal liability to Mrs. Calloway. And that means whether they will have to pay money to Mrs. Calloway for Mr. Calloway's smoking decisions. And you're going to do that by answering the various questions on the verdict form.
Some of the other lawyers have shown you the questions on the verdict form. Mr. Hammer did it throughout his closing. I'm going to go through parts of it again, and unlike in Phase I, you might have noticed this is the first phase in the case where you're going to have to answer questions individually for each defendant.
In fact, if you go back and you look at the questions, and we'll look at them, almost every question on the verdict form asks you to
decide separately whether something that each defendant did was a legal cause of Mr. Calloway's death.
Each defendant, legal cause.
Those two phrases are in almost all of the questions on the verdict form. And that concept, each defendant and the legal cause, that's that bridge, that's that connection that Ms. Gallagher talked to you about.
Now you know I represent Lorillard so I will be talking about Lorillard and I'm going to be focusing on the evidence that you heard about Lorillard in this case and maybe, more importantly, the evidence that you didn't hear about Lorillard in this case.
And because this is the first phase when you're going to make individual decisions about each of the individual defendants, unfortunately I'm going to have to talk to you for a little bit longer than I did in Phase I.
So I hope you'll stay with me. I'm not going to be anywhere near as long as Mr. Reid was or Mr. Hammer was, probably take about the same amount of time as Ms. Gallagher and Ms. St. Peter Griffith spent with you.
But I want to talk about the evidence. I want to talk about why the evidence and why the lack of evidence in this case really means that the plaintiff hasn't met the burden of proving that something Lorillard did or said or something it could have done or said was a legal cause of Mr. Calloway's death.
Now you heard about legal cause in Phase I, and you got an instruction on what it meant, and that concept applies here in Phase II, but it applies a little bit differently and you'll see it's in the instructions. And it's actually in the instructions that the Judge read to you and in the packet that you have for every single one of plaintiff's claims. Legal cause is an important issue.
Let's bring up the definitions in slide 2.
And this is the definition from plaintiff's claims for negligence. I'm bringing that up as an example, but it's almost the same in the claim for product defect. You just replace the word "negligence" for "product defect." And it's in there in the claim for
concealment.
And what it requires is it requires the connection between the defendant's conduct and the plaintiff be direct. See that word is highlighted and underlined. Has to happen directly. Has to be substantial. And it has to be a "but for" cause.
That's a word that lawyers spend three years of law school trying to understand. All it means is, when you think about the evidence, did it make a difference. If you take what you're talking about out of the equation, if you take Lorillard out of the equation, would something have changed? Would something have been different?
When we had our openings, I asked you as the evidence comes in, think about was this something that had any impact on Mr. Calloway, or would it have any impact on Mr. Calloway?
Did he change the things that he did because of it? Did he make different decisions about whether to smoke, whether to try to quit, how hard too try to quit?
That's what we're talking about. Would it have changed those decisions? That's "but
for." And that's part of legal cause. And proving that legal cause for each of the claims against each defendant, that's the plaintiff's burden in this case.
And now before I get into the individual questions of the verdict form, I want to talk about something pretty basic.
The fact that my client makes cigarettes isn't enough to find liability. Now some of you may not like cigarettes. Some of you may not like the fact that they're still sold in this country even after we know that they can be very harmful and very risky. And that's okay. Everyone has the right to feel that way, and if you do feel that way, you're absolutely not alone. There are plenty of people who feel that way.
But whether or not cigarettes should be banned. Whether they should be legal, whether they should be sold. That's not something that will be decided in this case, that's not what this case is about. And the mere fact that a company sells cigarettes, which are legal and lawful in this country, that's not enough to find liability.
It's also not enough just to say: Well, at some point in his life Mr. Calloway smoked some cigarettes that were made by my client.
You heard Mr. Hammer during his closing tell you that -- even they acknowledge that of all the cigarettes that Mr. Calloway smoked in his life, the vast majority were not made by Lorillard. But just saying: Well, some of them were, some of them were made by Lorillard, that's not enough. Because in order for something to be a legal cause, it has to meet these requirements. It has to mean that if you take it out of the equation, something changes.
So let's talk about the evidence that you've seen. Let's talk about the evidence with respect to Lorillard.
Now I'm not going to stand up here and cover every piece of evidence that came in during the entire case. It would take a month, just like it took a month for the evidence to come in. And I'm certainly not going to stand up here and talk to you about documents that were written by people that never worked for my client. And Mr. Hammer also told you that the vast majority of the documents that you saw in
this case were not Lorillard documents.
What I am going to do is talk to you about my client, talk to you about Lorillard and the evidence that you saw about his client.
Now I already mentioned that Mr. Hammer told you earlier that the majority of cigarettes, the vast majority of cigarettes that Mr. Calloway smoked were not made by Lorillard. But it's important to think about, well, the few that he did smoke, when in time did those come in? When in his life did he smoke those?
Now you heard evidence in this case from witnesses that knew Mr. Calloway at all different times of his life, and they testified about the brands of cigarettes that he smoked at those different times. In fact, you heard evidence going back to the very first cigarette that Mr. Calloway ever smoked in his life.
And Frank Calloway talked to you about that. He listed the brands that his brother Mr. Calloway smoked during the '40s, and the '50s, and the '60s. Ms. Gallagher went over those brands with you. I'm not going to cover them again, but what I am going to point out is
that none of those brands were made by Lorillard. None of them.
Now, no one who knew Mr. Calloway in the '40s, '50s or '60s, testified that he ever smoked any brand of cigarette made by Lorillard during those first 24 years, 24, 25 years that he was smoking, not one.
Now the evidence in this case is that Mr. Calloway didn't smoke a Lorillard cigarette until sometime after 1972. And we say 1972 because the evidence comes from Mrs. Calloway and from her daughter Tamara Cartelidge, and Mrs. Calloway and Mr. Calloway got married in
1972.	And so it might not have been that first year when he smoked a Lorillard brand cigarette, but it was sometime after they got married in 1972.
So how does that fit in with the other evidence, with the events that you've heard about in this case?
Let's bring up Slide Number 4. I put together a timeline of some of the milestones in Mr. Calloway's life. You see it's got up there some basic dates right now. Starts in 1948 when he had his first cigarette and it
ends in 1972.
In 1950, you see he turned 18 years old.
He turned 21 in 1953. Turned 30 in 1962. And in 1972 he turned 40 years old and he got married to Mrs. Calloway.
And now, let's pull up Number 5, 1972, that's the first place where there might be some evidence that he smoked some Lorillard brand. Like I said, like I said, it could be later, but we're going to put it there because that's when Mrs. Calloway really -- really marries him and knows what's going on.
Now by that time, by 1972, as Ms. Gallagher told you, Mr. Calloway was a 40-year-old man. This is not the same teenager that Dr. DiFranza sat on the stand and talked to you about and said he didn't really know what he was doing, he was a teenager. This is a grown man now, who Mr. Hammer told you about, grew up under difficult circumstances, in a difficult time with a good family. Happy family. But overcame a lot.
This is a man who started and ran his own business by this point in time. He'd been married once before. And actually his kids
from that marriage were all grown men themselves. He was smart. He was mature. He was self-educated. He learned by reading, by keeping up with current events, and he knew a lot. You heard him described as like a historian.
Let's put up the next one. And this really shows all the things that were going on, all the things that he knew, all the things that you heard about that are evidence in this case. Before he ever picked up a cigarette made by my client, by Lorillard.
In the 1950s, and 1960s, he and his brother Frank talked about what they were seeing, this media blitz. You remember Frank called it a media blitz about how harmful smoking could be, how harmful nicotine could be, how cigarettes could kill you.
In 1964, the first Surgeon General's report came, out and that's the same year that Mr. Calloway had that conversation with his son Harry, with the handkerchief, and told Harry:
Hey, look, don't do this, don't smoke. These things are deadly. That's eight years, at a minimum, before he ever picked up a cigarette
made by my client.
In 1970 -- excuse me, 1966, warnings went on every pack of cigarettes sold in the United States. In 1970, Frank Calloway quit smoking, and by 1972, warnings, which had already been on the packs of cigarettes also went on every advertisement in the United States.
So what does that mean for this case?
Well, that means that by the time Mr. Calloway smoked the brands of cigarettes that Mrs. Calloway testified about, including the whole time that he smoked any Lorillard brands of cigarettes, every single pack of cigarettes that he bought had a warning on them. Every single ad that he saw had a warning on it.
Now there are only four ads in this case in evidence for brands of cigarettes that Mr. Calloway was smoking during this period of time after 1972.
Let's bring up Number 7. These are those ads.
Every single one of them, warning: The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health.
Now Mr. Calloway didn't need that warning. It wasn't telling him anything he didn't already know. But every time he pulled out a pack of cigarettes and every time he saw one of these ads, the ones from 1972 from Ebony magazine that are in evidence that Mrs. Calloway testified about, that warning was there just to remind him, to remind him of what he already knew, of what he talked to his brother about, of what he talked to his son Harry about.
So how does all this relate to the questions that you're going to have to answer in this case?
Now, as I mentioned earlier, you're going to answer the questions by filling out the verdict form. And basically there are four categories of questions on the verdict form.
First couple of questions deal with claims about the products, the negligence and product defect claims. That's Questions 1 and 2.
And then there is a question about comparative fault. Mr. Hammer talked to you about that question. I'm going to spend some time talking to you about that also.
And then there are four questions which I call questions about information. They are the plaintiff's claims about concealment of information. We are going to talk about those, and then there are some questions about damages.
Now let's go ahead and put up Number 10.
These are the first two questions in the case. They are the plaintiff's claims for defect and negligence, and really you haven't really heard any specific evidence about Lorillard on these issues, and Mr. Reid covered this and Ms. Gallagher also covered it, so I'm not going to go too far in doing this again because I want to get you all out of here at a decent hour.
Except to say that as with R.J. Reynolds, Philip Morris and as with Liggett, the answer to these questions for Lorillard should be no, because that bridge hasn't been built, that connection from the defect or the negligence or whatever conduct you're talking about with Lorillard just hasn't been extended all the way to Mr. Calloway.
What I do want to talk about is the third
question, which is the question on comparative
fault. I want to talk about that because
Mr. Hammer spent some time talking about that.
Would you bring up Number 15, please?
This is the question that asks you to compare the fault of Mr. Calloway to each of the defendants. And you heard Mr. Reid talk about how Mrs. Calloway admits that Mr. Calloway had some fault here. And the plaintiff agrees with that, they agree that he could have tried harder or more often to quit smoking, and so they accept partial responsibility.
I actually think that's a better way to think about it. Comparative responsibility. Because no one is blaming Mr. Calloway for smoking. You know that our position is that was his right and that was his choice, and nobody is blaming him for doing it. So it's really about comparing the responsibility.
And so in doing that, the question becomes, well, who was really in the best position -- and again, this is true for all the defendants, but I'm just going to talk to you about Lorillard. As between Lorillard and
Mr. Calloway, who was really in the best position to prevent Mr. Calloway's injuries?
Now with respect to Lorillard, the evidence is that a long, long time before Mr. Calloway ever picked up a Lorillard cigarette, he had made his decision to smoke, he had made his decision to keep smoking. He made that decision a number of times, and he'd heard an awful lot about the health risks of smoking.
And he hadn't just heard it. Remember,
Dr. Proctor talked to you about the difference between awareness polls and belief polls.
Mr. Calloway was a believer. We know that because he told his son Harry about it. We know because he told Frank about it. He was a believer that cigarettes could be harmful, and he made his decisions about what to do with that information a long, long time before he ever picked up a cigarette made by my client.
Because Mr. Calloway is the only person that could decide what to do with the information that he had, our position is that if you do get to this question, the number for Lorillard should be zero. That's what is
consistent with the evidence.
At the time Mr. Calloway smoked my client's products, he was a grown man. He wasn't a teenager that didn't know any better. He'd read a lot. He'd seen a lot. He'd talked to his brother. He'd talked to his son. By that point in time, 1972 or later, he really knew what he was doing, and so he really was in the better position to avoid his injuries.
And when Mr. Hammer talked to, you he suggested: Well, because there is not a lot of Lorillard documents in this case, the vast majority are not Lorillard, because there is not a lot of Lorillard smoking, the vast majority of the cigarettes are not Lorillard, he told you: Well, that number should be low, but he suggested 20 percent.
I think the percentage should be zero.
I'm not going to stand here and try to negotiate and offer different percentages. I think 20 percent is too high, given the evidence in this case.
I understand that you might not agree with me. You might not think it's zero for Lorillard. That's up to you. That's in your
discretion. If you do think some number is appropriate, given the evidence in this case, given the timing, I think the number should be in the low single digits.
Let's go on to the next two questions, and these are on -- let's just bring up Number 17. These are on plaintiff's claims for concealment. These are Questions 4 and 5. Questions 6 and 7 are very similar.
These are those two sets of before-1982, after-1982 questions. And really all four questions deal with what I call the plaintiff's information claims. And Mr. Reid spent a lot of time talking about this. This is the whole notion that, well, was something concealed from Mr. Calloway and how can you say it was concealed if he knew it from another source.
And of course I agree with all that. So I'm not going to cover all of that again. But these are very important questions so I do want to spend some time on them.
Part of the reason that they're very important is when you get to the verdict form -- can we bring up the actual verdict form at the bottom of page 3.
When you get to the verdict form, you will see there is an instruction at the bottom of page 3, and the instruction deals with what happens to those percentages that you assign in Question 3. And what this tells you, what the last sentence tells you, there will be no such reduction if you find for the plaintiff on her claims for concealment or conspiracy to conceal.
What that tells you is if you answer yes to questions 4, 5, 6, or 7 for any one of the defendants, well that wipes out the percentage that you answered in Question 3.
So then there is no responsibility on Mr. Calloway. At all. It becomes zero, whether you wanted it to be zero or not.
So these are important questions, and because I represent Lorillard and because I think the answer to these questions for Lorillard should be no, questions 4, 5, 6, or 7, I want to make sure I cover all the evidence about those questions.
Really what these questions come down to, whether Lorillard or any of the defendants concealed or agreed to conceal information,
really what it comes down to is whether or not something that was discussed inside one of the companies, known inside one of the companies, whether it would have made a difference to Mr. Calloway if he'd have seen that internal document or whether he already had the information and it would have made no difference to him at all, if it would have made no difference either because he already knew the information or he just didn't care, then the answer to these questions is no.
Now there's no witness that came into the courtroom that told you that anything that my client said or didn't say had any impact on Mr. Calloway or the choices that he made.
Nobody told you that he relied on those four ads that had the warnings on them. How could he? They had the warnings on them and he already knew the information that was in those warnings. By the time he saw those ads in the 1970s and 1980s, he knew that smoking was risky. He wasn't waiting to hear from a tobacco company about that.
In fact, the only evidence that the plaintiff offered on this issue came from
Dr. Proctor, and he was here for a couple of days. But there's nothing about Dr. Proctor's testimony that helps build that bridge, because Dr. Proctor admitted to you when Mr. Reid showed you the testimony, he doesn't know anything about Mr. Calloway. Doesn't even know who he is.
Dr. Proctor talked about what the general public knew, not what any individual knew. And he went through a bunch of documents with you. But there's one thing that Dr. Proctor said that I thought was really important, and what it was, he was very careful to point out that the general public, which he likes to talk about, is not any one person.
Can you bring up Number 20.
Mr. Reid asked him: Let me ask it this way, Dr. Proctor. Do you believe that the public has long been aware or do you believe that only some of the public has long been aware?
Dr. Proctor said: Well, the public is not one person. You know there's always a differentiated response to all of these things.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, that's
exactly what I've been saying since the beginning of this case. This case is not about the general public. The general public isn't one person. This case is about one person.
It's about Mr. Calloway. It's about what Mr. Calloway knew.
And after a day and a half of evidence from Dr. Proctor, you didn't finish with any more information about what Mr. Calloway knew than you started.
In fact, the only thing you can take away from Dr. Proctor's testimony is that maybe, over the years, there were people in the United States who didn't know all the things that Mr. Calloway knew. And that's a fair take-away from that. But it doesn't tell you anything about what Mr. Calloway knew.
And we know from his own words, going back to 1964 and beyond, that he knew that the tar and nicotine in cigarettes caused disease.
He didn't lack information about the risks of smoking. He certainly didn't lack information by the time that he picked up his first Lorillard cigarette sometime after 1972.
Now even though the evidence is clear
that Mr. Calloway certainly wasn't confused and wasn't misled, I do want to spend just a minute talking to you about really the one piece of evidence that Dr. Proctor shared with you about Lorillard. Mr. Hammer told you that the vast majority of the documents were from other companies. There's really one. It was an internal Lorillard document that Dr. Proctor showed you. Out of the millions of documents that he talked about that were publicly available and the hundreds of thousands that he's read, there is one Lorillard document that he brought. That's Number 21.
Would you bring that up?
This is Plaintiff's Exhibit 496. You're going to have it in evidence. It's actually 16 pages long. Dr. Proctor read to you just a very short piece of it. You'll be glad to know I'm not going to read the other 16 pages. I'm only going to talk about some additional paragraphs on the very first page that Dr. Proctor didn't show you.
And so as you can see, it's 1966 and it's from someone named A. W. Spears, who is a researcher at Lorillard. And it goes to the
president of the company at the time.
Let's pull up the next slide.
This is the part Dr. Proctor read to you.
He read to you the part that said: It's thought that the development of a cigarette, the smoke condensate from which gives little or no tumorigenic response, would be regarded as a highly significant development by the scientific community.
Then it goes on to say that a product like that, one that doesn't have this tumor response, would place the company at a great competitive position.
And Dr. Proctor used this to try to show that in 1966 Lorillard had this secret knowledge that no one else had.
Well, I want to show you the rest of this document, starting with the very first sentence.
Move to the next one, please.
This is how Dr. Spears starts his letter to the president of the company: During the past decade, the research division of P.
Lorillard Company Inc. has been investigating the tumorigenic properties of cigarette smoke
condensate towards miscellaneous epithelium -that's mouse skin -- through cooperative studies with Dr. Wynder of the Sloan-Kettering Memorial Institute.
You remember who Dr. Wynder is? Same Dr. Wynder -- I don't know if you all took time to go through this particular exhibit last time when you were deliberating, but if you did, that's -- actually that's Dr. Graham. But Dr. Wynder is in here as well.
You can look at pictures of the experiments, how the smoke goes through the machine and collects into liquid. There's actually some kind of gross pictures of the actual mice and how they paint the tar on them, and you probably feel bad for the mice. That's all in here. It's the same experiment.
What Dr. Spears is saying is for the past ten years we've been working with Dr. Wynder to replicate some of these same experiments, to do more experiments like them.
He goes on to describe the experiments.
Go to the next memo.
He says: The epithelium -- again, that's the skin -- of specially inbred mice with high
tumor susceptibility has been defined as a system which gives a tumorgenic response to cigarette smoke.
A lot of special words. Yeah, if you take these mice who have been specially bred to be especially susceptible to tumors and you paint this stuff on their backs, the tar on their backs, they get tumors. That experiment works. That's not a secret. This is 1966.
That's what Dr. Wynder said 12 years earlier. That's in Life Magazine in pictures 12 years earlier.
He goes on and he says: Such a testimony is completely artificial, and may have no relationship to human lung cancer.
What he's saying is: Look, I'm a scientist and yeah, I know, these experiments with the mice, they are pretty provocative.
But I'm a scientist. I don't know yet that what happens in mice also happens in a human lung. And so because I'm a scientist, I'm telling you, the president of the company, I think this is kind of artificial.
But he goes on and says: It's the only known system which permits one to study it.
Look, I'm not totally convinced on this experiment, but it's the only experiment we've got so let's work with this.
Then he goes on and gets to the part that Dr. Proctor read. That's the part where he says: Look, if we could take this experiment and we could make a cigarette that doesn't give this result in mice, hey, I don't know if that's going to be true for humans or not.
But, boy, that would be a scientific breakthrough, that would be something new, and that would be something that would put the company at a competitive advantage.
That's the one document. That's the only internal document from Lorillard that the plaintiffs showed you. And all it tells you is that Lorillard was working with Dr. Wynder after 1954, when his research became public. And that even though internally, scientist talking to businessman, internally Lorillard had doubts about whether this meant anything for humans, they were trying. They were trying to develop a cigarette that wouldn't have this response.
And so on the plaintiff's claim for
concealment or conspiracy, this is what we're talking about, Questions 4 through 7 on the verdict form, those important questions that I talked to you about.
Here is the big question for you, this is the one big piece of evidence that you have.
If in 1966 someone at Lorillard had taken that letter, folded it, stuffed it an envelope, mailed it to Mr. Calloway and Mr. Calloway had opened it and read it with his morning coffee, would he have learned anything that he didn't already learn in 1954 from Life Magazine?
Would he have done anything differently? Would he have made any different decisions in his life?
If the answer to that question is no, then the answer to those questions is no.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, objection, that's the wrong legal standard.
THE COURT: Thank you. This is argument.
Proceed, Counsel. Counsel, this is your five-minute warning.
MR. PEDROSA: Thank you, Judge.
And that's especially true after 1982.
If you think about, that's just ten more years
of information and articles.
Now Ms. Gallagher and Mr. Reid talked about the damages in this case. That's the next question, and I agree with what they told you. So I'm not going to cover that again, but I do want to talk about Question 12, which relates to punitive damages.
Punitive damages, as you've heard already, have to be proven by the plaintiff -would you bring up 29 -- by a different standard, clear and convincing evidence. Has to be clear to you, you have to be completely convinced that Lorillard needs to be punished.
And the burden is for the plaintiff to show you that Lorillard had a complete reckless disregard, total indifference to what it was doing; and that that conduct specifically harmed Mr. Calloway.
Now if you look at the evidence in this case, I think you'll find that there is no conduct that satisfies that high standard. I want to just recap the evidence on this issue that you saw in this case.
Slide Number 30, please.
First evidence you saw are the ads. The
only ads that Mr. Calloway looked at at the time he was smoking a Lorillard product in this case, and it wasn't even his regular product.
Just something he smoked among different brands. They all had a warning on them.
What else have you heard about Lorillard? Number 31.
You heard that in 1963, Dr. Proctor told you this, Lorillard, like the other tobacco companies, made a submission to the Surgeon General and provided information to the Surgeon General in connection with the report.
And the report itself actually thanked Lorillard for its admission.
Would you bring up 32.
In the acknowledgments, you will have it in evidence. You can look at it. I'm not going to tell you Lorillard was the only company they acknowledged. They acknowledged lots of companies. They thanked lots of companies and lots of individuals. But Lorillard was one of them.
Go back to the last one.
After that, after 1964, some of the other Surgeon General's reports that you have here,
that you can take into evidence with you, they actually cited articles published by some of the same Lorillard researchers, by Dr. Spears, actually. And those are the 1979, '82, '86, and 2010 reports. They cited to research that Lorillard was coming out with.
Number 34.
Lorillard didn't just cooperate with the Surgeon General. You know from the one document in evidence that they cooperated with Dr. Wynder, who was a leading researcher at the time.
Number 35.
Lorillard was part of the Tobacco Working Group through the National Cancer Institute.
This is Dr. Farone's testimony in this case.
You remember Dr. Farone didn't know much about Lorillard but he knew this. He knew that the Tobacco Working Group was part of the National Cancer Institute.
The title of the program was actually "Toward a Less Hazardous Cigarette." It was a program where scientists, government scientists, and people from the tobacco companies, including researchers and scientists
from Lorillard, tried to work together to come up with a safer cigarette.
Out of that program came all kinds of technologies that Lorillard and the other companies implemented in their cigarettes: better filters, porous paper. Expanded tobacco.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, objection to this on behalf of Lorillard.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
Proceed, Counsel.
MR. PEDROSA: Bring up 36.
General reduction, Dr. Jupe talked to you about it. He told you: Look, I don't work for Lorillard. I work for Philip Morris. I keep track of what my competitors are doing and I know they do this stuff too.
In fact, he told you when it comes to selective reduction, that's when you try to pinpoint the cancer-causing chemicals and take them out one by one. He said it's really hard.
But for a group of chemicals called phenols, Lorillard's scientists actually invented the
technology to take those out.
This isn't reckless disregarded. This isn't complete indifference. The question on punitive damages is whether or not Lorillard was so indifferent, so disregarding that it just didn't care. That's not the evidence in this case.
I would say the evidence in this case is clearly and convincingly to the contrary. And that was over the years. This is now. In 2012, this is a different company. These are different people. And so I submit to you that there's not a reason to punish Lorillard in this case, and your answer to Question 12 for Lorillard should be no.
Now, I'm about done. But I do want to thank you again for your time. I want to thank you for your patience over the past month, really, and your patience over the past half hour.
As one of the last to speak, it's always very tempting for me to stand up and say I don't want to spend a lot of your time. Today I really needed to.
And I appreciate that you all paid
attention, that you listened, and I will appreciate it if you keep what I said in mind when you go back to deliberate in this phase.
You're going to be the only jury that is going to decide Mr. Calloway's claims. You're going to be the only jury to answer those questions for Lorillard. And I submit to you for Lorillard, and really for all the defendants, the answer should be no. Thank you.
THE COURT: Mr. Pedrosa, thank you.
MR. PEDROSA: Thank you, Your Honor.