         MR. COFER:  Counsel, Mr. Campbell, members of
    the jury, good afternoon.
         You remember back in jury selection we talked
    about there being two sides to every story.
    Remember that?  I want to thank you for waiting
    and giving us an opportunity to tell our side.
         You remember in opening statement I told you
    that we thought this case really comes down to
    three pretty simple, straightforward questions:
    Why did Judy Campbell smoke?  Why did she wait so 4183 long to quit?  And what, if anything, did the
    defendants do to cause Mrs. Campbell to smoke and
    get sick?
         Do you remember what I told you?  I told you
    the evidence will be that she smoked because she
    liked to smoke, because her family smoked.  I told
    you that the evidence would be that she always had
    the ability to quit whenever she made up her mind
    to quit and she was ready to quit.  I told you
    that the evidence would be that nothing the
    defendants did or did not do, said or did not say
    caused Mrs. Campbell to either become a smoker or
    keep smoking.
         And you may remember that I began my opening
    statement by telling you that there were certain
    things that we didn't disagree about.  There are
    issues that are not in dispute.  I told you I was
    going to take those off the table so we could
    focus on the real facts in the case.  Because
    that's what you need to decide the lawsuit, the
    facts of the case.
         So I want to begin my closing argument the
    same way.  I want to focus on the facts that are
    not in dispute.
         So let's start with the first question.  Why 4184 did Judy Campbell smoke?
         Well, Dr. Brady told you that no one becomes
    a smoker because of an addiction to nicotine.
    People start smoking for other reasons.  I don't
    think Mr. Wichmann or Mr. Millard mentioned it
    during their closing arguments, but, of course, we
    all know that Judy Campbell grew up on a tobacco
    farm in North Carolina in the 1940s and 1950s.
    Smoking and tobacco was just a part of life where
    she grew up back then.  You heard that her mom and
    dad smoked.  You heard that four of her five
    brothers and sisters smoked.  You heard that she
    had a brother named Hugh and a sister named
    Madrid -- Mr. Campbell corrected me on that
    pronunciation, Madrid -- and also a sister named
    Imogene.  And what you learned from the facts were
    that all three of them smoked until they got COPD,
    and they ultimately died of lung cancer.  And none
    of the three ever made the choice to quit smoking.
         Smoking was just a way of life in Coats,
    North Carolina, where Judy Campbell grew up.  It's
    no surprise that Judy Campbell decided to become a
    smoker, too.
         Now, plaintiff wants you to believe that the
    tobacco companies, that these defendants enticed 4185 Judy Campbell into becoming a smoker with their
    advertisements.  But we don't need to speculate as
    to why she became a smoker, because she told us.
    You have seen this questionnaire.
         And I want you to think about this for a
    second, because in closing argument, what Mr.
    Wichmann told you is maybe she didn't know why she
    started smoking.  Maybe she was subliminally
    influenced by advertising.  He said she started
    young.  Maybe she didn't realize it.
         Well, I want you to think about the
    circumstances of when this questionnaire was
    filled out.  Judy wasn't 15 years old when she
    filled out this questionnaire.  It was 2001.  She
    was 60 years old.  You remember, it was in the
    context of sending to the lawyer who represented
    the Engle class in Miami, and they sent a
    questionnaire to her to get some information about
    her.
         And you've heard plenty of leading questions
    throughout this trial.  Well, this is one of the
    most suggestive questions you could ever see.
         What caused you to begin smoking?  Was it
    advertising?  Movie heroes who smoked?  Sports
    heroes?  All of those? 4186 You can see they're begging Judy to give the
    right answer, right?  For their case?
         But what did Judy say?  What did 60-year-old
    Judy say?  Just trying something that was
    forbidden and liked it.  Advertising, movie
    heroes, sports heroes did not have anything to do
    with it.
         And I showed you this last line.  Every time
    I put this up -- I showed you in the opening
    statement, I showed you when I went through this
    during the trial, and I show it to you now.  The
    last line was:  The problem is not being able to
    lay them down once you're hooked.
         And we're going to talk about that.
         But in terms of why she began smoking, you
    remember when Dr. Proctor took the stand, I asked
    him, I said, Dr. Proctor, how much time do you
    think you spent talking about advertising on
    direct examination?
         And he said, Well, about an hour and a half,
    two hours.
         I said, Did Mr. Wichmann ever show you the
    questionnaire that Judy filled out?
         And he said, You know, I'm not really
    interested in what Judy knew.  I'm not here to 4187 talk about Judy.  I'm here to talk about the
    tobacco companies.
         Well, you have to decide this case based on
    Judy and what Judy knew and why Judy made the
    decision she made, because it's John Campbell who
    is asking for money based on Judy's smoking.
         Now, let me say one more thing about this.
    So Mr. Wichmann suggested that the defendants
    somehow subliminally influenced her with their
    ads.  Well, I will tell you, if Philip Morris was
    trying to do that, they did a pretty poor job,
    because Mr. Campbell told you that she did not
    start smoking a Philip Morris product until 1984
    or 1985.  He told you that's when she switched to
    Marlboro when she was what?  Forty-three, 44 years
    old?
         So boy, it would sure be hard to link up any
    Philip Morris ads with her decision to begin
    smoking decades before.
         Now, let's look at that.  It says, Just
    trying something that was forbidden and liked it.
         Even though Mrs. Campbell grew up on a
    tobacco farm, you heard from her brother and
    sister that smoking was forbidden when they were
    kids.  Their parents wouldn't let them smoke or 4188 drink.  And you remember what Josie Nash said when
    we were reading her testimony?
         They said, Did Barney ever smoke when he was
    a child?
         And she said, I think so, because I think I
    told on him once.
         That just goes to show, of course your
    brothers and sisters tattle on you if you're doing
    something you're not supposed to do.  That's all
    of our experience.
         And Barney Williams also testified that his
    father would have tore her up -- would have tore
    her up if he found out Judy was smoking when she
    was young.
         Both Barney and Josie testified the first
    time they ever saw her smoke was after she got
    married, was after she married Les Strickland.
    And not a single witness in this case saw Judy
    Campbell smoke before then.
         Now, plaintiff tried so hard to persuade you
    that Judy was a regular smoker when she was living
    on her parents' farm.  That just wasn't the
    evidence.  The evidence was she became a smoker
    after she married Les Strickland.
         And make no mistake about it, she was young. 4189 She married Les Strickland when she was 16 years
    old.  But she was making adult decisions.  She was
    living an adult lifestyle.  She was a married
    woman who was starting a family.  So that's why,
    according to the evidence, Judy Campbell became a
    smoker.
         Why did she continue to smoke?  She told you.
    She liked it.  Every time someone told
    Mrs. Campbell she should quit smoking, she said, I
    like to smoke.  She told that to her brother-in-
    law, Ed Haponski, Jean's husband -- we'll talk
    about that -- she told that to her roommate Gail
    Martin, and she told that to John Campbell, her
    husband.
         Mr. Campbell testified that Judy liked to
    smoke, that smoking relaxed her, it calmed her
    down, it soothed her.  He testified she enjoyed a
    cigarette with a cup of coffee; that she enjoyed
    the feel of a cigarette in her hand.  And you know
    what else he said?  He said it was something they
    liked to do together.  He said they liked to smoke
    together.
         I want you -- I want you to think about
    something else he said.  Mr. Campbell told you
    that from the time they were married in 1983 until 4190 she quit smoking in 1996, he bought her cigarettes
    for her.  He is the one that went to the store and
    bought the cigarettes for her.  Even after, in
    1993, when he said on the stand that she was
    having problems breathing all day long, he
    continued to buy cigarettes for her until she quit
    in 1996.
         Now, you know, we all know, we all have
    guilty pleasures.  Each and every one of us does.
    Whether it's eating too much pizza, whether it's
    laying out on Florida's beautiful beaches getting
    too much sun, even though the doctors tell us not
    to, and, you know, our parents tell us not to.  As
    adults, it's our right to choose to balance -- to
    balance the risk and benefits of the things we
    enjoy.  That's what life is all about.  No one can
    make those choices for us.
         The evidence was that Judy Campbell liked to
    smoke, she understood -- she understood that
    smoking was dangerous, and she made that decision
    with her eyes wide open.
         Now, in this lawsuit, Mr. Campbell wants you
    to second guess his wife's decisions.  He wants
    you to second guess her choices.  He wants you to
    blame the tobacco companies for the way she chose 4191 to live her life.
         But members of the jury, there was not a
    single shred of evidence that anything any tobacco
    companies did caused her to start smoking.  There
    was not a single shred of evidence that
    Mrs. Campbell was fooled in any way about the
    risks of smoking or relied on anything any tobacco
    company ever said or did not say.
         And Mr. Wichmann did say something in opening
    statement that I agree with, and I suggest you
    think about it.  And he said that ultimately, your
    job as the jury is to weigh the evidence in the
    case against the lawyer's theories.
         So let's talk about the next question.  Why
    did Mrs. Campbell wait so long to quit?
         Well, there is no question, none whatsoever,
    that she had the ability to quit, because she did
    quit.  In March of 1996, she put her cigarettes
    down and never smoked another cigarette the rest
    of her life.  She was able to quit and stay quit
    even though her husband smoked for another decade.
         You heard Dr. Brady talk about triggers and
    cues and how difficult it can be, when you have
    triggers and cues, to change your behavior.  She
    was able to do it.  Unfortunately, she waited 4192 until her COPD got so bad it put her in the
    hospital before she made the decision to finally
    quit.
         Now, Mr. Wichmann pointed out, we didn't call
    an addiction witness.  After Dr. Brady, there was
    no reason to.  Dr. Brady is a terrifically
    qualified witness.  You remember, I stood up when
    Mr. Wichmann was qualifying her as an expert.  I
    said, The defense stipulates that she's a renowned
    national expert in addiction medicine and
    pharmacology.
         Dr. Brady told you what you needed to know.
    And what she told you was that even addicted
    smokers can and do quit smoking.  She told you
    that 1.3 million Americans quit smoking each and
    every year.  She told you already, 50 to 60
    million Americans have quit.  She told you that 90
    percent of those quit on their own without any
    kind of assistance.  And in her view, the vast
    majority of them were addicted and the vast
    majority of them had brain changes.
         Basically, what Dr. Brady told you was that
    people quit smoking when they make up their mind
    that they would rather not smoke as opposed to
    continue to smoke. 4193 She told you that addiction does not prevent
    a person from trying to quit.  She told you
    addiction does not prevent a person from
    successfully quitting.  And she told you that Judy
    Campbell was a good example of those facts.
         Where was the evidence, members of the jury,
    that Judy Campbell was any different than the
    millions of Americans, addicted Americans, who put
    their cigarettes down and quit?  There simply was
    none.
         And there is also no information -- I mean,
    there is no question that Mrs. Campbell had the
    information she needed to make an informed choice
    whether to smoke or not smoke.  Dr. Proctor told
    you that people have known for a very long time
    that smoking can be bad for you.  Now, a hundred
    years ago, Dr. Proctor told you, people referred
    to cigarettes as coffin nails and to cigarette
    smokers as nicotine fiends.  He told you that in
    1899 the state of Florida actually banned the sale
    of cigarettes.  And one of the reasons was because
    cigarettes were bad for you.
         Now, let me show you something.  I want to
    make a comment.  I showed you this during
    Dr. Proctor's examination.  These are the Florida 4194 Health Notes.  This was -- these were published in
    1906 and 1907, more than a hundred years ago.  And
    it says, Today the cigarette is looked upon by all
    smokers as the very worst form of tobacco
    addiction.
         During his open -- during his closing
    argument, Mr. Wichmann said, quote, defendants
    kept it secret that smoking was addictive.
         Well, apparently we didn't keep it secret
    from the state of Florida, because 112 years ago,
    or 100 and however many years ago they were
    publishing, Today the cigarette is looked upon by
    all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco
    addiction.
         Five years later, the Florida Health Notes
    refer to cigarettes as coffin nails.
         I won't play the song for you, but you heard
    in 1947 that the No. 1 song on the Hit Parade was
    Smoke, Smoke, Smoke That Cigarette.  It's been
    recorded by a bunch of artists over the years --
    country western, swing artist, all kinds.  And
    basically it tells smokers that you can smoke
    yourself to death and that you become nicotine
    slaves.  So when Judy was six years old, 1947.
         Throughout the 1940s and 1950s, again, before 4195 Judy Campbell ever began smoking, popular
    magazines like Reader's Digest and Life and Time
    reporting on the dangers of smoking.
         Here is an article from Reader's Digest in
    1952.  Cancer By the Carton.  And, of course,
    they're referring to a carton of cigarettes.
         You heard all about Life Magazine and the
    Wynder-Graham-Croninger study.  Smoking Gets in
    the News.  Doctors report tobacco tar induces
    mouse cancer, note rise in cigarette use and human
    lung cancer.
         I showed you -- I won't take the time to do
    it today, but I showed you that Edward R. Murrow
    show where they actually had Dr. Wynder and
    Dr. Croninger on the show.  Remember, they were
    showing the experiments.  They were talking about
    it.  And Dr. Proctor told you that show was a big
    deal.  It was like 60 Minutes.  It was an
    hour-long show.  It was the big news show.
         Here is how -- you know, even editorial
    cartoons.  This is 1954, Life Magazine.
    Turn-of-the-Century Term "Coffin Nail" Comes Back.
    And you see a person in a coffin smoking
    cigarettes and nails to the side.
         And we know for a fact that these studies and 4196 these articles and smoking and lung cancer were
    getting lots and lots of attention back in the
    '50s because there was a national poll.  In 1954,
    June of 1954, a national poll by the Gallup
    Company:  Have you heard or read anything recently
    to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a
    cause of cancer of the lungs?
         Ninety percent said yes.
         1954.  Again, before Judy Campbell ever
    started to smoke.
         We have the time line I showed you before.
    Remember, 1964 was a big year.  That was when the
    Surgeon General published its landmark report
    announcing to the world that cigarette smoking was
    a proven cause of lung cancer.  Dr. Proctor told
    you this got massive publicity.  It was a big
    deal.  It was front page news.  It was on covers
    of newspapers.  It was in magazines.  It was on
    television.  People were talking about it.  They
    were talking about it big time.
         You remember, there were three news channels
    back then -- CBS, NBC and ABC.  And here is how
    Harry Reasoner covered it as a lead story on CBS.
         (A video clip was played in open court as
    follows:) 4197 A SPEAKER:  This is a CBS news extra on
    smoking and health, the findings of the Surgeon
    General's committee.
         A SPEAKER:  Almost from the moment that
    cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked.
    But the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and
    culminated in today's report by the Surgeon
    General's committee.  This in summary is what the
    committees says.
         Cigarette smoking is a major cause of the
    lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers
    points the same way.  Cigarette smoking is a
    significant cause of cancer of the larynx and
    probably the most important cause of chronic
    bronchitis.  Cigarette smoking may be related to
    other lung diseases.  Male smokers have a much
    higher death rate from heart disease, although
    it's not proven that smoking is the cause.
         On the question of filters, the committee
    says there is no evidence that they do any good,
    but it didn't exclude the possibility that an
    effective filter might be developed.
         In short, the committee says if you smoke
    cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying
    early.  The sooner you start, the more you smoke, 4198 the more you inhale, the worse your chances are.
         The Surgeon General's committee presented its
    report at news conference in Washington.
         A SPEAKER:  Out of its exhaustive
    deliberations, the committee has reached the
    overall judgment that cigarette smoking is a
    health hazard of sufficient importance to the
    United States to warrant remedial action.  This
    overall judgment was supported by many converging
    lines of evidence, as well as by data indicating
    that cigarette smoking is related to higher death
    rates in a number of disease categories.
         More specifically, the committee states on
    page 61 of the report -- and I quote -- in view of
    the continuing and mounting evidence from many
    sources, it is the judgment of the committee that
    cigarette smoking contributes substantially to
    mortality from certain specific diseases and to
    the overall death rate.
         A SPEAKER:  Cigarettes have been an intimate
    and reassuring companion.  The familiar slogans,
    the familiar packages have been a part of our
    lives.  It's like being told that an old friend
    has all along been betraying you.  In a case like
    that, you give the old friend every possible 4199 chance before you finally decide to believe what
    you have been told, and maybe even then you give
    them a chance to reform.
         In this kind of a country, it comes down to
    you, whether you like it or not.  No one is going
    to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite
    clear that no one is going to tell him it's good
    for him either.  The decision is his, the decision
    and the health that may depend on it.
         This is Harry Reasoner.  Good night.
         (The video clip concluded.)
         MR. COFER:  You heard Mr. Wichmann, both in
    opening statement and in closing argument, tell
    you that the defendants denied that smoking was
    addictive.  Well, let's look at what the Surgeon
    General said in 1964 in the report.
         What the Surgeon General said was smoking was
    not addictive.  Smoking was a habit.  And the
    reason why is the definition at the time required
    that the substance be intoxicating.  And
    cigarettes aren't intoxicating.
         But, having said that, the Surgeon General
    said, Thus, correctly designating the chronic use
    of tobacco as habituation rather than addiction
    carries with it no implication that the habit may 4200 be broken easily.
         The bottom line is people have known for a
    very, very, very long time that if you start
    smoking, it can be hard to quit.  For some people
    it's harder than others.  It doesn't matter
    whether you call it an addiction or dependence or
    a habit, it's behavior that's important.  And
    people have understood behavior.
         Now, 30 years later, Mr. Wichmann showed you
    30 years later the congressional hearings where
    they had the cigarette company executives raise
    their hand, and they asked them, Do you think
    smoking is addictive?  And you just watched that
    just before we went to lunch.  And Congressmen
    Wyden said Okay.  Let's make this short.  Let's go
    through.  I want to ask you.
         He asked the first person.  He says I believe
    it's not addictive.
         They went to the second person.  And do you
    remember what he said?  What he tried to say?  He
    said, Congressman, I don't believe they're
    addictive.  They don't meet the classic
    definition.  They're not intoxicating.
         And the Congressman cut him off.  The
    Congressman cut him off.  He was trying to explain 4201 what his view was.
         You know, I don't know about you guys, but,
    you know, my experience is that lots of times
    Congressmen are more interested in hearing
    themselves talk than hearing the witnesses talk.
    That's why I like a court of law, because
    everybody gets to talk, as long as the judge says
    it's okay.  Everybody gets to tell their side of
    the story.
         So I tell you that just for context, because
    I'm sure when you're hearing these guys say it's
    not addictive, you're saying, Are they crazy?  But
    that's why they were saying what they were saying.
         We'll talk more about that.  But I think it's
    important to add some context when you're
    evaluating statements and snippets that the
    plaintiffs are putting before you.
         So as a result of the '64 Surgeon General's
    report, Congress got involved.  They held
    hearings.  They passed something called The
    Federal Cigarette Labeling Act that required
    warnings to go on every pack of cigarettes,
    starting in 1966.  You heard Dr. Proctor tell you,
    Congress told the companies exactly what the
    warnings would say, how big it would be, what the 4202 type was, where on the pack it would be.
         Here was the first warning.  Caution:
    Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health.
         And John Campbell says he remembers that
    warning.  He said he remembers when that warning
    went on the pack.
         And if you think about it, of course he
    would.  It was a big deal.  It's not like today
    where there's warnings on everything.  There's a
    warning that coffee is hot.  I'm not saying those
    are bad things, but we're now saturated with a
    warning society.  But back then, you had a warning
    slapped on a consumer product after the '64
    report.  It was a very big deal.
         Four years later, Congress changed the
    warning.  They amended the law and said, Now it
    will say, Warning:  The Surgeon General has
    determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to
    your health.
         They strengthened the warning.  This warning
    was on the pack for the next 15 years.  This is
    the warning that was on the pack when John and
    Judy Campbell met.  And John told you that Judy
    was aware of the warning.  In fact, he told you
    that when they were dating, John used to say to 4203 Judy, Don't you know that cigarettes are hazardous
    to your health and them things are going to kill
    you?
         Do you remember what Judy would say?
         Well, you're smoking too.  Why are you
    bothering me?  Practice what you preach.
         After they were married, the roles reversed.
    Judy would tell John, those things are going to
    kill you.
         And John would reply, Yeah.  If they kill me,
    they will kill you too, because we're both doing
    it.
         You heard Mr. Tepikian play the part of Ed
    Haponski, the brother-in-law.  You remember, Ed
    was married to Imogene.  And Ed stopped smoking in
    1970 when he saw the Surgeon General's report, and
    he remembered he had a hernia operation, so he
    quit.
         And like, you know, people who stop doing
    things that are bad for them, we like to tell
    everybody else that they should stop too.  So he
    was telling Jean and Judy they should quit.  And
    he said that he would tell them, You're killing
    yourselves.  And whenever they would smoke a
    cigarette, he said, You're putting another nail in 4204 your coffin.
         And Jean would say, Yep, another nail.
         And he remembers one time -- he remembers one
    time where he took a pack and he showed the
    warning to both Judy and Jean.  And do you
    remember what they did?  Do you remember?  They
    laughed.  They laughed at him and they said --
    remember what they said?  You've got to die of
    something.
         There is no question that for decades,
    literally for decades before Judy quit smoking,
    both John Campbell and Judy Campbell understood
    that smoking was risky and could kill them.
         In 1985, 22 years before Judy Campbell died
    of emphysema, the warnings changed to specifically
    say, Surgeon General's warning:  Smoking causes
    lung cancer, heart disease and emphysema, and
    quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk
    to health.
         And that's important, and it's really
    important because it's undisputed that if a person
    quits smoking before they get COPD or emphysema,
    they won't get it, at least not from smoking.
         You heard Dr. Schroeder tell you that if a
    person quits smoking when their COPD is only mild, 4205 it won't progress any worse.
         You saw the PFTs on the -- on Monday where
    even after all those years of smoking and as bad
    as Mrs. Campbell's COPD got, when she stopped, her
    PFTs stopped getting worse.
         So it's an important piece of information.
    1985.  It causes emphysema.  Quitting smoking now
    greatly reduces serious risk to health.
         So let's talk about quitting smoking.  And
    one thing I want to make sure that I clear up --
    and we'll talk about this in the context of the
    jury instructions too.
         In order to be a member of the Engle class,
    plaintiff has to prove two things:  That
    Mrs. Campbell was addicted and that her addiction
    was a legal cause of her COPD.
         So you have to prove both addiction and that
    but for her addiction, she would have quit smoking
    and would not have died from COPD.
         We'll talk about legal cause, but that's what
    it means.
         So that raises a question, why did she wait
    so long to quit?  We know she had the ability to
    quit, because she did.  Why did she wait until her
    COPD got so bad before she quit? 4206 Well, Dr. Brady told you that the single most
    important factor in quitting smoking is motivation
    and persistence.  Dr. Brady told you she believes
    anyone can change their behavior when they're
    sufficiently committed to doing it.  And the best
    example I can think of for this case is how Judy
    gave up alcohol.  You remember there was a time in
    her life when she was a heavy drinker.  And you've
    all heard that evidence.  We don't need to go
    through it.  But then her mother was killed by a
    drunk driver, and so Judy made the decision to
    quit drinking.  And so what she did is she put her
    alcohol down and she never drank again.
         And Mr. Campbell told you that she was
    fidgety and she was irritable when she quit
    drinking.  Those are withdrawal symptoms.  That's
    exactly what they were.  He said that she craved
    alcohol for several months after she quit.  Do you
    remember what she told her husband?  She says it's
    one of the hardest things that she ever did.
         But, again, she quit and she never drank
    again, even though she had the same triggers,
    because Mr. Campbell continued to drink for
    another decade.
         What Dr. Brady told you was that Judy 4207 Campbell quit drinking when she was sufficiently
    motivated to quit drinking.  And she also told
    you -- and these were Dr. Brady's words -- that
    Mrs. Campbell quit smoking when she was
    sufficiently motivated to quit smoking.
         Members of the jury, any time Mrs. Campbell
    wanted to, she could have employed the very same
    skills that she used to quit drinking to quit
    smoking.  But she chose to continue to smoke for
    another 10 years.
         During closing, Mr. Wichmann said that Judy
    was only able to quit when she was in the
    hospital.  It took her being in the hospital for
    her to be able to quit.  So let's look at
    something else we saw with Dr. Brady.
         Do you remember, we used this Smart Move to
    Stop Smoking Guide.  It's written by a colleague
    of hers at the University of South Carolina.  It's
    used by the American Cancer Society to help people
    stop smoking.  And here is the quiz that they have
    you take.
         Do you have what it takes to stop smoking?
    There is no magic cure that can help you stop.
         I asked Dr. Brady, Do you agree with that?
    She goes, absolutely. 4208 Take this short quiz to find out if you have
    what it takes.  Question 1.  Do you want to stop
    smoking?
         And Dr. Brady said, you absolutely have to
    want to stop smoking.
         Are you willing to make some changes in your
    daily routine?
         These are the triggers we're talking about.
    You heard that there are certain situations we
    associate with smoking or drinking or whatever.
         Are you willing to make some changes in your
    daily routine?
         Three.  Are you willing to put up with some
    uneasy moments after stopping?
         Well, some people have withdrawal symptoms.
    Not everybody, but some do.
         And what Dr. Brady told you, just like what
    the American Cancer Society told you, or tells
    you, if you can answer yes to all three questions,
    you can stop smoking.
         Dr. Brady told you she knows no one who can
    truly answer yes to these three questions who
    can't stop smoking.
         So with that, I have a question for you.  You
    know, I think it would be really important to know 4209 what Judy Campbell's answers to these questions
    would have been at various points in time.  Did
    she truly want to stop smoking?  Was she willing
    to make some changes in her routine?  Was she
    willing to put up with some uneasy moments?
         The reason why is that one of the last things
    that Mr. Campbell admitted on cross-examination
    was that his wife could have quit smoking earlier,
    but she didn't want to give it up.  That's what
    Mr. Campbell told you.  She could have quit
    smoking earlier, but she didn't want to give it
    up.
         And the bottom line is, you have to want to
    quit and you have to try to quit.  And you don't
    need an expert to tell you that.  You don't need a
    lawyer to tell you that.  That's common sense.  We
    all know that.
         So let's talk about the efforts that Judy did
    make to quit smoking.
         The evidence was she never asked a doctor for
    help in quitting.  We'll talk about the '92 patch,
    believe me, in a little while.
         She never threw away her ashtrays or her
    cigarettes or her lighters.  That's important,
    because if you're really going to quit, why do you 4210 need that stuff anymore?  You know, I'm going to
    quit, but I'm just going to keep this stuff around
    in case I don't quit?
         She never asked her husband for help
    quitting.
         And similarly, and importantly, Mr. Campbell
    never asked his wife to quit.  He told you why.  I
    asked him that question.  He told you why.  Do you
    remember what he said?
         He said he believes that, quote, When you're
    an adult, you do whatever it is that you want,
    because you're responsible for yourself.
         That's not lawyer argument.  That came from
    Mr. Campbell on the witness stand.  In fact,
    Mr. Campbell told you on direct examination, I
    made up my mind I wasn't going to quit until I was
    ready to quit.
         Members of the jury, the fact is that was
    John and Judy Campbell's mindset when they were
    together.  They did exactly what they wanted to do
    when they wanted to do that.  And that's okay.
    You know, as long as you're not hurting somebody
    else, that's okay.  We've got a lot of freedom to
    choose how we want to live our lives.
         And let me address one thing that Mr. 4211 Wichmann said in his closing argument.  No one, no
    one is suggesting that Mrs. Campbell was a bad
    person or a bad mother.  No one is making that
    suggestion.  What we're suggesting is that she was
    a strong person who knew how she wanted to live
    her life, and she lived her life making her own
    choices.
         So Mr. Campbell testified in his deposition
    he could think of three times in Mrs. Campbell's
    entire life that she quit smoking.  He told you
    that quit for three or four days in 1985.  We know
    that she quit for six days in 1987.  He told us
    that in the deposition, and we have the journal.
    And we know she quit for good in 1996.  So let's
    talk about those quits.
         And while it is true that 90 percent of
    people quit on their own without any kind of help,
    it certainly is true we have more stop-smoking
    aids now than we used to.  Back in '84 you had
    Nicorette gum.  So there were nicotine replacement
    therapies on the market before Judy Campbell's
    first quit attempt.  It was prescription only.
    But I just tell you that, because you heard it
    from Dr. Brady, and I'm just kind of putting it in
    the context of kind of her attempts. 4212 So what Mr. Campbell told you was that in
    1985 his wife quit smoking for three or four days.
    She tried to quit by going cold turkey.  You
    remember, she also bought an artificial cigarette
    so she would have something to hold in her hand.
         Mr. Campbell tells you, he doesn't know why
    she tried to quit.  And he told you he doesn't
    know why she went back to smoking.  He didn't try
    to quit with her.  She didn't ask him to quit with
    her.  All he knows is that three or four days
    after she stopped smoking, he came home and he
    noticed that she was smoking again.  And he said
    to her, Well, I guess that didn't go very far, did
    it?
         They never talked about it after that.  And
    as far as we know, that was the first time Judy
    Campbell tried to quit.
         Two years later, in 1987, they were both
    talking about cutting back on smoking, because you
    remember, they said cigarettes were getting
    expensive.  So they were going to try to cut back
    to about a pack a day.  And Mr. Campbell actually
    quit for seven days, and we know from her journal
    that Mrs. Campbell quit for six days.  And you are
    going to have that journal. 4213 And like Mr. Wichmann, I suggest you read
    that journal.  It's not that often you get a
    review of somebody's realtime thoughts.  And not
    in the context of a lawsuit, somebody's realtime
    thoughts as they're doing something.
         Mrs. Campbell talked about why she decided to
    quit and what she understood the benefits of
    quitting to be.
         So first she said, This is the second day for
    Johnny and his attempt to stop.  It has made me
    really do a lot of serious thinking about quitting
    myself.
         So she decided she was going to quit too, and
    she decided she was going to surprise him.  She
    picked a quit date of October 31st, 1987.
         Remember, I talked with Dr. Brady.  It was a
    coincidence, because it was Halloween.  Remember,
    she got married on Halloween to Les Strickland.
    And it was actually Dr. Brady that said, Yeah, her
    first quit attempt was -- or the '87 quit attempt
    was on Halloween too.
         Now, in opening statement, Mr. Wichmann told
    you that in 1987 Judy Campbell tried to quit
    smoking and John Campbell was there helping her
    and supporting her. 4214 And I told you no, the evidence would be that
    Mr. Campbell didn't even know she was trying to
    quit in 1987.
         Now, the judge has told you what the lawyers
    say is not evidence.  Evidence comes from the
    witness stand, from the documents.  But let's look
    and see what the evidence was.
         This is from Judy Campbell's journal.  I
    think I'll keep it a secret as long as I can.
    Well, today is the day.  So far I'm doing real
    good, I think.  I hope I can keep it a secret for
    a few days.
         Johnny still hasn't guessed that I have quit
    smoking.  I wonder how long it will take for him
    to figure it out?
         You may remember when he was testifying -- I
    cross-examined him on that -- he waffled.  You
    know, it wasn't clear whether he did know or
    didn't know, whether he found out.  So I
    confronted him with his deposition testimony where
    he said, I didn't know she was trying to quit when
    I was trying to quit, just like she tried to quit
    and I didn't try to quit in 1985.
         Why do I tell you that?  Because Dr. Brady
    told you that people are more likely to quit if 4215 they get the support and encouragement of their
    family and their friends.  That's common sense
    too.  You know, if the people we love and care
    about and care about us, help us, then you're more
    likely to quit.  And frankly, there is no credible
    evidence that Mr. Campbell ever did that.
         Mrs. Campbell also talked about the good
    things that would come from quitting smoking.  She
    wrote that quitting smoking -- she could look
    forward to a longer life and more energy and
    breathing better and no hacking cough.
         She also wrote that after two days of
    quitting, I'm coughing less now.
         You remember that Dr. Schroeder told you why
    that was significant.  He told you that with
    emphysema, it's caused by chronic irritants from
    cigarette smoke.  And if you continue to suck
    those chronic irritants in, it causes you to cough
    and have symptoms.  But when you stop smoking,
    even for a couple of days, you're not dosing
    yourself with those irritants; you're not
    irritating your passages.
         So she wrote, I'm coughing less now after two
    days.  Again, she associated that with her
    smoking. 4216 The last entry in her journal.  Made it six
    days.  Maybe next time.
         And the evidence was, members of the jury,
    that Judy Campbell did not try to quit smoking
    again until March 1996, when she went in the
    hospital.
         All right, sir.  Let's talk about the 1992
    patch for just a few minutes.
         Here's the medical record.  This is
    Dr. Frank.  We've been all through this record.
    This is the one that talks about COPD too.  We
    will talk about this.  And it says, She has agreed
    to stop smoking, and we will try her on Habitrol
    patches.  You probably can't see it, but it says,
    She will take 21 milligrams for 28 days and 14
    milligrams for 14 days and then 7 milligrams for
    14 days.
         Now, in opening statement, Mr. Wichmann told
    you that Mrs. Campbell used the nicotine patch in
    1992.  And I told you this is the first time in
    the history of this lawsuit anyone has ever
    suggested that Mrs. Campbell used the nicotine
    patch.  I told you that Mr. Campbell gave his
    deposition for four days over a two-year period
    and never once mentioned it.  On 4217 cross-examination, Dr. Brady confirmed that was
    true.  Dr. Schroeder confirmed that was true too.
         Obviously, I wasn't going to bore you by
    reading all, you know, four days of the
    depositions.  But you had both Dr. Brady and
    Schroeder tell you that was true.  And you
    remember, I piled all those depositions up with
    the errata sheets in front of Mr. Campbell, and I
    confronted him with his deposition where he
    testified unequivocally that Mrs. Campbell made
    three and only three attempts to quit smoking.  I
    read him the questions and answers.
         QUESTION:  So there was a 1985 quit and a
    1987 quit, and then we have the 1996 quit,
    correct?
         ANSWER:  Correct.
         Any other quits you can recall?
         ANSWER:  No.
         Now, you learn from Dr. Brady that in 1992,
    the patch was only available by prescription.  Has
    plaintiff shown you any records that Mrs. Campbell
    filled a prescription?  Of course not, because
    there are none.
         So when Dr. Brady took the stand, Mr.
    Wichmann showed this record and asked Dr. Brady 4218 whether detail people from pharmaceutical
    companies give out free samples to doctors.  And,
    of course, they do.  And then they speculated that
    maybe that's how Mrs. Campbell got the nicotine
    patches.
         Now, on cross-examination, Dr. Brady conceded
    there is no evidence in the record, none
    whatsoever, that she ever used a patch.  None of
    her children testified about it.  None of the
    witnesses testified about it.  There is no
    evidence in the medical records she testified
    about it.  There is no prescription records she
    testified about it.
         Then Mr. Campbell took the stand.  And, of
    course he's been here the entire trial listening
    to opening statement, listening to all the
    evidence.  And when he took the stand, he said not
    only did his wife use the patch, he was with her
    that day in Dr. Frank's office and he watched
    Dr. Frank put the patch on her arm.  And he said,
    When they went home, he would put the patch on her
    arm.
         And I asked him, why didn't you tell us that
    in your deposition or in any of the errata sheets?
         And he said, I forgot. 4219 Is that something you would forget?  It's a
    new drug, it's a new medication, you say that you
    literally saw the doctor put it on her arm.
         So I said, Okay.  Well, so then you were in
    the office with your wife and Dr. Frank in 1992
    when your wife -- when Dr. Frank told your wife
    that she had COPD, she had changes with COPD, and
    that the x-ray that was just taken that day showed
    severe emphysematous changes in both lungs?
         Remember, I asked him that.  He said, I don't
    remember anything about that.
         Told you he didn't remember the records from
    1990, when his wife was -- was diagnosed with
    COPD.  He didn't know in 1991 his wife had a chest
    x-ray.  He didn't know in 1992 his wife had a
    chest X-ray.  But he remembers the nicotine
    patches?
         Well, let me tell you something.  It's really
    not a big deal whether she ever used the patch,
    because if she did, what it means is that in 40
    years, instead of trying to quit three times, she
    tried to quit four times.  And it really doesn't
    change anything.  But I will tell you something.
    The only evidence we have that that ever happened
    was here at trial.  And so candidly, you need to 4220 decide in this case whether Mr. Campbell is being
    straight with you.  Because if you decide he's
    not, that's a very big deal.
         So let's talk about the next topic.  What, if
    anything, defendants did to cause Mrs. Campbell to
    smoke and get sick?
         I told you in opening statement that if you
    look back at the millions of pages written by the
    thousands of employees of Philip Morris and other
    tobacco companies, you would see they said some
    dumb things.  You certainly now know that it's
    true.
         And I said, you would see statements where
    they said it's not proven that smoking causes lung
    cancer, and it's not proven that smoking was
    addictive.  And I told you in opening statement
    the evidence would be that the companies hung
    their hats on too many technical distinctions and
    they hung on to those for way too long.
         But I want you to think about how plaintiff
    showed you those documents.  What plaintiff did
    was they literally took out of context snippets
    from a series of documents written 40 and 50 and
    60 years ago, and they put them in front of
    Dr. Proctor, and they said, Tell us their 4221 historical significance.
         No one made any effort to tie any of those
    documents to Mrs. Campbell.  And those documents
    did not tell the whole story.  Let me just give
    you a few examples.
         You remember they showed you a 1961
    Philip Morris research memo that showed the
    partial list of compounds in cigarette smoke also
    identified as carcinogens.  And, of course,
    carcinogens are cancer-causing agents.  Even
    today, in his closing argument, Mr. Wichmann said
    this was a secret Philip Morris document and it
    was kept secret until 1999.  And he tried to
    suggest to you that Philip Morris knew something
    that the Surgeon General didn't know and that
    public health didn't know.
         It wasn't until cross-examination that you
    learned that this list came from the published
    literature.  Anyone who wanted to look, including
    the Surgeon General, had access to this
    information.  This wasn't something Philip Morris
    knew that the public health and Surgeon General
    didn't know.  And, in fact, it wasn't until
    cross-examination that you learned that
    Philip Morris actually gave the list to the 4222 Surgeon General seven months before the Surgeon
    General's report.
         And I showed you, remember?  I showed
    Dr. Proctor, I said these were polycyclic aromatic
    hydrocarbons.  They're carcinogens, right?  Here
    is benzo[a]pyrene, right?  Here is ammonia.  Here
    is arsenic.  All this was given to the Surgeon
    General seven months before the Surgeon General's
    report, right?
         He said, right.
         But I pointed out what they said in the
    letter.  None of the chemical substances listed
    therein, to our knowledge, has been found by
    scientific research to be harmful to the health of
    the smoker in amounts reported in smoke.
         And then I talked with Dr. Proctor about dose
    response.  Do you remember that?  And Dr. Proctor
    said that there is carcinogens all around us.
    There's cancer-causing agents in the air we
    breathe, in the water we drink, in the foods that
    we eat.  But carcinogens don't cause problems
    until you ingest them in large enough amounts.
         Remember, I talked about radiation.  I talked
    about there is no question that radiation causes
    all kinds of cancers.  We know that, of course. 4223 But we also know that small amounts of radiation
    are used in x-rays, and they're used actually to
    treat cancer.
         So the bottom line is, when Dr. Proctor and
    Mr. Wichmann tried to suggest that Philip Morris
    knew something that the Surgeon General didn't
    know and we kept it from them, it's not true.
    Here is two documents that show that isn't true.
         Dr. Proctor and Mr. Wichmann also tried to
    suggest that Philip Morris and Reynolds knew
    smoking -- people smoked for nicotine and tried to
    keep that information from the public.  In fact,
    in his closing argument today, he said the
    defendants kept it secret that people smoked for
    nicotine.
         Well, frankly, that's just silly.  First of
    all, you saw in the 1906 Health Notes, it said
    smoking is the worst form of addiction.
    Dr. Proctor admitted it's been known since the
    1900s that smokers smoked for the pharmacological
    effects of nicotine.
         And I showed you these documents.  This is a
    speech that was given by Bill Dunn, a researcher
    at Philip Morris, in 1972.  And it refers to a
    conference they had.  We talked about it.  Present 4224 at this speech were people from the National
    Cancer Institute, from the Surgeon General's
    office, and from the Department of Agricultural,
    where Dr. Dunn is saying, the majority of the
    conferees would go even further and accept the
    proposition that nicotine is the active
    constituent of cigarette smoke.  Without nicotine,
    the argument goes, there would be no smoking.
         So here is a Philip Morris researcher in 1972
    giving a public speech where the Surgeon General's
    representatives are there, the National Cancer
    Institute is there, saying people smoke for
    nicotine.
         After the speech, he was interviewed in the
    newspaper and said, The other two propositions
    from the group stated the main ingredient in
    cigarette smoke which produces the physical
    response is nicotine, and that the sought-after
    responses result in psychological efficiency.
         So he gave a speech, then gave an interview
    where he said, hey, it's nicotine, and then he
    wrote a book, or published a book.  And they talk
    about here the Neuropsychopharmacology of
    Nicotine.  Nicotine is a reinforcing agent, so on,
    etc. 4225 The bottom line is if Philip Morris was
    trying to hide that it believed that nicotine was
    the important reason people smoke, it did it in
    kind of an odd way of doing it, don't you think?
    A speech, an interview, and a book?
         And what you didn't learn until cross -- you
    didn't see any of this until cross.  But
    Dr. Proctor has this book in his own library.  The
    Surgeon General has published it in several
    reports.  But again, it wasn't until I brought it
    up on cross-examination that you learned about it.
         One last example.  They showed you this
    document written by George Weissman, senior
    vice-president, and Joe Cullman, CEO, after the
    '64 Surgeon General's report.
         However, at some point, reflecting the same
    seriousness with which we met the report, we must
    in the near future provide some answers which will
    give smokers a psychological crutch and a
    self-rationale to continue smoking.
         That sounds really bad, doesn't it?  I
    watched your faces when you saw that document, and
    I know you thought that sounds really bad.  But
    what you didn't learn until cross-examination,
    George Weissman did not make up the term 4226 "psychological crutch."  It's discussed in the '64
    Surgeon General's report that the memo is
    addressing.  It's under Beneficial Effects of
    Tobacco.
         Here is what the Surgeon General said.  The
    drive to use tobacco, being fundamentally
    psychogenic in origin, has the same basis as other
    drug habits and in a large fraction of the
    American population appears to satisfy the total
    need of the individual for a psychological crutch.
         Then to bring it to full circle, they didn't
    show you this either.  Here -- I showed you on
    cross-examination.  Here was the last sentence or
    paragraph in Mr. Weissman's memo.
         In closing, the main essence of the report
    and the publicity to me is that it has still left
    smoking on an individual basis, the individual's
    own choice of the psychological benefit versus the
    alleged hazard.  Anything that impinges on the
    right of the individual to make this choice is
    contrary to our most basic traditions.
         I'm not going to go through all the documents
    and respond tit for tat.  A, we don't have time;
    B, you're not interested; and C, that's really not
    the issue in the case. 4227 But my point is, there are two sides to every
    story.  And it is important to have the context.
    You remember, I told you -- we talked in jury
    selection.  I said for those of us who are
    parents, how many have a couple kids that are
    close to age with each other?  I said, so, you
    know, did you ever have the experience where your
    son came up and said, Look what my sister did.
    She's two years older, blah, blah, blah.  Daddy,
    go punish her.
         And then you go and you say to your little
    girl, what happened?
         The son looks at you like, Oh, my God.  Why
    do you need to even ask?  I told you what
    happened.
         There is two sides to every story, and it's
    important to get the context.
         Let me talk about one more thing.  You have
    seen lots of statements where the company said
    it's not proven; it hasn't been proven; it may or
    may not; it's not psychological -- or it's not
    scientifically proven.
         What you didn't learn until cross-examination
    was why the companies took that position.  The
    companies' position was statistics can't prove 4228 causation.  It's evidence, but it's not proof.
    And the reason why they said that was because 85
    to 90 percent of cigarette smokers don't get lung
    cancer; that nonsmokers get lung cancer too;
    therefore, smoking is not a necessary and
    sufficient cause of lung cancer.
         And the companies said, something else must
    be going on, because, you know, people are smoking
    and not getting lung cancer.
         Dr. Proctor also told you that even today, in
    2013, we don't know the specific constituent or
    combination of constituents that cause lung
    cancer.  Do we know smoking causes it?  Of course
    we do.  Are those arguments technical and do they
    hang onto them too long?  Yes, they did.  Are the
    arguments particularly credible?  No, they're not.
    In hindsight, would the companies have been better
    off in 1964, when the Surgeon General said smoking
    causes cancer, to either say, We agree, or nothing
    at all?  Of course they should have.  And they
    didn't.
         So sitting in this courtroom, you can say,
    What a bunch of nitwits.  What were those guys
    thinking?  And you're certainly entitled to that
    view. 4229 But let me tell you something.  Unless
    plaintiff proves that Mrs. Campbell heard those
    statements and she was fooled by those statements
    and she relied on those statements, then they have
    nothing to do with this lawsuit, because it's John
    Campbell's lawsuit, and the issue is why did Judy
    Campbell smoke and why didn't she quit?
         So let's look at the evidence.  In opening
    statement, Mr. Wichmann has suggested defendants
    somehow misled Mrs. Campbell into becoming a
    smoker.
         Well, you've seen the questionnaire.  We've
    talked about that.  We don't need to talk about
    that again.
         We heard about the 1950s.  It's something
    called the Frank Statement.  Well, what you heard
    from Mr. Campbell is that he didn't know what the
    Frank Statement was.  He never heard Judy Campbell
    talk about it.  Judy was 12 years old when the
    Frank Statement was published.  There was no
    evidence it was published in the newspaper in the
    little town where she lived.  She wasn't a smoker
    then anyhow.
         You heard about The Tobacco Institute and the
    Council for Tobacco Research and the TIRC.  But, 4230 again, Mr. Campbell told you he'd never heard of
    any of those organizations.  He never discussed
    them with his wife.
         There is simply no evidence that any of those
    organizations or anything they said or did had any
    influence on Mrs. Campbell.
         And again, you know, I got back to what Mr.
    Wichmann had to say.  Ultimately your job is to
    compare the lawyers' theories with the evidence in
    the case.  You know, I told you in opening
    statement that the case is about Judy Campbell and
    why she smoked.  I suggested that as you listen to
    the evidence, you should ask yourself, What does
    this have to do with Mrs. Campbell?  And if the
    answer is nothing, then why are you hearing about
    it?
         So with that said, let's talk just very
    briefly about Dr. Proctor.
         Dr. Proctor candidly admitted he has an ax to
    grind with the tobacco companies.  He told you
    three of four grandparents died of smoking-related
    disease.  He was very up front.  He said he would
    like to put the tobacco companies out of the
    cigarette business.  And he's getting rich in the
    process.  To even agree to take a case, he takes a 4231 $5,000 signing fee whether he does anything or
    not.  He charges $4,800 a day to fly here, to
    testify for each day, and to fly back.  He
    admitted that since 2009, he's testified in over
    30 trials in Florida alone and has been paid over
    a million dollars.
         His testimony is the same at every trial.  He
    told you he knows nothing about Judy Campbell.
    Remember when I started to try asking him about
    Judy Campbell, he said, I don't know anything
    about her.  The only thing I know about Judy
    Campbell is what Mr. Wichmann told me in a
    15-minute conversation before my deposition.
         He concedes he knows nothing about the facts
    of Judy Campbell's life or what influenced her,
    why she made the decision she made.
         So those are the facts.  So the question is,
    how do those facts help us decide this case?  Are
    you guys doing okay?  Do you need a break?  We
    have been going about an hour.  Everybody okay?
         Okay.  The first question you will be asked
    to decide on the verdict form is this one.  It's
    the class membership question.
         Was Judy Campbell addicted to cigarettes
    containing nicotine, and if so, was this addiction 4232 a legal cause of Judy Campbell's chronic
    obstructive pulmonary disease?
         I will show you the legal cause definition in
    a minute, but I wanted to point one thing out.
         It says was this addiction a legal cause.
    And Mr. Wichmann or Mr. Millard pointed out, it
    doesn't have to be the only cause.  There can be
    other causes, but it must be a legal cause.
         So the plaintiff has to prove both of those.
    They have to prove that she was, in fact,
    addicted, and that her addiction to cigarettes
    containing nicotine was a legal cause.
         Let's talk about addiction first.  There is
    nothing in the jury instructions that defines
    addiction.  That's something you have to decide
    for yourself.  You remember that the definition of
    addiction has changed over time.  Dr. Brady told
    you that the definition of addiction is different
    now than it was when she was trained.  You've
    already seen that until 1988, the Surgeon General
    said smoking was not addictive because it wasn't
    intoxicating.  In 1988, the Surgeon General
    adopted a different definition and now says
    cigarette smoking is intoxicating.
         Dr. Brady told you what her definition is. 4233 She says it's a NIDA, a National Institute of Drug
    Abuse, definition, and she said addiction is a
    chronic, relapsing brain disease.
         So if that's the definition, does it apply to
    Mrs. Campbell?
         The evidence was that during the 40 years
    that Mrs. Campbell smoked, she made two attempts
    to quit smoking before she quit for good.  She
    quit for three days in 1985 and six days in 1987.
         Is that evidence that she suffered from a
    chronic relapsing brain disease?  Because that's
    what the evidence is.  Does that persuade you she
    suffered from chronic relapsing brain disease?
         Here is plaintiff's argument in a nut shell.
    She didn't quit until she got sick, therefore,
    she's addicted.  Smoking can be addictive, she
    didn't quit, therefore, she's addicted.
         Where is the evidence of that?  Where is the
    evidence of that?
         Dr. Brady talked about brain changes.  But
    she admitted she doesn't know if Mrs. Campbell had
    any significant brain changes.
         So you can adopt that definition and apply it
    however you want to, or you can just disregard
    that definition completely and you can just 4234 decide, Hey, you know what?  If she smoked for,
    you know, for 35 or 40 years, a pack and a half,
    two packs a day, she was addicted.  You can do
    whatever definition you want.
         And I will tell you, frankly, I'm not sure it
    really makes a lot of difference.  And let me tell
    you why.  Because plaintiff has to prove more than
    she was addicted.  He has to prove that an
    addiction was a legal cause.  And the evidence is
    that it was not.
         Now, if you remember in jury selection and in
    opening statement, I talked to you about the
    difference between a cause in fact and a legal
    cause.  And you remember, I gave you the analogy
    of the guy that steps out in the street and gets
    hit by a truck.  So I step out in the street and I
    get smushed by a truck.  What was the cause in
    fact?  I got smushed by a truck.  Right?
         But what was the legal cause?  You need to
    know more.  You need to know why I got hit by the
    truck.  Did I ignore the warning light?  Did I
    have ear buds in, wasn't paying attention?  Was
    the truck driver speeding or, you know, messing
    with his or her radio.  You need to know why.
         So let's look at the legal cause of 4235 instruction.  And let me just tell you, it's a
    mouthful.  And let me just tell you, you can
    ignore everything below the highlighted portion,
    because all that says is there can be more than
    one legal cause.  I have already told you that.
    There can be more legal cause.  Let's look at the
    definition.
         An addiction to smoking cigarettes containing
    nicotine is a legal cause of a disease or medical
    condition if it directly and in a natural and
    continuous sequence produces or contributes
    substantially to producing such disease or medical
    condition so it can reasonably be said that but
    for the addiction to cigarettes containing
    nicotine, such disease or medical condition would
    not have been suffered.
         In other words, plaintiff has to prove that
    if Mrs. Campbell had not been addicted, she would
    have quit smoking and she would not have gotten
    sick.  That's what the "but for" means, that if
    she wasn't addicted, she would have quit and she
    would not have gotten sick.
         There was no evidence of that whatsoever.
    None.
         Dr. Brady told you that all smokers, 4236 including addicted smokers, have the ability to
    quit smoking.  The evidence was that 60 million
    Americans have quit, 90 percent on their own.  And
    Dr. Brady told you the vast majority of those
    people were addicted.  Dr. Brady told you the vast
    majority of those had changes to their brain.  The
    bottom line is, addicted smokers quit each and
    every day.
         Now, let me be clear.  I'm not saying it's
    easy for everybody to quit smoking.  For some
    people it's hard, and they have to try more than
    once.  May have to try several times.  For some
    people it is easy.  But it is undisputed that even
    addicted smokers can and do quit.  And the bottom
    line is, addicted smokers quit when they make up
    their minds it's more important for them not to
    smoke than it is to smoke.
         So where is the evidence?  Where is the
    evidence that Mrs. Campbell was any different from
    the 60 million Americans who have quit?  Where was
    the evidence?  There was none.
         Dr. Brady told you Mrs. Campbell always had
    the ability to quit whenever she was sufficiently
    motivated to quit.
         Mr. Campbell told you that too.  Mr. Campbell 4237 told you she could have quit smoking earlier, but
    she didn't want to give it up.  Those were his
    words.  She didn't want to give it up.
         And addiction to nicotine did not prevent
    Mrs. Campbell from quitting smoking earlier.  And
    there is no evidence that it did.  And we know she
    had the ability to quit, because she did quit.
         Members of the jury, the evidence is
    compelling that addiction to nicotine was not a
    legal cause of Mrs. Campbell's COPD.  An addiction
    to nicotine did not prevent her from smoking
    earlier.  Not a single witness in this case took
    the stand and told you that nicotine was a cause
    of Mrs. Campbell's COPD.
         This is plaintiff's burden.  Plaintiff failed
    to meet their burden.  If you agree that's the
    evidence, then you check no, you knock on the
    door, and you tell Deputy Nance that you've
    reached your verdict.
         Let's go to the second question.  And
    Mr. Millard made it clear this one is our burden
    of proof.  This is the statute of limitations.  We
    have the burden of proving this.  If you disagree
    with me and you believe that Mrs. Campbell was a
    member of the class, then you consider Question 2. 4238 And Question 2 asks:  Did Judy Campbell have COPD
    before May 5th, 1990?  Now, let me point out that
    doesn't say, Was Judy Campbell diagnosed with
    COPD?  We heard a lot about diagnosis, but that's
    not what the question asks and that's not the
    standard.  It says, Did Judy Campbell have COPD
    before May 5th, 1990, and, if so, did Judy
    Campbell know or should she have reasonably known
    before May 5th, 1990, that she had COPD and that
    her COPD was caused by cigarette smoking?
         I have a chart that lays out the medical
    evidence.  To kind of orient you, here is May 5th,
    1990.  This is the cutoff.  On here are all these
    medical records that we've been talking about.  On
    this side is the evidence I say what she knew.
    And we will talk about the medical record and
    we'll talk about the journal.
         Okay.  Let's go to the first question.  Did
    Judy Campbell have COPD before May 5th, 1990?
    Well, that's easy, because it's undisputed.
    Dr. Martinez-Salas, the very first witness who
    took the stand, the doctor they described as not
    having a dog in the fight or dog in the race or a
    pony in the show, who took care of Mrs. Campbell
    for 11 years, told you that she did. 4239 Dr. Martinez-Salas -- check your notes --
    told you that she did.  He told you that, if he
    had been her doctor on May 5th, 1990, he would
    have diagnosed her with COPD.  Dr. Martinez-Salas
    told you he had -- she had COPD long before May
    5th, 1990.
         I was amazed when Mr. Millard didn't admit
    this.  I was flabbergasted.  His own witness,
    Martinez-Salas, told you that she had it.
    Dr. Schroeder said he agreed.  The only two lung
    doctors in the case said, Of course she had COPD
    before May 5th, 1990.
         Here is the earliest record.  This is
    September 26th, 1990.  This is just a few months
    later, right?  What does it say?  We went through
    basically the same testimony with both
    Martinez-Salas and Schroeder.  Sorry to put you
    through going through it twice.  But you heard it
    from the first witness.  I wanted you to hear it
    from the last witness, because I didn't want you
    to forget after a week what you heard.
         The lung fields are hyperinflated.  Remember,
    both Martinez-Salas and Schroeder told you what
    that means.  And there is a paucity -- misspelled,
    should be a "c"; it's spelled correctly in the 4240 other records -- of lung markings in the upper
    lung fields.  He talked to you about what that
    means too.  You get air trapped and your lungs get
    too big and hyperinflated.  They push down the
    diaphragm.  These findings are consistent with
    COPD.
         Conclusion -- "conclusion" means diagnosis,
    means impression, means whatever you think it
    means, but it means conclusion.  You know, this is
    when you look at the evidence and here is what you
    decide.  Questionable right lower lobe infiltrate.
    They were concerned about lung cancer, because
    they saw a nodule on her lung, right lower lobe,
    and they thought, She's a long-time smoker; she
    may have lung cancer.  The good news is, she
    didn't have lung cancer.  The bad news is she had
    COPD.  The good news is that she had it and it
    wasn't as bad as we get later.
         This finding may be due to fibrosis and
    crowding of pulmonary vessels -- we know what
    crowding of pulmonary vessels means -- secondary
    to COPD.  Old films would be helpful for further
    evaluation.
         Both Martinez-Salas and Schroeder both told
    you that, in doctor speak, "secondary to" means 4241 caused by.  So this is just a few months after May
    5th, 1990.  You already have x-ray evidence that
    she had COPD.  Now, what else do those two doctors
    tell you?  That a chest X-ray, it's a very
    insensitive tool for diagnosing COPD.  It doesn't
    pick it up in the early stages.  You don't see
    hyperinflation and crowding of pulmonary vessels
    and paucity of lung markings until the COPD is
    advanced.
         So we know it's been there for a long time.
    Both Martinez-Salas and Schroeder told you that.
    They told you COPD is a progressive disease that
    takes decades to develop.  They showed you the
    chart, how it goes from no COPD to mild to
    moderate to severe to very severe.
         So members of the jury, I respectfully
    suggest you check your notes.  There is no
    question, there is absolutely no question that
    they hit the first part of the test, that she had
    it before May 5th, 1990.
         And here is just the other medical records.
    Chest X-ray conclusion in '91, COPD; '92,
    chest X-ray shows severe emphysematous changes.
    Worked on that.  Office note of COPD diagnosis.
    By the time we get to the PFTs, you have two of 4242 them.  Dr. Schroeder told you the real value of
    the PFTs is it tells you how bad it is, because
    you can stage it and, depending upon the staging,
    you treat it differently.  So that's the real
    value of the PFT.
         Okay.  So let's look at the second part of
    the test.  Okay.  I will put it up in a second.
         Let's talk about -- well, I will come back to
    it.
         Second part of the test.  Did Judy Campbell
    have COPD before May 5th, 1990?  And if so, did
    Judy Campbell know or should she have reasonably
    known before May 5th, 1990, that she had COPD and
    that her COPD was caused by smoking?  Well, let me
    tell you, we will never know what Judy Campbell
    knew.  We will never know what she actually knew,
    because she didn't testify.  And, unfortunately,
    we don't have all her medical records.  But it's
    not just what she knew; it's, you know, should she
    have known?  Would a reasonable person in her
    shoes have known?  So let's just look at the
    evidence.
         In 1985 -- you have seen this -- the warning
    changed to say, Smoking causes emphysema.  We do
    know that in 1985 Judy Campbell quit smoking for 4243 three or four days.  We don't know why.
    Mr. Campbell says he doesn't know why, but we do
    know there is a warning on the pack that says it
    causes emphysema.  We know in 1986 or 1987 that
    Judy's good friend Peggy, a long-time cigarette
    smoker, died of COPD.  Remember Mr. Campbell told
    you.  They were -- you know, they received an
    announcement for the funeral.
         In 1987, Judy Campbell quit smoking for six
    days.  Mr. Campbell testified that Judy had a
    smoker's cough before 1987 they both knew was
    caused by smoking.  And in 1987, Judy wrote in her
    journal that, when she quit smoking, she was
    looking forward to breathing better, being more
    active, and having no hacking cough.  In fact, she
    wrote, After two days of quitting, I'm coughing
    less.
         There is absolutely no question that, by
    1987, Judy associated her breathing problems and
    her cough with smoking.  And I think we can infer
    that was one of the reasons she wanted to quit,
    because I showed you the list in the journal:
    Things to look forward to when I quit smoking.
         Now, Dr. Brady -- and I told you Dr. Brady is
    the bomb.  She is a fabulous expert.  And she told 4244 you that she believes that Judy Campbell was
    addicted under DSM-IV.  Remember, there was seven
    criteria.  She said she hit all seven.  And here
    was the seventh one.  Now, remember they never
    showed you this on direct examination.  This is
    what she was relying on to diagnose her.  I'm the
    one that showed it to you on cross-examination.
    And I think you're going to see why.
         So the seventh criteria, which Dr. Brady said
    Judy Campbell met, says, The substance use is
    continued despite knowledge -- despite knowledge,
    members of the jury -- of having a persistent or
    recurrent physical or psychological problem that
    is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by
    the substance.
         You don't meet this criterion unless you know
    that you're having problems caused by the use of
    the substance.  And Dr. Brady said Judy Campbell
    met this criterion in 1987 based on her journal.
         And let's go through it.  She said, based on
    Judy's description in her 1987 journal, that she
    had a hacking cough and breathing problems that
    she associated it with smoking, that were
    exacerbated by her smoking.
         Their own expert -- their own expert told you 4245 that part of the reason she believes that
    Mrs. Campbell was addicted is because she was
    still smoking and she knew she was having problems
    smoking and she knew that in 1987 and she knew
    what those problems were.  Their own expert told
    you that.
         And then, finally, we do have Judy's own
    words.  And, you know what, I will admit it's not
    nearly as detailed as her journal was, but
    Dr. Martinez-Salas sent her to a respiratory
    therapist and they asked her, you know, what's the
    problem.  Chief complaint, dyspnea.  She probably
    didn't use that word.  She probably said, I'm
    short of breath, or, I have trouble breathing.
    And, of course, the respiratory therapist wrote
    dyspnea, because that's a medical term and
    everybody knows what that means.  On exertion --
    dyspnea on exertion, onset date 1988.  And it was
    signed by Judy Campbell.
         So this isn't just some record, you know,
    that someone is going through it and they're
    making notes and maybe they get it right or maybe
    they don't.  This was a record that they actually
    had Judy Campbell sign.  I think we can infer they
    went through it with her, because it's going to be 4246 for respiratory therapy.  They want to get the
    patient's buy-in on it.
         So we have that information.  We have the
    journal.  We have Dr. Brady's testimony under
    DSM-IV, seven.  We've got Judy's own words.  We
    have her husband saying that she had a smoker's
    cough in 1987 they both believed was caused by
    smoking.
         So we'll never know -- we will never know
    whether a doctor told Judy Campbell before May
    5th, 1990, that she had COPD caused by smoking.
    We'll never know that.  But that is not the test.
    And here is what we do know.  We know beyond a
    doubt that she already had COPD caused by smoking.
    Schroeder told you that.  Martinez-Salas told you
    that.  These records tell you that.  Common sense
    tells you that.
         And we know she had been experiencing
    symptoms of her COPD for years before that date
    and that she associated those symptoms with her
    smoking and that she was hoping those symptoms
    would get better when she quit smoking.
         Dr. Schroeder told you that when people get
    short of breath with activity, that's one of the
    classic symptoms people have that cause them to 4247 come to the doctor and get diagnosed with COPD.
         Members of the jury, I suggest there is no
    doubt that if Judy Campbell would have gone to the
    doctor in January of 1990 or in 1989 or in 1988 or
    in 1987, she would have been diagnosed with COPD.
         And if you believe that a reasonable person
    in Judy Campbell's shoes, with her symptoms and
    her smoking history and her knowledge of the risk
    of smoking, should have gone to the doctor and got
    that checked out, if you believe that's what a
    reasonable person would have done between '87 and
    '88 and '89, then you should check yes, because
    the question is, Did Judy Campbell have COPD
    before May 5th?  Yes.  And if so, did she know --
    we don't know -- or should she have reasonably
    known before May 5th she had COPD that was caused
    by smoking?
         If you believe a reasonable person would have
    gone to the doctor with the information she had,
    the symptoms she had, and checked it out --
         MR. MILLARD:  I will object.  Misstates the
    legal standard.
         THE COURT:  Well --
         MR. MILLARD:  It's whether she knew she had
    COPD, not whether she went to the doctor. 4248 THE COURT:  I'm going to just ask the jury to
    rely on the jury instructions on the law they have
    been given.  And this is -- a certain latitude is
    allowed for closing argument, and I'll ask the
    jurors to rely on their own memory of the
    evidence.
         MR. COFER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Bottom line is, Had she gone to the doctor,
    would she have been diagnosed?  Would a person
    with the symptoms and the smoking history and the
    knowledge she had have gone to the doctor?  Would
    a reasonable person have done that?  If you think
    the answer is yes, then you check yes, you knock
    on the door, and you tell Deputy Nance that you
    have your verdict.
         Question 3, the answer is no.  Was smoking
    cigarettes manufactured by each defendant a legal
    cause of Judy Campbell's death?
         I won't go through it again, but for all the
    reasons we discussed legal cause, the answer is
    no, if you get that far.
         Okay.  I'm going to take the next two
    together.  These are Questions 4 or 5 -- 4 and 5.
    The first says, Did Judy Campbell reasonably rely
    to her detriment on the concealment or omission by 4249 one or both of the defendants of material
    information not otherwise known or available, or
    one or more of the defendants' failure to disclose
    material facts concerning the health effects
    and/or addictive nature of smoking?  And it's
    before May 5th, '82, after May 5th, '82.
         The next question, Did Judy Campbell
    reasonably rely to her detriment on the
    concealment or omission by one or both of the
    defendants or any of the other companies involved
    in the conspiracy?
         So it's the same question.  The first
    question is, Did she rely to her detriment on
    concealment or omission?  The second is, Did she
    reasonably rely to her detriment on the
    concealment or omission as a result of conspiracy?
         Members of the jury, there is no evidence
    that Mrs. Campbell relied on anything
    Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds ever said or didn't
    say.  Where is the evidence?  There is none.
    Mr. Campbell admitted they were both aware of the
    warnings.  He admitted they both understood that
    smoking could kill them.  He told you, We were
    just hoping it wouldn't happen to us.
         You saw the questionnaire where she said she 4250 didn't start smoking because of advertising.  She
    smoked because it was forbidden and she liked it.
         You've already heard, and you heard
    Mr. Campbell tell you, that Mrs. Campbell never
    saw the Frank Statement, she never heard of CTR,
    she never heard of TIRC, she never heard of The
    Tobacco Institute.
         You've heard that they have known --
    basically Mr. Campbell has known since he was a
    teenager, when his mother told him before he ever
    started smoking, and he communicated that to his
    wife through jokes.
         Dr. Proctor admitted that his testimony has
    nothing to do with Judy Campbell, and he doesn't
    know anything about Judy Campbell's smoking
    history.
         Members of the jury, there is absolutely no
    evidence that anything the companies ever did or
    did not do, say or did not say, caused her to
    begin or continue smoking.  There is no evidence
    of that.  And I will -- and my suggestion is that
    the answer is no to all those questions.
         But let me talk to you just for a minute,
    since it's broken out by time both before and
    after May 5th, '82.  Let's talk specifically about 4251 May -- after May 5th, 1982.  The evidence is clear
    that Mrs. Campbell could not have reasonably
    relied -- she could not have reasonably relied to
    her detriment on any statement made by
    Philip Morris or Reynolds after May 5th, '82.  She
    was a 41-year-old woman.  It's undisputed she was
    well aware of the risks of smoking.  The warnings
    had been on the packs since 1966.  Cigarette ads
    had been off TV since -- for 11 years, since 1971.
         Back in the '70s, the decade before, she
    joked with her husband that smoking could kill us.
    Ed Haponski showed her the warning and said, See
    the warning; laughed; you've got to die from
    something.
         There is absolutely no evidence, members of
    the jury, and I suggest to you based on the
    evidence there is no way there could be any
    evidence that she could have relied, reasonably
    relied, to her detriment on anything the companies
    said or did not say after May 5th, 1982.
         Remember, with respect to the second part of
    this question, that's not asking about Judy
    Williams, the teenager in North Carolina.  It's
    asking about Judy Campbell, the mother of three
    and the adult that was living in Florida. 4252 Let me say one more thing about this
    question.  And we're going to talk about this on
    the next question on the verdict form.  You heard
    Mr. Wichmann say that Judy Campbell admits that
    she's partially at fault for causing her own
    injuries.  And we're going to talk about that on
    the next one.  But if you answer yes to either
    Question 4 or 5, then comparative fault may not
    apply.  Even if you decide that Judy Campbell was
    90 percent responsible for her own injuries, if
    you check "yes" to either Question 4 or
    Question 5, then --
         MR. WICHMANN:  Your Honor, I object.
         MR. COFER:  -- comparative fault may not
    apply.
         Let's have a side bar.
         MR. WICHMANN:  Can we have a side bar on
    this, sir?
         THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
         MR. COFER:  Excuse me.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
[#DELETED RECESS#]
        MR. COFER:  We are in the home stretch.
    We're almost done.  Thanks for being so patient.
         You know what?  I've probably talked about
    this enough.  The bottom line is there's no
    evidence either before and after May 5, 1982, that
    Mrs. Campbell relied on anything the companies did
    or didn't do, said or didn't say.  And I
    respectfully suggest, members of the jury, that if
    you get this far, you check no to each of those
    questions.
         And that takes us to the next question,
    comparative fault.
         What this says is, Please state the
    percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of
    Judy Campbell's death that you charge to R.J.
    Reynolds, Philip Morris or Judy Campbell.
         And you heard, I think it was, Mr. Millard
    talk about this.
         Let me tell you something so there's
    absolutely no confusion.  You never get to
    comparative fault, you never get to this question
    unless you decide that Mrs. Campbell was a class
    member.  You never get here.  You have to decide
    that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of
    her COPD or you never get this far. 4264 You never get this far if you decide she's
    barred by the statute of limitations.  I just want
    to make that clear that you don't get this far.
    And you will see that on the jury instructions.
    This is a completely separate question than class
    membership.  This is, if you decide she's a member
    of the class, if you decide certain other things,
    then you have an opportunity to decide how much
    each party is responsible.  So let's talk about
    that for a second.
         Mr. Wichmann told you the plaintiff admits
    that Mrs. Campbell was at least partially at fault
    or was partially at fault for causing her COPD.  I
    want you to think for just a moment about what
    that means.  It can only mean that Mrs. Campbell
    both understood that her smoking was causing her
    to get sick and that she had the ability to quit
    in time to avoid getting sick.  Because if she
    didn't understand her smoking was causing her to
    get sick and if she didn't have the ability to
    quit, how could she have any fault?  How could she
    have any fault?  The very fact that they admit --
    that they admit that she's partially at fault,
    they are admitting that she understood her smoking
    was making her sick and she could have quit in 4265 time to avoid it.
         And if you get this far, I suggest you take
    them at their word and allocate 100 percent
    responsibility to Judy Campbell.  And let me tell
    you why I'm saying that, because only
    Mrs. Campbell had the ability to control her
    decisions whether to smoke or whether to quit.  No
    one else, no other party in this courtroom had the
    ability to do that.
         Okay.  That gets us to damages.  If you get
    this far, the first question is, What is the total
    amount of damages sustained by John Campbell as a
    result of Judy Campbell's death, the loss of Judy
    Campbell's companionship and protection and for
    John Campbell's pain and suffering, and the second
    is funeral expenses.
         As Mr. Millard told you, we stipulate to the
    amount of funeral expenses.  You will have that
    number.  It's just under $10,000.  And if you do
    decide that John Campbell is entitled to recover
    money, then you should obviously award funeral
    expenses, because that was what they paid, and we
    stipulate to that amount if you get that far.  I'm
    not saying he is entitled to recover anything, but
    if you get that far, we agree on the amount of 4266 funeral expenses.
         The first question, though, What's the total
    amount of damages sustained?  Well, if you get
    this far, I can't help you with this.  And, you
    know, I saw that Mr. Millard suggested somewhere
    between $9 and $14 million.  And I'll be honest
    with you, I don't know what to even say about
    that.  All I can say is that you sat through this
    trial and you heard Mr. Campbell describe his
    relationship with Mrs. Campbell.  They were
    married a long time, and she's gone.  And you will
    have to decide, if you get that far, what you
    think an appropriate amount is.
         Now, that takes us to punitive damages.
    Under the circumstances of this case, state
    whether punitive damages are warranted against
    R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris.
         Let me say a few things.  First of all, the
    question asks you whether you find by clear and
    convincing evidence that punitive damages are
    warranted.  I want to talk about what clear and
    convincing evidence means.  It's in the jury
    instructions.
         But you never get to this question unless you
    check yes to 4 or 5.  You only get to this 4267 question -- it's in the instructions.  You can
    follow it through.  They'll tell you -- you know,
    it's like a Chinese menu -- where to go.  But you
    only get to this question if you answer yes to
    Questions 4 or 5.  If you answer no, you never get
    to punitive damages.
         Let me tell you what you're being asked to
    decide.  You're being asked to decide -- you are
    not being asked to decide an amount of punitive
    damages.  You're being asked to decide whether
    punitive damages are appropriate under the
    evidence and the legal standard.  The issue here
    must be decided by clear and convincing evidence.
         And I don't want you to think -- spend one
    minute thinking about amount, because if you
    decide the answer is yes, there would be another
    phase to the trial, plaintiff will put on
    evidence, Reynolds will put on evidence, Philip
    Morris will put on evidence, and then you will
    have an opportunity to determine what the amount
    is.  So don't even think about amount.  The issue
    is whether.
         So what is it you have to consider?  When you
    look at the instructions, you will see that clear
    and convincing evidence is defined.  It's a much 4268 higher standard of proof than the greater weight
    of the evidence.  With respect to punitive
    damages, you will see that the evidence must be
    precise -- this is exact wording from the jury
    instructions -- precise, explicit, lacking in
    confusion and of such weight that it produces a
    firm belief or conviction without hesitation about
    the matter at issue.  It's a much higher standard.
    You must be really, really convinced that punitive
    damages are appropriate.
         Let me tell you something else.  You have to
    decide, if you get there, that punitive damages
    are warranted based on the conduct that harmed
    Judy Campbell.  This is John Campbell's case.
    This is about Judy Campbell.  It's not a class
    action anymore.  Other people have the right to
    bring their own lawsuits.  They have the right to
    have their own juries evaluate their evidence.  So
    this case is about Judy Campbell and conduct that
    harmed her.
         MR. WICHMANN:  Your Honor, let me object.
    The Instruction 16 --
         THE COURT:  Oh, as to --
         MR. WICHMANN:  Page 27.
         THE COURT:  As to the explanation that was 4269 given a minute or two ago?
         MR. WICHMANN:  Yes, right.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. COFER:  Thank you.
         Okay.  I respectfully suggest, members of the
    jury, that nothing the defendants did or did not
    do harmed Mrs. Campbell.  We sold cigarettes.  We
    sell cigarettes.  That alone cannot be a basis for
    liability.  We can't be held liable simply for
    selling cigarettes.  The Engle findings are not a
    basis for liability.  Where is the evidence that
    we did something that was to Judy Campbell that
    warrants punitive damages?
         The evidence was that Mrs. Campbell always
    had the information that she needed to make an
    informed decision whether to smoke or quit
    smoking.  The evidence was at all times that Judy
    Campbell had the ability to quit smoking.
         And let me just say with respect to my
    client, Mr. Campbell told you that Judy Campbell
    never smoked a product made by Philip Morris until
    1984 or '85, when she was 42 or 43 years old, long
    after the warnings had been on the pack, long
    after she understood the risks of smoking.  I
    respectfully suggest that plaintiff has not met 4270 the burden of showing punitive damages, and you
    should check no for both Reynolds and Philip
    Morris.
         This is my chance to say thank you.  You guys
    have been here two and a half weeks.  You have
    been indulgent.  You have waited patiently while
    the lawyers couldn't get their act together and
    you had to sit in your room.  We apologize for all
    that.
         I told you in jury selection -- and I really
    believe it, and it's true -- we do have the
    greatest system of justice the world has ever
    known.  Even when you read about things that are a
    little bit haywire, believe me, there are
    countries all over the world that would beg to
    have the rights that we have and the system we
    have.  And we only have it because we have people
    like you who are willing to take three weeks out
    of your lives to come in and help parties resolve
    disputes that they can't resolve on their own.
         I told you in jury selection, all we wanted
    was a fair shot.  We just wanted an opportunity to
    tell our side of the story.  And I know that you
    guys have listened to both sides.  I know you have
    done that.  I appreciate it very much.  So it's an 4271 important case to Mr. Campbell.  It's an important
    case to Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds.  And on
    behalf of everyone, thank you very, very much for
    your service.


         MR. WEAVER:  Counsel, Mr. Campbell, members
    of the jury, good afternoon.
         Like anything in life, when we aspire to
    something, when, for example, we say we want to be
    intelligent, we want to get smarter, we want to
    learn a skill -- I want to learn how to play the
    piano -- or you want to learn something that is
    foreign to you -- I want to learn how to speak
    Spanish -- in each of those situations there are
    standards that you have to follow, there are goals
    that you have to meet, there are obligations that
    you have to fulfill.  And in this context what I
    would like to focus on at the outset is just
    reminding you that the burden of proof in this 4272 case is on Mr. Campbell, Mr. Wichmann, and
    Mr. Millard.  It's their responsibility to come to
    you, not with snippets, not with sound bites, but
    with facts and evidence, such that you-all can
    take that facts -- those facts and evidence back
    into the jury room and help you decide the answers
    to the questions that you have before you on the
    jury form.
         Now, when you think about addiction causation
    or whether or not Mrs. Campbell was addicted to
    the nicotine in cigarettes, one way to look at
    that, one way to read the instruction, one way to
    think about that issue would be whether or not
    Mrs. Campbell had the ability to quit but chose to
    continue smoking, or whether nicotine addiction
    had such control over her that no matter how hard
    she tried, she chose to continue to smoke.  It's
    as simple as that.  Could she quit or could she
    not?  It's really as simple as that.
         The evidence established -- when you know
    about Judy Campbell, when you hear what she went
    through in her life, that she wasn't someone to
    let circumstances overwhelm her, she wasn't
    someone who did not stand up for herself.  You
    heard a little bit about it in terms of the 4273 evidence, but her first marriage didn't go well at
    all.  You didn't see the actual documents, but
    they are in evidence, and you will have them back
    in the jury room, RJR Exhibits No. 89 and 90.
         When Mrs. Campbell, at the time
    Mrs. Strickland, needed to do something, she filed
    for divorce.  When she didn't think she was being
    treated fairly by her ex-wife [sic], she filed a
    motion for contempt.  She quit drinking in 1981.
    You heard the evidence from the witness stand that
    it was one of the hardest things, if not the
    hardest thing, that she ever had to do.
         Bless you.
         And she quit smoking in 1996.  And she didn't
    go back.  She didn't relapse.  She didn't -- she
    wasn't drawn back into the product for 11 years.
         So when you look generally at the issue of
    class membership, Question No. 1, the evidence has
    been that nicotine did not control Judy Campbell.
    Judy Campbell made her decisions, because I told
    you about this in opening.  She did what she
    wanted when she wanted to and when she needed to.
    Judy Campbell controlled her own destiny.  She
    made her decisions.  And like Mr. Cofer told you,
    it's not appropriate for you-all to sit here and 4274 second guess her in a court of law.
         Plaintiff has not proven that an addiction to
    nicotine in cigarettes was the legal cause of
    Mrs. Campbell's COPD and her death.  She is not a
    class member.  You should answer Question No. 1
    no.
         In his opening statement, Mr. Wichmann talked
    to you about what we refer to as the Engle
    findings, the statements that were issued by the
    Miami jury.
         And, Cliff, if we could go to No. 3, please.
         These were the Engle findings that I showed
    Dr. Proctor when he was on the stand.  I've blown
    them up a little bit more so you can see them,
    because I was punishing Dr. Proctor
    unintentionally by not blowing them up.  I
    apologized for that.
         But those are the Engle findings.  And I
    walked Dr. Proctor through those.  And I said,
    Doctor, you say this about the tobacco companies.
    You say that about the tobacco companies.  Doesn't
    this summarize what your testimony is?
         And he said yeah.
         Well, what were you shown in opening
    statement? 4275 3A, please.
         Do you remember this?  This is plaintiff's
    slide from opening statement saying that if you
    decide Mrs. Campbell is a class member, then and
    only then do these findings come into play.
         Well, that got me thinking.  That got me
    thinking about why Dr. Proctor was here, because
    Mr. Wichmann told you in his opening statement
    that those findings were something that had
    already been decided, and if circumstances
    resulted in you getting to that point, you would
    apply them.  But Dr. Proctor spent three days --
    three days answering questions about the Engle
    findings.
         He admitted that he didn't know anything
    about Judy Campbell.  He admitted that he didn't
    read anything about her.  He admitted that he
    didn't do any research about her.  He certainly
    didn't go to Coats, North Carolina.  And the only
    other -- the only time he had ever been to Polk
    County was when he came in to testify before the
    seven, now six, of you.
         So why was he here?  I'll tell you why he was
    here.  He was here because Mr. Wichmann and
    Dr. Proctor want you to be angry at the 4276 defendants.  They want you to be angry at Philip
    Morris and at R.J. Reynolds.  They want you to
    decide something on emotion as opposed to the
    facts and the evidence.  That's why Dr. Proctor
    spent three days of your time re-proving the Engle
    findings.  It was plaintiff's job to show you how
    the companies' conduct was connected to Mrs.
    Campbell.
         Number 4, please.
         You remember I showed you this in opening
    statement.  That question mark represents the
    burden of proof that the plaintiffs bear in this
    case.  It was their responsibility to fill in that
    question mark, to make that connection.  They
    haven't done it.  They've not showed you any
    wrongful conduct that links to Judy Campbell.
         Mr. Wichmann -- and we'll go through these
    documents.  But Mr. Wichmann points out that many
    company documents were not made public until 1996.
    Well, they were made public after Mrs. Campbell
    quit smoking.
         So what did those documents have anything to
    do with Judy Campbell quitting smoking?  They had
    nothing to do.  There was nothing in those
    documents.  And we'll talk about that more a 4277 little later.
         Now, I mentioned a sound bite society.
    Whether you turn on CNN or MSNBC or NBC, we live
    in a sound bite society now.  We live in clips and
    quips and snippets.  But in a court of law, the
    sound bite society ends at that door to this
    chamber, because these lawsuits have to be decided
    on the facts and the evidence.
         Youth marketing was a very big topic for Mr.
    Wichmann and Dr. Proctor, but neither of them
    provided you with any evidence that Mrs. Campbell
    saw any advertisements.  And the only thing that
    you have seen, in her own handwriting, as
    Mr. Cofer pointed out to you, that advertising
    made no difference.
         Now, Santa Claus, sports heroes, and movie
    stars were certainly not unique to R.J. Reynolds
    or Philip Morris or any company, for that matter.
    You saw a motor oil ad that was based on glamor
    and health and beauty, things like that.  The ads
    in that age were nothing unusual, were nothing
    unique to any tobacco defendant.
         But let's get in a little bit more to the
    snippets, the sound bite society, that the
    plaintiffs want you to try and decide this case 4278 on.
         If we can go to No. 6, Cliff.
         You remember this document, Dr. Teague's
    research planning memorandum?  Some thoughts on
    new brands of cigarettes for the youth market.
    You were shown a clip, a snippet from this
    document.  But what you weren't shown is on page 1
    of the document, Claude Teague, a bench chemist,
    writes, We should not in any way influence
    nonsmokers to start smoking.
         Dr. Proctor didn't show you that.
    Mr. Wichmann didn't show you that.  They just
    showed you what they thought you needed to know.
         If we can go to No. 7, please.
         You remember this 1984 memo entitled, Young
    Adult Smokers:  Strategies and Opportunities.
    This was the 89-page document that I held up and
    showed Dr. Proctor, 89 pages.  And what
    Dr. Proctor showed you was he went to the back of
    the document to an appendix, found a statistic
    that was published by the United States Government
    Department of Health, Education and Welfare, blew
    it up, and said this whole document is about that
    little table published by the U.S. government.
         But on cross-examination, it was Dr. Proctor 4279 who was forced to admit that if you go through
    this document, "young adult smoker" is defined as
    the age range 18 to 24 over 200 times.  Ask
    yourself why Dr. Proctor went to the back of the
    document and didn't tell you anything about the
    206 entries before that table published by the
    government more adequately defining the age range.
         Finally, there's another few documents I just
    want to touch on briefly.
         Number 8, please.
         You'll remember these documents.  We start in
    the upper left-hand corner, the Cigarette
    Advertising Code of 1964.  Cigarette advertising
    shall not appear directed primarily to persons
    under 21 years of age.
         1967, my client R.J. Reynolds backs out of
    its sponsorship of the Beverly Hillbillies because
    the audience data showed that there were too many
    people in the age range under 45 years old.
         1972, William Esty.  R.J. Reynolds says no to
    American Graffiti.  It's not the type of product
    or film that it wants to be a part of.
         1974, the Hilton Head presentation.  Sure,
    there was a reference in there to people under 18.
    But in the strategy section of that document, you 4280 saw, and Dr. Proctor admitted, that it was a
    strategy aimed at 18-to-24-year-olds.
         1980, younger adult smokers, terminology.
    R.J. Reynolds' stated policy that it's not the
    policy of the company to try and get youth
    involved in the adult custom of smoking.
         1990, the memo to all field sales employees,
    including those in Florida, saying it was
    inappropriate for someone to suggest that we
    should be increasing sales emphasis -- or emphases
    near high schools or colleges, things like that.
         Why did you only get half of the story?  It's
    because Dr. Proctor does this for a living.
    Dr. Proctor has, as Mr. Cofer pointed out, an axe
    to grind with the industry.
         With regard to Mr. Setchell, Joel Setchell,
    the man with the sort of frowning goatee,
    Mr. Setchell was the one that made it clear every
    time he answered the question, the only way you
    can get into the R.J. Reynolds consumer database
    is if you request to be included, if you certify
    that you're over 21, that you're age-verified to
    participate, and that you're a smoker.
         There have been missteps by R.J. Reynolds.
    No doubt about it.  But the plaintiff's obligation 4281 here is to show a connection between any wrongful
    conduct that it claims that R.J. Reynolds was
    involved in and Judy Campbell.  And they have not
    done that.
         The last thing that I want to mention -- if
    we can see No. 11, Cliff -- is this in Mr.
    Wichmann's opening statement.  You remember he was
    talking about the aftereffect of the mouse skin
    paintings in Life Magazine.  And the statement was
    made, The companies got wind of it.  They asked
    their scientists, Is there any truth to it?  Their
    scientist told them, Yeah, there's something to
    this.
         What was he talking about when he said that?
    We learned about it with respect to my client,
    R.J. Reynolds, when Dr. Proctor was on the stand.
    Dr. Proctor talked about a 1953 document that was
    called a survey of cancer research written by
    Claude Teague.  And Claude Teague was the
    gentleman who all -- all we know about him in this
    case is that he was a bench chemist.  He was a
    young man.  He had been working at Reynolds for a
    couple of years, and he had an assignment or he
    was given a task.  And you know what he did?  He
    went to his office, he got a pad of paper and a 4282 pen, he walked to the library, and he did research
    on what was in the public domain.  He would -- he
    did research on what articles were already
    published, what articles were available to the
    Surgeon General, what articles that were available
    to anybody that walked into a library.  And that's
    what he put in that memo.
         You didn't hear about that from Dr. Proctor
    on direct exam, only on cross-examination.  But
    none of that is good enough for Dr. Proctor.  He
    wants our companies out of business.  He wants to
    come into courtrooms like this all over Florida
    and say, You know what you need to do -- while
    he's earning his $20,000 a trial -- you know what
    you need to do?  You need to come back with a high
    plaintiff's verdict, so that's an extra tax on the
    companies.
         How objective and unbiased would you expect
    someone with that perspective on this type of
    litigation to be?
         On another subject, the Tobacco Industry
    Research Committee and the CTR, they were
    disparaged by Dr. Proctor for worthless research,
    for concealing scientific information, for
    misleading the public, when you have things like 4283 the Green Monster published in the early sixties
    that the Surgeon General said, You know what?
    This is a great basic reference source.  We're
    going to cite to this in the 1964, the historic
    1964 Surgeon General's report.
         But Dr. Proctor came into this courtroom from
    across the United States in 2013, and he said, You
    know what?  All of this research doesn't really
    give us any information.  It's not really
    important research to the issues of smoking and
    health.
         Mr. Wichmann and Dr. Proctor talked to you on
    direct examination about that theory in history
    called presentism.  Presentism is when you take
    today's standards and you look backwards in time
    and you make qualitative judgments about what was
    good or what was bad.  How is what Dr. Proctor did
    in this courtroom in 2013 not presentism?  He
    didn't present you with any information that said
    at the time the Green Monster or any of the other
    addendums to the Green Monster were being
    published, nobody came forward and said, These
    were not good; these were not worthwhile.  Only
    Dr. Proctor did that in May of 2013.
         And in any event, what did that have to do 4284 with Judy Campbell?  What did any of that have to
    do with Mrs. Campbell?
         There has been no evidence in this case that
    she was sitting around with Mr. Campbell waiting
    for the latest pronouncement.  None.
         You learned in terms of the design changes
    that were made, the reduction of tar and nicotine,
    the things that were consistent with what Dr.
    Wynder wanted, what the public health community
    wanted.  You learned that the tobacco companies
    have done a good job at trying to reduce the harms
    associated with smoking.  But there can be no safe
    cigarette.  No one has come here and said that
    this is a safe product.
         Judy Campbell made an informed choice.  She
    knew that she would be tore up if she was caught
    smoking.  She joked with her brother-in-law and
    sister.  She was intelligent and informed.  She
    worked in her family's tobacco fields, whether it
    was raining or not, said Barney Williams.  And
    Dr. Proctor told us a little bit about green
    tobacco sickness, nicotine poisoning and how
    anybody that worked in the fields was very
    conscious of that and had to avoid it.
         And when it came to the public companies of 4285 statements -- I'm sorry, the statements of public
    companies, we have the polls that have gone
    un-rebutted in this case.
         Let's see No. 18, please.
         1959, Roper survey.  Who would you be most
    apt to believe?
         1968, most reliable sources, five percent
    tobacco companies.
         1970, all very low approval rating.  So it's
    not surprising that nothing that Philip Morris or
    Reynolds said or did changed Mrs. Campbell's
    awareness of the hazards of smoking.
         Wichmann talked for the first time, really,
    about Mr. Setchell and how it was somehow wrong
    for R.J. Reynolds to respond to a consumer inquiry
    when that consumer has said, I would like to
    receive coupons or information, or, I'll be happy
    to take a survey every now and then.  But like the
    selling of cigarettes is legal and you can't
    impose liability because of that, advertising at
    the time and the way it was done was legal and
    communicating with a consumer, when that consumer
    has requested communication from you, is legal and
    not the basis for liability.
         They haven't shown you anything that was a 4286 false statement in terms of what was sent from
    Reynolds in a coupon.  And when Mr. Wichmann tried
    to tell you that there was evidence that
    Mrs. Campbell had redeemed coupons, that's just
    not true.  There's no evidence of that in this
    case, absolutely none.
         The last thing I would like to talk about,
    ladies and gentlemen, is an issue that relates to
    just Reynolds.  I agree completely with the
    thorough job that Mr. Cofer did in terms of going
    through the jury form and how the questions should
    be answered.  But if you get past Questions 1 and
    2 -- I don't think the evidence supports that you
    do -- but if you get to Question No. 3, with
    respect to my client, R.J. Reynolds, there's a
    very important additional reason that Question No.
    3 should be answered no.  And let's look at number
    3 just for one second.
         Question No. 3, Was smoking cigarettes
    manufactured by each defendant a legal cause of
    Judy Campbell's death?  You recall in my opening
    statement I pointed out to you that there would be
    two opportunities with respect to this question:
    one relating to Philip Morris, one relating to
    R.J. Reynolds.  This question relies on more than 4287 just saying she smoked a Reynolds brand.  You have
    to be able to be comfortable with Instruction No.
    9 that says, The smoking of a defendant's
    cigarette is a legal cause of loss, injury, or
    damage if it directly and in natural and
    continuous sequence produces or contributes
    substantially to producing such loss or damage so
    that it can reasonably be said that but for
    smoking a defendant's cigarettes, the loss,
    injury, or damage would not have occurred.
         Substantially contributing factor.  You may
    recall that when Dr. Martinez-Salas was on the
    stand, I asked him whether or not he knew anything
    about brands.  He said he did not.  I asked him
    specifically whether or not he could say that the
    smoking of Reynolds brands, brands like Raleigh,
    Winston, Salem, Kool, and Doral, were a
    substantial contributing factor?  Were they
    something that contributed substantially, a
    substantial contributing factor in the development
    of Mrs. Campbell's COPD and ultimate death?
         And you remember what he said.  He said no.
    He said he's not here to say that.  He said he
    doesn't have any facts on which to base that
    opinion. 4288 Members of the jury, plaintiff does not and
    cannot meet its burden against Reynolds simply by
    saying that all cigarettes contribute.  There's no
    cumulative effect.  The plaintiff has to prove as
    to each defendant that each defendant's product
    was a but for cause.  But for the smoking of
    Reynolds' brands, she would not have gotten COPD.
         Dr. Martinez told you under the American
    thoracic standard -- No. 25, please -- he told you
    that the standard is that patients with COPD have
    usually been smoking at least 20 cigarettes per
    day for 20 or more years.
         Remember, I asked him, Is that another way of
    saying 20 tobacco years?
         And he said, Yes.
         So what does that mean?  Let's look
    specifically at what was said about brand use.
         Can we have No. 28, please?  Number 28,
    please.
         Mr. Strickland testified that he remembered
    Mrs. Campbell smoking Raleigh cigarettes.  Now, he
    said 1966 to 1973.  But when I asked him on cross
    exam about how old he was, he was four years old
    in 1966.  He told me that he didn't start to learn
    how to read until about 1969 or 1970, when he was 4289 in first and second grade.  So that narrows the
    window from about '69 to '73, four years.  But
    even during that four-year period he couldn't say
    how many Raleigh cigarettes Mrs. Campbell smoked.
    He didn't pay attention to it.
         Twenty-nine, please.
         Mr. Campbell testified with respect to
    Winston cigarettes that Mrs. Campbell tried them
    for a different taste every now.  Then she didn't
    like the taste of them.  It was very rare when she
    smoked those brands.
         Number 30, please.
         Kool and Salem, you heard very seldom, very
    minimal, one pack would last an entire year.  Now,
    that's not a pack year.  A pack year is one pack
    per day for a year, 365, 366 if it's a leap year.
    That's a pack year.  One pack would last about one
    year.
         And finally No. 31, Doral.  One carton in the
    mid 1980s.  Dr. Brady confirmed that Mr. Campbell
    said that it was very rare, minimal.  And
    Mr. Campbell himself on the stand said he can't
    pay them any attention with respect to ads.
         Now, let's talk about the Doral ads for a
    minute.  You recall that Mr. Campbell, during his 4290 direct examination, said, Oh, some guys at work
    told me about Doral.  And then the next thing that
    he said was, I didn't see it on TV; I didn't have
    a chance to watch TV.  And you may recall one of
    the first things I did when I got up in my
    cross-examination of Mr. Campbell was I confirmed
    what the date was today.  It was May 17th, 2013.
    And I did that for a reason, because three years
    earlier on May 6th, 2010, when we had the
    opportunity to take Mr. Campbell's deposition, it
    was then when he said, Oh, no, I heard it on TV.
    I saw a commercial; it was 1985 or 1986.
         Now, I found it -- can we have the ELMO,
    please?
         I found it very interesting that Mr. Campbell
    would take the time to go through his depositions
    and work so diligently on his errata sheets for
    May 6th, for May 18th, May 17th, and May 18th, his
    three errata sheets.  He put a lot of time in
    those.  He knew this was important to him.  And
    rightfully so, this is important to us.  But it
    wasn't until three years after he first told us
    when he saw Doral on TV that he had the
    opportunity to sit through the testimony of
    Dr. Proctor who said that there were no cigarette 4291 commercials on TV after 1971.
         It was then when he said, Oh, I heard it from
    some guys at work, or, I saw a print ad.
         There's no evidence of guys at work, ladies
    and gentlemen.  There's no evidence of print ads.
    There's no evidence that he saw a Doral ad.
         And with all the documents, with all the
    archives that Mr. Wichmann and Dr. Proctor talked
    about so frequently throughout there trial, with
    all those documents, if there was a Doral ad that
    said, Smoke our product because it will help you
    quit smoking our product, don't you think they
    would have shown that to you?  If it was in the
    archives somewhere, why didn't they show it to
    you?
         Whether it's Doral, whether it's Winston,
    where it's Raleigh, when you add up those years,
    tops, you get to maybe six or seven years.  You
    don't get anywhere close to the 20 years that
    Dr. Martinez-Salas, the smartest man in the room
    when it comes to Judy Campbell, the one that
    doesn't have a dog in the fight, you don't get to
    the 20 years.
         So even if you do get past the first two
    questions, which I don't think you can, when you 4292 get to Question No. 3 with respect to my client,
    they haven't proven that any Reynolds brand use
    was a substantial contributing factor to her COPD
    and death.
         I told you and showed you with the chains
    that there was a disconnect in my opening in this
    case.  The plaintiffs want you to be mad at us.
    We think since the findings are something that
    were taken care of a long time ago, that this case
    should be about what Mrs. Campbell was exposed to
    and what connection any of this evidence had to
    her.  That disconnect is still here.
         Now, you know that the issue is not as simple
    as whether or not the companies did dumb things or
    wrote dumb things.  The issue is whether or not
    the plaintiffs have met their burden of proof.
    Plaintiff hasn't satisfied that burden, ladies and
    gentlemen.  And that's because Judy Campbell had
    choices.  She had the intellect and the knowledge
    to exercise those choices.  She controlled her own
    life, her future and her decisions.  And as a
    result, Judy Campbell is 100 percent responsible
    for those decisions.
         Mr. Campbell and Mr. Wichmann have not given
    you cause to second guess those decisions.  Like 4293 Mr. Cofer, I want to thank you for your time.  I
    want to thank you for the time that you'll give us
    when you are back in the jury room.
         That's all I have.
