         MR. WICHMANN:  Good morning, folks.  First, I
    would like to thank you on behalf of our team and
    on behalf of John Campbell for being so attentive.
    And I know that for some of you it was difficult,
    taking time away from your families and time away
    from work.  But as you-all know, this is a very
    important case for John, and we really appreciate
    the attention that you have given to all the
    evidence.
         I would like to start -- 4082 Baron, could we turn on the Elmo, please?
         Okay.  There is a Latin phrase, and it's
    called semper fidelis.  It means always loyal,
    always faithful.  It's shortened to semper fi,
    because it's the official motto of the U.S. Marine
    Corps.
         And John Campbell has lived by that motto.
    He was faithful to his country when he graduated
    from Kathleen High School here in Lakeland.  He
    went off to war.  And he was faithful to Judy.
    When Judy got sick, he cared for her, bathed her,
    did anything he could for her up until the time
    that she died.
         And Mr. Millard is going to talk to you a
    little bit more about that when I'm done.
         But I think also you could say Judy Campbell
    lived by that motto.  You see, Judy started
    smoking the cigarette company's products when she
    was 15 or 16, and she remained faithful and loyal
    because of the nicotine that caused her to be
    addicted for 40 years.
         The cigarette companies with their suits and
    their scientists were not exactly faithful or
    loyal to Judy, who was one of their best
    customers.  Because after all, what they wanted 4083 their customers to do was smoke, smoke, and smoke
    a product that they knew for 50 years was
    addictive and would cause her death.
         But they're not exactly loyal to one of their
    best customers, because they're going to come in
    here today and they're going to tell you, despite
    the fact that Judy was one of our best customers,
    smoked our product for 40 years that we knew was
    addictive and we didn't tell the American people
    that we knew would cause death and disease and
    didn't tell the American people, it's all her
    fault.
         So they're going to blame it on their best
    customer.  That's what's going to happen today.
         They're also -- the cigarette companies also
    are not exactly loyal or faithful to the American
    people.  After all, during the 50 years that they
    conspired to conceal the health effects of their
    product, you heard from Professor Proctor, 20
    million Americans died, 435,000 a year.  But
    they're going to come in and tell you all of those
    customers, it was always the customer's fault.
         The first issue that you-all have to decide
    in this case is -- I will get a little organized
    here -- whether or not Judy Campbell was a member 4084 of the Engle class.
         Can you make it a little bit bigger for us,
    please?
         And that is right there, question No. 1.
    This is the verdict form that you'll be getting
    and you'll be filling out when you retire and
    deliberate in this case.
         Now, in order to be a member of the Engle
    class, Judy Campbell has to have been addicted to
    cigarettes containing nicotine and that that was a
    legal cause of her COPD.
         Again, their best customer, they're going to
    come up and tell you, she was our best customer
    when we needed her to be, when we sold her
    cigarettes from age 15 until 1996 when she smoked
    a pack and a half to two packs a day, got sick,
    but she's not a class member.
         Now, they're going to want to talk --
         Can we switch over, Baron?
         They're going to want to talk about fault.
    They're going to want to say, why did Judy start?
    Well, folks, the first question I showed you was
    not why did Judy start or what were the reasons
    she began.  The first question I showed you was,
    was she addicted to cigarettes containing 4085 nicotine?
         There is going to be a section on the verdict
    form for you to assess the fault between the
    parties.  I'm going to get to that in a moment.
    But the point I want to make now is in order to be
    a class member, we have to prove that she was
    addicted to cigarettes and that those cigarettes
    were a cause of her COPD and death.  That's the
    first and most important concept for you-all to
    deal with.
         Now, you might ask yourselves -- there we
    go -- what is legal cause?
         Now, I know you-all take your oath very
    seriously and you're all going to follow the law
    the way the judge instructed you.  And in the
    package of instructions is addiction is a legal
    cause if it directly and in natural and continuous
    sequence produces or contributes substantially to
    producing such loss, so that it can reasonably be
    said that, but for the addiction, the loss would
    not have occurred.
         I have highlighted down below "contributes
    substantially."  And the question is, did her
    addiction play an important role?
         We all have heard from one expert witness. 4086 And believe me, these are two Fortune 500
    companies, and they have very skilled lawyers.
    We'll talk about that in a minute.  Their lawyers
    are highly trained.
         This company, these two companies could have
    hired whatever expert witness available to come in
    and tell you that Judy was not addicted and that
    her smoking cigarettes didn't cause her death.
    Could have done that.  The only person you heard
    from on addiction was Dr. Kathleen Brady, an
    addiction psychiatrist and a pharmacologist,
    internationally known, a Betty Ford Addiction
    Center winner, published over 300 articles on the
    brain, on addiction, on smoking and women, on
    smoking and adolescents.  She stood up there and
    told you that Judy Campbell was severely addicted.
         I'll get to that in a second.
         Again, the lawyers talked to her about Judy's
    drinking.  And she said, We don't know when she
    started, but she quit in 1981.  Didn't have
    anything to do with her smoking or getting sick.
         And they talked about the stress with the
    family ledger and showed you pictures of her
    ledger and her filling out all the forms.
         Dr. Brady said, Well, there is one constant, 4087 and the one constant is nicotine and the effects
    nicotine has on the brain.
         We talked about John.  Said, Well, John is
    hard to live with.  He went over to Vietnam and
    got post-traumatic stress disorder.  In his mind
    sometimes it's night, sometimes he's a teenager in
    Southeast Asia.  There is explosions.  Yeah, I
    guess, you know, it might be hard to live with
    someone like that.  John told you, she got him
    through that.  She helped him.  He got help.
         But one constant remained, and that was
    nicotine, a pack and a half to two packs a day,
    cigarettes and smoking.  And that's, ladies and
    gentlemen, what legal cause means in this case.
         Now, addiction to nicotine caused her to
    smoke, that caused the COPD and that caused her
    death.
         Let's go through who you have heard from.
    They could have hired any lung doctor that they
    wanted to.  They did.  They hired a guy from
    California.  I was astonished.  He came in over
    there and he looked at you-all and said, Well,
    Judy must have liked Dr. Lucille Frank in Port
    St. Lucie so much that she traveled all the way
    from Pensacola just to see her. 4088 Now, who in their right mind would believe
    that?  Because first they told you in opening
    statement, part of the whole deal is that John
    couldn't support his family, wasn't making enough
    money and causing all kind of stress, so who is
    going to drive -- who would believe that Judy
    would drive from one time zone in Pensacola -- is
    that ten hours over to Port St. Lucie?  Didn't
    make sense.
         But even their lung doctor said
    Dr. Martinez-Salas is correct, smoking caused her
    emphysema -- which is COPD -- and caused her
    death.  Didn't dispute it.
         Again, you heard from Dr. Martinez-Salas.
    Mr. Millard will talk to you more about that in a
    few minutes.  It's a local doctor in Winter Haven.
    He knew her when she was alive.  He was the only
    doctor that had that opportunity.  He told you
    about it.  He told you about how he took care of
    her.  He came in and he told you -- and there is
    no question, undisputed -- she smoked for --
         Baron, could you switch me over?
         Dr. Martinez-Salas came in and told you, and
    we went through his medical records and there was
    argument all over about when it was that she 4089 started.  It's consistent in the medical record,
    if you do the math, she started at age 15 or 16,
    maybe 10 years before the package warnings, and
    smoked them for 40 years, a pack and a half to two
    packs.  Some records said three packs, some
    records said a pack, but it was always consistent
    that it was 40 years from 15 or 16.
         So I'm not surprised that right here,
    Jose-Israel Martinez-Salas -- there is his
    signature up top -- where he certified on the
    official State of Florida death certificate, cause
    of death, emphysema, which is COPD.  And he would
    have gone right down there in the lower right-hand
    corner and checked the box, Did tobacco contribute
    to death?  Yes.
         There it is.  You're going to get this
    original document, the Florida death certificate.
    It's in evidence.  You will get it and get to take
    it back and look at it.
         You also are going to have medical records.
    We talked about them, and I'm going to show you a
    few here in a minute.  But they are also evidence
    that you can use to make your decision.  But I
    would like to take a moment now and talk to you a
    little bit about nicotine and cigarettes and what 4090 the defendants knew.
         Again, they want to come in and tell you
    today that all this is the fault of Judy, one of
    their best customers, who started at age 15 or 16,
    maybe in high school, worked in a factory
    producing mailboxes.  Judy somehow was supposed to
    figure all this out on her own.  And they kept it
    secret for 50 years.
         And you're going to see records back there.
    We've gone over them.  If you-all want to write
    the numbers down, you can pull them out.
    But Dr. -- Professor Proctor went through them
    with you.  All of these are in evidence.
         They started in 1953.  In the left-hand
    corner:  It's fortunate for us that cigarettes are
    a habit they can't break.
         Never told the American public that until
    1999.  That's 50 years.
         Cigarette smoke should contain sufficient
    nicotine to supply the necessary requirements of a
    smoker with respect to this compound.
         That's back in 1959.  They denied it.  We'll
    go through that.
         Then on the right-hand corner, they wanted
    to -- they wanted you to believe that since Judy 4091 grew up on a farm that grew tobacco leaves, why,
    it was just matter of rolling them up and lighting
    them, and she should have known everything that
    was in a cigarette.  Well, here we have one from
    1963, Brown & Williamson, one of the Reynolds'
    companies, saying that their nicotine levels are
    not obtained by accident.  They have a research
    program in process to obtain by genetic means any
    level of nicotine desired.
         What they require.  Well, remember Professor
    Proctor explained to you how complicated
    engineering was of the modern cigarette; how they
    laid out sheets and they sprayed nicotine to get
    the exact proper level; how they put additives so
    that, when a smoker would smoke, it would be --
    the smoke would be inhaleable; how they added
    menthol, all of that, so people would do what
    addicted smokers say, and that is that they like
    it.  They liked the sensation of nicotine on the
    brain.
         Well, this was something they knew back in
    1963, '69.  Talked about pharmacological effects
    of smoking.  Here we go.  1972.  They say -- look
    at that one in the middle on the lower level,
    please. 4092 Without nicotine, the argument goes, there
    would be no smoking.  No one has ever become a
    cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without
    nicotine.  Nicotine is the essential ingredient.
    Happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both
    habituating and unique.  It's the sine qua non.
         That's the essential ingredient that
    Professor Proctor told you about.
         We'll go over -- there is even more.  There
    is just -- here is a bunch talking about physical
    effects, 1973, 1977, 1982.
         Most of those who have smoked for any
    significant time would like to stop.  But the
    internal secret documents that they had in 1982
    said, But many -- many but not most of those who
    would like to stop are unable to do so.
         But they knew the hold that nicotine has on a
    smoker.  They kept it secret, and they wouldn't
    tell public health officials, and they blocked
    public health officials for 50 years.  And that's
    the conspiracy.  And we're going to get into that
    in a second.
         But look down here.  They're talking about --
    here is one from the U.S. Surgeon General that I'm
    going to read to you in a minute. 4093 Cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are
    addicting.  Nicotine is the drug in tobacco that
    causes addiction.  The effect of tobacco addiction
    is similar to those that are -- those that
    determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and
    cocaine.
         That's the U.S. Surgeon General talking,
    folks.  That's the chief medical officer in this
    country.  That's the same person that the
    cigarette industry for 50 years during the
    conspiracy publicly attacked and said he doesn't
    know what he's talking about, he's wrong, dead
    wrong, wrong, wrong.  It was the gentleman you saw
    the video of with all the microphones in front of
    him, ranting about the Surgeon General trying to
    get out to the American people the health effects
    of a product that they were selling.
         The top -- and look at the one all the way on
    the right, the lower right dated 9/9/1980.  That's
    an internal previously secret document in the
    industry archives that Professor Proctor told you
    about.  Judy had no idea about this.
         And it says:  The entire matter of addiction
    is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney
    can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case.  We 4094 can't defend free choice if the person was
    addicted.
         Now, there was a lot of talk about choice in
    this courtroom.  I'm going to discuss it in a bit.
    You remember Dr. Brady.  She came and she showed
    you MRI scans and she showed you the latest
    technology.  She explained to you that there is
    choice, but in an addicted smoker, in that
    person's brain, the brain gets rewired by
    nicotine.  So choice is -- and she used the term
    "constrained."
         They'd like you to think that you can only be
    addicted to cigarettes if you're like a zombie out
    there with no choice and under no control of your
    compulsions or emotions.  That's not the way it
    works.  It's constrained.  We'll talk about that
    here in a minute.
         Before we do that, let me contrast for you
    what I have just kind of given you a bird's eye
    view of what the industry knew about cigarettes
    and how addictive that they were.  And they want
    you to believe -- all that document -- all that
    documentation was secret in their archives.  They
    want you to believe that Judy, right there on the
    right with the baby, was supposed to have known 4095 all that.  Judy.
         Here is one.  I don't know if you-all recall,
    but big old Greg Strickland, Judy's son, works
    here for the City of Bartow, came up and got on
    the witness stand.  And the lawyer said, Well,
    you're asthmatic.  You had asthma as a child.
         And he said, Yeah.
         Mom smoked around you.  You had asthma,
    asthmatic as a child.
         He said, Right.  She was -- she was hooked.
    And he started crying.  He told you about John
    taking care of his mom.
         They want you to believe that this woman
    right there is a bad mom, is a bad person because
    she smoked around her asthmatic son.
         Well, you know, we look at things the way
    they are now.  That's not the way that this
    society was in the 1960s and the 1970s or the
    1980s.  You-all will remember Professor Proctor
    got up and told you, historically, in the '60s,
    early '70s, 50 percent of doctors smoked.  He put
    up -- he put up the ads.
         They still want you to think that --
         I'm going to switch back to the --
         They still want you to think, well, that's 4096 her fault, she was a bad person, she smoked around
    her kids.
         Well, give me a moment here, folks, and let
    me show you what the cigarette company was telling
    the American people at the same time.
         (A video clip was played for the jury as
    follows:)
         A SPEAKER:  From CBS Washington, in color,
    "Face The Nation," a spontaneous and unrehearsed
    news interview with Joseph Cullman III, chairman
    and chief executive officer of Philip Morris,
    Incorporated, chairman of the executive committee
    of The Tobacco Institute.
         A SPEAKER:  We have no program that I know of
    to try to help people to stop smoking.  We do talk
    to the question of whether or not cigarettes are
    hazardous.  We do not believe that cigarettes are
    hazardous.  We don't accept that.  Because when,
    as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is
    identified as being injurious to human health, we
    are confident that we can eliminate that
    ingredient.
         A SPEAKER:  Do you believe that cigarettes
    are safe?  Have they been proved to be safe,
    Mr. Cullman? 4097 A SPEAKER:  I believe they have not been
    proved to be unsafe.  And I concluded from that
    report that it's true, that babies born from women
    who smoke are smaller, but they're just as healthy
    as the babies born from women who do not smoke.
         (The video clip concluded.)
         MR. WICHMANN:  So Judy is smoking around her
    kids.  And they have -- that's a president of the
    company, of Philip Morris, on TV, as if a pregnant
    woman smoking was nothing.  But they want to come
    in here and tell you that it's her fault, she was
    a bad mom, she was a bad person.
         Well, they were fostering this whole
    environment, and they were telling Americans,
    There is nothing wrong with it, just like he said.
    She was doing what 50 percent of the doctors were
    doing, because Dr. Proctor told you that they had
    a third-party strategy.  They were funding the
    American Medical Association.  They were passing
    out leaflets and pamphlets at doctor conferences
    to get the doctors to smoke.  And I showed -- and
    you saw the demonstrative of how prevalent smoking
    was at the time.
         Well, so I think it's unfair and it's not
    being faithful to your consumer to come around 4098 later and blame Judy for getting addicted, which
    is exactly what they wanted her to do.
         We brought down Dr. Kathleen Brady.  I talked
    to you about her already.  She told you that the
    definition of addiction is a chronic, relapsing
    brain disease characterized by compulsive drug
    seeking and use despite harmful consequences.
         What did that mean as to Judy?  What that
    meant as to Judy is that she started at age 15 or
    16, 10 years before the warnings were on the
    packs.  And you're going to see how they marketed
    their product at that time to children, to
    adolescents.  They targeted teenagers.
         There was also a woman you're going to see in
    a minute.  We'll talk a little bit more about
    that.  Dr. Proctor told you they targeted women
    for a number of reasons.  They told women smoking
    was a diet aid, make you lose weight.  They put it
    glamorous in the movies.  You saw videos of all
    that.  They sponsored women's tennis tournaments
    so they could get women to smoke.  You are going
    to see in a minute what the end result of that
    was, because it worked.  In this whole marketing
    and advertising campaign that Professor Proctor
    told you they spent $250,000,000,000 on.  I will 4099 show you in a minute how that worked.
         I think I discussed this with you a moment
    ago, but let's just go through it.
         Dr. Martinez-Salas, I showed you what he put
    on the death certificate.  And there is no
    question, the judge read you the instruction that
    smoking cigarettes causes COPD, because there's
    thousands of chemical compounds including -- and
    Dr. Proctor talked to you about that --
    nitrosamines, cyanides, 70 carcinogens alone in
    that smoke.  Forty-five percent of all long-term
    smokers will die of a smoking-related disease.
         Again, these are the figures that Professor
    Proctor gave you that he researched and has
    written articles on, and they don't dispute.
    435,000 Americans die a year from smoking-related
    diseases, 20 million deaths during the time of the
    conspiracy.
         If I could, there has been some talk about
    the U.S. Surgeon General.  You-all are going to
    get this report.  This is the 2010 report.
    You-all are going to get it back there.  I'm just
    going to -- it's in evidence.  I just want to read
    to you some of the sections from it.
         This is what the Surgeon General says. 4100 And you can highlight that for me, please,
    Baron.  Yeah.
         Nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason
    that individuals persist in using tobacco
    products, and this persistent tobacco use
    contributes to many diseases described in this
    report.
         Go down to the next paragraph.
         Tobacco addiction remains a substantial
    problem in the United States and worldwide.  Of
    those individuals who have ever tried smoking,
    about one third become daily smokers.  Of those
    smokers who try to quit, less than five percent
    are successful at any one time in 2002.
         Now, they're going to bring you in these
    Reader's Digest articles.  Bear in mind, 30 of
    them over 40 years.  Reader's Digest.  That's what
    they want you to believe.
         Dr. Brady, who in addition to being a medical
    doctor, an addiction psychiatrist, is also a Ph.D.
    in pharmacology.
         And we'll get to that in a second, because
    I'm going to talk to you about this nicotine patch
    that the cigarette companies say John is not being
    honest with you about.  But we're going to go 4101 through that.
         But Dr. Brady explained that in the '80s
    there were no medicines like we have today,
    Chantix, to help an addicted smoker like Judy to
    quit.  It wasn't until 1992 when the nicotine
    patch first came on the market, and it wasn't for
    a couple years after that that Chantix,
    Wellbutrin, and the other medicines were common.
    You have to look at this in terms of what was
    available to Judy at the time.
         Now, in the same Attorney General report,
    you're going to see, if you thumb through it,
    where the Attorney General says, COPD is a leading
    cause of death in the United States, and as of
    2005, approximately 1 in 20 deaths in the United
    States had COPD as an underlying cause, with an
    estimated 75 percent of those deaths attributable
    to smoking.
         Now, I can see it's possible that somebody
    could get COPD who never smoked.  But you heard
    from Dr. Martinez-Salas.  You have the Florida
    death certificate.  You even have the California
    lung doctor.  There is no dispute in this case
    that smoking is what caused her COPD.
         Now, the same Attorney General's report -- 4102 or, I'm sorry -- Surgeon General's report for 2010
    says, Importantly, the evidence indicates that in
    the U.S., COPD could almost completely be
    prevented by the elimination of smoking.
         So it's not surprising, it's not surprising
    that when Dr. Martinez-Salas started treating this
    lady in 2006 and looked at her medical records,
    treated her until she died in 2007, it's not
    surprisingly the first thing in his mind that he
    put down on the death certificate as the cause of
    COPD was tobacco use.  That's how prevalent,
    that's the interrelationship between cigarette
    smoking and this kind of lung disease.
         Now, Dr. -- here it is.  DSM-IV, Diagnostic
    and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.  Like
    how Dr. Martinez-Salas told you, only a pulmonary
    function test can diagnose COPD and emphysema,
    Dr. Brady got on the witness stand and said, you
    know, I wish there was a test that you could
    diagnose addiction with.  There isn't.  And this
    is the book that she follows.
         Again, she's the only addiction expert you've
    heard in the case, and she was unequivocal that
    Judy was highly addicted to the nicotine in
    cigarettes.  She applied the criteria in the book 4103 and she came to her conclusions.
         Now, in that same book --
         Can you highlight the top, please?
         -- you'll find the following:  Because
    nicotine sources are readily and legally
    available, spending a great deal of time
    attempting to procure them -- to procure nicotine
    would be rare.  Continued use despite knowledge is
    particularly important to an individual who
    continues to smoke, despite having tobacco-induced
    general medical conditions such as bronchitis or
    COPD.
         That -- that, folks, is why one -- one of the
    reasons why she qualified.
         Can we put this Elmo up, please?
         There is another page.  I may have to
    read you from the book--
         MR PHILIPSON:  I think that's the same page.
         MR. WICHMANN:  Right here at the top.  Let's
    see if I'm getting --
         MR. COFER:  Is this evidence?
         MR. WICHMANN:  Yes.  You used it with
    Dr. Brady.
         Right there at the top.  Although more than
    80 percent of individuals who express -- who smoke 4104 express a desire to stop smoking and 35 percent
    try to stop each year, less than five percent are
    successful in unaided attempts to quit.
         That's today, not back in the '80s, not back
    in the '90s, back in the '70s.  That's today.
    They're going to bring you in evidence.  They're
    going to say, Well, 60 million people have quit.
    Everybody in the world has quit.  She couldn't
    quit, so it's her fault.
         Well, it's not quite the same.  Quit and quit
    attempts versus stopping.  That's what the DSM is
    talking about here.  Stopping, quitting once and
    for all.
         What I found interesting in this case is that
    you-all heard from two people about Judy's
    stopping once and for all.  You heard from John
    Campbell and you heard from Greg Strickland.  John
    Campbell told you that Judy was in the hospital.
    She was begging him for cigarettes.  She had
    withdrawals.  She had to be sedated.  Begging him
    for cigarettes.
         Greg Strickland said, I went to the hospital
    and my mom was sedated.
         So I think that being sedated in the
    hospital, begging your husband for cigarettes, I 4105 mean, that was the only way in 1996 that she could
    have and eventually did successfully quit.
         Now, you're going to get into evidence, in
    addition to the -- in addition to the death
    certificate, you will get this little packet here.
    And you're going to get to flip through it.  And
    these are Judy Campbell's private, her personal
    journal and her personal notes.  You can look
    through it.  And I'm going to read a little bit to
    you in a second.
         You saw some of it during Dr. Brady's
    testimony.  Dr. Brady made a big deal.  Well, Judy
    was trying to do all this in secret.  Dr. Brady
    said, Well, as an addiction psychiatrist and a
    woman --
         Well, what's that got to do with it?
         ANSWER:  Nothing.
         She drew a battle plan, determination to
    quit, how to quit.  She wrote all this down.  She
    documented her six days, her struggles with
    nicotine.  She talks here, little self-help notes.
    You-all can take it back and you-all can look at
    it and you-all can decide, Is this a woman who is
    writing this down because she likes to smoke, that
    it's a lifestyle choice?  Or is this a woman who 4106 is writing it down because she's addicted to
    nicotine?
         Dr. Brady told you when someone starts at age
    15 or 16, the frontal part of your brain is not
    fully developed, the part of the brain that deals
    with choice when you grow up.  And nicotine
    rewires that and it makes it harder for people who
    started at 15 or 16 to quit.
         Dr. Brady told you she's also a woman.  She
    also had a history of depression.  Dr. Brady told
    you this.  They don't want to talk about it.
    Because Dr. Brady said she has studied women and
    nicotine addiction, and that women who have a
    history of depression, it's easier for them to get
    addicted to the drug nicotine and it's harder for
    them to quit.
         Now, she also told you, well, it's the
    difference between blue eyes and brown eyes, and
    not everybody is the same.  Dr. Brady also told
    you she's done studies on genetics and nicotine
    addiction.  She said this doesn't happen across
    the board, but the studies show that for genetic
    reasons, in families where mom and dad smoke,
    children are at a greater risk of becoming
    addicted to nicotine, and it's harder for them to 4107 quit.
         Both Judy's mom and dad smoked.  You heard
    them.  They read depositions the other day from
    the family that hadn't seen Judy in years and
    years and years.  And they said, Yeah, almost
    everybody in the family smoked.
         Well, that's another strike she had against
    her.  I'm not saying that every family where mom
    and dad smokes -- because there is always -- I
    mean, it goes to the risk.  It's not a hundred
    percent across the board.  Dr. Brady explained to
    you, this is the scientific reason why the woman
    was addicted.  That's the only testimony you've
    heard from, from experts in this case.
         Let me just briefly read to you -- and I hope
    that when you go back, you take a look at the
    woman's journal.
         She writes in here:  I'm going to start this
    journal because I want to document and I want the
    help to quit smoking.  She writes in here, I'm
    going to give it an all-out effort.  I'm going to
    use the power of prayer.  It's in her journal.
    I'm going to pray.  I'm going to keep a journal.
    She calls it an ordeal.  She talks here about the
    afternoon before she tried to quit.  I read 4108 everything I could find on stopping smoking and
    taken a lot of notes.  I have set my date for
    Saturday, October 31st, 1987.
         Now, in 1987, there were no nicotine patches,
    there was no Chantix, there was no drugs to help
    you.  She's trying to do this all on her own.
         10/30/87.  She said, This is my last day of
    smoking.  Tomorrow is the day I'm going to take on
    the title of nonsmoker.  She says, Because John
    was trying to smoke -- was trying to quit smoking
    at the time, and she was still smoking, and all of
    the sudden she noticed bad breath that she had and
    how it would affect her husband.
         You ladies and gentlemen, you look at the
    diary and you read through it.  I mean, is this
    someone who now realizes she has bad breath, but
    it's because she likes it, she likes smoking, it's
    a lifestyle choice?
         She goes on to write, In a way, I dread it,
    but at the same time I'm kind of looking forward
    to the challenge.  With God's help I will make it.
         Does that sound like someone who didn't want
    to quit, who had no motivation, which is what they
    want you to believe?
         Then here it is.  She says, Well, today is 4109 the day.  She says, I want a cig, but so far it
    doesn't seem to be overbearing.
         This is just the first day.
         I know God is helping, because I feel that he
    is.  I need something to do with my hands.
         Dr. Brady told you, this is common for
    addictive smokers who put the cigarettes down,
    because of the ritual and the body is conditioned
    to using your hands with smoking, so she's
    already -- she's already having that experience.
         And the next morning she says, Made it
    through my first day.  First day.
         She goes on to write:  God is helping a lot.
         Come on.  The woman is not addicted?  She's
    crying out to her God for help to quit this
    addiction.  She says, With His help, I will make
    it another day.
         The next day she says, Now I have been a
    nonsmoker for two full days.
         Greg came and testified -- remember, he told
    you he was a momma's boy.  Cried on the stand.
    Big old guy.  She said, Greg was very pleased when
    he found out I was trying to quit.
         Then she writes down what Dr. Brady told you
    addicted smokers experience when they put the drug 4110 nicotine down.  She says, I had tension in my face
    for most of the day yesterday.  Had craving --
    this was after only one day -- for a cig was
    pretty strong yesterday too.  I think the big job
    for the next few days will be staying busy and
    keeping control of my willpower.
         She's telling you, nicotine is taking control
    of her.  It's taking control.  It's rewired the
    brain, just the way the doctor told you.  She's
    trying to keep control of her willpower.
         Dr. Brady also talked to you about cues and
    talked to you about going to the grocery store and
    seeing cigarettes for sale, how that activates the
    brain and activates a desire in an addicted smoker
    to smoke.
         The next day Judy writes in the afternoon,
    I'm still surviving.  Surviving.  Be glad when I
    don't have these tension headaches.
         Dr. Brady told you that's a common sign of
    withdrawal for someone who is addicted to
    nicotine, to experience a tension headache.
         It says, but I want a cig so bad.  Sure hope
    the rest of my life isn't spent wanting a
    cigarette.  That would be a bad way to live all
    the time. 4111 Judy wrote, I'm sure God will have something
    better than that in my future.
         Does that sound like someone who smokes
    because they like it?  Does it sound like someone
    who smokes because it's fun?
         She writes, Made it six days.  Maybe next
    time.
         They're going to stand up and tell you, she
    didn't try to quit; she wasn't motivated to quit.
    Well, you-all take the journal back and read it
    over.  And there is more to it with her little
    sheets where she writes down what her motivation
    is and when she's going to do this and when she's
    going to do that.
         Now, let's talk a little bit about 1992 and
    the big issue of the Habitrol nicotine patch.
         Dr. Brady came in, the addiction
    psychiatrist, who teaches pharmacology.
    Pharmacology has to do with smoking cessation
    drugs.  Not the lung doctor.  The addiction
    doctor, the specialist in this.  She reviewed it
    all and said, You know, in 1992, that was the
    first time that the nicotine patch was available.
         Dr. Martinez looked at this record and said,
    That lady was committed.  She tried.  She was my 4112 patient.  I know her.  She tried.
         MR. COFER:  Objection.  Misstates the
    evidence.  Dr. Martinez did not speak about
    addiction.
         THE COURT:  I caution the jury to rely on
    your own recollection of the evidence.  What the
    attorneys say is not evidence.  It's simply their
    summation of what they believe the evidence
    showed.
         MR. WICHMANN:  If you will read the first
    paragraph there.  She has agreed to stop smoking
    and we will try her on the Habitrol.
         Those are the brand new nicotine patches.
         She is committed at this time to stop.  She
    will take -- and she goes on to say how much.  And
    said, By then, she should be off all nicotine and
    cigarettes.
         You don't see the word "prescription"
    anywhere in there.  Take it back and look at it.
    You just don't see it.  And Dr. Brady said, I
    know, I teach this.  And when these smoking
    cessation drugs first came out, the cigarette --
    the pharmacology companies gave them to the family
    doctors to pass out to their patients.
         Now, first they tell you on one hand, well, 4113 you know, in opening statement, John Campbell was
    broke, had no money.  Had all kind of money
    problems.  That caused stress.  That's why she
    smoked.  Forget about the nicotine.
         Well, it doesn't make sense that the doctor
    does not write the word "prescription," and this
    is a family, a working family that's trying hard
    to make it, and all of the sudden they're going to
    have the money?  It doesn't make sense.
         So Dr. Brady said, Well, it was common at the
    time that the patches would be given.
         Now, one thing I found very interesting,
    again, you-all need to bear in mind, please,
    Mr. Campbell, high school education, went to
    Vietnam and served his country and came back, and
    he's got PTSD.  Bear that in mind.
         These lawyers, they're the best.  The
    cigarette company could hire whoever they wanted
    to hire.  The lawyers had Mr. Campbell four days
    in deposition.  And here is his transcript that
    they brought up and they sat in front of him when
    he was on the witness stand.
         And they said, Well, Mr. Campbell, we've
    talked to you about quit attempts four times.
    And, you know, I don't know if you saw the look on 4114 his face, but he was looking right straight at
    you.  And I don't know if the hearing aids were
    working or not, but he goes:  Quit attempts?
         Yeah.  You never mentioned the Habitrol
    patch.  You never did any of that.
         And so John looked at you and said, Well,
    they never asked me in four days.  They never
    asked him, Did you ever see Judy wearing a
    nicotine patch?
         Now I ask you, these highly skilled lawyers
    for the cigarette companies, they had that medical
    record.  And that's an important medical record.
    They had it for the four days of John's
    deposition.  Do you think it was an accident that
    they forgot to ask the question?
         Well -- and let me just make this clear.  In
    a deposition, the Judge has instructed you, it's
    just like here in court.  The lawyers ask the
    question, the witness answers.  Here in court,
    you-all get to ask a question and then the witness
    answers.  This is not like Oprah where you go on
    TV and somebody stands in front of the camera and
    then they've got to tell their story for 45
    minutes.
         I mean, you didn't see a single witness stand 4115 up there and say, Hi, my name is Ms. Smith, and
    here is -- here is everything I have to say on the
    matter, and just talk and talk and talk and talk
    and talk for four days.  And then they get to get
    up and leave, and then some lawyer stands up and
    says, Well, you know, they just gave us a speech
    here, but they forgot to mention this and they
    forgot to mention that and they forgot to mention
    this, that, and this.
         That's not the way it works.  They have to
    ask the question to get the answer.  And nowhere
    here in four days of depositions did they ever ask
    John Campbell, Did you ever see Judy wear the
    nicotine patch?
         John told you, he looked at you straight in
    the eye -- and you-all have to decide whether you
    believe him or not -- he said she tried it.  It
    wasn't giving her enough nicotine, so she smoked
    while she was using it.
         Dr. Brady said, you know, looking at this,
    I'm not surprised because that's not the proper
    dosage.
         The drug was brand new.  The doctors really
    didn't know how much to give.
         Dr. Brady said, I'm not surprised she was 4116 smoking.  It wasn't being administered correctly.
         Okay?  So she tried.  The doctor wrote, She's
    committed to stop.
         Now, if you believe them, that John is making
    all this up, I mean, I don't know -- I don't know
    what else I can say.  But here is the four
    transcripts.  They never asked the question, so
    they didn't get the answer.
         Now, speaking of John, Mr. Millard is going
    to talk to you about Mr. Campbell, but I thought
    this might be an important time for me to point
    this out to you.  In the medical record, you're
    going to see -- here it is -- Winter Haven
    Hospital, family history.  Significant for a very
    supportive, caring husband who is her main
    caregiver.
         Semper fi.  But you-all have to decide, was
    that man sitting on the witness stand and looking
    you in the eye and saying I saw her with the
    nicotine patch and she tried it, was he being
    honest with you or not?  That's going to be your
    decision.
         Now, it's hard for me -- it's hard to believe
    that this woman smoked for any reason other than
    her addiction.  And I will show you this document. 4117 And I don't want to go through a lot of these
    medical records.  But if you look at the bottom,
    she's a 54-year-old lady.  A lifelong smoker of
    probably greater than 40 years.
         Up top -- this is Dr. Martinez-Salas -- said
    severe COPD, secondary to active smoking.
         I mean, that's -- that's the undisputed
    evidence in this case.
         Now, the Judge read you instructions, and I
    would like to talk a little bit with you about
    that.  First, I want to talk to you about this
    instruction.  This is the greater weight of the
    evidence.  That's the standard that you-all are to
    use to decide the issues in this case.  And if you
    think of the scales of justice, the greater weight
    of the evidence means are they tilted just a
    little way?  Which is more likely true versus
    which is more likely not.
         It's not a criminal case where you have to
    decide based on beyond and to the exclusion of any
    reasonable doubt.  You-all can have a doubt.
    Whichever side comes to you with 51 or 50, the one
    with 51 wins.
         Now, how many addiction experts did they
    bring in to say this lady wasn't addicted to 4118 cigarettes?  It was stress.  This lady wasn't
    addicted to alcohol -- or this lady wasn't
    addicted to cigarettes, it was alcohol.  They
    didn't bring anybody.  There is -- there is no
    testimony about it.
         There was a big deal over choice.
         And I will make this thing work here.  I
    think that did it right there.
         I think you need to highlight, please, the
    section above it, please, Baron.  Yeah.  Highlight
    above.  The sentence above.  Yes.
         This is the law.  In order to be regarded as
    a legal cause of disease or a medical condition,
    an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine
    need not be the only cause.
         Baron.
         Okay.  Let me read through this again.
    Please highlight the sentence before "an addiction
    to cigarettes may be."
         In order -- he doesn't have it highlighted,
    but if you read right there.  In order to be
    regarded as a legal cause of a disease, an
    addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need
    not be the only cause.
         You-all can think back there, Well, there is 4119 some choice, and it's the choice of a 15 or a
    16-year-old.  Put that in context.  It's the
    choice made 10 years before the package warnings.
    Put that in context.  Or you can think, well,
    maybe she should have chosen -- she should have
    chose to try harder or earlier to quit.  Or maybe
    you can think since she drank alcohol up until
    1981 -- that's when she stopped -- that maybe her
    drinking alcohol had something to do with her
    smoking.  Or maybe John's drinking alcohol or
    maybe's John's service or maybe these other
    things.
         So my point is that under the law, nicotine
    need not be the only cause.  An addiction to
    cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal
    cause of a disease or medical condition even
    though it operates in combination with the acts of
    another.
         That's the law you're sworn to follow.  So
    you-all can think, maybe at some time point in her
    life she's drinking too much so she smoked too
    much.  But there is one constant.  She quit
    alcohol in '81.  We don't know when she started.
    We know when she started smoking, at age 15 or 16.
    We know she smoked for 40 years, a pack and a 4120 half, two packs, some records say three, some
    records say one.  It's a constant all the way up
    until 1996.  That's always there.  Alcohol is not.
         As long as it acts in combination with the
    act of another, some natural cause or some cause
    of such addiction to cigarettes contributes
    substantially to producing a disease or medical
    condition.
         Now, it's hard to imagine this woman -- and
    you-all saw her journal -- that she was smoking
    cigarettes for any reason other than what the
    cigarette company internal secret documents said,
    and that is to get the addiction -- to sustain the
    need that her brain had for that addictive
    substance.
         Now, I'm going to kind of move it along here.
    There was great discussion in this case, I
    think -- Baron, do we have the Elmo here? -- about
    this questionnaire.  And I'm sure they will talk
    to you about it.  Judy said why she began smoking.
    Just trying something that was forbidden and liked
    it.  Advertising had nothing to do with it.
         You've got to bear in mind she's 15.  A lot
    of times 15-year-olds, with advertising, it's a
    subliminal thing.  They don't know.  Kids go out 4121 and buy Nikes.  They will tell you, well, it
    wasn't a particular ad.  Because it's all around,
    it's everywhere, it's pervasive.  People call
    photocopies Xerox.  I'm going to take a Xerox copy
    of this.  And they call it a Xerox copy, even
    though Xerox is the name of the company that makes
    the photocopy machine.  Because it's so ingrained,
    it's subliminal.  It's in your mind.
         But what's interesting, and I don't think
    they're going to talk to you about with regards to
    this entry --
         I will give you a moment.
         A JUROR:  Sorry.
         MR. WICHMANN:  No.  That's okay.  Thank you
    for paying attention.  And I know I'm going on
    probably longer than I wanted to.
         But if you look at what she wrote here that I
    have highlighted, Judy wrote, The problem is not
    being able to lay them down once you're hooked.
         So let's talk a little bit about this
    $250,000,000,000 advertising campaign.
         MR PHILIPSON:  What page number do you have?
         MR. WICHMANN:  Fifteen.
         $250,000,000,000 that the industry spent
    during the time of their conspiracy on 4122 advertising.  And here it is, just a montage of
    the kind of ads that were out there to make it
    look for teenagers that smoking was hip and
    smoking was fun.
         Now, it gets even more interesting.
         If you could go to 35, please, with the
    redaction.
         When you look at the internal,
    previously-secret industry documents that you will
    have -- you will take them back there and you can
    read them over.
         Starting in 1928, there is an R.J. Reynolds
    letter.  Regular school is over.  Summer school is
    starting.  Most high schools, prep schools,
    colleges and universities have finished, and
    summer schools are now getting underway.
         Dr. Proctor told you, Yeah, that letter was
    from the company to their salespeople to tell them
    to get out there, sell those cigarettes.  High
    school age kids.
         Look at the next one.  This is 1973.  If our
    company is to survive and prosper, we must -- this
    was in the middle -- we must get our share of the
    youth market.  The fragile developing self-image
    of the young person needs all the support and 4123 enhancement it can get.
         Here is a presentation at Reynolds that was
    made to their board of directors in 1974,
    previously secret until the industry documents saw
    the light of day.
         The 14-to-24 age group represents 21 percent
    of the population.  This is Reynolds writing,
    talking to the board of directors.
         Now, they are going to tell you, Well, these
    are some wrong-headed statements that somebody
    made over in the file room.  Well, these are the
    top executives, the most educated suits in the
    company.  The board of directors.  All right?
         What are they writing?  People, American
    teenagers, age 14 to 24, represent tomorrow's
    cigarette business.
         Ouch.
         They will account for a key share.
         It gets even more interesting, if you look at
    36, please.  Take a look at this in 1975.  It's
    another company, Philip Morris.  They're talking
    about, the brand must increase its share.  This is
    on the left-hand side on the top.  Penetration
    amongst the 14-to-24 age group, which represents
    tomorrow's cigarette business. 4124 Over here, they're talking about, 1980,
    smoking amongst the 14 to 17-year-old age group.
         In the lower left-hand corner, you see that
    the decline in their numbers means the industry
    can no longer rely on an ever-increasing pool of
    teenage smokers to replace adult smokers.  While
    the news is bad for the industry, it's not as bad
    for Philip Morris in '81, because they had
    products that kids were buying.
         Look over in 1984.  Dr. Proctor talked to you
    about this document.  It's entitled Young Adults'
    Importance as Replacement Smokers.  It says,
    Younger adult smokers are the only source of
    replacement smokers.  Less than one third of
    smokers -- 31 percent -- start after age 18.
    That's right down there.
         I asked Dr. Proctor, What in the world is
    that?
         Well, you-all heard the statistics.  Twenty
    million dead, 435,000 customers dying a year.  So
    what are they doing?  They're looking for
    replacement smokers for their smokers that either
    quit or their smokers that died.  And where are
    they looking for them?  Twelve, 13, 14, 15, 16,
    17, and 18.  And those are their internal 4125 documents.
         Last but not least, if you could put up --
    well, let me see if I can get this thing to work
    here.  No.
         1433, please.
         This document is also in evidence.  And
    they're going to tell you these are wrong-headed
    statements.  They're old documents.  They're back
    in the archives.  They don't mean much.  This one
    is 1990.  And look who it is written to.  It's
    written to the principal of the Willow Ridge
    school.  They say that the tobacco industry is
    concerned about the charge being made that smoking
    is responsible for many serious illnesses.
         You see that at the bottom.  Okay.  If we can
    have the full paragraph, please, Baron, at the
    very bottom.
         And what does R.J. Reynolds write to the
    principal?
         Despite all the research going on, the simple
    and unfortunate fact is that scientists do not
    know the cause or causes of the chronic diseases
    reported to be associated with smoking.
         Wrong.  You-all heard from Dr. Proctor -- I
    will show you in a minute.  They knew in 1953 4126 about the diseases that their product caused.
    That's wrong.  It's just wrong.  They go on to
    say, believe it or not, We would appreciate your
    passing this information along to your students.
         Now, when we raise our kids, we raise our
    kids to tell the truth.  If you don't tell the
    truth, you get punished.  You don't lie.  That's
    not how we do things.  Here you have companies
    selling a product that they knew was manufactured
    to get people addicted and to keep people
    addicted, that they knew would cause disease.
    Here they are.  They're writing letters in 1990,
    to the principals at schools, telling them
    something that is not true and telling them to
    pass that information along to your students.
    Now, why in the world would they be doing that if
    they weren't interested in having American kids
    start smoking so they could be replacement
    smokers?
         I will run briefly through these.  If you
    could, to No. 1, Baron.
         I have talked to you --
         MR PHILIPSON:  Can I see it?  Can you show it
    to me, Mr. Wichmann?
         MR. WICHMANN:  -- all about whether or not 4127 Judy was addicted.  And the evidence in this case
    is way beyond the greater weight.  There has been
    no evidence that she's not been addicted.  So the
    judge read to you these instructions.  One,
    smoking causes COPD.  We went over that.  Nicotine
    in cigarettes is addictive.  We went over that.
    The next finding that is the law, if you-all find
    Judy was addicted, is that they placed cigarettes
    on the market that were defective and unreasonably
    dangerous.
         You-all don't have to decide -- if you find
    Judy was addicted to cigarettes, you-all don't
    have to wrestle with the idea --
         MR. COFER:  Objection.  Misstates the law and
    the requirement.
         THE COURT:  I think it's part of the -- it's
    part of the prerequisite.  You didn't state the
    second part of it, I think is what --
         MR. WICHMANN:  And that the addiction caused
    her COPD and death.
         MR. COFER:  Objection.
         MR. WEAVER:  Still objection.
         MR. COFER:  And a legal cause.
         MR. WICHMANN:  Let me try again.  If you-all
    find that Judy was addicted to the nicotine in 4128 cigarettes and that smoking caused her COPD and
    death and that she satisfied the legal causation
    requirement that we talked about earlier, then
    these are the findings that the judge has read to
    you.  And they're -- and you-all don't have to
    struggle with, was that particular cigarette or
    cigarettes that she smoked for 40 years defective?
    The jury already decided that in a separate Miami
    case.  They heard evidence for a year.  They came
    to that conclusion.  So the issue for you is the
    one that I showed you in the verdict form, which
    is, was she addicted, with all the legal language
    after that.
         If she is -- if she does satisfy class --
    Engle class membership, which we're asking you to
    apply, then the law is that the cigarette
    companies concealed and omitted material
    information not otherwise known, knowing that the
    material was false and misleading or failing to
    disclose a material fact concerning the health
    effects or addictive nature of cigarette smoking
    or both.
         Also, they agreed to conceal -- this is the
    conspiracy -- or omit information regarding the
    health effects of cigarettes or their addictive 4129 nature with the intention that smokers and the
    public would rely to their detriment.  They wanted
    people to believe their misinformation.  We're
    going to go over that here in a second.
         They were -- they sold cigarettes that were
    defective and they were negligent.
         Now, just a little bit of the history here.
         If you'd go to 16 for us, please.
         You-all heard from Professor Proctor, who
    wrote a book on this from Stanford University.
    Came and told you it was back in December 1953
    that the cigarette companies' executives got
    together.  They were all competitors at the time,
    just like McDonald's, just like Burger King, just
    like Wendy's.
         Instead of competing, the information was
    coming out that cigarette smoking was a cause of
    lung cancer, so they all met in the Plaza Hotel
    towards the end of the year.  What did they do?
         Did they hire personal -- a public relations
    firm to go to the American public or to go to the
    Surgeon General to tell Americans there is a
    connection here, let's see if we can't work
    through this?  They made a choice.  They made a
    choice, not Judy.  They made a choice.  Were they 4130 going to disclose what they knew -- were they
    going to disclose what they knew to the American
    public or not?  Let's see what they did.
         Eighteen, please.
         They put out this Frank Statement in the New
    York Times and it was signed by all the head
    executives and we went through all this.  They
    will tell you Judy -- no evidence Judy ever saw
    this.  No evidence -- no evidence that she did.
    But Dr. Proctor explained to you that all the
    major newspapers at the time picked it up.  It was
    all over the airwaves.  And they said, There is no
    proof cigarette smoking is one of the causes, and
    we accept an interest in people's health as a
    basic responsibility.  We believe the products we
    make are not injurious to health.
         False.  How do we know that?  We can look,
    please, at 17.
         In the archives that were previously
    secret Professor Proctor found this.
    Hill & Knowlton was the public relations company
    that wrote this in December of '53:  It's
    fortunate for us, being the cigarette companies,
    that cigarettes are a habit they can't break.
    Boy, wouldn't it be wonderful if our cigarette 4131 was -- if our company was the first to produce a
    cancer-free cigarette.
         So they knew and Dr. Proctor told you that's
    the first evidence right there that they knew that
    they had a product that was causing cancer and
    they were going to mislead the American people.
         Thirty-nine, please.
         Here we go again.  I'm going to run through
    these, because I -- I have been up here for a long
    time and I know you-all heard Professor Proctor
    for a while, but this was what they did with the
    information that they had.  These are from
    previously secret internal documents, 1957, on the
    top left-hand corner talks about the TIRC, which
    was their public relations company that they --
    that they funded, the Tobacco Industry Research
    Committee, to talk about it being a successful
    defensive operation.  And in the middle, We must
    provide answers which will give smokers a
    psychological crutch and a self-rationale to
    continue smoking.  That's 1964.
         They already had psychologists looking at
    this.  They already had scientists looking at
    this.  How could they, with the emerging
    information coming out about the relationship 4132 between smoking and health, how could they put up
    a shield for that?  This is what they did.  They
    got a psychologist that understood nicotine and
    how nicotine worked on the brain.  Said we got to
    give them a psychological crutch so they're going
    to have a self-rationale to continue to smoke.
         So they went and they said, on the far upper
    right-hand corner, Our basic position is that the
    controversy is subject to the charge and may be
    subject to a finding that we are making false or
    misleading statements to promote the use of
    cigarettes.
         So they knew back in 1968 that their campaign
    of doubt would later come back to haunt them.
         And this is what pretty much sums it up, the
    1968 document:  The most important type of story
    is that which casts doubt on the cause-and-effect
    theory of disease and smoking.
         That's what they knew.  That's what they had.
    They weren't standing up and saying, Our product
    has all these cancer- and disease-causing
    properties and can be addictive.  Let's see if we
    can't help folks like Judy, who started ten years
    before the package warnings.  No.  They were
    telling the American people, Let's put out a story 4133 and cast doubt on whether there is a connection.
         Look at the 1972 internal records.
         Always been a holding strategy consisting of
    creating doubt about the health controversy
    without actually denying it.
         So that's playing with words, folks.  It's a
    half truth.  It's playing with words.
         Nineteen, please.
         So while they were putting this creating
    doubt out there, this is what their own records
    show.
         1953, we already went over that one.
         1961:  Carcinogens are found in practically
    every class of compounds in smoke.  That was a
    secret document until 1999.
         Obviously, the amount of evidence accumulated
    to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is
    overwhelming.  This is what they were telling
    themselves internally in secret in 1962.
         The evidence challenging such an indictment
    is scant.  This is what they knew when they were
    telling the American public.  There is no proof.
    There is doubt.  Our products don't cause harm.
    See what they knew?  What did they do?
         Look at 40 please, Baron. 4134 Early on the president of Reynolds, Paul
    Hahn, 1953, when the first reports were coming
    out, he took issue with what he called lose talk.
    Lose talk, lose talk.  Twenty million Americans,
    dead, 435,000 a year.  Lose talk, he's called the
    subject of smoking in relation to cancer.
         We're not going to play these again, but
    Mr. Cullman, high executive -- I know you-all
    think it's funny.  These are suits.  This guy here
    on the right, see him in front of all those
    microphones in 1979?  I'm not going to play it
    again, but he's the one that took after Joseph
    Califano and the Surgeon General that -- the day
    before the Surgeon General's report was going to
    be released, attacking the Surgeon General, saying
    he had no proof.
         It was a scare tactic.  It was a scare
    campaign.  This was what they were doing.  And you
    don't think that people heard it?  There was no
    Internet back then.  But guess what, look at those
    microphones, calling a press conference.  And how
    would they know what the Surgeon General's report
    had before it was even released?
         I asked Professor Proctor that.  He said,
    Well, I have done the research.  They had 4135 connections in Congress.  They had connections
    through the government.  They knew stuff before it
    was even out there.  That was their reaction, to
    attack.
         Calls claims that cigarettes are addictive
    irresponsible and scare tactics in 1988.
         All right.  Last but not least, in 1994 --
    1994, two years after Judy tried to quit with the
    patch, two years before she could.  And we'll show
    it to you again.  They had the executives of the
    cigarette companies appear in front of Congress
    and raise their right hand and say, We don't know
    what causes lung cancer.
         Now, let me show you the effect of all this,
    and we'll wrap it up.
         If we could go to 21, please.
         Dr. Proctor went over this with you.  And if
    you look at the blue line, that is the consumption
    of cigarettes starting in 1900.  No one was
    smoking.  And as the modern cigarette was
    developed and as advertising came into play,
    consumption rose.  And you will see the right --
    the red line.  That's disease.  That's lung cancer
    death rates for men.  You can see as people
    smoked, lung cancer death rates went straight up. 4136 You can see the "V."  We talked about the V.
    That was when the first Surgeon General's report
    came out.  People got concerned.  The industry
    hired spokespeople to represent it and a campaign
    of doubt, and then consumption went back up again.
         Look over there in the right-hand line.  I
    think it looks green to me.  That's the women
    rising death rates.  Dr. Proctor explained to you,
    Women started smoking a bit later than men,
    because men started overseas when they were in the
    war, the First World War.  He talked about the
    latency rate, the time between when you smoke and
    when diseases start to occur, lung cancer, COPD.
    But you see, women bought into it also.  You see
    the rise up there?  1960, 1970s, 1980s and 1990
    women were getting sick and sick and sick.  And
    that's Judy Campbell's generation right there.
         Now, I want to talk with you briefly about
    this reliance issue.
         I'm so well organized here, I can't find that
    verdict form.  Do we have it?  Bear with me one
    second.
         MR. COFER:  Mr. Wichmann?
         MR. WICHMANN:  I know it's been a long time
    that I have been standing up here.  I'm going to 4137 try to wrap it up.  This is the verdict form that
    you-all are going to get to go and fill out.
         And just to recap, on the first page here:
    Was she addicted?  The answer is yes.
         And Mr. Millard is going to talk to you about
    the second question.  We're going to want you to
    answer that no.
         The third question is:  Were cigarettes
    manufactured by each defendant --
         MR. PHILIPSON:  Mr. Wichmann, you need to
    slide it up a little bit and maybe look at the
    screen.
         MR. WICHMANN:  The second one is no.
    Mr. Millard is going to cover that here in a
    minute.
         The third question we've already gone over.
    Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by a defendant
    a legal cause?  Went over that.  We want you to
    say yes.
         And then we're going to talk on the subject
    about did she reasonably rely to her detriment on
    anything that they did?  And that's question 5 --
    question 4 and question 5.  And there's dates in
    there.  And those dates are before May 5, 1982,
    and after May 5, 1982.  Did she rely on their 4138 false statements or did she rely on their
    conspiracy that we have been talking about?
         Well, one thing we know for sure is that
    in -- after May 5, 1982, she tried to quit smoking
    by using low tar, filtered cigarettes.  And what
    she found was -- and John Campbell told you
    this -- the more she started to smoke the filtered
    low tar cigarettes, the less nicotine her body
    got, and the more her brain craved.  So she
    actually ended up smoking more.  And we showed you
    documents that the industry knew that they could
    market these as health cigarettes, and that the
    result would be, because people would close the
    vent holes with their fingers, that they would
    inhale deeper, hold it in deeper and smoke more,
    because addicted -- addicted smokers had to get
    that compensation.  They had to compensate for the
    nicotine levels in their brain.
         We know she started doing that in the late
    1980s.  And we know, John Campbell said they saw
    an advertisement, a print advertisement about low
    tar cigarettes.
         MR. WEAVER:  Objection.  Facts not in
    evidence.
         THE COURT:  I will caution the jury to rely 4139 on your memories of what you believe the evidence
    is and that the attorneys are simply making
    arguments.
         MR. WICHMANN:  The other thing that she
    relied on is -- I played the videotaped deposition
    of the R.J. Reynolds corporate representative,
    Mr. Setchell.  He said they had internal records.
    They're in evidence.  You had a package to look at
    while he was testifying.
         He said in 1994, Brown & Williamson and
    American Tobacco and Reynolds --
         And, you know, you see two defendants there
    now, but really there is four, because Reynolds is
    responsible for those other two companies.  The
    set of those three Reynolds companies, they had
    Judy Campbell listed in their adult tobacco
    database as a smoker who preferred Marlboro but
    who also smoked their brands of cigarettes.  And
    he said we sent a questionnaire, we sent her the
    surveys asking about her smoking behavior.  We
    sent her promotional information, and we sent her
    coupons, only a couple of which she redeemed, he
    said.
         MR. WEAVER:  Objection.  Facts not in
    evidence. 4140 THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. WEAVER:  Move to strike.
         THE COURT:  I will sustain.  I would ask the
    jury to disregard that statement and rely on your
    own memories of the evidence.
         MR. WICHMANN:  So my question is, if she
    wasn't relying, if she didn't get the industry
    message towards the end of the conspiracy in
    1994 -- okay? -- two years before she quit, how
    would she know to contact Reynolds to ask to be on
    their mailing list?  And how would she know to ask
    for promotional information from Reynolds?  And
    why would she do that if she wasn't smoking
    Reynolds' cigarettes?  And why in the world would
    they have her in their database if she weren't an
    addicted smoker?
         These are the reasons why we think you should
    answer yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, and yes to
    all of those.
         Now, once you are past all of those questions
    that we went over, you're going to be asked to
    apportion and determine what the fault is amongst
    all the parties.  I'm here to tell you, the
    evidence is that Judy started smoking at age 15 or
    16, 10 years or so before the warnings were on the 4141 packs.  So you-all are going to find that that is
    a teenage decision.  If you want to find her
    responsible for making that decision, that's
    within your province.  I would just ask that you
    bear in mind her age and the circumstances
    surrounding her beginning.  But if you-all want to
    apportion some fault on her for that, that's
    within your province as jurors.
         Now, they're going to tell you she didn't try
    hard enough.  She didn't want to quit.  She didn't
    do enough.  We think given testimony on the effect
    nicotine has on a woman's brain, this woman's
    brain, that she tried pretty darn hard.  But if
    you-all think that there is choice, you-all think
    she didn't try hard enough, that doesn't go to
    whether or not she was addicted.  That goes right
    here, when you-all apportion the fault, and you
    can put some fault on Judy for that if that's the
    way you feel.  That's within your -- within your
    province.
         We would like to make a suggestion, and it's
    only -- only a suggestion.  We'll live with
    whatever you-all decide to do, because you-all are
    the jurors.
         We think that a proper apportionment of fault 4142 is 40 percent to Reynolds and the three companies.
    That's really three in one.  It's Reynolds,
    American Tobacco, and Brown & Williamson that
    caused Judy -- for the most part, the evidence has
    been that she smoked mostly Marlboro, but she did
    smoke their product.  You heard Greg, her son,
    say, My earliest recollections were from 1966 to
    1974 she smoked Raleighs, and I remember because
    she would go to the -- to the Publix, and she
    would buy cigarettes.  I saw the Raleighs on the
    carton.
         When she went to switch to the low tar
    cigarette, it was a Reynolds Doral brand that she
    switched to.  John also said she would on occasion
    smoke Kool and on occasion smoke Salem.  We think
    40 percent on Reynolds, we think 50 percent on
    Philip Morris, and we think 10 percent on Judy.
    You-all need to make that decision, and whatever
    you-all decide, we will live with it.
         Now, on this last page, I have the good
    fortune of letting Mr. Millard talk to you about
    that, so I would ask you-all to please wait a
    moment here.  It might be after lunch and
    Mr. Millard will cover that.  But I want to leave
    you-all with this last piece of evidence that 4143 you-all heard.  And that's 31.
         MR. PHILIPSON:  Are you ready for it to play,
    Mr. Wichmann?
         MR. WICHMANN:  Yeah.  Can you play it,
    please?
         MR. PHILIPSON:  Sure.  Oh, give me one
    second.
         MR. WICHMANN:  Give us one moment.
         (A video clip was played for the jury as
    follows:)
         A SPEAKER:  Rise.  And those of you who will
    be testifying, as well with you, to rise.  If you
    would raise your right hand.
         Do you swear that the testimony you are about
    to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
    but the truth?
         (Affirmative response).
         A SPEAKER:  Please consider yourself to be
    under oath.
         MR. WAXMAN:  Let me begin my questioning on
    the matter of whether or not nicotine is
    addictive.  Let me ask you first -- I would like
    to just go down the row -- whether each of you
    believes that nicotine is not addictive.  I heard
    virtually all of you touch on it. 4144 Just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is
    not addictive?
         A SPEAKER:  I believe nicotine is not
    addictive, yes.
         MR. WAXMAN:  Mr. Johnston?
         A SPEAKER:  Congressman, cigarettes and
    nicotine clearly do not meet the classic
    definitions of addiction.  There is no
    intoxication.
         MR. WAXMAN:  Again, we'll take that as no.
    Again, time is short.  If you could just -- I
    think each of you believe nicotine is not
    addictive.  We just would like to have this for
    the record.
         A SPEAKER:  I don't believe that nicotine in
    our products is addictive.
         A SPEAKER:  I believe nicotine is not
    addictive.
         A SPEAKER:  I believe that nicotine is not
    addictive.
         A SPEAKER:  I believe that nicotine is not
    addictive.
         A SPEAKER:  And I too believe that nicotine
    is not addictive.
         A SPEAKER:  Mr. Campbell -- 4145 (The video clip concluded.)
         MR. WICHMANN:  I think you-all saw that and
    you remember that.  This is what they were telling
    the American people in 1994.  And there is another
    question on the verdict form that has to do with
    punitive damages to punish the companies, and
    we're going to ask you to check "yes" to that
    question.
         Mr. Millard is going to talk to you a little
    bit about that when he gets up, as well, most
    probably, perhaps, after lunch.
         Thank you.


         MR. MILLARD:  Thank you.  I know we're tired,
    we're hungry.  I'm going to try to move through
    this pretty quickly for you.  I'm going to hit a
    few key issues that's important that we talk about
    before you are sent back to deliberate.  In my
    openings I talked to you a little bit about
    statute of limitations which is an issue in this
    case.  And I'm going to address those issues for
    you.  And then I'm going to talk a little bit
    about damages and how to go about doing that and
    some thoughts we have on that.  So bear with me.
    I'll try to get through this pretty quickly.
         First, I want you to remember that I told you 4147 in opening -- and you have seen it through the
    trial -- there's a couple things that are agreed
    upon in this case and that's that Mrs. Campbell
    developed her COPD from smoking and that her COPD
    was the cause of her death.  It's not in dispute.
         On the statute of limitations, I talked to
    you in opening and you heard quite a bit about it
    that it's a burden on the defense -- this is a
    position the defense has taken in this case.  The
    other issues are our burden.  We have the burden
    of proof in the case.  And we talked about the
    greater weight of the evidence.  You saw that a
    little bit ago.  The statute of limitations, it's
    the defense burden, so the greater weight of the
    evidence is borne out by them.  They must present
    evidence sufficient to meet that criteria for you.
         Let me set forth the questions that you-all
    need to ask.  I was scribbling on this, so I'm
    sorry.  This is the only copy I have.  The statute
    of limitations is set forth right here in
    Question 2.  And Question 2 is going to ask you to
    decide -- it says one question that you will
    either answer yes or no, but it's actually broken
    down into a couple different parts, so I'm going
    to go through them real quickly. 4148 The first part is did Judy Campbell have
    COPD?  Did she have it before May 5, 1990?  So you
    must consider that.  If you find that she did,
    that the evidence rose to the level, the greater
    weight of the evidence convinced you that she had
    it, then you must go on and think about a couple
    more things.
         The next thing you are going to think about
    is did she know about it, or was there a reason
    for her to know about it.  Should she reasonably
    have known, again, before May 5, 1990, that she
    had COPD?
         Again, defense burden.  They have to put
    forth the evidence that rises to the level
    necessary.  And, again, we don't guess, we don't
    speculate, we don't assume.  There needs to be
    evidence upon which you can make your decision
    that the burden met -- was met.  There's the
    greater weight of the evidence.  The third part of
    this is even if she did know or should have known,
    she must also know that it was COPD and that the
    COPD was caused by her smoking cigarettes.
         We suggest the answer to this is no.  She did
    not know.  And I want to go through the different
    parts real briefly here. 4149 The evidence in this case -- you have seen
    evidence come in basically through Dr.
    Martinez-Salas.  You remember him.  He came up
    here.  He was the treating physician.  He's the,
    probably, smartest guy in the room when it comes
    to Judy Campbell, her injuries, her illnesses, her
    diseases.  He had hands on.  He talked to her.  He
    asked her questions.  He treated her.  You heard
    him talk about that.  He came forward and he
    talked about the issues of her COPD, when it
    developed, when it was diagnosed.
         From the other side the defense brought forth
    Dr. Schroeder.  You heard him take the stand he
    came in and told you he's a paid expert.  He never
    met Judy, never talked to her, never had an
    opportunity to ask her any questions.  What he did
    is he said he had to take all the records that
    were available at the time, primarily those of Dr.
    Martinez-Salas through his clinic, Gessler Clinic
    or Winter Haven hospital where she was treated and
    a handful of other records.  We saw Dr. Lucille
    Frank, Dr. Ford, starting in 1990, September of
    1990, after the date, after the May 5 date.
         He talked about that he's paid by tobacco.
    This is what he does.  He only represents tobacco 4150 companies, not plaintiffs in these cases.  He's
    done it 50 times.  He comes forward and does the
    same thing in these cases.  He works for the
    tobacco companies, not the injured smoker.
         You are going to have to evaluate, Who do you
    believe.  You are going to -- they're both highly
    educated men.  They are both professionals in the
    same field.  They both talked about these
    diseases.  They both talked about these concepts.
    Your job is to evaluate what they said, evaluate
    the evidence they used, evaluate the bases for
    their opinions and make a decision.  What do we
    believe, as you go through the verdict form?
         I'm going to point out a couple things,
    though, before we move on.
         You will also remember that
    Dr. Martinez-Salas, he remembered Judy Campbell.
    It wasn't as if he just read a record and was
    talking about that.  He knew her.  He remembered
    her.  He talked about her.  He talked about the
    legacy of her smile.  You remember that?  He
    was -- he was fond of her.  He got to know her as
    a person, not just a patient.  And he came in here
    with no dog in the fight.  He had nothing to gain
    or lose by coming here.  He came just to tell you 4151 what happened.  He met this woman.  She had a
    condition he cared for.  He treated her.  He was
    there for her.  He met the family, he talked with
    them.  He monitored her care all the way through
    to the very end, beginning in 1995, when he first
    read the first PFT that was available in this
    case.  You remember that testimony.
         Dr. Ford ordered a PFT while Judy was in the
    hospital.  Dr. Martinez-Salas was the physician,
    the pulmonologist reviewed it and wrote a report.
    He then met her in 1996 when she was in the
    hospital.  And from that point forward, that was
    his patient.  She saw him on a regular basis as
    her primary care physician, as well as her
    pulmonologist.
         You also remember that Dr. Schroeder said he
    has no criticisms of Dr. Martinez-Salas.  He
    agrees with what he did.  He agrees with his
    treatment.  He agrees with his care.  He even
    agreed with the death certificate.  He said, I
    have seen that; I have reviewed that; I know
    Dr. Martinez wrote that and put that together and
    signed it.  I agree with the cause of death as
    COPD and agree that it was caused by smoking, that
    smoking was a contributing factor to the cause of 4152 death.  No dispute there as well.
         Question 1 -- take that back.  We saw there
    was one question but different parts.  The first
    part of the question is whether Judy had COPD or
    not.  You saw a lot of evidence coming in
    different records, and you saw Dr. Schroeder
    primarily trying to say that these records had
    some kind of inference that something was going on
    earlier.
         At no point in time, again, do we have
    anything that would tell us in a medical record
    that she had COPD before May 5, 1990, not one.
    Dr. Schroeder admits that there is zero medical
    evidence in the record dated before May 5, 1990.
         I want to look at one record -- we'll look at
    a couple of records, maybe four of them.  I won't
    do a bunch of them.
         You have seen these before.  In 1995, Judy
    was seeing Dr. Ford.  Dr. Ford had a chest X-ray
    at that time.  And on August 17, 1995, the lungs
    were slightly emphysematous.  I hope I got that
    right.  I was practicing it.  So '95 we have
    slightly -- a finding of slight emphysematous
    changes in the lungs.  Not severe, not overly
    severe, slightly. 4153 Think about that.  Think about the testimony
    you heard from Dr. Schroeder and why he's trying
    to opine that she had this disease before May 5,
    1990.
         I want to show you another one.  This is a
    record dated a month later.  September 8, 1995,
    Dr. Ford as well.  We talked when we had Dr.
    Martinez on the stand that the first time there
    was a diagnosis was in 1995, an official
    diagnosis.  In his opinion, it had to come from
    having a pulmonary function test.  Remember that?
    He talked about that.  He said, X-rays don't cut
    it; you have to do the pulmonary function test.
    These were done.  And after they were done,
    Dr. Ford says in his record -- and this is the
    only time we have this in any record, where he
    said that Judy came in, 54-year-old white female,
    to go over the results of her lab work.  We don't
    know what the lab work was, but we know that she
    went over the PFTs, that at that time he advised
    her -- this is when she knew that the PFTs were
    consistent with COPD and it also shows the X-rays,
    showed emphysema.  That was the X-ray we just
    looked at.
         So at this time we know that she knew or she 4154 should have known at this time that she had COPD.
    No record exists like that before May 5, 1990,
    there's just no records.
         I'll show you one more real quickly here.
    Here is a PFT.  And this is the 1995 PFT.  And
    counsel with Dr. Schroeder on the stand went over
    all the different numbers and what the FEVs stand
    for and percentage ratios.  I'm not going to touch
    that.  You heard all that.  But the point of this
    is that on August 23, '95, Dr. Ford had her in, a
    note that she weighed at this time 175 pounds.
         But of significance, at the bottom, is the
    spirometry, which we learned was part of the PFT
    studies.  And they were described to you as
    reveals a moderate obstructive change.  This is
    not a severe condition in 1995.  Dr. Martinez is
    the one who read this report.
         So the question that you'll have to answer,
    the first part of it is, Did she have COPD?  Not
    could have had it, might have had it.  And quite
    honestly, I'm standing before you having heard all
    the evidence, I can't tell you.  I don't know.
    Maybe.  But the question is we can't rely on
    maybe.  The question is, Does the evidence rise to
    the level where you can say, as a group, that the 4155 greater weight of evidence supports her having it
    or does not support her having it?  We contend it
    doesn't support her having it.  There's certainly
    possibilities there.  The thing we do know is that
    if it did exist, it was quiet.  It was developing
    in her lungs, nobody knew it.  She didn't know it.
    No doctor knew it.  We have no records.
         You recall that Dr. Martinez sat on the
    stand.  And here is what he said to you.  He said
    the standard of care in pulmonary medicine in the
    diagnosis of COPD, the standard of care for
    pulmonologists is that you need pulmonary function
    tests.  This is how we diagnose.  He went on to
    say that it's inappropriate to diagnose COPD from
    an X-ray.  He said there's -- certainly, X-rays
    are very important, and, typically, they tell us.
    And we've seen it in the 1990 X-ray.  It says
    there are changes consistent with, or these are
    suspicions of.  So we looked at those as a
    pulmonologist and we say, This is important.  I'm
    not saying it's not important, but it's not
    diagnostic, not to the point when you say this is
    COPD.  It's the point when you say we need to
    follow up and figure out what's going on; let's
    take a look.  So that's what Dr. Martinez told 4156 you.  Dr. Schroeder, on the other hand, disagrees.
    Weigh the evidence, make the decision.
         Dr. Martinez-Salas said radiologists are not
    the ones making the diagnosis.  They read the
    films, take the films, read them, and they provide
    their findings of what they see.  The
    pulmonologists take that, review it, make their
    decisions.
         On the other hand, I believe Dr. Schroeder
    said he would rely.  In fact, I believe his
    testimony was that he would look at the 1990
    consistent with COPD and make that a diagnosis.
    Who do you believe?  Weigh out the evidence.
         Now, relying on radiologists would be
    uncommon, according to Dr. Martinez.  He would not
    rely on a radiologist to make the diagnosis.  But
    perhaps a rheumatologist, such as Dr. Frank may do
    that.  And we saw in her record in 1992 she had
    COPD in there.  From the 1991 X-ray, you recall,
    it didn't say just consistent with.  At that point
    it just said COPD.  She may have just taken that
    and relied on it.  She's not a pulmonologist.  So
    that's understandable.  Dr. Martinez said people
    many times misdiagnose and get these records wrong
    on these issues.  Weigh it out and look at the 4157 evidence.
         So what we know is that no single record
    exists before May 5th, 1990, except for the fact
    that she had a diagnosis.  Dr. Martinez sat up
    here and told you that she did not have a
    diagnosis until 1995.  Dr. Ford talked to her
    about it in 1995.  She knew about it at that time.
    And using the X-rays are not appropriate for a
    diagnosis.  But even if they were, there's nothing
    dating back earlier than the date of question
    right here.
         We do know that Dr. Frank also sought to find
    early records.  She asked if there were any
    available.  And if they were there, I would
    presume she would have had them.  She didn't find
    any, though.  We don't know why.  The records were
    destroyed.  Dr. Schroeder said sometimes they are
    lost or misplaced, or perhaps another explanation
    is there were none.  Nobody went in to look into
    this issue, that he was concerned about this
    issue.  No X-rays were done.  No treatment was
    had.
         We pointed out with Dr. Schroeder, in 1993,
    that she went into the Gessler Clinic for a new
    patient visit.  Do you recall that?  We looked at 4158 this record.  And I pointed out the fact that in
    this record there's no mention whatsoever of
    breathing problems, dyspnea, COPD, nothing, not
    one reference anywhere in this record.  This is a
    new patient coming to the clinic.  This is what
    they write about.  They talk about the fibrositis,
    the arthritis.  She was having pain, and that's
    why she was seeing Dr. Frank.  I'll note here that
    she weighed 165 pounds at this time.
         So it's your task -- sometimes it feels
    daunting looking at all the evidence and trying to
    put it together and trying to figure out what
    happened.  Again, you know what the law is.  Did
    the evidence presented by the defense rise to the
    level that you can say, as a group, that the
    greater weight of the evidence supports the fact
    that she did have the COPD before May 5, 1990?
    Again, I don't know what the answer is to that.
    You will have to decide and look at all the
    evidence.
         The next part of the question is, If you find
    that she did have the COPD you must then go on and
    say, If so, did she know about it or should she
    reasonably have known about it before May 5, 1990?
         How would she know?  This is the instruction. 4159 How did she know?  Was there any evidence?  Not
    one piece of evidence that could suggest she had
    knowledge of COPD, if she had it before May 5,
    1990.  Not one record suggests that.  No witness
    was able to suggest that.
         Again, we cannot guess and we cannot
    speculate.  You cannot assume.  You must find some
    evidence to support this theory.  There is zero
    evidence to suggest that she has -- that she knew
    about COPD if she had it, and, certainly, there is
    no evidence to suggest that she believed smoking
    was causing COPD if she had it before this period
    of time.
         Dr. Schroeder, when I asked him, said the
    following, that he had never seen any evidence
    that Mrs. Campbell had attributed her coughing.
    He talked about a little bit of coughing, I think,
    from her journal, her dyspnea, which is in that
    1996 physical endurance therapy document.  It had
    an onset date of 1988.  Do you recall that up in
    the corner?  He used that as one of the bases,
    that he had never seen any evidence that
    Mrs. Campbell had attributed her coughing, her
    dyspnea or shortness of breath to emphysema or
    COPD prior to May 5, 1990, no evidence.  The 4160 defense expert says there's no evidence.  Our
    expert says there's no evidence, no witness
    brought in any evidence.
         So I would suggest that your response to this
    part of this question would be no.  She did not
    know.  The other part of it, should she have
    known?  What was there that would lead her to
    believe that she had COPD?
         Okay?  It's interesting.
         You will find that Dr. Schroeder admitted
    that there's zero records anybody treated her for
    these conditions prior to May 5, 1990.  Zero
    records to suggest she was advised of COPD prior
    to May 5, 1990.  Zero records that any doctor
    diagnosed her before May 5, 1990.  We did learn,
    though, that many times patients are misdiagnosed,
    and they are -- they have a condition, and the
    condition is given an incorrect diagnosis.  Both
    doctors talked about that.
         As we saw in the records -- and Dr. Schroeder
    admitted -- that throughout her course of
    treatment, from the time we have records, there's
    numerous references to acute bronchitis.  And then
    he defined acute bronchitis for us.  Acute
    bronchitis is that which comes and goes.  It's not 4161 chronic.  It doesn't last.  It's not permanent.
    It's not COPD.  That's what the defense expert
    tells us.
         What are the symptoms?  Coughing, lethargy,
    fatigue, worn out.  We get colds in the winter.
    They come, they go.  Mr. Campbell sat up here and
    told us the same thing.  Frequently, she would
    have that.  She would get sick during the winter,
    and she'd get some medications, maybe, maybe not,
    and she would get better and it would go away.
         Asthma, references of asthma.  Dr. Schroeder
    told us that there's references in there, but he
    believes it's wrong.  Dr. Martinez said it's
    wrong.  Both doctors agree.  There was no asthma.
    However, certain doctors put asthma into the
    records.  They got it wrong.  They said especially
    with women, Dr. Schroeder says, they sometimes get
    that wrong.
         And then he explained to us why, but I don't
    think the explanation matters.
         So the question is, Is if the doctors were
    getting it wrong, calling it wrong things,
    assuming she did have COPD, and none of the
    doctors got it right.  How in the world can we
    expect Judy Campbell got it right?  She has no 4162 medical training.  She went to tenth grade.  She
    did go back and get her GED.  But she didn't go to
    college and study any medical learning.  She
    didn't go to medical school.  She didn't go to
    nursing school.  She had none of these skills
    which would lead her to be able self diagnose
    herself, especially in light of her doctors
    getting it wrong.
         Again, I would suggest you check no to this
    box.  There's no evidence.
         Real quickly, I want to touch on the fact
    that I talked to Dr. Schroeder about the form
    where it was indicated that she had dyspnea --
    remember, that's shortness of breath -- and that
    there was an onset date of 1988.
         I asked him, If you had that information
    alone, would you diagnose COPD?
         He said I would not.
         I asked him, Would you need more information?
         He said, I would.
         I said, Like what?
         Like what brought it on, what kind of
    endurance was involved in it, how long it would
    last, how often it happened, or if it was even
    related to smoking.  He said he had none of that 4163 information.  He had one little comment with no
    basis for it, and he's relying on that to suggest
    that somehow she either had it and knew about it
    before May 5, 1990.
         I'm here to tell you, I don't think the
    evidence stands up.
         We do know, though, that John Campbell took
    the stand and he talked about her physical
    condition at the time of question, the late
    eighties into the early nineties.  You remember
    that?  He talked about going to the amusement
    parks.  She would pet the deer.  You remember
    that?  She liked the deer.  She went to Silver
    Springs, she went to the Epcot Center, went to
    Disney World, walking those parks.  We have all
    been to those parks.  We know it can be
    exhausting.  She was able to do that.  She -- not
    one time did she suffer from shortness of breath
    beyond just usual tiredness that we all would
    experience.  Not one time all the way through the
    late eighties into the nineties.  Didn't happen.
         Remember, we saw the pictures and we heard
    John talk about it.  Again I would suggest that
    there is no evidence that can support a finding
    that she had COPD or especially that she knew 4164 about it, if she did, before May 5, 1990.
         John talked about the smoker's cough.  Do you
    remember that?  He said she had it.  It would come
    and it would go.  It was no big deal.  They didn't
    think much about it.
         Dr. Schroeder said he didn't think much about
    it.  He said if it was just a smoker's cough, it's
    not diagnostic.  He said it would not be
    clinically significant without more.  You need
    more.
         Just like the other report we talked about.
    When did it happen?  How often did it happen?
    What was bringing it on?  How long would it last?
    These kind of things.
         We don't have it.  It's not there.  It
    doesn't rise to the greater weight of the
    evidence.  We suggest you check no on this box.
         All right.  I will move off that.  Let's talk
    about damages.  In my humble opinion, this is the
    most difficult part of your task.  There's no
    formula, there's no set criteria, there's nothing
    anybody can hand you and say here is the number to
    put on this, here is how it should be done.  You
    as a group have to talk about what you have seen,
    what you have heard, look at the evidence, and 4165 come up with a determination of what value to
    place on this case.
         Before you do that, I want you to know that
    if we could turn the clock back, if we could bring
    Judy back, John would drop all this in a moment,
    in a heartbeat.  He misses his wife.  You saw it.
    You saw him talk about her.  He loved this lady.
    This was his girl.  He talked about her.  You
    know, what we have here is they were married for
    24 years.  She was his companion.  She was his
    soulmate.  She took care of him.  He took care of
    her.  They were good for each other.
         The way I see this, this is a love story that
    ended in a tragedy.  We heard him talk about the
    fact that they both had tough upbringings.  He had
    even a worse situation after high school, going to
    war and coming back with some troubles.  He's seen
    a lot of things over there nobody wanted anybody
    to see, especially a 19-year-old son.  He had to
    go through that.  Came back a broken man.  He had
    a hole ripped through his heart and soul.  And
    guess what.  When he saw her, that started
    healing.  When he saw her, their eyes met.  He
    talked about that that little bar that night.  It
    was instantaneous.  They started dating, and they 4166 had a period of time when they weren't dating and
    John had gone off to Georgia.  When he came bak it
    was right back as if he had never left.  They were
    in love with each other.  And it stayed that way
    from that moment, married in 1983 and lived on
    until her untimely passing until she was taken
    from him.
         Their plans were -- and you heard him talk
    about it -- their plans were they were growing old
    together; that she was the one that could make him
    okay.  He's got issues with all the things he's
    had to live with, that he talked about she could
    put a hand on him and hug him and look at him and
    she softened him.  She filled that hole.  She made
    him whole.  She brought him back.  She put him
    back together.  He depended on her.  She protected
    him.  She made him feel safe, secure.  And without
    her he's lost again.  He's feeling it.
         He talked about he's never stopped loving
    her.  He says he's still got the wedding pictures
    all over the walls in the house.  Remember that?
    He hasn't let this go.  You saw the emotion.  He's
    still feeling it.  It's been six years.  He's
    still feeling it.
         Guess what?  He's got many more years to 4167 live.  You will see the mortality time tables that
    will come in.  Those are tables that give you a
    general idea as to when people are expected to
    live.  Okay.  And I don't want him looking at
    that.  That's not something anybody wants to look
    at.  But it gives him about 16, 17 more years
    without her.  Think about the time that he has
    got.
         A couple ways we look at this.  One, he's
    entitled to recover for a period of suffering from
    her injury, his pain and suffering.  Not hers.  We
    don't award for the suffering that she went
    through.  But his what he had to endure.
         He told you on the stand that he loved her.
    He cared for her.  He did everything he could to
    try to help her.  He stood by her.  When she
    couldn't get outside any longer, he built that big
    beautiful wooden deck.  Do you recall that?  She
    would go out there with her oxygen hose and sit on
    the deck and get some sun.  He built that so she
    could have that.  He did everything he could to
    make her okay and to keep her safe, to keep her
    happy.  But he felt helpless.  He told us this.
    He felt helpless.  As she continued to get sicker
    and sicker, he had to watch this.  Nothing he 4168 could do.  He could plead to the doctors.  He took
    her to the doctors.  But he couldn't do anything
    to stop the pain of his girl, the one he loved.
    He struggled with that.  All right?  Probably from
    1996 to 2007 when she passed.
         So we have an 11-year period of time of
    suffering.  Add another 17 onto that.  We've got
    almost 30 years of suffering.
         You will see on the verdict form, when it
    goes to damages.  First of all there has been a
    stipulation to the funeral expenses.  And I just
    want to let you know that that's part of the
    verdict form, the damages that are available in
    this case.  The amount is not in dispute.  So if
    you find that he's entitled to damages, the amount
    of the damages is set forth right here for the
    funeral, newspaper, death certificate, dignity
    discount, cemetery, $9,874.  There is a place for
    that on the verdict form.
         I have written that in right here.  What is
    the total amount, is number 8.  Of damages
    sustained by John Campbell for funeral expenses.
    The amount is right there.  We'll give you the
    number so you can go back with those.
         What is the amount?  Number 7 is the question 4169 I want to talk about now.  The total amount of
    damages sustained by John Campbell as a result of
    Judy Campbell's death and for the loss of Judy
    Campbell's companionship.
         His bride, his girl, his companion -- and the
    protection she provided him -- she cared for him,
    she took care of him, she kept him safe and
    secure; and especially for John, significant.  He
    needed that.  She was there for him.
         And his pain and suffering.
         And this is pain and suffering through the
    sickness and now and into the future.  He's
    entitled to damage for that.
         I'm not going to spend a lot more time on
    this, but I want to just briefly remind you of the
    testimony you heard from Dr. Martinez and from
    John Campbell himself of the struggle that Judy
    went with.  She never gave up.  She kept that
    smile.  We saw that smile over and over and over
    again.  She continued to battle, but she suffered
    greatly beginning in the hospitalization in 1996
    all the way through the time of her death.  Went
    from two liters of oxygen, which is a normal
    amount, up to six liters, which Dr. Martinez said
    is significant.  It's at really the top amount you 4170 could really provide somebody.  She struggled to
    breathe.  She was slowly being suffocated to death
    year after year after year.
         Because of the medications and the disease
    she was suffering from, her weight continued to
    increase from 165 pounds to 240 pounds toward the
    end.  Couldn't clean herself, couldn't bathe
    herself, couldn't cook for herself, couldn't take
    care of herself, John did that.  He cleaned her,
    he bathed her, he fed her, he dressed her, he
    cared for her.
         He didn't run from that.  Many men run from
    situations.  Many people run from situations when
    they get hard.  He didn't run away.  He ran to
    her.  He ran to her side.  He stayed there.  He
    was there to the very end holding her hand.  That
    was his girl.  Remember he talked about that he
    liked her legs.  All right?  He liked her legs.
    That was his beauty queen.  And she made him
    whole, and now she's gone and he's without her
    growing old alone.
         All right.  The last point I want to touch on
    is how you are to come about putting a number on
    this case, the hardest thing you are going to have
    to do.  But I've got a couple things I just want 4171 to share with you that might make it easier.
         I calculated 30, 33 years going back of the
    total time he suffered from 1996 to the end of his
    expected lifetime.  Brings us back to about 1980.
         It helps sometimes to look back.  Think about
    how much time has gone on in the past, you can
    help evaluate the time into the future.
         1980.  And I hate to bring up some of these
    examples, because His Honor, as we know, he is
    keen on dates of presidencies.  But I have noted a
    couple things.  And I hope I don't get corrected
    on these.
         1980, Governor Ronald Reagan defeats Jimmy
    Carter to become the 40th president of the United
    States.  Remember that?  Learned about that?
    That's been a long time.  Think about that.
    President Reagan has now passed.  He's not with us
    any longer.  A long time.  Think about it.
         Twenty-seven years back.  Remember the space
    shuttle Challenger exploding?  A tragedy in midair
    right after takeoff?  A long time ago.
         How about 20 years back, 1993.  World Trade
    Center bombing.  Do you recall that?  A lot of
    things have happened since then.  That's a long
    time has passed. 4172 How about 1996, O.J. Simpson trial.  Remember
    that?  A long time ago.
         Presidential election between Bill Clinton
    and Al Gore.  Remember Ross Perot, the election?
    Many, many things have happened since then.
         Thirteen years, George W. Bush ran for his
    first term.  Remember the hanging chads
    controversy?  It seems like forever ago.  A lot of
    time has passed.  A lot of time.
         I don't know if that helps you.  It helps me
    sometimes put it in perspective.  But it's one way
    to look at this.  Look at it any way you want.
    You as a group have to figure out how to put a
    value on this case by a year by year of damage
    award, coming up with the single number, looking
    at it as a whole, talking about it amongst
    yourselves, figuring out what is the appropriate
    amount.
         We don't want you to award anything for
    sympathy.  We are not looking for sympathy.  He's
    looking for justice.  He gets sympathy every day
    when he talks about his wife being gone.  Every
    birthday, every Christmas when she's not around.
    He gets plenty of sympathy.  He's not looking for
    that.  He's looking for justice. 4173 The number we as a group have put together
    that we believe is appropriate and fair is a
    range.  Take it, leave it, higher, lower, do
    whatever you want with it.  This is our thought.
    Somewhere between $9 and $14 million would be the
    appropriate award in this case.  You would add to
    that -- you don't have to add, just have it on the
    form, is the funeral expenses.
         I want to touch real briefly on the last
    part.  Bill touched on it but I just want to make
    sure you are familiar with the last question No.
    9, whether punitive damages are warranted in this
    case.  You are going to have jury instructions to
    read.  They are already read to you.  It's
    instruction No. 15, which tells you how to go
    about doing this.  Remember, the burden is higher
    when you get to punitive damages.  You will read
    about that.  But the bases for it are was the
    conduct so gross and flagrant as to show a
    reckless disregarded to human life.
         I'm not going to read the rest.  They are all
    in here.  But think about that for just a moment.
    We've heard all the testimony about the tobacco
    companies and knowledge they had, knowledge they
    withheld.  Would you consider that reckless? 4174 Would you consider that disregard for the well
    being, health and safety of humans, to the public
    at large, the Campbell's?  Think about it.  We
    suggest you check yes on both of these.  We
    believe it is.
         I want to thank you again.  We very much
    appreciate the time that you have put in here and
    your attentiveness.  I want to ask that you give
    the same courtesy and attentiveness to defense
    counsel.  Thank you.


         MR. WICHMANN:  Five minutes.  I promise.
         Well, you know, they took some shots at me
    personally.  I'm okay with that.  I'm tired.  It's
    been a long trial.  I have tried to do my best.  I
    mean, it is what it is.  I can take it, but please
    not John Campbell.
         I don't want to go back over this whole
    business about the nicotine patches, but he stood
    up there and said to you, I'm trying my best to
    tell the truth, and that's all he's been doing
    throughout the whole proceeding.
         They also took some shots at Dr. Martinez,
    the historian.  Well, if the history was
    different, do you think two of the major cigarette
    companies in America, do you think they would have 4294 gone out and hired their own historian to come in
    and say, No, this gentleman from Stanford, little
    meek, mild fellow there, the professor was dead
    wrong?  They didn't.  They didn't because they
    can't, because the history is the history.
         Now, ladies and gentlemen, they also said,
    Look at Judy, look at Judy, look at Judy.  Look at
    Judy, don't look at anybody else.
         Well, the final Instruction 16 that you got
    from the Court on the issue of punitive damages,
    the law is, When considering whether to award
    punitive damages, you may consider any harm
    defendants' conduct caused Judy Campbell.
         Okay.  But there's another paragraph that
    they didn't read to you.  The other paragraph
    which is the law says, You may also consider
    harms, similar remember, harms suffered by other
    persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing
    the reprehensibility, the other wrongness of the
    defendants' acts as proven in this case.
         That's marketing to children, to kids, to
    teenagers.  That's marketing to women.  That's 20
    million smoking-related deaths over the course of
    their conspiracy.  That's 435,000 Americans who
    have died from smoking-related -- who die from 4295 smoking-related diseases every year.
         MR. COFER:  Object to that as misstating the
    law.
         THE COURT:  I'll just, again, caution the
    jury to rely on the instructions the Court has
    given you as to the law, and --
         MR. WICHMANN:  Final Instruction 16, fine.
         Now, last but not least, they want to tell
    you, Well, Judy was -- I wrote this down --
    intelligent.  She's informed.  Take a look at the
    last page of the journal, the page where she
    writes, Made it six days; maybe next time.
         Ladies and gentlemen, here is what she wrote.
    I think the big job for the next few days will be
    staying busy and keeping control of my willpower.
    That's what she wrote.  With God's help, I'll do
    it.
         The next day, Made it six days; maybe next
    time.
         My point is, You can have willpower and you
    can be intelligent and informed, but when you are
    addicted, severely addicted as Dr. Brady testified
    in this case, the effects nicotine has rewiring
    your brain make it hard, hard, hard to quit.  This
    poor woman -- no one has disputed the fact that 4296 when she was in the hospital and sedated begging
    her husband for cigarettes and going through
    withdrawal symptoms, that's how she was able to
    quit.
         You-all look at the journal, read it over,
    make up your own mind whether this is a woman who
    did all of this as a matter of lifestyle free
    choice or whether this was a woman who was
    addicted to nicotine.  I promised five minutes,
    and I hope I've kept with my promise.  Thank you
    all.
