MR. PAIGE: Good morning, everybody. Last time to see you -- hopefully not, but it could be one of the last times we talk.
First and foremost, you know, and I see people are sick and people have been sick -- I've had it in my house, too, during trial. Thank God I didn’t get sick. I thought I was going to. My wife was sick, very sick, so we really do appreciate that being jurors is not easy.
I remember while hearing -- Alex told me during the initial phase that everybody that’s here actually volunteered and said that they would be willing to serve. And that is not usual that that happened, so we do thank you. We do appreciate it.
You don’t have to be here. We know you have your families, your jobs, people are sick, and to be here on behalf of Willie, his sister back there Iola,
Mr. Furr, and Frank and Philip, we all do recognize and appreciate that without you the whole system wouldn't work. And this is important.
As the judge told you, this is an important case and these are important issues and when you came here initially, you know, people have preconceived notions about what people think they know. People think they
know -- and as I'm preparing for closing arguments, I get inundated with e-mails and I can only take in a few things at a time because you have no idea.
But a friend of mine told me about a song from Elton John. I’ve heard this song before, but I didn’t know the lyrics. And it’s Mona Lisa and the Mad Hatters. It’s a nice song -- if you listen to it, it’s a really nice song. But in the song, Elton John talks about: I thought I knew, but now I know. And he’s talking about rose trees growing in New York.
And that’s -- really in this case, when you all started here, you may have thought you knew, but now you know. You know, you saw Dr. Proctor who’s devoted his career to this. He's an expert in these issues.
And I don’t want to get on a tangent and be critical of Dr. Castro -- he’s a nice man. And I met Dr. Castro in his deposition, I met him in the hallway, and he is a nice man.
But if you see the difference between when Dr. Proctor or Dr. Villa answered questions and Dr. Castro, who is difficult for me -- and if I did anything to offend anybody or be too argumentative with Dr. Castro, I apologize.
But Dr. Proctor, he told you things that you may have thought you know but now you know. And those
documents that you saw, that were confidential and secret, that they didn’t want anybody to know about -all their dirty little secrets that they've had for decades about youth smoking -- that 90 percent of their business, their business model comes from teenagers, from kids; that’s how they build their business.
In our society, we have to do what’s right and what’s fair. You know, there’s an instruction. I knew about it but I took it out when the judge was talking about corporations need to be treated like people. But they have to act like people. If they wanted to be treated like a person, they have to be decent and act like a person.
There’s a book -- many of you may have read or heard about it: "Everything I Know I Learned in Kindergarten.” Be nice to people, don’t hurt people, be honest, don’t lie. Those are things we live by.
So if R.J. Reynolds wants to be treated like a person, they need to act like a decent person. They did not do that. We’re not here spending all this time and resources -- there’s a big trial in the ’90s -- the Engle case, the Supreme Court heard it.
And this is important. It’s very important.
So the things that you’ve learned that I’m going
to talk about are the importance of youth smoking, their business, how they build their business on this knowing that the amount of kids that smoke every day, 3,000, 4,000 -- I think 2,500 turn into addicts,
50 percent of them die. They know that. They study that. We'll show you the documents again to remind you.
But how do you build a business on kids, and then when they grow up to be addicts and die, you blame them? You know, that's not acceptable in our society. They manipulate nicotine, they then get you hooked and they add ammonia, Compound W, all these chemicals to make it more difficult to quit. And then they lie for 50 years about it.
You know, if you want to be treated like a person and you have to act like a person and those things that they did, there's no exception to that rule.
There are no excuses, there's no excuses -- there's no excuse to sell an addictive, deadly product to a kid who's going to grow up to be an addict and die and manipulate the nicotine and lie about it on purpose knowing what's going to happen and knowing what the result is going to be.
You know, Georgia Cheeley, she's somebody's mother. You know, these kids, they grow up to be
mothers. They want to be grandparents. They want to be great grandparents. But tobacco companies don’t care about that. They don’t think about that. They think about one thing and one thing only and I don’t even have to say what it is. You all know what it is, you know what it is.
So this was the instruction I took out. It says you have to treat them like a person, they have to act like a person. So we’re going to go through some of the law in the documents and so forth and just -- I have confidence that if you follow the law, your decision in the case will be very easy. It’s not going to be that difficult.
The first issue is class membership. And that’s an important issue. This whole thing about May 1992, you know, what she knew, what she didn’t know. You’re not going to see those instructions in class membership. You know, in opening, Mr. Furr who I respect, you know, wholeheartedly, I like Mr. Furr, I like Frank Bayuk, and I like Philip, they’re not R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. They’re not R.J. Reynolds.
So these issues, I think Mr. Furr said in opening, some of the documents, he called them a side show. But I submit to you that these documents are serious, they should never have happened. People --
millions of people have died because of it, and that’s not excusable.
But this whole thing about May 1992 and whether she could have quit, that has nothing to do with class membership. The issues that you have to decide is more likely than not, do you believe more likely than not that she was addicted to nicotine? And do you believe she had lung cancer from smoking?
And if you answer both of those yes, regardless of what a lawyer says to you, you know, you have to use your common sense, your experience and knowledge about what you know about cancer and what you know about people being addicted to nicotine.
And regardless of what the evidence is, you have to use your common sense. It’s not the evidence, you have to weigh the evidence but the testimony. I’m going to talk to you about the standard for expert testimony in a moment.
So this is the question for class membership, and it’s a simple question. And again, it means what it says and it says what it means, and lawyers can’t put their spin on it.
If you read it and you see what it says, it says: Was she addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?
And if so, was such addiction a legal cause -- and
that's what we're going to talk about. Other causes. Maybe her fault was a cause, and we've admitted that.
We admitted it from the very first time, you know. I learned a long time ago about smokers and they have to share some responsibility. It's true. It's true. I don't care if they smoked -- they tried to quit two times, they should try five times.
If she tried 30 times, she should have tried 40 times, but that's not what that instruction says. It doesn't mention that. It says: Was addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death. That's how you become a class member. Okay?
To be a member of the class, it was a trial in the 19 -- you know, when Georgia Cheeley was smoking in the '50s, they got her to smoke, they wanted her to be a member of their class, of her club, and she was addicted and she couldn't quit, they were happy she was a member of their customer club and class.
And now that she comes before you with all the other people from the '40s and '50s, because this class action is about presentism -- like Dr. Proctor told you, it doesn't apply to everybody. It applies to people that were smoking in a different time in a different world in the '40s and '50s when they couldn't have known.
You know, you say I thought I knew but now I know. You think to yourself: What did you learn in this trial that you didn’t know? What did you learn in this trial about youth studies, manipulation of nicotine, lies, confusion, doubt, what they did with politics? What did you learn, how was she going to know all of that back in the ’40s and ’50s.
So the class membership is simple. And all we ask you today -- you know, they want to exclude her from the class -MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor, that’s a misstatement of the burden of proof.
THE COURT: Once again, ladies and gentlemen, I’ve read you the burden of proof, I’ve read you the legal instruction. If the attorneys say something that differs from those legal instructions, always follow the instructions as I’ve charged you and set out in the packet I have. You may continue.
MR. PAIGE: So that’s what we’re arguing about. We would like to include her in the class. We think the evidence has been overwhelming. We have to prove it by clear and convincing evidence. We think the evidence is overwhelming, that she’s a member of the class. They obviously want to exclude her from the class.
And all we ask, most respectfully, that you -and I know you will be, but we just know that if you will be fair and follow the law and the evidence in this case, she has to be a member of the class. She has to.
And I’ll go through with you -- class membership is not about fault. The judge read you the jury instructions. There’s nothing in the jury instructions -- nothing whatsoever that even hints of the statement of the word choice was nowhere -- is nowhere in the jury instructions on fault, on class membership.
Does it apply to comparative fault? Yes. And I’m going to address that and I’m going to talk about it. That’s fair. That’s a fair assessment, to say: Hey, somebody smoked. They bear some responsibility. We’re going to apportion fault. We’re going to talk about apportioning fault between somebody who is a teenager that starts smoking, who grows up into an addict, versus the actions of a corporation who are deliberately lying, deceiving, manipulating and marketing.
MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor. The intentional torts are not part of the comparative fault.
THE COURT: Okay. Once again, folks, you'll follow the legal instructions as I have given them to you.
You may continue, sir.
MR. PAIGE: One of the things that they were found with is negligence. They have to act as a reasonable corporation. What do reasonable corporations do? Do they lie, do they deceive, do they manipulate nicotine?
I submit to you that's not reasonable in any society in the world, and it's certainly not acceptable in Florida.
So in class membership -- I just want to go over what class membership is not about. Okay? So it's not about whether you do or don't like smokers.
That's not in the class membership phase. It's not about whether you do or don't like tobacco companies. That's not a part of class membership.
It's not about whether smokers relied on a statement after 1982 or not. That's not in the class membership phase. That's an important part of the case. It has to do with punitive damages. Alex is going to talk about that. But it doesn't have to do with class membership.
It doesn't have to -- to be a class member, it
doesn’t have to do with whether you can quit. It doesn’t say anything there if you can quit. All addicts can quit. Whether you’re a cocaine addict or heroin addict, a nicotine addict. Addicts can quit.
And if that was the standard, that if you can quit, no one would ever be a class member ever in the history of the world because there’s no dispute that Mrs. Cheeley, and other smokers like her who smoke a pack or two packs a day, could quit.
You know, now today, they do -- and I’m going to talk about her life experiences. But now today it’s different. They have Chantix, Zyban. You know, more counseling. People are learning more about quitting. I know a lot of people who have quit over time and we’ll talk about why she had -- am I clicking that?
VIDEOGRAPHER: Yes.
MR. PAIGE: And so it’s not about addicts can quit and it’s not about whether addicts bear some responsibility, because they all do. That’s not in class membership.
Here is the legal cause instruction the judge gave you. And it talks about, in order to be a legal cause, addiction need not be the only cause. It can act -- I’m not going to read the whole thing, but it can act in combination with the acts of others or
some other cause. And that’s what we’re going to talk about.
What else but was the addiction to nicotine that she suffered from, did her addiction contribute substantially to producing her lung cancer and death? That’s it. That’s what it says and that’s what it means.
So here’s the instruction: Addiction is a legal cause of an injury if it directly, and in natural and continuous sequence, produces or contributes to substantially producing.
Okay? Substantial -- you look it up in the dictionary. It means important. Was it a substantial, important cause? That you can say: But for the addiction, without the addiction, would the injury or damage have occurred? That’s it. That’s what it means.
Was she addicted? Did the addiction play an important role in causing her injury and death? But for the addiction, if she was not addicted to nicotine, would she have smoked one to two packs a day of unfiltered Pall Malls -- which was really like smoking two to three packs a day of regular cigarettes -- would she have smoked that many cigarettes for 35 or 4 0 years and developed lung
cancer?
And I submit to you that the evidence is overwhelming that nobody does that in the history of the world, unless you believe the Defendants and Mrs. Cheeley would be some -- anomaly of some person who the nicotine in the highest -- it was the highest level of nicotine in the market.
She's smoking that cigarette without knowing it, without filters. She's getting seven extra hits of nicotine to the brain, and they have want you to believe that the addiction -- that's their defense to her being a class member.
They want you to believe that Willie's mother was spending her hard-earned money, sitting in the Ely projects, smoking away two packs a day of unfiltered cigarettes because she liked the taste and it relaxed her. That's what Dr. Castro told you under oath.
That was his -- that was their expert that they brought to you. And that's what they want you to believe. And that's why it's -- you know, these cases are hard -- they're hard fought. And, you know, for Willie and Iola to testify, it wasn't easy. And, you know, they have certain defenses and they can defend the case any way they want. They have a legal right, the judge told you, to do that.
But this isn’t easy, and I’m proud of our clients for bringing forth this case and sitting through here and testifying to what they know happened to their mother. And there’s no way in the world that this lady smoked that many unfiltered cigarettes with the highest nicotine level, when they put Compound W in it to make it more addictive, because she liked the taste.
You don’t like the taste of a cigarette. Their own documents say that. People don’t smoke because it tastes good. You know, if that was the case, we would all go smoke a cigarette and probably throw up because it’s poison. Nicotine is a poison, and you have to get used to it. Your body has to get used to it.
So was she addicted to nicotine? Did she smoke because she was addicted to nicotine or did she smoke just because she liked the taste? Did she get lung cancer and did it cause her death? If your answer to those are yes, she’s a class member, you can’t exclude her, you can’t exclude them. You must include her.
So how do we know nicotine is so important? You just have to look at their documents. You know, this is what they were saying. I would ask you to reject -- and I am going to ask you to reject Dr. Castro’s testimony. And you can do that.
But you don’t have to listen to the witnesses.
You can look at the documents in evidence and see what their -- you know, they have scientists who study this. That’s what they’re -- you know, Dr. Castro doesn’t research this. He doesn’t even do it.
They have scientists and this is what they say internally, that: We’re in the business of selling nicotine. Nicotine has to be the dominant specification. Nicotine is a potent drug. Our industry is based upon the sale and the attractive dosages of nicotine. They know that. They don’t talk about people smoking because they’re not addicted or they enjoy it or they -- choice.
You know, they know choice is like when Castro -Dr. Castro was on the stand, it was like almost for me -- and, again, you know, I might be biased. But when I talk to him, it’s like talking to a politician. I asked him one question, and he answers something else.
MR. FURR: Objection as to counsel’s personal opinion, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained. Don’t give your personal opinions. You can say what the evidence showed or what the evidence goes to.
MR. PAIGE: Well, the evidence is when you talk
to him, you know, he has these buzz words that are clear. He wants to say choice. He wants you to believe that. That's what they want to do. They want to tell you. They want to build doubt, controversy, confusion. That's what their Dr. Castro did. And you look at their documents, there's no controversy, there's no doubt, there's no confusion.
You know, we know that nicotine look at the NIDA, the CDC, the World Health Organization, the Surgeon General. Forget about Dr. Castro for a minute. You look at all these organizations. They all talk about how highly addictive nicotine is. Why? These are scientists that devote their lives to it.
There are scientists that devote their lives to studying cancer, writing peer review articles to help people -- to help people. You think of the difference they would have made in the world if all their scientists would have devoted their resources to helping cure cancer rather than helping cause cancer.
And they know that all of these organizations talk about how highly addictive it is.
MR. FURR: Excuse me, Mr. Paige. I'm sorry, Your Honor, but three of these four documents aren't in evidence.
MR. PAIGE: This is a demonstrative that we used,
Your Honor.
THE COURT: If it’s a demonstrative, it’s not in evidence. You can’t show it. Take it down. It has to be in evidence. You can certainly comment on anything used during the trial, but if it’s not in evidence -MR. PAIGE: Well, this is not in evidence either. Can you do this, sir? Put up the last -- just block out and give me the one on the bottom right, on the last line, and then the one on the bottom left, on the last line.
Some of this is in evidence. You know, some of it we used for demonstratives. We didn’t move it into evidence. I apologize, but hopefully you guys remember it. Remember, there is no dispute that nicotine is a highly addictive drug.
VIDEOGRAPHER: Give me one second. Keep talking.
MR. PAIGE: I’ve known Baron a long time. Let me see where I’m at while he’s doing that.
So this is in evidence. And it talks about this is a Surgeon General -- it’s a 2010 consumer brochure report. This one is in evidence, and it talks about nicotine is a highly addictive drug. Addiction keeps people smoking even when they want to quit. Breaking addiction is harder for some people than others. And
we showed you why.
Everybody is different genetically. Nobody is the same. No two people are the same. You smoke more, you smoke longer. There are different reasons why different people have a harder time quitting. You know, most people don’t start quitting until they’re in their 30s, and that’s common. You get older, you learn more. But breaking addiction, you know, is harder for some people.
And then it goes on to say: Like heroin or cocaine, nicotine changes the way your brain works, causes you to crave nicotine more and more, and these make it hard for you to think about anything else.
And smoking can cause both physical and mental addiction.
That’s the Surgeon General of the United States. He’s not a biased party. We didn’t hire him, we didn’t pay him, we didn’t meet for him for six hours before his deposition or before he published his report. You know, Dr. Castro met with the lawyers for all those hours before his deposition. And you wonder -- you have to wonder -- was he teaching them or were they teaching him?
Because his answers, you know, he always had an answer that wasn’t really responsive to the questions
asked. And was that intentional or was that just a mistake? It's for you to decide.
VIDEOGRAPHER: You're ready with your next slide.
MR. PAIGE: That's fine. And this is from the '88 report. This is in evidence, too, and it talks about the processes, the pharmacological processes similar to cocaine and heroin.
And so Dr. Castro, you know, he tried to talk about smoking is like riding a bike. You know, tried to trivialize it. You know, minimize it. There's not really much of an impact with it. The impact of it is we know that 20 million people, Americans have died in the last four decades.
You know, the impact of it is that 450,000 Americans die every year. 8.6 million are sick right now. That's the impact of it. And we throw around the number, 450,000, like it's a number, but it's not a number.
They're real people. They're real people, they're really families, people are dying, people are crying. You know, that's what's going on in our country from this. And I submit to you, when you hear that number, when you want to hear the magnitude or the impact of it, if a 747 were to crash three times -- three of them would crash today, it would
have to happen every day for a year for it to equal 450,000 Americans.
That’s the impact and the magnitude of what they’re causing. And it all starts with teen smoking. They know it. And they know it. And it only gets worse when they manipulate the nicotine. And to think that none of this had an impact on Willie and Iola’s mother would be to just ignore the obvious.
So then this is their next defense. They come in and they talk about addiction is a free choice. You know, Dr. Castro -- again, he tries to trivialize it. They talk about addiction being a choice, a free choice, and we know people who have studied this and written on it.
You know, it was in the article -- one of the articles we showed -- it was a demonstrative from the New England Journal of Medicine, but this stuff is in evidence from the FTC report, and this is our government, again, saying that people would know that smoking is no longer a matter of choice once he becomes addicted, is basically what the FTC is saying.
It’s no longer a matter of choice. You know, you choose to smoke that first cigarette. And that’s why they started as teens, because people -- they can’t sell somebody in their 30s and 40s and 50s a cigarette
to start. They’re not going to do it. It won’t work.
So when somebody is a kid and their frontal lobes of their brain are not fully formed and they’re not thinking rationally and they don’t know about addiction and they don’t know about dying of cancer, that’s their market.
And that’s not -- that’s not an informed choice. You don’t know what you’re going to get into when you’re a kid. You know, you -- they should be counseling kids and helping kids. You know, help them. Don’t -- you know, don’t mislead them and deceive them. You know.
These kids grow up and they become somebody’s parent, somebody’s grandparent, and that’s the sadness of it all, and that’s the problem.
The Surgeon General report, all of this is in evidence. You know, you can write down the numbers if you want to look at the documents in more detail because you do have a lot of evidence back there. But you probably -- everybody took a lot of notes.
So tell me what I’m saying you probably already know and tell me to sit down. So we talk about as people start as a teenager, you know, they don’t understand that it’s not a free choice. And their own internal documents -- see, this is the irony of it
all.
When you look at their internal documents, it's so hypocritical. It's so hypocritical that they can say internally that we can't defend these cases as a free choice if somebody's addicted. And they put a witness on the stand and they say: It doesn't matter if you're addicted, it's a free choice.
And then they tell you that. They look in your eyes and they tell it to you with a straight face.
They try to create doubt. They want there to be controversy and confusion, and nothing has changed but the date on the calendar. And more and more people are dying. And every day, 3,000 more are starting and they keep making money. And that's a problem. That's a problem.
They tell me I have to speed up. I'm a third of the way down, and I've used half my time. So there are different definitions of addiction. Okay? The judge -- there's no definition of addiction. Okay?
You know, Dr. Castro told you there was a gold standard. Well, we prove there is no gold standard.
We read from his own society that there's no gold standard. You all know what addiction is. You don't need a lawyer to tell you what it is to be addicted. You know, you use your common sense.
If somebody smokes two cigarettes a year, they’re probably not addicted; right? But if somebody smokes two packs a day of unfiltered cigarettes, if you use your common sense, you would have to agree they’re probably addicted.
This is a definition of addiction from NIDA, the American Psychiatric Association. They all talk about it being a chronic, relapsing brain disease. That’s the irony. They call it a choice when they know it’s a disease of the brain.
It’s characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use despite harmful consequences. They try to show you all the slides: Oh, my mother knew it was harmful. You know, over 50 years we remember. You know, it’s so hard to remember last year, you know; right? It’s so hard to remember five years ago. I remember my mother, she tried quit one time.
Well, tell me right now what were her withdrawal symptoms. I don’t remember? Oh, you don’t remember any. You know, that’s what’s going on here. And the truth is -- and it’s a fair statement and that’s why I say we have nothing to hide. I’ll use every one of those slides with you, of their slides, and embrace them, because I know what addiction is.
MR. FURR: Objection as to counsel’s --
THE COURT: Sustained, sir. Stick to the evidence. Your personal opinions don’t matter.
MR. PAIGE: And addiction, when they show you the slides and when Mr. Furr gets up and he shows you slide after slide about we told our mother -- you know, we told our mother. She knew it was bad; that’s what addiction is and that’s what they know. You know, people who love their families can be addicted. You know, that’s why it’s hard to beat. Here’s what the FDA says: Almost half the smokers who undergo surgery for lung cancer resume smoking. Even after smoking -MR. FURR: Excuse me. It’s not in evidence, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Take it down. It’s not in evidence.
MR. PAIGE: You remember how many -- how hard it is to stop smoking. And this is what Georgia Cheeley went through. She started at 12 years old.
90 percent of addicted smokers start before they’re 18. The younger that you start, the more likely you become addicted. They know that. It’s in the medical literature. That’s what it says. They can’t deny that.
She smoked one to two packs for 35 to 40 years. She smoked these longer cigarettes and she was getting
seven extra hits of nicotine to her brain every day. 340 to 600 hits of nicotine every day to her brain.
And they want you to think she wasn't addicted.
She slept with an ashtray by her bed. She smoked in the middle of the night. You know, Dr. Castro wouldn't even admit that. Everybody testified that they would see their mother smoking in the middle of the night. You know, she would get up -- we don't know what she was getting up for. Maybe she was getting up to do the laundry. Maybe she was getting up because she had to go to work.
Willie lived with his mother. Willie, you have to judge him if you think he was being straightforward with you because there are a lot of things that he could have said that I think, you know Willie, you met Willie, and you know that his mother clearly smoked in the middle of the night to get her nicotine. She smoked first thing in the morning. She smoked while she was sick. 30 to 4 0 times at church tarrying, praying to God to help her -- to help her. You know. And it didn't work. You know, it didn't work. Cold turkey. She tried to reduce cigarettes. She had arguments with her family. Willie talked about his mother crying, cursing at him. And she smoked compulsively despite the health consequences.
We have played the video of Dr. Henningfield.
He’s a generic video that we’re entitled to play in these cases. They know that. We did the deposition long ago so we could play it in Broward County in these cases. He’s one of the top experts in the world. He works for NIDA -- worked for NIDA.
The FDA, the Surgeon General. And he told you that somebody who smokes first thing in the morning is a critical factor in determining addiction because their brain is without nicotine for eight hours, and somebody who smokes a pack a day, and smokes first thing in the morning, is not only addicted but they’re highly addicted. That’s what Dr. Henningfield said.
They brought you Dr. Castro. And I submit to you again respectfully, he’s a nice gentleman, but you have a right -- you have to listen to where he’s coming from.
Why did they hire Dr. Castro? Why Dr. Castro? He’s written nothing on the topic. He’s spoken nowhere on the topic, he teaches nobody on the topic, he has no interest in the topic on his bio, he doesn’t care, and they bring him in here to trivialize it and tell you it’s like riding a bike. That’s what he counsels his patient.
And I submit to you respectfully, under the law,
with a regular witness -- this only applies to expert witnesses -- this is the law in Florida.
If you consider his knowledge, skill, experience, and training is inadequate to be an expert on nicotine addiction, you’re entitled to reject it, and I submit to you his opinion needs to be rejected because they need to know -- Dr. Castro should know, and your verdict should know, that this is more serious than that. This is a lot more serious than bringing in somebody and having him testify like that.
He did use the DSM, which, again, you know, if you look at it, I am probably -- I am a little naive. You know, both of these guys were policemen before. They think I’m -- they say I’m the most naive person, I’ll believe anything. So I really -MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor, that’s not a comment.
THE COURT: Sir, stick to the evidence.
MR. PAIGE: When I cross-examined Dr. Castro, I asked him if you would -- remember, I said: Look, if you admit nine of these -- we can agree that she’s addicted; right? And -- but I couldn’t get him to admit anything. I mean, I thought maybe I could, but the fact that just because he denied it, doesn’t mean that you have to accept it.
Just because he says no, he wouldn't admit anything. But you know what the evidence is. Did she use it more longer than intended? This is -- the APA is an example that people start as kids, don't intend to use it later in life. You know, that's the example they give.
Persistent desire, or unsuccessful efforts to cut down. All of her tarrying, all of her cutting back cigarettes. Great deal of time using tobacco. We lined up her cigarettes in a room, we wouldn't see her for another five or ten, 12 years, and that was with the regular cigarettes. You said, well, that's not enough time. Maybe if she smokes five packs a day, we don't see her for 40 years, but we all know that's a lot of cigarettes. That's a lot of time using.
Craving or strong desire, you know, Willie was clear about that. He did continue to use -- despite current personal problems, the DSM gives the example, arguments with others.
He wouldn't admit to that, Dr. Castro. Just because he says no doesn't mean that's not the evidence. You know, he could say no to whatever he wants. Recurrent use, smoking in bed. Eight, nine, and ten he agreed with. And then 11. It's not only withdrawal, but it's smoking to avoid withdrawal.
Smoking the first thing in the morning is the example given in the DSM.
So if she has six or more -- she has severe -severe tobacco use disorder. She had nine, nine. And the DSM also says that smoking -- no, it was smoking in the middle of the night and arguments with family members are critical factors in determining severe addiction. And those are -- and Willie gave his deposition long before the DSM-V ever came out.
Alex went through the Fagerstrom with Willie, and he answered all those questions. I believe Fagerstrom is in evidence, you can go through all of that, and, again, she scored a 10 with Fagerstrom. No matter what test you use for her -- she smoking -- I’m going to try to move this along. What slide am I on?
VIDEOGRAPHER: You’re on Slide 20.
MR. PAIGE: I have to speed this along. I’m sorry. I don’t want to tell you how many I have.
So she smokes. This is how addiction causes disease. If you’re a social smoker, you might smoke a few cigarettes, but if you’re an addicted smoker like Georgia, you’re getting about 10 million, five to 10 million lifetime exposures to these carcinogens.
The carcinogens -- when you’re doing that, you know that 15 percent of all smokers will get lung
cancer and die. 90 percent of all lung cancers are caused by smoking. 50 percent of all long-term smokers die of a smoking-related disease, 450,000 a year. Here are the medical records, and I bring this up to you because these will be in evidence.
You know, we brought in an expert, Dr. Villa, a nice gentlemen, he explained to you how lung cancer was caused by smoking. It hasn’t been disputed by anybody that they brought in, but they did bring up some issues, so I want to just tell you about it and I’m sure based upon all your experiences with -- back there in the jury room, when you talk, you’ll see that this is clear that the lung cancer was caused by smoking.
But this is on the 23rd, they did a needle aspiration, and they did an x-ray that showed a lung field consistent with a biopsy proven carcinoma. And the doctors at that time are saying it’s consistent with metastasis. That means it’s spreading. Okay? That’s what these doctors say.
They talk about, oh, you don’t have all the records. They know these cases are from the ’90s, it’s hard to get all the records, we give you what we have. Oh, you don’t have an autopsy report.
Well, they know. You know, if we needed an
autopsy report to prove our case, nobody would win because nobody has an autopsy report.
MR. FURR: Objection as to other smokers, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: Then on the 2 9th, they came in and they did more pathology because they wanted to know what cell type it was, because they wanted to know how to treat it. That's what they did. And so they do these biopsies and they can't get any cancer on the biopsy. And that happens in medicine. That happens.
You know, if somebody goes for a mammogram, you know, and sometimes it will come back negative -- they tell the person: Come back in three months. Come back in six months, so we can follow up on it.
Because not all biopsies are accurate, and they know that.
But the doctors already know from the few days before that she's got all these other problems that are cancerous. So she goes back on the 8th and they do another x-ray and they do another pathology and that comes back positive for non-small cell, non-oat cell, which is non-small cell, most likely nonsquamous carcinoma. That's what all the doctors said. That's what all the doctors thought, there's no dispute.
They say: Oh, you don’t know Dr. Williams is a medical student, or you don’t know if he’s a first year doctor. They brought in evidence of John Adams letter from the 1700s. If Dr. Williams was really a first-year medical doctor, don’t you think they would have showed that to Dr. Villa, if that was really the fact.
You know, they cross-examined him with possibilities that Dr. Villa can’t deny because they don’t know, but then they have to dig up something on John Adams from the 1700s, they could find it, but they don’t present Dr. Villa with evidence of who Dr. Williams really is.
Dr. Williams was a pathologist. Dr. Baker,
Dr. Hunter, all these doctors talked about this being cancer with multiple sites of pain. She’s coming with extreme pain, lung cancer metastasizes to the bones. The brain it appears that the MRI was negative, but that’s not the only place that lung cancer metastasizes to. She was in so much pain that she died very shortly thereafter, and there’s no dispute that she had lung cancer and died.
And, again, this is -- there’s no dispute that when you are addicted and you get lung cancer, it’s generally accepted in the world that that’s a cause of
death. And you can play that, Baron.
(At this time, a video was played in open court and taken down to the best of the court reporter’s ability.)
MALE SPEAKER: We should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 Americans each year.
(End of video.)
MR. PAIGE: I got to really move this. This is their documents where they talk about without, again, how important when you talk about the substantial cause, their own documents talk about without the chemical compound nicotine, our market would collapse. Without nicotine, we would be out of business overnight.
So when you ask yourself: Was the addiction a substantial contributing cause, they know it’s a substantial cause of why people smoke. It’s no secret internally.
So, again, this is the legal cause. I submit to you that it’s clear that she’s a class member and that you answer yes to that question and that Georgia Cheeley be included in the class. These are very serious findings in the Engle class trial and we don’t have to reprove them anymore. You know, we don’t have
to prove anymore that smoking causes lung cancer. We no longer have to prove that cigarettes are addictive. That's been proven as if you've proved them and found them yourself.
The Florida Supreme Court approved them. They were negligent, they were defective, they lied, they concealed, they omitted material information.
If somebody is smoking cigarettes -- if somebody is smoking cigarettes that are the highest on the market, they're as addictive as cocaine and heroin and they're adding Compound W in it, don't you think that's the type of information that's revealed and not concealed -- told and not omitted.
You know, they omitted everything. The fact that there is no doubt, that 50 percent of the people die, they knew that. They knew that. Georgia Cheeley, in all due respect, she had a sixth-grade education. She was a victim. And they blame the victim, it's very convenient.
But you know what? They should have helped her, and they should help people like her. They intentionally, deliberately don't care. They don't care, they never did care, and they still don't.
So the next question is you have to apportion fault. And so I want to go through what they did when
we talk about fault. We’ve admitted partial fault. Okay? And I want to be clear what we admitted. We admit that she’s partially responsible in combination with what they did. Okay? But we don’t admit that we’re responsible for what they did.
So when we talk about what they did, they studied, they deliberately studied and profited from youth smoking. They talk about inducing presmokers to become smokers, convince them for irrational reasons to start smoking in hopes it will become addictive. That’s their business model.
If you accept that -- you’re the jury, you know, of Willie’s peers. And you have to decide whether that’s fair and reasonable, whether corporations should get a free pass on that, a pat on the back, or whether they need to be held accountable for putting profits over human lives, over real lives over real people.
MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor. Those are not the legal issues in this case.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: They talk about replacement smokers, and so forth. So we don’t agree that we’re responsible. They put this into evidence that no person shall -- it’s against the law for any person,
they want to be treated like a person. No person shall indirectly sell cigarettes to a minor, indirectly, which is what their advertising is. Or persuade or compel any child underage to smoke.
They’re not supposed to do that. It’s against the law. If you do it twice, you go to jail for 60 days, they do it 3,000 times a day for decades.
They promote smoking as fun, glamorous, and safe. All these ads, the Santa Claus, this little thing here says prom ticket, younger smokers, popular with younger smokers. This little girl saying: I’m going to live to be 100 years old with a doctor. Very glamorous.
And the FTC indicates that, you know, many youngsters consider smoking to be acceptable. The health effects are not brought to them in a meaningful way. You know, it’s their product -- their product. They’re selling it, they need to safeguard it, they need to help people.
And in making a decision, youngsters don’t realize once they start, they may never be able to stop. That’s what people don’t realize. And that’s a problem -- that’s the epidemic that our country has.
Here’s Pall Mall. This is the product so, you know, we’re not responsible for this. When I say we
bear responsibility in combination with what they did, they had a longer cigarette that was more carcinogenic, highest nicotine level in the market. They're adding Compound W to it.
So let's talk about what they did, because we're responsible in combination with what they did. They had their meetings and they knew at that time that people couldn't break this addiction. They called it a habit. And they're talking about how wonderful it was, how wonderful it would be if we would be the first one to produce a cancer-free cigarette. But they're talking about that because they want to make money. They're taking about happy people can't quit, but what we can do to our competitors. But they knew it caused cancer.
And they told the public -- they made a promise to them -- they made a promise. They came forward and promised that your health is a paramount consideration. We're making that pledge to you and that promise and we're going to do everything that we can to make sure we look into this. And if there's anything wrong, which there's not, we're going to remove it. Okay?
So you can be assured of what you're doing is safe and we promise you that. But all along, they
knew that there are carcinogens in every single cigarette that she smoked. They knew it and they lied to her. They lied to everybody. And they talk about providing doubts, crutches, rationales to addicted smokers, knowing that if they can give them some doubt -- look, when an addicted smoker goes to church and tries to quit and purging and tarrying and vomits and regurgitates and does that 30 times and they fail, think about it.
Addicts like to be reassured that what they’re doing might not be bad. Hey, I can make my own decisions. What do you know, Willie? You think you’re so smart? What do you know? That’s called rationalization, and they know it. They talk about it internally, and they do it on purpose.
This Defendant is smart. They have a lot of power and a lot of money. Here is all their documents and I have a hard time going through them because I have a lot more slides and I only have a few more minutes.
So I apologize. I probably talked too much in the beginning. Didn’t use a good sense of my time.
But I’m probably going to go over a couple minutes.
MR. ALVAREZ: Remember, I’m a policemen.
MR. PAIGE: You’ve done it to me before.
So here are some of the documents internally.
They talk about providing smokers with a crutch and rationale, confusion. You know, they knew internally we were going to be subject to the findings, one way that we’re making false statements.
So this was a business plan. They knew, they weighed the risk and the benefit. You know, they knew one day we would be here. You know, they knew it was going to happen. These are smart men talking decades ago.
And all along, they knew people were dying, but they knew it was going to happen. Create doubt.
Doubt is Our Product. And if Baron can play this.
This is some of the public statements that they made.
(At this time, a video was played in open court and taken down to the best of the court reporter’s ability.)
MALE SPEAKER: We accept an interest in people’s health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. And that’s where we stand today.
MALE SPEAKER: If they do find anything that we consider harmful -- and so far we have not -- we’ll remove these from smoke and still retain the pleasure of your favorite cigarette.
MALE SPEAKER: We want to be the detective just as much as the Surgeon General or the AMA, and we'll cooperate in every way.
I don't think the industry admits there are any bad elements. If there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find them. And if they are found, they will be removed.
MALE SPEAKER: We do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that. Because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
MALE SPEAKER: Do you believe that cigarettes are safe? Have they be proven to be safe, Mr. Cullen?
MALE SPEAKER: I believe they have not been proven to be unsafe.
(End of video.)
MR. PAIGE: And they talk about opportunities, choices. You know, I embrace those words. Choice is a two-way street. You know, choice, you know, they have choices. They have opportunities to do the right thing. You know, they have their own motivations,
what motivates them.
You know, grown men to go on TV and lie, you know, what was motivating these people to do that when they had all the opportunities to go on TV and say, listen, you know, 1964, the Surgeon General’s report comes out. 1966, the warnings go on. 1970.
What would have happened -- how would our world have been different if they would have just came forward and told the truth and said: Listen, you know, back in the ’20s and ’30s when we started this out, we didn’t really know. You know, we really didn’t know.
But we know now. You know. We know now. We didn’t know, but we know now. Okay? And we have a problem. And we have the courage to accept it, you know. We can’t put our profits over the human lives of our customers. We have an obligation and responsibility.
What stopped them from doing that? They should have made sure that no teenager smoked. They should have made sure that they helped people get off of their nicotine. Helped them. You know, helped them. Lower the nicotine levels.
But they didn’t dare. You know, admit it. Admit it’s highly addictive and causes lung cancer. Those
are their opportunities, to help people, to save lives, to save lives. You know, that’s what a decent human being does. You know, that’s when they talk about when the judge instructs you, treat them like a person, treat them like a person. You know, treat people how you would want to be treated.
More documents. You know, again, it goes on and on. You know, they talk about this is an interesting document, you know, if you ever want to read a document back there, this is one of the interesting ones, 2050.
You know, we’ve employed a strategy to defend ourselves on three major fronts: Litigation, politics, and public opinion. It’s been brilliantly conceived and executed, you know, and creating doubt. So they’re bragging internally, you know. It’s like no remorse internally. Nobody has got any trouble with that. And they knew people were believing them. We showed you that poll.
You know, they had so much power, we talked about. All these Congressmen they knew, tobacco state Congressmen, we talked about that. You know, they were against FDA regulation in 1969. It took 40 more years. Didn’t happen until 2009, and that’s a whole other story. Hopefully we get to punitive damages we
can talk about it.
But in 1969, they were using their power and influence, what chance did Georgia Cheeley, with a sixth grade education, growing up in the projects in Ely Estates, who was smoking two packs a day of unfiltered cigarettes, what chance did she have against them? Come on. Come on. Here is more lies. You know, it goes on and on. We could be here for -(At this time, a video was played in open court and taken down to the best of the court reporter's ability.)
MALE SPEAKER: As far as I'm concerned, the bottom line is that we simply don't know.
FEMALE SPEAKER: The case is still open. The jury has not come in.
MALE SPEAKER: It may not be harmful. You're not convinced.
MALE SPEAKER: It may be or it may not be. We don't know.
MALE SPEAKER: It is not know whether cigarettes cause cancer. That has not been causally established.
MALE SPEAKER: Do cigarettes cause cancer?
MALE SPEAKER: I don't know if they do or not.
MALE SPEAKER: I'm not in a position to give you a does or does not answer.
MALE SPEAKER: We don’t know what causes cancer in general right now, so I think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which is yet to be proven.
(End of video.)
MR. PAIGE: You know, and all the time this is happening, they know. You know, they all know like there’s no guilty conscience. Like they know people are dying. They know wives are losing their husbands.
MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor. Inflammatory.
THE COURT: Sustained. Your ten-minute warning,
sir.
MR. PAIGE: Right now?
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. PAIGE: Okay. Thank you.
Here they had chances to help people, they gave a grant to this guy -- Dr. Proctor told you this story, and he started looking into finding a clinically -- a clinical antagonist for nicotine. And they cut off his funding. And internally, they’re talking about -it’s not funny. I apologize I laughed.
But I didn’t even pick this up -- a friend of mine told me about this -- but they talk about we’re in the process of digging our own grave.
So when they talk to you about Mrs. Cheeley not
having a choice, not having a choice -- think about the choices they had to help people. And they were concerned with not the 450,000 people who were dying, but about digging their own graves. And that’s -- you know, you can’t get any worse than that.
They know that they’re manipulating nicotine. There is a Surgeon General’s report. Cigarette makers have known for a long time that addiction helps sell their product. Cigarettes today deliver more nicotine and deliver it quicker than ever.
Dr. Castro even admitted the higher nicotine levels and the more hits will deliver quicker to your brain. He admitted that.
The additives and chemicals they put in the cigarettes have helped make them more addictive. Once inhaled, nicotine races from your lungs to your heart to your brain. This is from their internal documents, they talk about the levels of nicotine are not obtained by accident, they can get any desired level management may require. Their awareness of pH levels and talking about the best way to exploit nicotine satisfaction.
And finally, this is the cigarette Mrs. Cheeley was smoking -- it’s case-specific to her -- that they know they were adding this Compound W, which is
increasing her nicotine from one -- increasing it by 19 percent. But that document is in evidence.
So, you know, they know what they're doing. And here's the chart that's very significant, that they know, you know, what they're doing is making a difference.
And what they're doing, you can't be -- when you talk about manipulating nicotine, marketing to children, you can't be any more sneaky or dishonest than that. You know, that is something that's been -when you talk about material information concealed or omitted, you know, there can't be anything more underhanded than that.
And this is the sad chart because this shows the per-capita use in our country. Now it's per capita. Dr. Proctor talked about we have more people now, so the rates of people smoking still I think 45, 50 million, and the teen smoking rate, the height was in 1995.
But the point I want to make here is in 1950, instead of having all these people -- this could have just came right down here and they could have saved millions of lives and they never did that. They didn't care.
And the FTC report -- part of the report is in
evidence -- this particular passage is not, but it’s -- we spoke about it. But in the FTC report, it says: Cigarette smoking is, without question, is the greatest single public health problem this nation has ever, ever faced.
You know, that’s why, when Dr. Castro trivializes it and says it’s like riding a bike, you know, that’s not what the government says. The cost to society and cigarette smoking in human terms is staggering.
So let’s talk about -- you know, for 50 years, you know, come on.
Let’s talk about what Mrs. Cheeley did, what she did wrong. She grew up in a time when smoking was normal. You know, based on $250 billion, $250 billion marketing cigarettes to make it appear glamorous, safe, healthy, fun. They participated in making smoking appear normal and safe. These are some ads we have seen.
(At this time, a video was played in open court and taken down to the best of the court reporter’s ability.)
MALE SPEAKER: Tens of thousands of doctors, doctors in all parts of the country, in every state of the union, doctors in every branch of medicine were asked: What cigarette do you smoke, Doctor? The
brand named most was Camel. Yes, according to this survey, more doctors smoke Camels than any other cigarette.
MALE SPEAKER: Do you inhale? Then you’re better off smoking Philip Morris. And here’s how you can prove it. Light up a Philip Morris, take a puff, get a good mouth full of smoke and slowly let the smoke -MALE SPEAKER: Cigarettes in this special Christmas carton. There’s no much time, so go out and get several cartons.
MALE SINGER: Don’t miss the fun of smoking, don’t miss the fun of smoking, (inaudible) is a pleasure with Pall Mall.
MALE SINGERS: Don’t miss the fun -MALE SPEAKER: -- Mickey Mantle. What do you say, Mickey?
MALE SPEAKER: It’s not hard to see why more folks enjoy Camels than other brands. I found that out -MALE SPEAKER: I got a better idea. Let’s take a Winston break.
MALE SPEAKER: That’s it. Winston is the one filtered cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. Winston has got that filter blend.
MALE SPEAKER: Yeah, Fred.
FEMALE SPEAKER: Why don't you settle back.
MALE SPEAKER: Settle back.
FEMALE SPEAKER: And have a full-flavored smoke.
FEMALE SPEAKER: I tell you, Pearl, Winston is good smoking. Sure wish you could taste it.
(End of video.)
MR. PAIGE: So I submit to you, respectfully, the first -- and I want to break her life into two halves.
The first half of her life, from the time she was born in '39 until 1966 when she put the warnings on the cigarettes, she can't be attributed to any fault. She did nothing wrong, she was a kid. They studied her, they marketed cigarettes a particular way for a particular reason, and she smoked. So I would submit to you, for the first half of her life, that she did nothing wrong.
The second half of her life, from '66 to the end, I submit to you that it's fair to apportion the liability during that half, but not all, to her and I'll explain why. Because she did have certain choices and so did they. And that's a critical time period for her.
You know, they knew -- they knew what was going on, so it's a fair question for you to ask: Could she have tried harder. You know, she tried hard. She
tried as hard as she knew how. You know, she didn’t want this to happen. She was an addict. She didn’t understand. You know, you know now, but you didn’t know when you got here.
So think about what she knew. So she didn’t know what she was dealing with. So for that, you know, her fault is the fault of an addict. You know. Could she have tried harder? Sure. You know, but her motivations, her lack of control were part of addiction.
Their motivations and their lack of control was that of greed. You know, she’s not perfect, but she’s not a liar. She’s not a liar. She’s not hurting anybody, and that’s when you apportion fault. You have to take that into consideration.
Here is a quick board to tell how hard it is to quit. I’m going to try to run through these quick.
You know, again, the document that it’s not a free choice. So I submit to you that, for the first half of her life, I submit you apportion no fault.
And for the second half of her life, I want to tell you that R.J. Reynolds didn’t do this alone.
Okay? It was R.J. Reynolds, American Tobacco Company, Brown & Williamson, and they are all of them. They’ve all merged, so you have three corporations versus, you
know, Georgia Cheeley.
So if you apportioned it equally during the last half of her life, and give her 25 percent, and each of the corporations that they’re now responsible for 25 percent and you do the math. So for the first half, she did nothing wrong. And for the second half, you give her some apportion of responsibility for being addicted, for having -- not able to quit -- she did quit.
You know, sometimes it takes time and she was proud. She thought she was in the clear. She didn’t know two years later she was going to die and get cancer. So I submit to you that if you do the math, that would be a fair apportionment of liability. You can do the numbers any way you want. That’s just my suggestion, respectfully. I hope it makes sense to you.
But you can do more, or you can do less. It’s within your discretion. What you believe is fair and what you believe is right and just in this case.
Is that my last slide?
VIDEOGRAPHER: That’s your last slide.
MR. PAIGE: Okay. So, you know, in closing I would just say that you all respectfully, you know -as I said at the beginning, you know, you thought you
knew, but now you know what really happened.
And I submit to you that you have an opportunity today to hold a powerful corporation responsible for what they did to the Cheeley family. And, you know, we ask that you hold them accountable for all their lies, all their carelessness, all of their -- Alex is going to talk about punitive damages and their lies and how that relates to that, but all their carelessness, all their marketing of a defective product, that you hold them accountable for this and let them know that this is not just a big misunderstanding.
You know, this is not just something that happened. You know, this shouldn't have happened.
This should never have happened. It's not acceptable.
This is my last time talking. I thank you all for all your time, respectfully. Thank you very much. And Alex is going to talk now. You have really a big responsibility and a big opportunity to do something right and fair. And thank you very much.



MR. ALVAREZ: May it please this honorable Court, counsel. Good morning.
ALL JURORS: Good morning.
MR. ALVAREZ: I can just look in your faces in some of you and I can just tell that you’re just struggling to make it here today. I can tell that you were all at one point in time, many of you were very ill, and this is what I want to tell you about that.
I want to ask you to hold on because Willie James Cheeley and his sister Iola have waited 17 years for this day. So we want to ask you to please hold on for one more day and just give us a little bit more time and attention and that’s all we ask. Okay?
So I would like to start off with talking about -- I call it a decision tree. Okay? What I want you to understand is that there’s really two cases that we really want to talk about here. Okay?
One of them has to do with deciding whether he was addicted or she was addicted and whether that was the legal cause of her death. The apportionment of fault and the damages; that’s one part. I’m going to call that the path to compensatory damages. Okay? We’re going to talk about that.
There’s a separate part of the case that has nothing do with that, okay, that has nothing to do with that, which are the concealment claims and the conspiracy claims and when certain information that Georgia Cheeley may have relied on. Okay? That’s a separate path because that’s the path to punitive damages. Okay? So I want to separate them because when you get the verdict form, one of the things you’re going to notice is the very first three questions are, was Georgia Cheeley addicted and was that addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death? What is the percentage of fault and then what are the damages. Okay. Not one question there about reliance, what she believed, what she knew; none of that. Okay? So it’s important to understand the distinction. Okay?
Addiction caused her death, apportionment of fault between R.J. Reynolds and Georgia Cheeley, damages for Willie and Iola. And I’m going to talk
about damages in a little while. Okay? And why is that important? It's important because you got to understand that if you find that she's a class member, you must accept the Engle findings. They are the law of this case; right? And once you accept that, once you accept that it's been determined that R.J.
Reynolds Tobacco Company was negligent and they placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous.
So what does that mean in this context? That means that because of those findings, you must accept them and then you apportion responsibility. How much of it is Georgia's fault and how much of it is R.J. Reynolds' fault. Okay? So I want you to keep the two paths separated in your mind because they are two separate paths. Okay?
Let's go to the other decision tree. You're going to be asked some questions about whether she relied on concealed or omitted material information and whether that information that was omitted from her she relied on after a certain date, May 5th, 1982.
And you guys are all probably scratching your heads going, what's this May 5th, 1982, date. Listen, don't hurt yourself to try to figure it out because you'll never figure it out. You're just never going to
figure it out because it has to do with the class action, when certain things were filed. And it has legal consequences but it doesn’t have any factual consequences to anything in this particular case.
Okay? So nothing happened magical for Georgia Cheeley on May 5th, 1982. Okay? But it has legal consequences, and because of that you have to make certain determinations. Okay?
Now, these are the findings. Okay? These are additional findings, and these are important because it says R.J. Reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading and this part is very important, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. They failed to disclose; that’s key. That means that they didn’t tell her what they knew, so it doesn’t matter that she may have become aware of the warnings. It doesn’t matter that people told her that smoking can cause cancer. What’s important here is that they failed to disclose what they knew; that’s the big difference.
Because in order to appreciate a risk and do a risk/benefit analysis, you really have to know how
dangerous this is. You really have to know how addictive it is. And we’re going to talk about all the things that they failed to disclose to her that were material that had she known, she would have made a different decision sooner which would have avoided the consequences. And that’s what’s key. It’s not what she knew or she was aware of; it’s what they failed to disclose that would have made a difference. That’s what this finding means. Okay?
And the next one is that they agree with other tobacco companies and the Council for Tobacco Research USA and the Tobacco Institute to conceal or omit information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public will rely on that information to their detriment. So this is the -- let me give it to you in a broader concept.
You got three or four kids up to no good, they all pick up a rock, they’re going down the street, they’re taking turns throwing rocks at cars. Maybe R.J. Reynolds throws a rock first, PM, Philip Morris throws a rock second, and Lorillard throws a rock third but that rock hits somebody. Every single one of those guys in that group is responsible under the law for the person that got hit. Okay?
A wise man once told me when I was growing up, and it's an old Spanish saying is, tell me who you're hanging out with and I'll tell you who you are. Okay? Let's look at who they were hanging out with, how they were pooling their money, how they were spending their money. I'm going to show you documents -- and videos of statements after 1982 to show you that they were still doing what they weren't supposed to be doing that could have changed what happened to this family.
(At this time, a video was played in open court and taken down to the best of the court reporter's ability.)
SPEAKER: Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no?
SPEAKER: It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer.
SPEAKER: All right.
SPEAKER: It has not been causally established.
SPEAKER: Cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
SPEAKER: Despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established.
SPEAKER: No causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease?
SPEAKER: No. As a matter of fact, there are
studies that while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over ten years that would say, again, that science is still puzzled over these forces.
(End of video.)
MR. ALVAREZ: Okay. That is the president of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company in 1984 still denying that smoking caused cancer. Okay? So here you have a woman -- and you have to use your common sense because no one is going around following Georgia Cheeley with a camera or an iPhone and writing down everything she does and says because that’s unreasonable. Right? No one does that. Okay? But you have to put things into context. This is a lady, okay, who grew up in an era, right, where smoking was normal. Okay? That’s what she believed. That’s where she grew up, that’s what life was all about for her. Okay? And she’s an addict, and you give two conflicting messages to an addict; right? You give them one which says smoking is bad, it could cause cancer or you plant the seed of doubt in their minds and you tell them, no, it hasn’t, it hasn’t been proven, we’re still studying it. And if you’re truly addicted, which one will they believe?
And sometimes it takes decades because what you think as a 20 year old, you don’t think as a 30 year
old, and when you think as a 30 year old, you don’t think as a 4 0 year old. And when you think as a 50 year old, all of a sudden, you know, you get more gray hair, right, and you start to think, you know what, some of the things I did, I probably shouldn’t have done and I probably was naive. And I’m in a better place now and I’m going to make a change in my life. And that’s probably what happened.
Use your common sense. Use your common sense.
But that whole scheme could have been changed in 1953, the whole course of history could have been changed for this family, for this man, and this woman.
History could have changed.
Is there another after that?
MR. PHILLIPS: No, you hit the button.
MR. ALVAREZ: Let’s talk about material information concealed and omitted from Georgia Cheeley. This is what you’re being asked to do. What was it that they failed to disclose to her, what is it that she didn’t know, what is it that she didn’t know? Well, this is what she didn’t know, that Pall Mall cigarettes she smoked had the highest nicotine level on the market. Many of you probably didn’t know that there were different levels of nicotine in cigarettes. You guys probably learned -- remember I told you the
very first day in opening statement when I told you, listen, I wish I could give college credit to you guys. Remember I told you that?
Listen, you're walking out of this courtroom with a lot more knowledge than you had when you walked in here. Okay? We brought you three world class experts, world class experts to come in and educate you, me, and everyone in this courtroom about the tobacco industry, about nicotine addiction, about cigarette smoking, about causing cancer. You've learned a lot. Compare that to a woman who was born in 1939 in Georgia who grew up in the projects, who was poor. She didn't stand a chance. She didn't know these things, she didn't know that they were manipulating the levels of nicotine in cigarettes, they were putting Compound W. She didn't know what they do that it was really just as addictive as heroin and cocaine. She didn't know that the longer Pall Mall cigarettes didn't filter anything out.
What do you think she picked -- they say -- they ask these questions to the family, you don't know why she smoked, you don't know why she chose this, you don't know why this. Well, what do you think? All of a sudden she woke up one day and started to smoke for no reason, for no reason? Does that make any sense?
Don’t you think that the $250 billion that they spent advertising the products, smoking, cigarettes, don’t you think that had any influence on why a 12-year-old girl from the project would start to smoke? It was cool to smoke. Well, why was it cool? Who made it cool? Do you think that she knew, do you think that she knew that when she picked up cigarettes at 12 years old, do you think she knew what they knew that she had a 50 percent chance of dying? Is that material information you think you would have liked to have known?
Many of you probably walked into this trial not knowing that statistic, not knowing that. You probably knew, hey, it’s probably dangerous, it’s bad for you, you know, some of you have some medical training, so some of you may know it. But the other ones that are in different walks of life may not know and appreciate -- it’s not just having some awareness, it’s appreciating the real risk. You see the difference? Knowing something and appreciating the real risk is what you really have to look for, and they knew the real risk and they weren’t telling anybody.
There’s a lot of things they knew internally that they weren’t sharing with people because they knew if
they shared it with people, the floodgates, like they said, would open up and they would be out of business. They were in the business to do one thing and one thing only, and that’s making money. And that’s all they cared about.
Addicted smokers believed their doubt, crutches, and confusion into the ’80s and ’90s. I mean, this thing didn’t stop. I mean, this was a train. This was going down the tracks, you know. She was just a passenger on that choo-choo. Play it.
(At this time, a video was played in open court and taken down to the best of the court reporter’s ability.)
SPEAKER: Throughout your tenure with American, it was not only American’s position but your position that cigarettes weren’t injurious to health; is that accurate?
SPEAKER: Through my tenure?
SPEAKER: Yes.
SPEAKER: Yes, that is so.
SPEAKER: That’s something American Tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct?
SPEAKER: Yes.
SPEAKER: It’s a statement that American Tobacco placed great reliance on?
SPEAKER: We issued that statement, yes. (Inaudible) believe it.
SPEAKER: As far as you're concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement?
SPEAKER: Yes.
SPEAKER: Truck driver Dennis Gaines, a grandfather, he's been smoking for 30 years.
MR. ALVAREZ: Can you stop it for a second?
(End of video.)
MR. ALVAREZ: Before we show you this clip, look how smug that guy is, the president of American Tobacco Company, look how smug he was. He wanted people to rely -- we want people to rely on what we tell them. The president of American Tobacco, the maker of Pall Mall, is telling us when we make statements like that that it's not injurious to people's health, we want them to rely, and yet they come into court today and they tell you that no one should have relied. Think about the hypocrisy of that argument.
If a tobacco executive would have taken that position 20 years ago, they would have been fired.
But yet that's the defense they're taking now. The defense is everybody knew, you shouldn't have believed us. The hypocrisy of that whole argument.
So there are people just like Georgia Cheeley, millions and millions and millions of people out there that believed it, that had doubt in their mind, that were addicted, and all they needed was a rationale to continue to smoke. Guys like this man.
(At this time, a video was played in open court and taken down to the best of the court reporter’s ability.)
SPEAKER: Truck driver Dennis Gaines, a grandfather, says he’s been smoking for 30 years and is still not convinced cigarettes are dangerous.
SPEAKER: You know they say it causes cancer and heart disease. Do you believe that?
SPEAKER: No, I don’t. Not in my heart I can’t believe it.
SPEAKER: You can’t believe that it’s bad for
you?
SPEAKER: No.
(End of video.)
MR. ALVAREZ: You know, we look at these statements now and we go, how is that possible? Okay. But when these statements were made, okay, you got to walk in the shoes of the people who were listening -living those lives.
MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor, that’s the
golden rule -THE COURT: Sustained. Don’t make that argument.
MR. FURR: I would like to approach, Your Honor,
I would like to make a motion.
THE COURT: Come on up.
(Bench conference was held within the presence of the jury.)
MR. FURR: We move for mistrial. I don’t think I’ve ever seen a clearer example of someone violating the golden rule. He just asked the jury to walk in the shoes of Georgia Cheeley and other people similarly situated.
MR. ALVAREZ: Let me tell you what the golden rule, the golden rule has to do with damages; it has to do with damages. It doesn’t have to do with liability and decisions that people make. All the case law -- I have researched this, all the case law has to do with damages, telling them that you can’t -with having them feel like the Plaintiff, and that’s not what I was doing at all. These are judging decisions that people make. All the golden rule cases deal with damages, Judge. I’ll stop, but I’m just telling you that’s right.
THE COURT: Okay. The motion for mistrial is denied. The objection is sustained. I’m going to
give a curative instruction, we're going to move on.
(Bench conference concluded and proceedings continued as follows:)
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, I sustained the objection to the last remarks about other people. This case is about Georgia Cheeley, as I told you before, you disregard the remarks.
Mr. Alvarez will continue.
MR. ALVAREZ: I apologize, Your Honor. I'm sorry. I'll continue. If I do something or say something during the heated battle, I'm just trying to do the best I can with the limited abilities that God gave me to do the best for my client. Okay?
So there are people just like Dennis that believed it and they wanted people to believe it.
They spent hundreds of millions of dollars getting people to think like him, to think like Georgia; that's what they wanted. What they did was -- have you ever watched a fisherman on the shore with a net? Right, they get there and they throw, it's actually an art to open up that net wide and catch fish. Well, you don't catch all the fish; right? You catch some of the fish, and you bring it up and you start to shake it out and you get some of the fish; right?
Well, they were throwing nets out. They didn't catch
everybody, but they caught some, and Georgia Cheeley was one of the people that they caught in the net, and they can’t run and they can’t hide from that.
So this is the question, did Georgia Cheeley reasonably rely to her detriment on any statement of material fact made by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company that concealed or, or omitted material information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of Georgia Cheeley’s lung cancer? And the answer to that is yes. They omitted information that was material that she didn’t know. She didn’t know how addictive those cigarettes were, she didn’t know that it was the highest cigarettes -- nicotine levels in any cigarettes, she didn’t know she was getting seven more puffs of carcinogens in her smoke. You know, she didn’t know that when she picked up a pack of her cigarettes she had a 50 percent chance of dying. They knew that. They had a duty to disclose it, and they didn’t, and they’re responsible for it, and that’s what the law says.
So here’s some direct evidence of that. In 1984, think about it, use your common sense, in 1984, okay, in 1984 Iola has her second child; right? Her mom is smoking around her. Smoking around her when she’s
pregnant, smoking around the infant. This is a lady who loved, cherished her daughter, loved her grandchildren. If she thought she was harming them, do you think she’d be smoking around a pregnant woman, do you think she’d be smoking around an infant, do you think she would be doing that?
1985 when the warning labels changed because there was different times, 1966 the caution label went on, 1970 the warning label came on, in 1985 more warnings came on, stronger warnings, rotating warnings came on, he finally has a conversation with her about the new warnings. You know, it’s all over the record, you heard it over and over and over, it was 1985 and she finally said, you know what, I’m 54 years old, enough is enough, I’m at a different place in my life now, I get it. Three years after the May ’82 date. That’s direct evidence that she didn’t believe. In evidence.
So did any statements referred to in question five on which Georgia Cheeley reasonably relied to her detriment occur after May 5th, 1982, the answer is yes. And you have to answer yes to both of these, in order to get the path. What path? The path of punitive damages, the path of punitive damages. And we’re going to talk about that in a few minutes.
The next one is did they reasonably rely to her detriment on any actions taken in furtherance of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's agreement with other tobacco companies or organizations to conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of Georgia Cheeley's lung cancer and death, the answer to that is yes.
So this is the conspiracy, these are the kids that are out for no good, these are the rock throwers. Think about this. What did this group do? What did these guys do? What they did is they got together, remember they formed that conspiracy beginning at the Plaza Hotel, and they started throwing money and money and money at this problem. Remember? Doing false advertisement, buying scientists, buying the AMA, you know, buying legislature, just buying, buying, buying, buying, so they can just keep buying time.
Well, let's look at how they spent their money. Remember, I stood in front of you and I read the admissions about how much money they spent. Remember that? Let's take a look at this because this on this side here is pre-1982, from 1954 to 1981 they spent $104 million; right? From 1982, which is less years, to 1999, over $443 million, so after 1982 they spent
four times as much money than they did before.
Now, these guys are smart guys; right? They’re smart executives; right? If everybody knew, why are they throwing hundreds of millions of dollars away? Why? If everybody knew that smoking was bad, why are you throwing $443 million to try to convince the public of doubt and confusion? Why? Follow the money. Follow the money.
THE COURT: Five-minute warning, sir.
MR. ALVAREZ: Five minutes? So the answer to both those questions have to be yes in order to get to the path of punitive damages. And I’ve got five minutes left, but there’s a standard on punitive damages and what’s warranted and I’m going to skip through that. You’ve read it, I want you to read it back there, but in order to -- if you find that their conduct warrants it by clear and convincing evidence, if there’s a case for punitive damages, this is one of them. Okay? This is one of them. Because they purposely went down a path that they knew was going to affect millions of people and especially Georgia Cheeley.
So when you get to this question it says under the circumstances of this case, please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that
punitive damages are warranted against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, the answer there has to be yes. And this is 1994, this is a couple years before. Let’s listen to them because this is what they did.
(At this time, a video was played in open court and taken down to the best of the court reporter’s ability.)
SPEAKER: If you raise your right hand. Do you swear that the testimony you’re about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth?
ALL: I do.
SPEAKER: Please consider yourself to be under
oath.
SPEAKER: Let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. Let me ask you first, and I would like to just go down the row whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. I’ve heard virtually all of you touch on, and just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
SPEAKER: I believe nicotine is not addictive,
yes.
SPEAKER: Mr. Johnson?
SPEAKER: Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of
addiction. There is no intoxication -SPEAKER: We’ll take that as a no, and, again, time is short. If you can just -- I think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive; we would just like to have this for the record.
SPEAKER: I don’t believe that nicotine for our products are addictive.
SPEAKER: I believe nicotine is not addictive.
SPEAKER: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
SPEAKER: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
SPEAKER: And I too believe that nicotine is not addictive.
(End of video.)
MR. ALVAREZ: There is all seven of them throwing rocks, they’re right there doing it. Lying. Their internal documents show you they’re lying. If there’s a case for punitive damages, this is the case. We urge you to say yes to that question and we go on to the second phase of this trial, which is very, very brief, it’ll be a day at most. I know you have hung in with us, but this is an important case, it’s important to all of us. These people have waited 17 years for this day.
So the next thing I'm going to talk about is compensatory damages, okay? This isn't to punish R.J. Reynolds, that comes in a different phase, we don't want you punishing them, this is to compensate them for their loss. And the question is, what is the amount of any damages sustained by Willie James Cheeley and Iola Cheeley for the loss of their mother's parental companion, instruction, and guidance and the pain and suffering as a result of Georgia Cheeley's injury and death. Okay.
So, listen, there's no book. We can't go to a book and say she was 57 when she died, you're this, you're that, okay? Listen, there's no way to do that. Okay? One of the things they said to me was, look -actually, Willie said this to me this morning and I'm going to share this with you. He said, Mr. Alvarez, do me a favor, what's more important to me, more important than the money is that you clear my mom's name because -MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor, this is not in evidence.
THE COURT: Sustained. Ladies and gentlemen, step in the jury room for a minute, please.
[#DELETED MOTION FOR MISTRIAL#]
MR. ALVAREZ: Thank you. So that’s what happens when I get too excited. I apologize. Okay? So there’s no standard, there’s no book we can go into and say this is what we should award a man like Willie Cheeley who is the man he is today because of his mother, okay. He was very close to his mother. When his mother got sick, he was living in another state, as you heard, came down and spent the next eight, nine months with his mother at her bedside, going with her to cancer treatments, and being there for his mother. Okay?
Look at the life he has lived. Look at the man that he’s turned out to be. He’s that man because of that woman. That love that that family had for each other is not something that you could put a dollar sign on. So when you say, well, what has he lost? Well, at 57 years old, you know, your mother is not supposed to die at 57; that’s not normal. That’s not normal.
Iola lived with her practically her entire life except for a few times, she was always living at her mother’s house. They were two peas in a pod. Okay? She was her rock. Her grandkids, you know, when you
have grandkids, that's like the greatest thing in the world. Okay? Because no matter how good your kids are, I'm telling you, your grandkids are better.
Okay? They're better. All right? No doubt about it, no doubt about it. Some of you when you have grandkids you're going to know. Okay?
Iola, every time there's something important with her kids' life, you know, she's happy, she's thrilled, but she only wishes for one thing, that she could have her mother next -MR. FURR: Objection. There's no such testimony in evidence.
THE COURT: Overruled. You guys will be guided by what you heard from the evidence.
MR. ALVAREZ: Her mother's side. Think of all the milestones that she missed. So we're going to be very, very reasonable. The time to punish them is not now. You're going to have an opportunity to do that later. Okay? So what we would suggest to you is $3.75 million for each of them, for Willie Cheeley and Iola Cheeley, for the pain and suffering and loss of their mother. And that may seem like a lot of money and that may seem like millions of dollars for an adult who loses her -- their adult mother, but at 57 years old that's not normal. 17 years, 17 years
have gone by without their mother. 17 years, and she still would have been, according to the life tables, she still would have been alive today. Still would have been alive today. In fact, last week was the 17th anniversary of her death.
So I’m going to address you one last time after Mr. Furr, and I want to thank you for your attentiveness. And if I got a little bit too passionate and too much zeal came, I apologize for that. Please don’t hold it against my client. Okay?
