MR. FURR: Thank you. If it please the Court, counsel, Mr. Cheeley. Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
ALL JURORS: Good afternoon.
MR. FURR: With all due respect, the argument you just heard was designed to do two things, designed to
make you angry and designed to get you to take your eye off the ball. You may have noticed that Mr. Alvarez referenced only one jury instruction in the whole package, one jury instruction. And that's because when you look at the whole package of jury instructions, you're going to see a set of legal principles, a set of legal principles that demonstrate that any punitive award in this case should be nothing like the award that Mr. Alvarez just asked you for.
Now, what I'm going to do is I'm going to walk through those instructions again so that we make sure we have the framework, talk with you about what the facts of this case are and what the real issue before you is, because the issue before you is not one of youth marketing and not one of how many people developed smoking-related illnesses; the issue is very simple. It's should R.J. Reynolds be punished, should punitive damages be awarded to punish R.J. Reynolds for entering an agreement to conceal information about the dangers of smoking and the addictive properties of smoking that was a legal cause of Georgia Cheeley's death.
So it's really important in this phase to keep your eye on the ball. What is the real issue before you and what are the legal rules that guide your
decision-making? And, again, I won’t say please three times like I did this morning, but, please, read your legal instructions before you do anything else because you’ll see why Mr. Alvarez referenced only one of the instructions. So that’s where I’m going to start.
Again, he suggested to you that it’s a done deal, that somehow your first verdict mandates that you award punitive damages, you’re going to see and I put the page numbers on here so that there will be no dispute that what I’m telling you is accurate. You may in your discretion decline to assess punitive damages. And the reason you still have that discretion not withstanding your first verdict is because the legal rules are different now, and the evidence is different. You’ve heard a lot of new things about R.J. Reynolds, and you have different legal principles.
Second, this is the plaintiff’s request for more money, that’s really what it is. Punitive damages can only be awarded to the estate of Georgia Cheeley.
They can’t be awarded anyone else, and I think that’s important to keep in mind. They can’t be awarded to public health agencies or antismoking organizations or smoking cessation clinics or any other smokers, they can only be awarded to Georgia Cheeley’s estate. Let
me be clear about something, I'm not saying anything bad about Willie and Iola Cheeley, haven't done it the whole trial, not going to do it now, nice folks, but I simply think it's important for you to understand what you're being asked to do and where you're being asked to award money; that's why I point this out to you.
Next page three, again, it's important to understand that this amount would be in addition to compensatory damages you have already awarded. You've already awarded $3 million, a significant, significant compensatory award, and now you're being asked to award 18 million more dollars on top of that, even though you all unanimously agreed that $3 million was full compensation for Willie and Iola Cheeley under the law of Florida. Full compensation and now you're being asked for six times that much.
Another important instruction as you'll see on page three is that you should consider the conduct and actions of others including Mrs. Cheeley, and here is really the point I'm making here. You found unanimously that Georgia Cheeley was equally at fault for causing her death as R.J. Reynolds was, and yet now you're being asked to award her estate $18 million in a case where you determine she was equally at fault? You have to decide whether that's fair and the
right thing to do and whether that’s the right thing to do under the law.
Again on page three, you will see that you should not award punitive damages if you conclude that those purposes will be satisfied by Reynolds’ compensatory liability. I mentioned this this morning. What this really is is that the law recognizes that while those $3 million may be compensatory to Willie and Iola Cheeley, those dollars also have the effect of punishing and deterring R.J. Reynolds. They serve the same purpose from the company’s perspective, and that’s why the law tells you that you can decide that those 3 million are punishment enough, that that’s punishment enough.
Perhaps the most important point is to remember what we’re really here for because, again, it’s not the broad-ranging attack that you just heard on the tobacco company; it’s this question, and page two of your instructions is crystal clear as to what the issue is. Reynolds can only, and the words only in the instruction, be punished for agreement to conceal information after May 5th, 1982, that caused Ms. Cheeley’s death. That’s the narrow, precise question before you. Reynolds can’t be punished for harm to other smokers, for concealment of information.
As we discussed, on question five you found that concealment of information was not a cause of Ms. Cheeley’s death and so as the Court instructs you, that’s not a basis upon which you can punish Reynolds, it’s the agreement to conceal, and the agreement to conceal only, that can be a source of punishment, not for strict liability, not for negligence.
I want to take a step back, talk about how we got to where we are today because we talked about you all deliberating about 38 hours. But, again, not that we count hours, at about 25 hours, you came back the first time and you returned a verdict in which you six unanimously agreed that an agreement to conceal -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge, it’s inappropriate.
MR. FURR: It’s precisely what happened, Your Honor.
THE COURT: I’ll give you some latitude, sir, but, again, we’re on phase two, and it’s phase two evidence that controls these proceedings.
MR. FURR: Yes, sir. You all unanimously found that agreement to conceal information did not cause Georgia Cheeley’s death. You went back and changed your mind, I’m not challenging that. I wish I knew what evidence caused you to change your mind so I
could address it more specifically; that’s the only point I want to make. I really wish I knew what considerations caused you to change from one to the other.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. It’s inappropriate.
THE COURT: Overruled. I’ll let it stand.
MR. FURR: Okay. Again, let’s continue looking at the legal framework just a little bit because this is where the rubber meets the road. You know, we started talking about this in jury selection. This is not some wide ranging broad issue about do you like the tobacco companies or dislike them, do you want them out of business, do you question the morality of the business they’re in; we talked about all that.
It’s a specific legal question governed by the law of Florida, and that’s what’s embodied in your instructions. It’s your road map, and that’s why I’m belaboring this because the most important thing you can do is make sure you understand the legal rules that govern what you’re being asked to do.
The next instruction you’ll see on page 5 is that any award of punitive damages is solely for the injury caused to Ms. Cheeley and should not include punishment for harm suffered by other smokers who may
bring their own claim for punitive damages in other cases, and one thing we know is that's a meaningful instruction. It's certainly not abstract because we know there are 5200 cases pending, 5200 other people are going to be asking for compensatory damages and maybe punitive damages. We're going to talk a little bit about the implications of that number as we go forward.
Now, I showed you this instruction also this morning, which Mr. Alvarez asked, what's the point, I don't get it. What's the point about talking about whether the executives have changed and whether people are gone. Well, here's the point, here's the point, the point is your instructions tell you that you can consider that. On page 12 it says you're entitled to conclude that misconduct that occurred in the distant past and involved actors who are no longer associated with Reynolds should not be punished or that it should be punished less severely than recent misconduct; that's the point. The point is it's a relevant factor under the law of Florida in your analysis; that's why we put on that evidence.
Now, I'm not going to belabor this, but you know now that the past is gone. The TI and CTR and TIRC is gone. Mr. Alvarez made the argument that they were
forced to go, well, forced to be disbanded. They were disbanded under an agreement, under an agreement that settled those cases. It wasn’t somebody putting a gun to the company’s head or a court ordering them to disband; that was the agreement. That was the negotiation as part of the settlement agreement. It was a voluntary agreement on behalf of the tobacco companies. Nobody forced them to enter into this.
This is something they chose to do as part of the settlement agreement. That’s what happens in settlement agreements, both sides give and take, that’s the nature of settlement. This was voluntary; it wasn’t forced.
You’ve heard the CEOs are gone. Again,
Mr. Alvarez said, what’s the point if they’re gone?
The point is that under the law you’re entitled to consider whether the actors who were involved in the agreement to conceal are gone; that’s why we provide this evidence to you. I won’t belabor this.
Dr. Figlar told you that all these people are gone, and if you take a step back, why would that be important? It’s important because you have, you know, punishment without purpose is just revenge. It’s not -- punishment needs to have a purpose to be meaningful. And so today the people operating these
companies and the scientists developing the products and the ownership of the company are different, that’s a factor you’re entitled to consider in deciding what a fair amount of punishment is because, you know, pretty fundamental principle is we don’t punish the innocent, we want to punish the people who committed the wrongdoing.
And you heard if you go down to 401 West Main Street in Winston-Salem and knock on the door at R.J. Reynolds headquarters and say I have a judgment here,
I want to punish Claude Teague, or Alan Rodgman, or Jim Johnson or Ed Horrigan or anybody else you saw. You’re not going to be able to deliver it there, they’re gone. Most of them unfortunately have passed, but you’re simply not going to punish those people. What you’re going to be doing is punishing the new company; that’s just the way it is. That’s what you’re being asked to do.
Another very important instruction, important instruction. You know, when I listened to the closing argument what I rally hear by a plaintiff is just a broad-sided attack that cigarettes are dangerous and they shouldn’t be made, they shouldn’t be sold, they shouldn’t be marketed, whether we should simply go out of they business. They try to cross examine
Dr. Figlar on why don't you go out of the business of selling cigarettes? Here's your instruction on page nine of your instructions, the manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a lawful activity protected by federal law, therefore, you may not impose punitive damages to punish Reynolds for simply manufacturing, selling, or advertising cigarettes.
Now you see why the plaintiffs only referenced one part of one instruction in their closing argument because when you look at the whole package of instructions, you see a very different picture of the legal principles that you should use to decide this case.
Page three. You should consider whether there is a continuing need for deterrence in light of any changes in the conduct of Reynolds from the conduct on which you base your determination that punitive damages were warranted. A few minutes ago Mr. Alvarez just made an argument of, so somebody has changed, they still need punished. Well, you see under the instructions in the state of Florida, you see that whether somebody has changed, in fact, is relevant to whether punitive damages should be awarded. That's why we present that evidence to you; it's right there on page three of your instructions that you'll see
when you look at it.
So what’s the real issue? Putting all this together, here is the issue for you to decide. Are punitive damages needed to prevent Reynolds from agreeing with other tobacco companies or organizations to conceal information in 2014? That’s really the question before you because, as you’ve seen, the agreement to conceal is the only misconduct in this case that you can base a punitive damage award on, the only misconduct. So when you put all that together, here is the question you’re really faced with. I’m not going to be to belabor this, you’ve seen the website, you know that Reynolds tells everybody that smoking -- cigarette smoking is a leading cause of preventable death, that no tobacco product is safe or without risk, that quitting cigarette smoking significantly reduces the risk for serious diseases, that you should rely upon the Surgeon General in making decisions. I thought we cleared this up with Dr. Figlar, although I heard the argument again. Reynolds directs smokers and the public to the Surgeon General, CDC, NIH and World Health Organization and says make your decisions based on them.
It doesn’t mean Reynolds agrees with everything they say, but Reynolds doesn’t do anything that causes
the public's confidence in those authorities to be undermined. Reynolds doesn't debate it publicly, they don't take out newspaper ads or use press releases or spokespeople or anything else. Nothing Reynolds does creates any confusion in the mind of the public with respect to the public health message. All Dr. Figlar told you is I don't agree with every scientific conclusion in those reports, as a scientist I don't agree with every finding they make. Does he run around telling anybody that to try to influence their smoking decisions? No. The only, the sole message that Reynolds gives smokers and the public is rely on the public health authorities. It's a smokescreen, it's a red herring, there's nothing to it because this is just a scientific dispute over whatever the issues are. It has nothing to do with influencing the public.
You heard about the additives. You know, if a smoker wants to say, I want to know what additives are in my product, they can get on the website and see.
In addition, Reynolds informs smokers about different types of products and the levels associated with different types of products. So if you're a smoker and you want to know and you want to continue using tobacco, first Reynolds tells you, you're concerned
about health, Reynolds says first you should quit, you should quit. But if you’re not going to quit, you need to know that there are other types of products that are less risky than burning cigarettes. Here’s what they tell smokers, the best course of action for tobacco consumers concerned about their health is to quit. What else would you have them do? What possible message could be better for Reynolds to send to smokers, if you’re concerned, quit. But if you’re going to continue to use tobacco products, you should consider the reduction of risk for serious diseases associated with moving from cigarettes to the use of smoke-free tobacco or nicotine products.
And, of course, you know, Reynolds puts its money where its mouth is, they spent time and money developing these products so that they can provide smokers the information and provide the opportunity to smokers to switch to products that are less risky.
And, you know, you kept hearing this argument that it’s not change if you’re forced to do it, if you’re forced to do it, but that’s not what the evidence was. Remember Dr. Figlar telling you about this voluntary warning label that Reynolds is putting on its e-cigarette and how Reynolds is encouraging states to adopt minimum age levels for the use of
e-cigarettes. These aren’t anything that anybody is forcing Reynolds to do, they’re doing it because they believe it’s the right thing. Certainly nobody forced Reynolds to go out and purchase an NRT, nicotine replacement therapy company in Switzerland, bring it to the United States, get FDA approval for this, and as you heard Dr. Figlar explain, market it in a package size and a location that is novel and intended to increase the likelihood that smokers will use it. They put it right beside cigarettes in convenience stores, so you don’t -- a lot of NRT -- no other NRT product is sold in convenience stores. You have to maybe go to the pharmacy or someplace like that to buy the nicotine replacement therapy.
But what Reynolds has done is it’s put it right beside cigarettes so a smoker walking in a convenience store, when they reach for their pack or ask the clerk actually behind the counter to hand them their pack, before they get there they see the NRT product; that’s what Reynolds has done, that’s what’s novel and the hope is it helps people have access to it and quit more readily than they otherwise would because they don’t have to go through a long process to go get the product.
In addition, this is a really important
instruction, ladies and gentlemen, page 11, you should also take into account -- into consideration any mitigating evidence when considering punitive damages which may demonstrate that there is no need for punitive damages. Well, we know there’s several types of mitigating evidence in this case that demonstrates how the tobacco industry has changed and how the tobacco industry has paid for what happened in the past. We know about the FDA. The company is transparent. I mean, they’re on lockdown. There’s no possible, possible way for them to conceal information or enter into some agreement to conceal information. The FDA inspects their plants, looks at their documents, everything, all the information about the products and smoking and health and smoking addiction goes to the FDA.
And you heard the company pays for it. It’s a very unusual situation. Dr. Figlar told you, we are the only industry in the United States that has to pay the regulator. The regulator looks over our shoulder, monitors the way we do business, and we have to pay them to stand there and look over us, and it’s no small sum. Reynolds alone has paid over 300 million, Philip Morris has paid more, Lorillard has paid a little less. Clearly it’s going to be billions and
billions of dollars for the company to pay the regulator to look over their shoulders.
Another form of mitigating evidence, you've heard that the companies have paid enormous, enormous sums under the master settlement agreement with the states. The numbers are really mind boggling. They already paid $40 million to the state -- excuse me, 40 billion with a B dollars to the states, and these payments continue into perpetuity. And Dr. Figlar told you that in those payments, hundreds of millions of dollars from those payments have been earmarked for anti youth smoking programs. State of Florida had a separate settlement agreement with the companies, they've already paid $2 million to the State of Florida with monies earmarked to anti youth smoking programs.
The Engle litigation. Over 5,000 cases are still pending, more than 100 cases have been tried. I don't know if it's 114 or not, but the punitive damages already paid, already paid have been $66 million.
$66 million with only, you know, with 5,000 cases left to be paid. And you know that you're not supposed to award other smokers in these cases, this is only for the Georgia Cheeley case.
Let me try to put all this together. 14 years
ago R.J. Reynolds turned a corner and changed. It voluntarily under a settlement agreement that it voluntarily entered, took the position that smoking is dangerous and addictive, disbanded the CTR, the TI, did all that under the voluntary agreement, and there has been zero, think about it, zero evidence has been introduced in this phase that R.J. Reynolds has entered any agreement to conceal information since 2000. 14 years ago, 14 years of company conduct and documents and they gave you zero evidence of any agreement to conceal-related conduct since then. You know, the people are gone who are involved in that, and that’s, you know, that’s something you should consider under the law. The company is fully regulated, it’s transparent. The FDA really has them on lockdown.
Ladies and gentlemen, I submit there’s really no valid purpose to a punitive damages award because punitive damages aren’t needed to prevent Reynolds from agreeing with other tobacco companies or organizations to conceal information in 2014. So I would encourage you to exercise your discretion as the instructions permit you to and award no punitive damages.
I recognize you may not agree, so what I want to
talk to you about is sort of a format for how you evaluate what size punitive damage award to award if you choose to, because the plaintiffs just said,
$18 million, $18 million. You know, the fact is it would make the family very, very wealthy. And, again, nothing bad about them, but you need to understand what the money will do. Instead of just talking about something like $18 million, I want to suggest to you sort of a common sense way to think about what a punitive damage award would be in this case if you choose to award one. And I suggest that there are a few things you should think about.
One is that the family has already been fully compensated, that you unanimously agree that $3 million was the right amount of money to fully compensate them. Second, that punitive damages would be punishment without a purpose in this case because there’s just, again, there’s just zero evidence. They didn’t introduce one piece of evidence that Reynolds has entered into any agreement to conceal since 2014. But if you choose to award punitive damages, I would like to suggest to you that the maximum amount that you should award will be $500,000. Because, again, I want to think about the fact that there are over 5,000 Engle cases pending, 5,000 Engle cases pending.
If even $500,000 were awarded in each of those 5,000 pending cases, that would be $2.5 billion.
$2.5 billion. Some cases will be awarded, some cases they won't. You're going to have to use your judgment, but the numbers are huge if you start thinking about what the cumulative effect of all those punitive damages award would be, and you don't have to do it all in one case. I suggest to you that really something in the nature of $250,000 or $500,000. When you think about what that would mean across all the Engle cases would be more than sufficient punishment for the company.
Just a couple more thoughts along that line. I want you to think about what the message that a large punitive damage award would send. You know, even though Reynolds has already changed the way it does business and it's absolutely clear it was done voluntarily, not because it was forced to. You know, the plaintiff really wants you to award a huge sum of money to punish them for conduct from a time long past. And what I would ask you to think about is, will that really motivate other corporations to modify their behavior? If another corporation looks at this situation and says, wait a minute, let me get this straight. I enter a voluntary settlement agreement, I
change my behavior, and 14 years later I’m still faced with 5,000 lawsuits asking for billions of dollars of punitive damages collectively, is that really something that would change somebody’s behavior?
Finally, the message of a large punitive damages award is really pretty straightforward, the message will be that even if you change everything, you will still be punished over and over and over; that’s what the Plaintiffs are asking you to do.
Let’s talk about what a large punitive damage award would not do, would not do. Is a punitive damage award needed to make Reynolds stop any agreement to conceal? No. We know there’s no agreement to conceal since 2014. You can look in those boxes all day long when you get back there, although I hope you don’t, but you could, and you’re not going to find any evidence of an agreement to conceal after the year 2000. Would it improve public health? Would it make people more aware about the dangers of smoking, would it stop people from beginning to smoke? Would it cause more people to stop? Would it make Reynolds more transparent? The answer is no.
It’s not going to accomplish any of those purposes; it’s simply not. It’s going to make -- it’s
going to be a large award to the Cheeley family; let me just say that. That’s all it’s going to do. It’s certainly not going to serve any valid purpose when change has already taken place.
I thank you again for your patience. I tried to get through this and not take too long because I know you’ve heard this a couple times today, but I’m going to end where I began, and that is I just ask you to keep your eye on the ball, on the narrow specific question that you’re now here to answer and I ask you again to please start by reading those instructions, not one of them, read the whole packet of instructions so that you really understand the legal framework you’re being asked to make a decision in and if you do, you’ll deliver a just verdict. Thank you very much.
