MR. ALVAREZ: If it pleases the Court, counsel, Mr. Cheeley. The first thing I want to kind of discuss with you is one of the slides that Mr. Furr used with Dr. Figlar regarding the annual cigarette volume, and I think -- because when I first looked at it, I went, wow, they went from almost a little over 190 billion to almost zero, you know, and then I
realized that it’s really not zero because this line here, this bottom line here, right here is not zero, it’s 60 billion. So what we should be seeing is this line continuing to go down here to zero would be somewhere over here. So, you know, it’s not accurate. So I wanted you to understand that the volumes of sales have decreased, but it’s still a significant number because this is 60 million; it’s not zero.
It’s not zero. -- billion.
Remember, this is about punishment. This phase is really about punishment. Okay? Remember I told you there’s two things, it’s about punishment and deterrence. Okay. Let’s forget about deterrence for a second because we’re going to talk about deterrence, okay, and whether they're a changed company or not really doesn’t matter for this purposes. Okay? They have to be punished for what they did to this family. You’ve said that through your verdict that it’s warranted under the law to punish them. And whether they are changed or they haven’t changed or whether they were forced to change makes no consequence on whether they should be punished to begin with.
So think about that. If you have a situation where somebody should be punished but later changed, does that mean they shouldn’t be punished? It doesn’t
mean that. It means maybe the punishment should be a little bit different depending on the circumstances. And it depends on the circumstances, but in this case 50 years went by, 50 years went by before they changed; right? 50 years went by before they changed. And here it is, you are to decide the amount. This is about the amount of punitive damage, if any, to be assessed against Reynolds as a punishment and as a deterrent to others. We talked about that ad nauseam from the beginning. Trust me, I don’t think you need me to keep saying the same thing over and over again.
I understand that you get that.
This is now 2014. Things they still deny, and this is important because -- that’s why we played the video of Dr. Figlar because I want you to understand the things that are still denied, they still deny.
They still deny that they lied to consumers in the 1950s -MR. FURR: Sir, can we approach?
THE COURT: Are you talking about the exhibit, sir, or the argument?
MR. FURR: The argument.
THE COURT: Overruled. Ladies and gentlemen, you'll be guided again by the evidence that was during the course of the trial and not anything more or less
than that during the course of this trial. Go ahead,
sir.
MR. ALVAREZ: This was a question that was asked of Dr. Figlar in the video that you saw and he said it. He denied that they lied. He understood the findings that said that they didn’t do it. That they did not conspire with other tobacco companies to conceal the adverse health effects of smoking. They still deny that they conspired with other tobacco companies to conceal the addictive nature of smoking, they still denied that they failed to disclose material facts about the health effects of smoking. They still deny that they failed to disclose material facts about the addictive nature of smoking.
They still deny because they were justified in disputing the 1964 Surgeon General report. They still deny that they were justified in disputing the 1988 Surgeon General’s report. They still deny that nicotine is as addictive as cocaine and heroin. They still deny that one in four high school seniors currently smoke, they still deny that half of all smokers will die of a smoking-related disease. This is today. Today they still deny every single one of those things. They deny that they entice teenagers to smoke.
So the question is, what’s changed? What’s changed? 2014 when we asked them if they still agree or they still disagree, they say they still disagree with the Surgeon General of the United States. They still disagree with the Centers For Disease Control, they still disagree with the FDA. And think about that. You know, you heard all this hey, we have the regulations, we’re heavily regulated, we’re closing down our plants. But when the FDA tried to do something about packaging, what did they do, they sued them.
They still disagree with the World Health Organizations. These are the same organizations that for 50 years they were disagreeing with, and this is 2014, their corporate rep came in here and said we still disagree with them. So the question is -- and the National Institutes of Health.
So the question is, what’s really changed?
What’s changed? They’re still denying these things. They’re still denying these organizations are correct.
Is it change if you’re forced to admit it? And if you remember Dr. Proctor, he said they were forced to admit in 2000 as part of a master settlement agreement, they were forced to admit. Is it changed if you’re forced to do something? Is that change?
Did you change if you were forced to do something? That's not change. Change is when you voluntarily do something because you know that something that you were doing was wrong and you wanted to change your conduct; that's change. If you're forced to do something, that's not change; that's not change.
When he asked Dr. Figlar, well, the TIRC, the CTR, the TIR, and the TI, they're no longer, they're no longer around; right? They're no longer around. Well, they're no longer around because they were forced to disband, not because they wanted it, not because they had a change of heart. Because they were forced to disband.
Is it change if you were forced not to debate the health effects of smoking? The only reason they admitted it is because they were forced to admit it as part of the agreement. They were forced, they could not debate it any longer.
MR. FURR: Your Honor, I object. None of this is in evidence. It's not in evidence.
THE COURT: Okay. Ladies and gentlemen, if the matters aren't in evidence, then you'll make such a finding in your deliberations. What the lawyers say as I instructed you 14 days ago is not evidence, the evidence comes from the materials here, the testimony
you heard from the courtroom. You may proceed, sir.
MR. ALVAREZ: Remember the testimony of Dr. Proctor. And it’s not change if you are forced that you can no longer conspire with other tobacco companies; that’s not change. It's not change if you were forced to put your internal documents in a public repository in Minnesota as part of the master settlement agreement, that they’re forced to do that. That’s not change. If you’re forced to do something, that’s not change.
Here is an interesting -- I was thinking about this because I was trying to get my head around the argument. If they have really changed, then why are they saying that their executives are gone? What’s this whole point of saying is Dr. Teague gone, is Johnson gone, is Heimann gone, is -- who is the other one? We talked about Teague, I think there was about four people that he named. These people are all gone, they’re all gone, they’re all gone. Well, if they did nothing wrong in the beginning, then what’s the point of them being gone? If they didn’t do anything wrong, what’s the point of bringing up the fact that they’re gone if they did nothing wrong?
This is 2014, and you’re going to see evidence from the Surgeon General’s report that they are still
marketing to young people, young adults, and teens. They're still doing it. This is page 8 of the 2012 Surgeon General's report. Advertising and promotional activities by tobacco companies have been shown to cause the onset and continuation of smoking among adolescents and young adults. Adolescent and young adult initiation rates for cigarette smoking have been stable over the past five years. This finding is consistent with the idea that tobacco companies are successfully targeting young people in advertising and promotional efforts to attract new smokers. Page 164. By the way, all this is in evidence. I know you guys like to go through the evidence. It will be there.
In 2006 cigarette companies spend an estimated 28.9 percent of their revenues on their marketing efforts, up from somewhat from an estimated 25.4 percent in 2003. That's page 488 of the report. Industry maintains that they are marketing for brand-switching customers. So let me just preface this so that you have some context of what I mean by this, because they spent an enormous amount, they spend billions of dollars every year on marketing.
Why are they doing that if there's three companies that have basically 95, 96 percent of the market share? Why are three companies spending billions of
dollars if they say it’s just so makes sure that our brand, one guy doesn’t switch from one brand to another.
Because that’s not the reason why. Because what they care about is the entry, the young people, that 90 percent who are the people under the age of 18, that’s why they spend the billions of dollars.
They’re not concerned about losing market share sideways, what they care about is marketing to the new potential customers, and that’s what they’re talking about here. Industry maintains that they are marketing for brand switching customers. Surgeon General, the most plausible justification for advertising expenditures at the levels that have been observed would be to attract new customers to generate a long term cash flow for the companies. In addition, the nature of the imagery used in the advertisements clearly appeal to the aspirations of adolescents, suggesting that they are a target. Page 517. That’s why they spend those billions of dollars; it’s not for these people switching. It’s for the young adult smoker and the teens.
So this is one question and one question only, should they be punished and what should they be punished for. You’ve heard for a handful of cases out
of the 114 that have been tried, there’s 5200,
5,200 cases over the last six years, only 114 approximately have been tried and of those they’ve only paid punitive damages in a handful of the cases and I think it was 66 million in those handful of cases. Okay. So this is an arduous road that this family has taken. Okay?
So the question is, what is the total amount of punitive damages, if any, which you find by the greater weight of the evidence, not by clear and convincing, by the greater weight. You’ve already found by clear and convincing evidence that we should be here. Here the standard is by greater weight of the evidence should be assessed against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. I would suggest to you that -- this is not about bankrupting anybody because we’re not, we’re not about that. This is about a number that should be fair and reasonable in light of the evidence, it should be fair, but it should be for punishment. And to punish somebody or a company for bad behavior, you have to punishment -- the punishment has to have an end. It has to be for a purpose, and it has to be a punishment, you know? If it’s a small amount of money, it’s not punishment. They’re not being punished.
So we think that for each of the -- you awarded 1.5 million for each of them. For a total of $3 million. We think for a total it should be six times -- six times the total compensatory award, and we think it should be -- and we suggest to you -- by the way, you could reject this number, okay, you could agree with this number, you could make it -- you can do whatever you want. You guys are the law. You guys decide. You guys decide. But we think $18 million is fair and reasonable in light of what a punishment should be to this corporation to punish them for what they did. They have to understand that this amount of money will punish them because a few hundred thousand or a million dollars is not punishment to them. This is not punishment to them. It has to be something that they understand, they get through their head, that they got punished or else it means nothing.
On behalf of Willie James and Iola, thank you.



MR. ALVAREZ: He said that $18 million would not change or deter other companies, that it wouldn’t be an incentive for them to come forward and change, well, that’s not the purpose. The purpose is for them not to start. The whole purpose of the deterrent is for people and companies to go, wait a minute, if I do
this, look what happened. The idea of the deterrence is to get them to never start; that's the purpose of deterrence, to get them to never begin the bad conduct. That's the purpose of a deterrence is to understand that if you embark in conduct like the tobacco companies did, like this Defendant did, this is what could happen; that's the purpose of deterrent.
He said, Mr. Furr said that let's take a common sense approach to this punitive damages award, and he suggested $500,000 and said, look, if you add up $500,000 times 5200 plaintiffs it will be $2.5 billion. That's a lot of money; right? But what he didn't tell you is that those 5200 plaintiffs at the same rate that we're going now would take almost 300 years to conclude these trials. How many of these people, these plaintiffs would still be alive?
MR. FURR: Objection, this is a wrongful death case here, that's an inappropriate argument under the law.
THE COURT: Sustain the objection. Stick to the evidence in the rebuttal.
MR. ALVAREZ: He said in Florida 2 billion went to the state for payments, but Dr. Figlar told you that not one cent, not one cent went to a single victim, went to a single Engle Plaintiff, not one.
He talked about mitigating evidence, well, they put up no free smoking clinics, no free medical clinics, they don’t give away their products for smoking cessation, they still haven’t stopped advertising to children. That is the type of evidence that you would look for in mitigation. Did they really do something to change, did they really do something to help? Did they really want to right a wrong -- did they really try to right a wrong or just take money and try to make money on the way out when people are trying to quit smoking? Is that really what they’re trying to do? Just think about that.
They talked about all these millions of dollars that they have to pay to the FDA. They said we’re the only industry that has to pay the FDA millions of dollars to regulate us. Why do you think they’re the only industry, the only ones that have to pay the government to regulate them? Why do you think that is? Because of their bad conduct. That’s the only reason. Mr. Furr suggested they did everything in agreement, it was a settlement, so we agreed to the settlement.
Well, the only reason that there’s a settlement is because they got sued by the attorney generals of 48 states, so they had to reach an agreement because
they got sued, not because they came in and raised the white flag and went to the attorney generals before they got sued and said, by the way, we’re doing something wrong here and we want to make it right. We want to agree voluntarily that we won’t do this anymore; that’s not what happened. What happened was they got sued by 48 states and as part of that litigation they made this agreement, not because they did it voluntarily. They had to get sued.
Mr. Furr for you said -- that’s a phrase, you know, keep your eye on the ball. Well, I’ll suggest to you that for 38 hours you guys had your eye on the ball. Okay? You guys had your eye on the ball. And you came back with a fair and just verdict that was difficult to reach, hard to reach, but you dedicated yourselves to look through the evidence and carefully discuss it and reach a verdict. You had your eye on the ball. You had your eye on the ball. And all I’m asking you guys to do is be yourselves again; that’s all you have to do. And continue to use the wisdom and the common sense that you all have because no one is questioning that and no one is questioning your dedication. Thank you.