MR. WICHMANN: May it please the Court.
Ladies and gentlemen, this trial is about addiction, it's about fraud, it's about accountability, and it's about responsibility.
George Ciccone was addicted to cigarettes that he smoked from when he was 11 years old ; a boy, two to three to three to four packs a day, until he died of lung cancer. You all
decided that already in our favor in Phase I.
Now in this phase we're here to talk about fraud. We're here to talk about blame. We're here to talk about responsibility.
This is your chance to hold RJ Reynolds accountable for engaging in the longest-running misrepresentation campaign in American business history that lasted over 50 years and caused the death of George Ciccone and hundreds of thousands of Americans.
This case is important, and it's important because RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company made a promise back in 1954. And I know you've heard it time and time again, but promises are important. What they promised to the American people was, "We accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility, paramount to every other consideration in our business."
"We believe our products that we make are not injurious to health."
"We always have and always will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health."
Well, in plain, simple English, Reynolds Tobacco concealed the scientific research
results that they had that showed that cigarettes were addictive, caused cancer from George Ciccone and the American people. They conspired to commit fraud for 50 years.
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. WICHMANN: And they did it for money.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WICHMANN: They did it for money, plain and simple.
They targeted American teenagers to get them addicted to nicotine. They created a controversy over whether their product was indeed injurious to health when they knew all along that it was. They lied. As Martin Luther King said, Lies cannot live. We're here asking you all to finally bury this lie.
The reason they did this, folks, is simple.
They did it using their own words for money, large bags of money to take to the bank.
We told you at the beginning of the case with great power comes great responsibility. Reynolds for nearly 50 years used their great power as a Fortune 500 company in this country without any accountability at all. They lied to the American people. They ridiculed the U.S.
Surgeon General. Their CEOs lied in front of the Congress of the United States under oath and over 400,000 Americans died a year, including George Ciccone.
Accountability, folks, is a two-step process. You already found George was addicted that cigarette smoking caused his lung disease and his death.
Now, what are we going to learn about the fraud? And when I say fraud, what I mean is this misinformation campaign that the Reynolds Tobacco lawyer got up at the end of Phase I and told you in closing that his client maybe stayed in the debate a little bit too long. Debate is a fancy word for stonewall, cover up, conspire, and lie. They created it. Today we're going to ask you all to hold them accountable for it.
If you recall in the first phase of the trial I asked you all to base your verdict on the contemporary medical records. And to your credit you did. And the reason why is we felt that those records represented the best evidence of what was happening at the time.
You all are going to get composite subset of the internal cigarette company records so you
can look through them. I'm going to run through them here in a second.
Bear in mind Dr. Cummings told you there are literally 16 million records. If I could bring them all to you I would. It's physically impossible. We've culled through them to try to give you a fair and accurate picture of what was going through the minds of the suits and the scientists. While they sealed the fate, while they sealed the fate of a family man, a U.S. naval veteran, a married man, a working man that the testimony has been his big enjoyment in life was going home after work with his family, getting up the next morning and going to work so he could provide for his family, that he married Pam Ciccone when they were both teenagers, she had two children from a prior marriage that he raised as his own, he raised five kids. This is the man that Reynolds Tobacco is going to come to court and tell you was irresponsible.
These documents, ladies and gentlemen, were not made public until recently. Again, Martin Luther King said, Darkness cannot drive out darkness, only light can do that.
These documents were secret for 50 years,
keep that in mind, 50 years.
Now, we're going to go through them so you all can get an idea of what was going through the minds of the Fortune 500 suits and scientists that sealed George Ciccone's fate.
Take a look at this. Hill and Knowlton in
1953	had the Tobacco Institute Research Council They wrote a white paper. Dr. Cummings told yoi a white paper was supposed to be a scientific publication about the health risks of cigarettes.
Well, a fellow called Tommy Ross, counsel for the American Tobacco Company, which is now RJ Reynolds, wrote the scientific white page for them. What does that tell you about this company, that they have lawyers writing their scientific papers that are supposed to go out into the American public?
Here's what the lawyer wrote, the lawyer wrote, the lawyer for Reynolds Tobacco. "A Scientific Perspective on the Cigarette Controversy."
We have to ask ourselves, how much science do lawyers know? It was presented as a scientific document, obviously part of the
fraud.
This document you'll see on the upper left-hand side, strictly private and confidential. Another one of those documents in the darkness, dated July 17th, 1963, Brown & Williamson, now RJ Reynolds Tobacco written by, again, their lawyer, a suit, a gentleman called Addison Yeaman. And what did he say? The TIRC that was their public relations organ, "In my opinion it cannot provide the vehicle for such research. It was conceived as a public relations gesture." That's the entity that the tobacco companies were telling the American people was doing legitimate scientific research.
But most importantly, take a look here at the next page where they wrote, back in 1963, "Moreover, nicotine is addictive. We are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the release of stress mechanisms. However, it may have certain unattractive side effects. They cause or predispose to lung cancer, they contribute to certain cardiovascular disorders, they may well be truly causative in emphysema, et cetera, et cetera."
That was 1963. They denied it, they denied it, they denied it for 50 years. They stonewalled, they lied, they conspired to keep that information from the American people.
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WICHMANN: Here we go again, January 29th, 1964. Look at that document. It's got a big stamp on it "confidential." That's another example of what comes when you shine the light in dark places.
"Reaction," they wrote. They're talking about the reaction of RJ Reynolds to the U.S. Surgeon General's 1964 report. They're patting themselves on the back saying, "While the propaganda blast was tremendous and the penetration of public opinion very widespread, I have the feeling that the public reaction was not as severe nor did it have the emotional depth that I might have feared."
Down at the bottom they wrote, However, at some point, some point in the future, we're going to need to provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking.
You all recall the charts. The charts showed that when the Surgeon General came o with his report cigarette sales briefly dipped and then they went right back up again. And they went right back up again because RJ Reynolds spent millions on marketing and advertising on their campaign to create doubt, their campaign to give addicted smokers like George Ciccone a psychological crutch to continue to smoke, all the while telling the American people there's no proven link, there's nothing wrong with our product, because if there is, we'll take it out, health is paramount to this company, that was the story on and on, the story that you heard from the witness stand today, which we'll get to in a second.
Here's another document, 1969, Brown & Williamson, now Reynolds Tobacco Company, talking about their advertising campaign. Right down there in their secret document. What do they say? "Doubt is our product since it is the best means of competing with the 'body of fact' that exists in the mind of the general public.
It is also the means of establishing a controversy."
The body of fact was the U.S. Government, the public health entities, the Surgeon General that were trying to get the message out that you heard the testimony from the witness stand that more money was spent by the tobacco industry i one day on marketing and advertising on getting their message out than the government and the public health authorities were able to spend in a year.
Here's another one from the dark, deep corners of the tobacco archives. May 1, 1971. Tobacco Institute, again, the public relations entity they created that tried to tell the American people it was a research committee, it was a propaganda word.
This is what they meant when their lawyer said in closing statement of Phase I that they stayed in the debate too long. "On the contrary," the document says, "it has always been a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it, advocating the public's right to smoke without actually urging them to take up the practice."
Bear in mind 1972. We just showed you a
document back in 1963 from Addison Yeaman, general counsel in a suit from RJ Reynolds, where he said, our products cause that? There are some serious side effects, including lung cancer. Here they are telling you, telling the American people, we're in the business of creating doubt in the minds of the public.
Here's another one. Look at that stamp,
"RJR, confidential, research planning memo on the nature of nicotine business and the crucial role of nicotine therein."
This is a 1972 document, ladies and gentlemen, years after their 1954 promise that there was nothing wrong with their products and if they found anything wrong with them, they'd take it out.
Here he is in 1972, Claude Teague, you heard from the witness stand, started out as a scientist, a brilliant chemist, rose from brilliant chemist to suit. What did he have to say? "In a sense, the tobacco industry may be thought of as being a specialized, highly ritualized and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry."
Well, that's the way scientists in suits
talk. In simple terms what that means is, we're in the drug business.
He goes on to say, "Tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects."
Well, let me tell you, you all are a lot smarter than those guys, because you all found in Phase I nicotine addicted George Ciccone.
They need to write back in '72, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects, that means addiction, ladies and gentlemen.
And the lawyers that Reynolds Tobacco sent into this courtroom to defend this case brought in a witness in Phase I who talked about chocolate, talked about caffeine, talked about just giving it up. Well, here's what they knew about it and they weren't telling the American people, all the way back in 1972.
From that same document, happily, for the tobacco industry, "Nicotine is both habituating and unique in its variety of physiological actions, hence no other active material or combination of materials provides equivalent satisfaction."
Well, the only drawback to that is, as they
knew, the nicotine addicts you, the tar and the smoke kill you.
Mr. Teague went on to say, Product is designed, it should emphasize nicotine.
Nicotine delivery efficiency. What we should really make and sell would be the proper dosage form of nicotine with as many other built-in attractions and gratifications as possible -that is, an effective nicotine delivery system with satisfactory flavor, mildness, convenience, cost, et cetera.
They knew exactly what they were doing because they knew how addictive this drug was and how that would hook teenagers and that would keep adults smoking so that they could sell cigarettes so that their profits could go higher and higher and higher, but not one word out of them about the health effects. To the contrary, they always took the position up until almost the end of George Ciccone's life that there was nothing wrong with their products and if there was, they would find it, they would cooperate with the government, they would take it out.
Here's one from 1978, RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company suits, Brown & Williamson was the
company then, it's now owned by RJR. What were they saying? "Very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine, i.e., its addictive nature and that nicotine is a poison."
19	-- whoop, I misspoke, 1978. So much for the $200,000 historian that Reynolds brought to testify in Phase I who had never set foot in an American courtroom before and said, oh, no, no, no, no, no, everybody in America knew, everybody in America knew all about how addictive nicotine was. Here in their internal archives we see the truth. They knew that very few consumers were aware of the side effects of nicotine. They knew it and they kept selling it and they kept making profits from it.
Here's one, November 17th, 1978. Minutes from a meeting in New York, secret meeting in the CTR file. Look whose present: Mr. Tucker, the general counsel, fancy terms for lawyer, for RJ Reynolds; Mr. Arnold Henson, general counsel, fancy term for lawyer, for American Tobacco;
Wally Hughes, the vice-president of Brown & Williamson, all RJR guys.
What do they say at the bottom? At the outset of this meeting Arnold Henson, one of the
lawyers, reminded all the participants of the meeting that there should be no written record of what transpired for distribution.
Well, some of the documents survived, and those are the documents we're bringing to you.
Here we go. They're writing, Council For Tobacco Research began as an organization called the TIRC. It was set up as an industry shield in 1954. They talk about special projects, and on those special projects they talk about the CTR being a front.
Propaganda to this company was everything. Marketing and advertising to this company was everything. The campaign of doubt was everything. Because they needed people to question the government so that they could sell them more cigarettes so that they could make more money.
November 1978, here we go, the scientific director for the Council For Tobacco Research says, In my considered opinion, it's the time for me to sever connections with the CTR. That time is near.
It was just a front, as Dr. Cummings told you when he testified from the witness stand
they didn't do any research, all they did was put out the message of doubt to the American people.
Here's a Tobacco Institute memo. You recall the Tobacco Institute was financed by RJ Reynolds, Brown & Williamson, and American Tobacco Company.
What did they say in 1980? "The lawyers remind us, I'm told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case. We can't defend continued smoking as 'free choice' if the person was addicted."
Well, you heard the lawyers for Reynolds Tobacco come down in Phase I and talk to you all about how it was George Ciccone's choice, and you're going to hear more of that today. Well, back in 1980, correct me if my math is wrong, that's nearly 30 years ago, they were saying, we can't defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. They knew their scientists knew what nicotine addiction does to the question of choice. It creates a barricade.
It creates a wall. And there are some people
like George Ciccone who, despite their best efforts, the efforts of their doctors, the efforts of their family, they just can't quit.
They knew it and they used that to sell more of their products to the American people.
Mr. Claude Teague is at it again, the man who went from scientist to suit in 1982. And they're going to tell you that he wasn't that high in the company. Y'all are going to have into evidence his resume, take a look at it, decide for yourself. What's he say? "However, we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could."
Does that sound like free choice? "Stop using if they could."
"That is to say, if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we would be out o' business overnight."
It goes on to say, When and if that occurs our options include go out of business, find a way to eliminate the desire of smokers to stop smoking or provide other products away from the conventional cigarette.
"Some cigarettes now meet but without" --
I'm sorry -- "which meet the same needs cigarettes now meet," which means nicotine, "but without the associated negatives."
The associated negatives being the lung cancer and the PVD, the diseases that tortured and killed George Ciccone.
Ladies and gentlemen, here's pictures of young George. What you see here is evidence that Reynolds Tobacco Company was targeting teenagers back in 1958. Remember Dr. Cummings he said they were looking at the 14- to 24-year old market, where 65 percent of the boys like George smoked.
What do their results show back in 1958?
Here it is, current brand preference for high school, freshman, sophomores, juniors, and seniors. That's another document that they wished we'd never find, another document from the archives that shows that in 1958 they were targeting teenagers just like George. Guess what? Reynolds' brands were the top sellers to teenage boys, Camel, Pall Mall, Lucky Strike, Winston, and Raleigh. They had a market and they were looking for reasons to expand. And that market was teenagers, because they knew if
they got them hooked that it would be impossible for them to quit, health consequences be damned
Now, this just didn't start. Here's a document that Dr. Cummings found in the archives, RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company Winston-Salem, New York [sic] back in 1928. "Regular school is over. Summer school is starting. Most all high schools, prep schools, colleges and universities have finished the spring term." Look at that, "an unusual opportunity for some good and long-lasting trade building work."
Look at the bottom paragraph. They're telling their distributors to "see to it that the stores and stands near the schools have a good supply of our products."
Well, ladies and gentlemen, as I told you, these are just a few of the documents, but this one takes the cake.
Brown & Williamson, June 25th through 28th, 1984 meeting. Brown & Williamson is now RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company. And what was the summary from that secret meeting, ladies and gentlemen, back in 1984? The summary was, to quote Oscar Wilde, "A cigarette is the perfect
type of a perfect pleasure. It is exquisite, it leaves one unsatisfied. What more could one want?"
And get this comment, "Let us provide the exquisiteness and hope that they, our consumers," George Ciccone, "continue to remain unsatisfied. All we would want then is a larger bag to carry the money to the bank."
Not my words, the words of RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company. "A larger bag to carry the money to the bank."
Again, folks, as I said, there's 16 million documents, we've tried to give you a smattering of the best ones. I'd like to show you the verdict form that you're going to get at the end of this phase of the case.
Here's what it looks like paper-wise for you all to fill out. Here's what it's going to look like blown up.
"Was the negligence," not was there negligence, "Was the negligence on the part of RJ Reynolds' Tobacco Company a legal cause of George Ciccone's death?"
We submit you answer yes.
The second question, "Were the defective
cigarettes," not were those cigarettes defective. The judge is going to instruct you on the law. The law is the cigarettes are defective. "Were the defective cigarettes manufactured by Reynolds a legal cause of Geori Ciccone's death?"
Well, I thought we answered it in Phase I. We're going to ask you to answer it again yes.
If there was any doubt as to whether the defective cigarettes that George smoked were from RJ Reynolds, that doubt was erased today when the suit from RJ Reynolds got on the witness stand and said, oh, yeah, I know George Ciccone smoked our products, yep, yep, he admitted it.
Following that, ladies and gentlemen, you'll have a series of questions, one on gross negligence, let me put this back up.
"Was there gross negligence by RJ Reynolds? And if so, was that gross negligence the legal cause of George's death?"
The answer to that is yes.
Baron, could you hook me up on the Elmo, please.
You're going to get the same jury
instruction, ladies and gentlemen, on believability of witnesses in this phase that you got in the other phase. Bear in mind, RJ Reynolds brought in only two witnesses in this phase to talk to you, a scientist from the company and a suit from the company. Scientist told you he made 2 million bucks a year. The suit today couldn't figure it out, couldn't give you a straight answer whether it was 3.6 million a year or whether it was 1.7 million a year.
Here's the legal instruction on whether y'all can believe or should believe a witness, what standards to use under the law. "In determining the believability of any witness," any witness, "and the weight to be given to the testimony," of any witness, "you can consider any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case."
Both of those gentlemen were shareholders, stakeholders in Reynolds Tobacco, one making 2 million bucks and the other making either 3.6 million buck a year or a million seven, he couldn't give us a straight answer, I submit to you that you need to take what those kind of witnesses say with a grain of salt.
You're going to get this jury instruction.
It is on gross negligence. The judge is going to instruct you gross negligence means that the conduct of RJ Reynolds was so reckless or wanting in care that it constituted a conscious disregard or indifference to the life, safety, or rights of persons exposed to such conduct.
400,000 Americans die a year as a result of the conduct of RJ Reynolds, including George Ciccone. We submit, ladies and gentlemen, that is gross negligence, and you should check number 3 yes.
Now, the next series of questions have to do with reliance. Reliance. That's just a simple term to mean, did George buy into this campaign of doubt?
Baron, could we go off the Elmo.
All right. There we go.
You heard by videotape deposition, ladies and gentlemen, the deposition of Paul Ciccone, George's brother. Paul said, Growing up we had a TV from about 1952 on. And as a boy he recalled watching TV programs with George. The question was, Did you watch any TV programs tha were sponsored by cigarette companies?
His answer was, "Most of them were. Most every program was then."
We asked him if you recall about watching the show Sergeant Bilko with his brother.
He said, Sergeant Bilko, definitely.
Do you recall any particular ads for Camel?
He said, Camel was real popular, because that was his dad's brand. He talked about newspapers ads that they saw. He talked about their favorite being Pall Mall and Lucky Strike means fine tobacco.
And as far as reliance goes, I asked him,
Would you have seen that ad, that tobacco ad, with your brother George, if you can recall?
And his answer was, "Most likely.
Television was a family deal. I mean, if one of us watched it, chances are we both did."
So I asked him, As you sit here today, do you feel your brother was influenced to smoke by any of the advertisements that we've mentioned today?
His answer was: "Who wasn't? That's the only answer I can give you."
Ladies and gentlemen, their campaign worked. Their campaign worked successfully. Pam Ciccone
told you about watching the Nightline program in 1984 with the CEO Mr. Horrigan where he said there's no proven link.
But I submit to you the most potent weapon that the cigarette companies had, RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company had were their advertisements You heard from this gentleman, the CEO and president of American Tobacco Company, now Rj Reynolds. This is what he had to say.
(Video clip played.)
VOICE: One source of expectations concerning a product which a consumer has are the advertisements of that product; is that accurate?
VOICE: I would agree with that.
VOICE: Would you expect a consumer to rely upon your advertisements?
VOICE: Yes, our advertising is truthful and we would anticipate that they would rely on it if they chose.
VOICE: That's sort of your promise as to what the consumer can expect from your product, isn't it?
VOICE: Yes, it is.
(Video clip ended.)
MR. WICHMANN: They weren't spending all that money for nothing, ladies and gentlemen. They expected the consumers to rely on their advertisements, and they did.
The next page of the verdict form has to do with legal fault. We told you in Phase I that in the first papers we filed in this case we accepted fault on behalf of George Ciccone, not for starting smoking as an 11-year-old boy years before there were any warnings on the package, years before the American public knew how dangerous cigarettes were. Perhaps, perhaps hf should have tried harder, maybe there was something else he could have done to quit that habit. But this, ladies and gentlemen, is up to you, the percentages of fault.
I would like to point out to you that RJ Reynolds has taken no responsibility, no responsibility at all. They said it was all George Ciccone's choice, all George Ciccone's fault, all George Ciccone's responsibility.
I showed you before this family man, this service man, this man that worked all day, came home to his family, sound like an irresponsible risk taker to you? I don't think so.
Now, this number, the amount of medical expenses and funeral expenses is coming into evidence in a one-page document. It's approximately $196,000, give or take. That's what had to be spent for George's hospital and medical care from the lung cancer that killed him.
We're asking you to award that in damages to the estate.
Next, ladies and gentlemen, we're going to talk about the noneconomic damages, the damage to Mrs. Ciccone for her loss of her husband's companionship, protection, for her pain and suffering as a result of George's injury and death. And I submit to you, look at these two pictures in the lower right-hand corner of the composite exhibit, that tells you everything.
Look at the look on Pam's face, that will tell you what she lost. She told you she lost the love of her life, she lost the man that she married when she was a teenager, she lost the man who she still dreams about today.
The law doesn't obviously allow us to bring George back. What we ask for is compensation. And compensation is an interesting term. You
heard the compensation from the two Reynolds employees that came and testified. The scientist said he made 2 million dollars a year from Reynolds. The suit, the CFO, said he made well, maybe it was 3.7 million a year, maybe it was 1.7 million a year, he couldn't be sure.
I read to you the mortality tables. The reason I did that is because the law provides you can take those as a measurement for the combined life expectancy of Pam and George, how long they would have lived if George hadn't been addicted and hadn't died of lung cancer. That comes to about 25 years. I submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, it's totally up to you to decide on an amount of compensation, but we think it would be fair if you took half of the yearly compensation of the scientist over 25 years, if you all can figure out what the yearly compensation of the suit was, more power to you, I'm still confused about that, take half of his yearly compensation and multiply that times 25, that, we suggest, would be adequate compensation for this widow, who, by the way, lost her home, lost the love of her life, didn't choose either of those alternatives. Those witnesses got paid
a ton of money, they chose to take their job and they can go back and return to it anytime they want. They are in a totally different situation than this widow.
There's going to be another set of damages we're going to ask you, ladies and gentlemen, to consider, those are punitive damages, those are damages designed to punish a company. And I'm going to put up here the jury instruction that the judge is going to give you.
"Punitive damages are warranted against RJ Reynolds if you find by clear and convincing evidence that the damage to Mr. Ciccone was so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard for the safety of Mr. Ciccone, or," not and, "or the conduct causing Mr. Ciccone's damage showed such an entire lack of care that the high-ranking official of RJ Reynolds Company must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences to Mr. Ciccone, or the conduct causing Mr. Ciccone's injury showed an entire lack of care that a high-ranking official of RJ Reynolds Company must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of Mr. Ciccone, or the conduct showed such reckless
indifference to the rights of Mr. Ciccone as to be equivalent to an intentional violation of those rights."
Those are all "ors." You can find one of them and award these damages.
Now, the instruction talks about the highest ranking officials at RJ Reynolds. If you all recall, The Frank Statement that was signed in
1954	was signed by the top man at RJ Reynolds. You recall the CEO that testified on Nightline in 1984, that was the top man in Reynolds.
And y'all will recall this. See the second fellow from the right? That's the biggest suit in RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company at the time. That was the chief operating officer. There he is raising his right hand in front of Congress; our products are not harmful, they're not addictive, they don't cause disease.
As Martin Luther King said it's very simple, These lies can't stand.
These people at this company didn't develop a set of principles until 2004, two years after George Ciccone died. That's what you heard fror Mr. Adams on the witness stand today.
You have to finish the job now. The job
requires that you fix responsibility and that you award punitive damages. Ladies and gentlemen, by clear and convincing evidence we believe you should find, yes, you should punish this company for the conduct that they committed over 50 years that caused and resulted in George Ciccone's death.
The next board is going to ask you for an amount. We leave that, ladies and gentlemen, totally up to you, but there are a few guiding principles I would like to go over with you.
This is the instruction that the judge will give you.
"If you find punitive damages are warranted, you must decide the amount. You might ask, how do we do that? Well, the law says, "You should consider the following, whether the wrongful conduct was motivated solely by unreasonable financial gain."
What was the quote I read to you back in 1984 by the RJ Reynolds Tobacco people? We he that our smokers keep smoking so we can get larger bags to take -- larger bags of money to take to the bank.
Ladies and gentlemen, that's exactly the
kind of conduct that the law has punitive damages, that punitive damages are designed to punish?
"You may also consider the financial resources of the defendant."
You all can recall that I started to read the stipulation and I had to go consult with opposing counsel two times because I didn't get it right. The numbers are so big I thought 7,334 million was 7 billion dollars, but they didn't want to speak the B word, they didn't want me to say the B word in the courtroom yesterday. Well, today they brought down their suit, their VP, and he said, yes, the net worth is 7 billion dollars.
By the way, I found it interesting that they bring down the vice-president who said, well, my office is right next to the big guy, Dan something or other.
So I said to myself, why would they send the number two man down? Why didn't they send the number one man down to defend the conduct of his company over the last 50 years? You didn't hear from him.
Also y'all can consider, you should
consider, the judge will instruct you, "Whether RJ Reynolds' conduct has changed from the conduct that you based your determination of punitive damages were warranted and the extent to which circumstances have changed."
Well, ladies and gentlemen, I found it interesting, and you might have also, that the gentleman who came down and testified today, the VP, said, in 2008, RJ Reynolds was still advertising in Vogue and Cosmopolitan Magazine.
Well, they did a survey and they found out that 75 percent of the people that were reading Vogue and Cosmopolitan Magazine in 2008 were over the age of 18. Well, pardon my math, that leaves out 25 percent. That means that they knew still in 2008 that 25 percent of the readers of Vogue and Cosmopolitan where they ha their cigarette ads were under the age of 18.
Didn't bother him one bit.
Also, he told you, in 2008 RJ Reynolds was still giving away berry-flavored lip balm. They were still giving away purses, and they were giving away cell phone jewelry with their Camel cigarettes in 2008. Now, I don't know about y'all, but I don't know very many grownups that
are using berry-flavored lip balm. I don't know too many grownups that use cell phone jewelry. They knew exactly what they were doing in 2008, exactly what they were doing, just in a different format back in the '50s, back in the '20s, back in the '60s, and back in the '70s.
They're trying to market their product to a total new generation of smokers.
THE COURT: Five minutes on your hour, sir.
MR. WICHMANN: I'm going to come back to yo and talk a little bit more after Mr. Boyce talks to you for RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company. We greatly appreciate your service.
The attention that you've paid to the case has been remarkable. This country's just gone through a great economic crisis, the witness from the witness stand mentioned it today, a crisis in which Americans have lost their homes and their jobs, not a single person in this crisis lost their life. As a result of this 50-year fraud and conspiracy over 400,000 Americans, including George Ciccone, lost their life every year.
And one of the elements of punitive damages is to punish a company and to send a message so
that this sort of conduct never happens again. That's what we want you to do based upon the ne worth of RJ Reynolds in your verdict form on the last page.
Thank you, and I'll be back for a few closing remarks.
THE COURT: Thank you, Mr. Wichmann.



MR. WICHMANN: Well, the former RJR CEOs are gone, but their legacy sits right here in this courtroom and that's Pam Ciccone, George Ciccone's widow.
And by the way, Pam has her own doctor, her doctor is Dr. Hirsch. And let's see what Dr. Hirsh had to say about George Ciccone's diagnosis of nicotine addiction. We went all over this once before, but what's interesting is that he said, "Over the course of the years that you treated George for his addiction did he try to stop, start again and relapse?"
And his answer was, "Yes.
"Do you remember offhand how many times?
"No. Quite a number.
"Was that unusual for your patients who were trying to quit a severe nicotine addiction?
"No.
"In his case it's fairly typical of a patient with a severe addiction."
We went over this already in Phase I, but since we brought it up again, I'm going to just quickly go over it. Again, Dr. Hirsh, who knew Mr. Ciccone better than any other treating physician, said, "So the patient was asked, so the patient starting in 1990 all the way through until 2001 he's still struggling with his addiction?"
Doctor's answer, "Yes.
Have you seen patients that struggled for that long and that hard in the course of your treatment?
"All the time, yes."
Again, doesn't get any better than Paul Ciccone, George's brother, the question asked of him, "As you get older, did you get the impression your brother wanted to quit smoking?"
And his answer, From what he told me, he just couldn't stop, he couldn't quit smoking.
Now, they made a big deal of the mother saying that smoking would stunt George's growth. Well, there's a big difference between stunting your growth, PVD and lung cancer.
Again, here's that old document from the darkness to the light and what does it say?
"We can't defend continued smoking as free choice if the patient was addicted."
And George, remember, we found from Phase I, was not just addicted, he was severely addicted according to his treating physician whose testimony I just put up.
Baron, can we quickly get here to the Elmo.
Ladies and gentlemen, you're going to be instructed by the judge on the law. And what the judge is going to tell you as a matter of law, RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company did the following as a matter of law, was negligent in failing to exercise the degree of care that a reasonable company would exercise under the circumstances, placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous.
That should answer that question.
Now, Mr. Boyce talked all about whose fault it was and it was only Mr. Ciccone's fault and not their fault.
Here's the jury instruction on legal cause.
"In order to be regarded as legal cause negligence need not be the only cause. Negligence may be a legal cause of loss even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause or other cause."
So this is not an either/or situation and this is not a bargaining situation. This is a situation where both sides were at fault and y'all have to apportion that and decide who was more at fault, George Ciccone who dropped out o' high school and got his GED and went into the navy and worked for all those years to support his family. He's supposed to figure out the list of chemicals that the tobacco scientists give to the government? He's supposed to figure out this great 50-year conspiracy when the suits and the scientists, the educated men in the Empire State Building kept this from the U.S. Government until a year or so before George Ciccone died.
No, they would have you believe all their
choices don't matter. The only choice that matters is an 11-year-old boy who starts smoking cigarettes before there's package warnings when he's bombarded with cartoons, TV ads, all sponsored by them. No fault on the part of the tobacco company, it's all George Ciccone's fault. That's what they would have you believe.
Let me show you another instruction you're going to get.
This is the law. It's not lawyers talking.
The judge is going to advise you, "As I instructed you previously, a prior court decided certain issues they are binding on you and the parties." The parties mean it's binding on them, not just us, it's binding on them.
"Therefore, I am instructing you RJ Reynolds Company did the following: Was negligent in failing to exercise the degree of care that a reasonable company -- that's the one I read you before.
Here's the one I wanted to read.
"Instructing you that RJ Reynolds did the following, concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or
misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes."
Material information not otherwise known or available, but George Ciccone somehow was supposed to figure it out. The man who dropped out of high school to join the navy, got his GED, worked as a sprinkler fitter all his life, he's supposed to figure this out.
The next instruction that the judge is going to give you as a matter of law is that "RJ Reynolds entered into an agreement to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment."
So George Ciccone turned out to be their best customer. He did exactly what they wanted him to do, he started at age 11 and he smoked when he was in hospice dying of lung cancer. This is the only situation where a company manufactures a product that if you use it exactly the way they want you to use it and you die, they come to court and they blame the
customer for that.
Now they come in and they say, well, maybe it wasn't RJ Reynolds products, maybe there were other products. Well, we had the suit came in this morning and the suit told you, blurted out from the witness stand, ah, I didn't do much research on Mr. Ciccone, but, yeah, he did smoke RJ Reynolds' products. Well, here's what the son Mark Laliberte said from the witness stand, "Did those brands change over time, do you know?
"He was consistent with Raleigh. I remember Chesterfield Kings as well, but Raleigh, some Camel. They were all plain-end cigarettes that he smoked, but he was pretty," last line "consistent with Raleigh. I think that was his favorite brand."
Now, RJR comes in here to court and tells you 1.5 million dollars is adequate compensation for the widow. Well, they had the scientist who came in yesterday making 2 million bucks a year. They had the suit come in today making, I don't know, I thought he said 1.7 million a year, then he said maybe it was 3.6 million. I still can't figure out how much that man made. They get to go home to their spouses. She can't. They have
the audacity to tell you how much to award.
Ladies and gentlemen, that goes in keeping with this document that tells you everything you need to know about this company. This is the document, the internal archived record. They hate it because they wrote, "All we would want then is a larger bag to carry the money to the bank."
Now, they talk about Premier or Eclipse, they weren't available to George Ciccone back in 1990. Why is that important? You heard from one oncologist in this case, one cancer doctor, a world famous cancer doctor who injected himself with medicine to treat voluntarily the victims of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster. This man volunteered to go to Japan to treat the Japanese who suffered the radiation from the Tsunami. He got up there and Mr. Depew asked him, let's talk about when the cancer started, is that sometimes referred to as latency?
And he said, yes, George Ciccone's cancer started approximately 10 years before his diagnosis. That, ladies and gentlemen is in the early '90s. So Mr. Boyce would have you believe that the man never tried to quit, despite what
his family doctor said. This product that they sold that George used sealed his fate in the early 1990s.
THE COURT: You have two minutes.
MR. WICHMANN: Thank you, folks. Please remember the law and the evidence. Please remember choices cut two ways, responsibility cuts two ways, lying, conspiring -MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WICHMANN: -- cuts one way.
