PLAINTIFF'S CLOSING ARGUMENT 
MR. WICHMANN: May it please the Court. Good afternoon, folks. I want to start by thanking you for being so attentive, for coming down here every day; and I know you all travel from different areas of the county, and I knew you all had issues with doctor's appointments and maybe not feeling 100 percent. But on behalf of Mrs. Ciccone, we thank you for doing your service.
With that, I would like to start right out with business because, believe it or not, I have a lot to cover in an hour and 15 minutes.
First of all, as the judge said, you are going to be asked certain questions at the end of the case. The judge is going to give you a one-page form that's going to be a verdict form for you to fill out. I would like to show you what that verdict form is right now.
It's going to look like this, ladies and gentlemen. It's going to ask you to answer yes or no, all three questions. We submit all three questions should be answered "yes."
The first question: Was George Ciccone addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his peripheral vascular disease?
We submit you should answer Question 2 "yes."
Did George Ciccone's peripheral vascular disease manifest prior to November 21, 1996?
And the third question we submit you should answer "yes": Did George Ciccone havf lung cancer caused by smoking; and if so, was such lung cancer a legal cause of his death?
Those are the three questions that we ask you to answer "yes." And a verdict "yes" is a verdict for the plaintiffs in this case.
Now, your job is to determine what the facts in the case are. The judge is going to instruct you on the law. The facts come from the witnesses that testified here under oath, and also from all of the exhibits, big stack of documents that include medical records and hospital records, school records for George Ciccone.
Those records were all prepared and completed ten years ago, 20 years ago, long before anyone was thinking lawsuit. Those records were done by George Ciccone's family doctors, George Ciccone's treating doctors, all part of the Memorial Hospital Healthcare System here in Broward County.
Those documents are the best evidence of what George Ciccone was going through in his life and what caused his death. And I will go through that in a second.
The judge is going to instruct you that you should use your reason and most importantly, from our side of the table, your
common sense to decide each and every issue that comes before you.
Before we get into what is in dispute in the case, let me tell you what is not in dispute in the case. It's not in dispute -and the judge is going to instruct you on this -- that cigarettes that contain nicotine are addictive. That's not an issue. That's already been decided.
He is also going to instruct you that R.J. Reynolds or one of its successor companies manufactured Camel, Lucky Strike, Raleigh and Pall Mall, and all those cigarettes contain nicotine.
We submit that it's not in dispute that R.J. Reynolds has stated on their website, that you saw in evidence in this case that cigarette smoking is a leading cause of preventable death in the United States, cigarette smoking significantly increases the risk of developing lung cancer.
Now, you might be asking: How are we supposed to decide this case? Everybody watches TV, and they watch on TV criminal cases where the burden of proof is beyond and to the
exclusion of any reasonable doubt. That, ladies and gentlemen, is not the standard that we use in this case.
The standard that we use in this case, the judge is going to instruct you, is to use the greater weight of the evidence, which means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in this case.
Now, the best example that I can think of to use, you all will remember when we were doing jury selection, I was talking about the blindfolded lady justice who holds the scales in her hands. In order for us to prevail, all we have to do is tilt that scale a little bit to our favor and we win.
We do not have to exclude every single doubt that there may be in the case. And let me tell you, ladies and gentlemen, that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company has come into this courtroom for one purpose and that is to create doubt.
You'll see on the left-hand side they have brought you highly compensated expert witnesse and theories. They are highly expert witnesses. You saw one today, $1,000 an hour.
They brought you Dr. Greenwood the other day, who had never set foot in an American courtroom in her life, and yet R.J. Reynolds had paid her $200,000.
You saw Dr. Cole -- and we'll talk a little bit more about that -- who got up here and said nothing on any X-ray, there's no evidence of anything. And then my colleague,
Mr. Millard, took all the medical records, laid them right in front of Dr. Cole and said: Show me one medical record that reflects the care and treatment of George Ciccone that says he had small cell prostate cancer.
The $800,000 R.J. Reynolds witness did not have an answer for that because there is not one.
Ladies and gentlemen, the best evidence in this case comes from the men, the women, the doctors, the nurses who were charged with the responsibility of caring and treating for George Ciccone while he was ill, here in Broward County at Memorial Hospital at Joe DiMaggio Hospital. Those are the people, we submit, whose opinions and conclusions sway am tilt the balance to our favor.
And I'm going to go through the evidence piece by piece. I'm not going to put up any more medical records, because I know you all have seen them.
But what you all will get as part of the packet of exhibits -- and it's going to be huge -- you all are going to get a document and it's going to have this label on it here. And in it you're going to have perhaps 20 of the medical records that we have constantly referred to in this case. So, instead of going through a stack, you can flip right through them and you can see for yourself. Nicotine addiction, nicotine addiction. Severe peripheral vascular disease. And you're going to see diagnosis: Small cell cancer of the lung. You're going to see a death certificate, small cell cancer of the lung.
What you're not going to see in any of the medical records, you're not going to see one document that says Mr. Ciccone is not addicted. You're not going to see one document that says Mr. Ciccone did not have peripheral vascular disease. And you're not going to see one document that says small cell prostate cancer.
But you are going to find one document in December of 1999, a CT scan report, that says prostate cancer normal.
Ladies and gentlemen, you heard it from the witness stand that this country's foremost business journal, the Wall Street Journal, said the tobacco companies have engaged in the most successful misinformation campaign for 50 years in American business history.
They are trying to create doubt in your minds in this courtroom, when the evidence from the doctors and the nurses who treated George Ciccone from 1988 until the day he died clearly compels an answer of "yes" to each of the three questions.
Now if you answer these three questions, we're going to move on to Phase II. In Phase II you're going to learn what they knew and when they knew it.
I promise you Phase II is going to be short. It is not going to be anywhere near the duration of time that you've had to sacrifice in this case.
Let's talk about one local doctor.
Dr. Michael Hirsch. Dr. Hirsch came in here
and testified -- can you not see, sir?
JUROR MATTHEI: I'm going to sit over there. Because -MR. WICHMANN: I'm sorry, we're trying our best with the graphics.
JUROR MATTHEI: I can see now.
MR. WICHMANN: It's been awhile. You might have forgotten him. But Dr. Hirsch was George Ciccone's family doctor from 1988 to the day he died. He wasn't paid a handsome fee to come to court to second-guess the medical records like the R.J. Reynolds experts were.
He was, and he is, a 24-year family doctor in Broward County and a part of the Memorial Hospital Healthcare System.
What did he say? Well, they want to tell you this guy never took any advice.
Mr. Ciccone never took any advice, he was hard-headed, he was stubborn. He came in anc said yeah, he had a rough exterior, but there were times on a number of occasions -- and there's his sworn testimony -- that he did take his advice.
And I showed you the record time and time again. I'm not going to show you the record
again. It's going to be in evidence. He was asked: Did you make a diagnosis in April of 1990 of George's condition? And George said -and he testified yes, he assessed and diagnosed George Ciccone as being addicted to nicotine.
He also asked him: Over the course of the years that you treated George for his nicotine addiction, did he try to stop and start again and relapse?
And the doctor answered: Yes.
And I asked him: Do you remember offhand how many times he did that?
The doctor said: No, quite a number.
If you'll recall, the R.J. Reynolds tobacco lawyers told you on opening statement Mr. Ciccone never even tried to quit.
Well, there you heard from the witness stand and there's the sworn testimony from his treating doctor otherwise.
I asked him: Was it unusual for your patients who were trying to quit a severe nicotine addiction -- which is what he called George's condition, a severe nicotine addiction -- was it unusual for them to try to quit to start and stop and relapse?
And he said, under oath: No. In his case it's fairly typical of a patient with severe addiction.
Now, he also described the nature of George's addiction. I asked him: How would you describe George's smoking habit at the time?
His answer was: He was relentless. He smoked like a fiend. Not my words, the witness's words.
He went on to say: Being as stoic as George was, I don't know that he was the one who initiated coming in to see me, but he wanted help.
This man, this U.S. Naval veteran, this man who raised five children, with the long hair and the Naval tattoos, this man who got up and went to work nearly every day of his adult life, for him to go to a doctor to seek help to try to quit his addiction to nicotine was significant.
So I asked Dr. Hirsch: Did you think he was serious in 1990? And Dr. Hirsch came in here, told you from the witness stand, he had an independent recollection of George Ciccone,
and his answer was: I do.
If that's not a tortured smoker, a smoker whose own family doctor who treated him from 1988 until the day he died, called him a fiend, if that's not a tortured smoker, ladies and gentlemen, I don't know what a tortured smoker is. Not an addicted smoker, according to his family doctor, a severely addicted smoker.
The man started smoking at age 11. He smoked up to three to four packs a day to the day that he died. We're going to go through that again.
Dr. Hirsch, the tobacco lawyers asked -well, the R.J. Reynolds defense lawyer said he was unwilling to quit, he refused to quit.
They showed the medical records to all the experts.
Well, I asked the doctor: What about this December 20, 1999, letter here that's sent to you?
The doctor said: That's right. I got it.
And the letter told me -- and you'll get that letter in evidence -- that George had stopped smoking and was using a nicotine patch.
So I asked him, just as I'm asking you,
ladies and gentlemen of the jury, to put it into context. The question I asked him was: Let's put everything into context. The tobacco lawyers said that they held up the chart we looked at earlier where he said he was not interested in quitting, and they held up a record that said "unwilling to quit."
But those were at a point in time before this December 20, 1999, letter, right, Doctor?
And his answer was: Yes.
So George came in 1990 to his doctor, seeking help. Later on -- there were medical records that he was refusing to quit, he was unwilling to quit. But after that there was a medical record that was just referred to that he stopped and he was using the patch.
And as Dr. Hirsch testified, that's not unusual for people who get caught up in this nicotine addiction cycle.
Here it is again, just to summarize.
That 1999 record, putting it in context with the 1909 quit attempt. My question at the bottom was: Sound like a guy not interested in quitting?
The doctor said: No.
I asked him: So the patient, starting in 1990, all the way through 2001, he was still struggling with his addiction?
ANSWER: Yes.
Have you seen patients that struggled for that long and that hard in the course of their treatment?
The only treating doctor, the only family doctor -- the doctor who knew Mr. Ciccone best of all, not a paid out-of-town, highly paid expert witness. His answer was: All the time, yes.
Now you all will also remember that we brought in here for you to hear the testimony of George Ciccone's adopted son, the son that he raised as his own when he and Pam got married, when he was married -- when he was still in the Navy, married Pam, who had two previous children, and raised them just as his own.
I asked Mark about his father. He said:
He had a rough exterior, a rough front, but I never felt more secure than I did living with my father.
And you recall also Paul Ciccone, his
brother, came in and testified that George told
him: I would quit if I could, but I just
can't.
So I asked Mark, or Mr. Millard asked Mark, about this motto that George Ciccone had. You can't always believe what you read. And Mr. Laliberte from the witness stand said that was his motto. It was: Don't be gullible.
Don't believe everything that you read.
Well, that's important, ladies and gentlemen, and the reason it's important is because during that time frame, for 50 years R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company denied that cigarettes were addictive and that cigarettes caused disease.
And you know what? George Ciccone, one of their best customers, smoked like a fiend, bought their product for over 40 years. You know what? He believed them.
So now they're going to come into this court and tell you that their best customer, it's all his fault. We're going to get to that in Phase II. Blame is not a part of this part of the proceeding. But we do accept some responsibility in Phase II. But we will cover
that then.
What did he believe?
Pam Ciccone told you from the witness stand in 1984 there was a 20/20 Nightline program where that gentleman, Mr. Horrigan, at the time the CEO of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, got on the TV and told the American people there is no proven link.
There were government scientists on the other side who said smoking is addictive and smoking causes lung cancer.
But Mr. Horrigan said, on behalf of the defendant company, no proven link.
And Mr. Ciccone believed him, because Pam said: I mentioned and discussed the article or the news show with my husband and my husband said: Don't believe everything you hear, don't believe everything you read. If the tobacco companies say there's something wrong with it, they will fix it. He believed them.
Now, Mark Laliberte, the son, came down and testified under oath about the fact that George Ciccone was a loyal R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company customer, brands, said: As early as I can remember, my father smoked
Raleigh Plain Ends, that's one of theirs, and Lucky Strike.
At the bottom, he said: He was consistent with his Raleigh. He smoked Raleigh, some Camel, but it was pretty consistent with Raleigh. I think that was his favorite brand.
Now, was he or was he not a tortured smoker?
Mark Laliberte came down and testified under oath about coming to see his father when his father was in Memorial Hospital, suffering from lung cancer, with oxygen tubes in his nose. His testimony was -- my question was: Yet he went out and smoked anyway, with the oxygen tubes in his nose?
The answer was: Yeah, yeah, he went out and smoked anyway.
Do you know why he was in the hospital at this stage in his life? It was due to his lung cancer.
Ladies and gentlemen, they came and told you, through one of their expert witnesses, that Mr. Ciccone never smoked at work. Well, we have the Oscar Chaires clip? I would like to show you a brief 40 seconds of one of his
co-workers from the '70s, and '80s, who
testified here in videotape deposition.
(Video clip played as follows:)
Q. When was the first time you had any mowledge about George's smoking habits?
A. When we worked together.
Q. So sometime around '72, '73?
A. Yeah.
Q. And what can you tell me about George's moking habits?
A. He smoked a lot. I -- I can remember, you now, we was standing there smoking, and a lot of imes when we were reading the blueprints of what we vere doing, the next part of our activity for the ay, you know, we stand there smoking as we was ioing our job. I was a heavy smoker back then, and ie was too at the time.
Q. You said you smoked around a pack, pack ind a half a day; is that correct?
A. Yeah.
Q. Do you know whether George Ciccone smok more or less than you?
A. I don't know.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. WICHMANN: Do you recall William
Jones?
He came in and testified. He worked with George Ciccone in 1994, 1995, 1996. They worked together as sprinkler fitters. It was a tough job; it was a physical job. George was his boss. He was George's apprentice.
This is what he had to say: George was a kind, gentle bear, teddy bear of a guy. I saw him smoke.
Did you see him smoking on the job?
Yes.
Do you have a recollection as to the quantity of cigarettes he would smoke on any given day?
ANSWER: Oh, I knew he had a pack of cigarettes in the morning, and when he came home -- and then when he came to work, I knew he had one in his lunchbox for later on.
Was this a regular routine for him?
Every day.
So, ladies and gentlemen, when they brought down their expert witness, Dr. Abramson told you he was not a tortured smoker, could have given it up at any time. Dr. Abramson told you he did not smoke at work. He
refrained from smoking at work. I don't think the evidence shows that at all.
Now, let me point out a few facts about Dr. Abramson, R.J. Reynolds' expert witness, the psychologist who came down and testified. Never worked in a smoking cessation clinic before in his career. Never set foot in a smoking cessation clinic before in his life. Didn't even know if there was a smoking cessation clinic in Fort Lauderdale, as we sat here today.
But he was quick to criticize Mr. Ciccone. On the board that he put up, said Mr. Ciccone didn't go to a smoking cessation clinic.
Here's a guy who never even set foot in one. That was their expert witness.
I asked him in deposition in March of this year: You were treating exactly zero patients for nicotine addiction or dependence?
The answer is "yes."
The judge is going to read you an instruction on believability of witnesses.
Again, we are talking about balancing the scales, and you can take an expert witness's opinion and put weight on it or you can
completely disregard it.
And I submit to you that the opinion of Dr. Hirsch, the family doctor, is more closer and should be given greater weight than any of the experts that R.J. Reynolds brings to the courtroom because he doesn't have a dog in this fight. He treated Mr. Ciccone, didn't get paid by one side or the other, and is the only neutral source on that issue.
Dr. Abramson, I thought, was not the greatest qualified expert. I asked him: Do other doctors refer patients to you with primary nicotine addiction problems, yes or no.
His answer: Generally not.
I asked him: Have you ever published a single peer-reviewed article since becoming a doctor?
ANSWER: Never have.
Done no research regarding smoking cessation or nicotine or the changes to the human brain.
His answer was: That's correct.
No research, no treatment, no patients, but oddly enough, take a look at this.
In early 1990s, when he began his practice
here in Florida, he got a phonecall from a lawyer representing the tobacco companies. He received that phonecall. He didn't even know why they contacted him.
I asked him: At that time you didn't -you weren't known for any research -- because he hadn't done any, he didn't do any articles -- but they called you out of the blue, and you found that odd?
And his answer was: Yes, I found that odd.
I said: Not only did you find it odd that they would call you out of the blue, you were rather perplexed about it?
And his answer was: That's right.
The next question I asked him was: And how much money have the tobacco companies paid you to date?
His answer, surprisingly, was: I don't know.
But take a look at this.
He testified, under oath in deposition, back in March, that it was likely -interesting term -- that Mr. Ciccone was addicted to nicotine. But by the time he came
here to court to testify before you, all of a sudden he changed his tune and all of a sudder it changed, as this slide shows, from "likely" to "possible."
Well, somebody didn't like "likely."
Again, the judge is going to instruct you on the credibility of witnesses and the credibility of expert witnesses. You can take them or you can leave them.
And I suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, that you leave Mr. Abramson,
Dr. Abramson, you disregard him, because we brought down Dr. Michael Cummings, this country's foremost expert on nicotine addiction and epidemiologist. He was the first witness we brought down, and he testified from Roswell Center, Roswell Cancer Institute in Buffalo, which is the oldest cancer institute in this country.
And I've prepared a slide for you to look at here on what his qualifications are. The director of a cessation -- smoking cessation center, yes. Dr. Abramson, no.
He directed the New York Quitline. He's published 312 peer-reviewed articles, book
chapters, was actually a reviewer and contributor to the Surgeon General's report, has received numerous grants, personally treated 10,000 or more smokers in trying to quit smoking.
And you'll see all of those yeses under Dr. Cummings, and a no under Dr. Abramson, who said in his deposition it was "likely" he was addicted, but they didn't like that, so by the time he came here, it was "possible" that Mr. Ciccone was addicted.
What was it that Dr. Cummings came and told you? I know it's been awhile, so I'm just going to go through them very quickly. Was a long-term heavy smoker, the smoking pattern is consistent with diagnosis of nicotine dependence, smoked daily, smoked heavily, tried to stop without success, continued to smoke even though he was told by his doctor it was serious, smoked first thing in the morning, smoked continually throughout the day, smoked if he woke up at night, found it difficult to refrain from smoking, and when he didn't smoke he felt miserable and stressed.
So his opinion was right here. Exactly
what Dr. Hirsch, the treating family doctor, said. Mr. Ciccone was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. That's the answer to Question Number 1 on the verdict form.
Two, he said Mr. Ciccone's nicotine addiction was a substantially contributing factor to his peripheral vascular disease and to death from lung cancer. We're going to discuss that.
Now I'm going to have to pick this up because I know I'm running a little bit short on time.
Mark Laliberte told you that his father came and visited him in January of 1995 when he had his wedding. He told you, under oath, that George Ciccone tried to make it up to the second story of his apartment, stopped halfway and said: I can't go any farther. My leg is hurting me.
They brought down Dr. Brewster, and Dr. Brewster came and testified: No, no, no. Walking up a flight of stairs is not going to cause any leg pain.
Well, I've -- I submit to you on those days when the elevator doesn't work in the
courthouse and you have to get from the ground floor up to the sixth floor via the stairs, walking up a flight of stairs does require physical exertion and does cause you some pain, particularly if you have peripheral vascular disease that is narrowing the arteries in your leg and in your hip.
Also, anybody that's been to the gym and gone on a StairMaster machine knows what kind of an effort that requires of your leg.
So again, I don't think that you need to -- you should set aside your common sense when it comes to deciding which witnesses to believe and which witnesses not to believe.
You recall also that Mark told you, and I mentioned this in opening statement, that he was married January of 1995, and at the reception his father tried to dance with the bride, got up on the dance floor and wasn't able to because of the pain in his leg. That came straight from the witness stand, and that is followed by this testimony.
Mr. Laliberte said. Did you ever come to understand what the problem was in his leg?
Later we found out that they had diagnosed
him with circulatory problems, and he ended up having surgery on his leg, vascular surgery on his leg, and that's when I knew what the problem was.
You didn't know at the time it was occurring in 1995? You figured it out later when he had his surgery, right?
And his answer was: Right.
So not to get too complicated. But George also had a back injury and that was causing some radiating pains. But he had the back surgery done. The leg pain from his PVD continued. And that's why it progressed to severe peripheral vascular disease that required the operation. And I'm going to get to that in a second.
You also heard from William Jones,
Mr. Ciccone's apprentice that worked with him in '94, '95, and '96, and he said: I saw him on the job site. I would park away from the job and have him walk to the shop, and he complained because I made him walk.
Would he ask you to drive him because he was in pain?
No, he would ask why wouldn't I drop him
off there and save him from having to walk because of the pain that he was suffering from.
Now, William Jones saw with his own eyes and told you: I can't see by the way he walked that something was wrong with his leg.
To pin it down datewise, he was asked:
And he continued to experience these problems, in 1994. Did you witness these physical
symptoms during that period of time?
And his answer was: Yes.
QUESTION: In 1995?
Yes.
1996?
Yes.
Ladies and gentlemen, that was the PVD, the peripheral vascular disease, that was manifesting itself by these right-leg symptoms in '95 and '96, according to the eyewitnesses that we heard from, from the witness stand.
Now, they brought an expert witness down, he was Dr. Brewster. Dr. Brewster basically testified, and we put up these statistics. His patients with peripheral vascular disease, with severe peripheral vascular disease and with life-limiting claudication, that's the cramping
and pain in the leg -- were anywheres between 75 and 90 percent.
So my question to him was: So it seems to me, Doctor, like the American cigarette has kept your waiting room rather full over the last several years?
And his answer was: Perhaps you could look at it that way.
If there's any question as to whether George's smoking caused his peripheral vascular disease, their own expert put that to rest.
And here is the direct testimony that he gave in this courtroom:
In fact, my question was: It's a substantially -- it substantially contributed to his peripheral vascular disease, right?
ANSWER: I wouldn't quarrel with that, yes.
And then I went on to ask him about his patients. I said: The 75 to 80 percent of your current patients with severe peripheral vascular disease who are smokers, many of them have tried to quit smoking and failed, correct?
And his answer was: That's a frequent story, yes.
This nicotine addiction to severe nicotine addicts is very tough to quit and causes PVD.
Now, I tried to ask the doctor a straight question, and -- about what the manifestation symptoms of peripheral vascular disease were.
We went back and forth and back and forth and back and forth. But finally I asked him: How about walking from Mr. Ciccone's truck to the gate of his shop, as he was doing in '95, and '96, at the end of a day that consisted of walking, working and lifting heavy things.
Might that be consistent with mild early manifestations of PVD?
And the doctor's response to me was, as most of their witnesses were in not giving a straight answer to the question, his answer was: How far is it from his truck to his shop?
So I said: Come on, Doctor.
And this was the response he gave: It's possible.
So they are admitting that the leg pains and hip pains that George Ciccone was experiencing in '95 and '96 on the job that were causing him to limp were mild manifestations of smoking-related peripheral
vascular disease.
Now, in keeping with their theme, which is everybody got it wrong -- in other words, all the Memorial Hospital doctors that cared and treated for George Ciccone got the wrong diagnosis; they were all wrong when they said he was suffering from nicotine addiction; they were all wrong when they said he had peripheral vascular disease; they were all wrong when they said he died of small cell lung cancer -Dr. Brewster joined the course.
I asked him a simple question about the staff and Joe DiMaggio Hospital, because in the operative report they had written "life-limiting claudication," and he kept insisting it was lifestyle limiting.
So he said: I don't know what that doctor dictated. Perhaps it was a transcriptional error.
Okay? So now it's the fault of the clerk typists at our local hospital. Okay?
And I asked him, I said: What evidence do you have that Joe DiMaggio Hospital contributed a transcription error in preparing this report?
Do you have any evidence of that?
Finally pinned him down, yes-or-no question, so he said: No.
So it was life-limiting testimony.
Most importantly, Dr. Hirsch talked about an MRI study, a lumbar X-ray study you're going to see in the records dated in June of 1991.
Dr. Hirsch got up here and said: Was he diagnosed with severe peripheral vascular disease after May of 1990?
And he said: Yes. Based on that film study.
I asked him: Does this show up overnight?
His answer was: No.
And my question: In your opinion, how long had he had it?
He said: At least for the time when the MRI was done showing the aortic vascular sclerosis.
And that MRI was done, and you'll get a copy of it, in 1991.
So I submit, ladies and gentlemen, that the answer to Question 2, in accordance with what the treating doctors have testified to and the contemporaneous medical records show, he did have peripheral vascular disease and it did
manifest itself within that window of time to allow us to qualify as class members, that is, before November of 1996.
A doctor's diagnosis is not needed.
You're going to get the instruction on that.
What is needed is manifestation of symptoms or a diagnosis.
We have manifestation of symptoms.
Now, you heard this morning that George Ciccone didn't have small cell lung cancer.
No, he really had this prostate cancer. Let me just go through things real quickly for you.
Memorial Hospital oncologists Dr. Wittlin and Dr. Greenhawt diagnosed lung cancer. Memorial Hospital chemotherapy treatment was for lung cancer. The mediastinal X-ray mass, lung cancer.
Look right here. They circled it. You can barely see the circle. You can see all of the red arrows. That looks like the chest to me. That looks like the lung to me. He had it. That's what every single doctor that treated him at Memorial Hospital said. And they brought Dr. Cole, their $800,000 radiol- -- $800,000 they paid Dr. Cole, who
testified in 75 or 80 cases for R.J. Reynolds alone, he looked at that same film and said no, there's nothing there. Nothing there. They're all wrong. Nothing there, had to have been prostate cancer.
You recall, I will show it to you again, but Dr. Wittlin, the Memorial Hospital oncologist in charge of George's care and treatment, diagnosed him with small cell lung cancer, not small cell prostate cancer.
Went on the record and he signed the official State of Florida death certificate, which you'll get when you go back there, and it says cause -- immediate cause of death, signed by Dr. Wittlin back in 2002, before the lawyers were involved: Small cell cancer of the lung.
Now they also asked you about the bone scan. We have that. It shows tumors all over. Our doctors say that's consistent with small cell lung cancer. Their $1,000-an-hour expert who came in today says, no, no, small cell prostate cancer.
Their $800,000 radiologist who came in the other day says no, no, no, small cell prostate cancer. But there's not one single piece of
evidence, not one single record in the chart that says small cell prostate cancer.
Now, what did Dr. Hirsch say? He sent the patient to Dr. Wittlin. Dr. Wittlin certified the cause of death to be small cell lung cancer. He's totally in agreement with that.
I asked him: Have you ever heard of small cell cancer of the prostate? He said nope, never heard of it. In 24 years of treating patients in Broward County, he's never had a case of small cell prostate cancer.
Here we go. He's known Dr. Wittlin personally and professionally for 24 years.
Dr. Wittlin, who is busy right now taking care of cancer patients at Hollywood Memorial, wrote in his records: Small cell cancer of the lung.
I asked Dr. Hirsch very quickly: Tell us what is a death certificate? It's a legal document certifying a cause of death. A physician has to sign off on that and their signature and their license and the date that they sign it, affirming the cause of death.
Ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is overwhelming this man died of small cell cancer of the lung.
Small cell cancer is very rare, we thought, until we heard from their $1,000-an-hour expert who came in today and said it's not so rare.
Well, if it's not so rare, then, ladies and gentlemen, what they're saying to you is that every doctor and every nurse and every healthcare professional that treated George Ciccone at the Memorial Hospital system missed it, got it wrong. It's the most massive medical malpractice case you can imagine. They all missed it.
Here's another list of items: CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis, normal prostate.
You'll see that record. That's the only record that mentions prostate. All of this PSA tests were normal. No retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy.
Dr. Taylor, the pathologist we brought in, gave you the death rates, and he used government statistics.
The bottom line is it's 900 to 1 small cell lung cancer versus small cell prostate cancer.
The only oncologist, that is, cancer
doctor, that you heard from was Dr. Robert Gale, who came in, very well-known, internationally known doctor, he came in and told you he had received a medal from the Russian government for going to Chernobyl and injecting himself so that he could go treat the victims of radiation that had cancer from that disaster.
He told you he went over to Japan, at the most recent disaster, at the invitation of the Japanese government, to help patients over there. He told you -- he's testified he's diagnosed 50 to 100 lung cancer cases. He said overwhelming evidence in this case is it's lung cancer.
The pathologist who we brought down testified lung cancer beyond a reasonable doubt. Dr. Feingold, who put up the model and showed you that the mass is actually in the lung, it's in the chest, it's in the root of the lung, said beyond a reasonable doubt. He's almost never seen small cell prostate cancer.
All three experts testified that the Memorial Hospital doctors and the death certificate were exactly correct. They got it
right here. The only ones that are saying that they didn't get it right are Dr. Cole, the R.J. Reynolds witness, paid over $800,000 in court from the witness stand.
Mr. Millard brought him all the medical records, put it in front of him and said: Show me, Doctor, where prostate cancer exists in the medical records.
Couldn't point to a single record here in front of you. That was the exact question.
So your answer is there are no records from any treating physician that Mr. Ciccone was treated for prostate cancer at any time; isn't that true?
ANSWER: That's correct.
Just to wrap it all up, Mr. -- Dr. Hirsch came in and talked about George's prostate and that test in 1999. He said that test shows George's prostate was normal. I asked him:
Did you ever know George during the time you treated him from 1990 to the time he died to ever have a problem with his prostate?
ANSWER: No.
Did any doctor that you're aware of in the Memorial Healthcare System, while George was
under your care and treatment, ever diagnose him with prostate cancer?
ANSWER: Not that I'm aware of.
Here we go again. He talks about the problems men have with their prostate. I'm not going to read them to you, but this question was important. Did George Ciccone ever have any of those problems including -THE CLERK: Five more minutes.
MR. WICHMANN: Okay.
-- including cancer that you enunciated to the jury while he was under your care and treatment for the prostate?
Not that I'm aware of, no.
CAT scan of the abdomen, I asked about that. He said it shows no more abnormalities to Mr. Ciccone's prostate.
I asked him what a PSA test was. He explained to you all that that's a test for prostate cancer. They were all normal in his patient George Ciccone. He said: Based on my scope and treatment with the patient, there was no evidence to feel he had prostate cancer.
They're all up in arms over this rectal exam. Well, Dr. Gale told you that the
American Cancer Society and U.S. government no longer require a rectal exam for -- as a diagnostic tool for prostate cancer. But I asked Dr. Hirsch: Did he like the idea of a rectal exam while he was under your care and treatment?
ANSWER: I don't think he would have liked it under anyone's care.
How about the colonoscopy?
ANSWER: Same answer.
My question to him was: Was that unusual for male patients?
He said: That's something that's commonly seen in male and female patients.
Are you aware, sir, of any record in your chart to suggest that he ever had prostate cancer?
No. No.
While we're on the subject of the R.J. Reynolds experts, you recall Dr. Greenwood. I asked her: Isn't it true the first time you ever set foot in a courtroom was in this case, and she had been paid $200,000 for that performance that she put on last week.
She testified that basically everybody in
America knew that cigarettes were addictive and caused disease, but she also put up an interesting little display, where she talked about a book from the early 1900s that called cigarettes "little white slavers."
And defense counsel asked her: Are you familiar with other slang terms used to describe smoking?
And she said cigarette fiend is another term they applied since the early 1900s to cigarette smokers, people you know, who were out of control because they craved cigarettes.
Those are exactly the terms that Dr. Hirsch, Mr. Ciccone's treating physician, used from the witness stand. He said he smoked like a fiend. Things haven't changed that much since 1900, ladies and gentlemen.
Finally, and I'm going to wrap it up here,
I asked her -- she was another witness that R.J. Reynolds paid a lot of money to, we couldn't get a straight answer, in my view, from her from the witness stand. Couldn't get a yes-or-no answer.
And here my question was, I asked it five times of her, six times of her: Have you found
in your research anywhere over the last 50 years, one public statement by R.J. Reynolds before the year 2000 to the American public that the use of their products would cause addiction, lung cancer and death?
And her answer is: No.
That, ladies and gentlemen, was the Reynolds campaign of misinformation that the Wall Street Journal called the most successful campaign in American business history. Because they wanted people like George Ciccone who were addicted to their products to doubt the public service message and keep on smoking and so that their profits could go up and 400,000 Americans a year died.
She had professed, she claimed, tobacco was only one voice that was getting drowned out by everybody else. You remember that testimony?
Everybody knew and tobacco -- they were just one little peep, peeping voice in the corner.
Well, I asked her: Every year from 1975 to 2005 they spent billions to advertise and promote a product that is addictive and causes
disease, correct?
And she: Well, actually I think it was a million, but I won't quibble. The total is in the billions.
I said: That's a lot of money spent by tobacco to advertise and promote their product.
She said: Yep, that's right.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, I want to close. There was one clip that was played to you, and it was garbled and it was played to you garbled because our technician was out of town at the time. I would like to play that to you now so you see it clearly.
That's PT1681, please.
(Video clip played as follows:)
VOICE: From CBS Washington, in color, Face the Nation, a spontaneous and unrehearse news interview with Joseph Cullman III, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Philip Morris Incorporated, and Chairman of the Executive Committee of The Tobacco Institute.
VOICE: We do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that.
That's because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
So -- I did read that report, and I concluded from that report that it's true that babies born from women who smoke are smaller. But they're just as healthy as the babies born from women who do not smoke.
VOICE: What about the high rate of deaths?
VOICE: And some women would prefer having smaller babies.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. WICHMANN: Some women would prefer having smaller babies from smoking cigarettes. That's 1971.
Now, he was on The Tobacco Institute.
That was the public relations entity for R.J. Reynolds. That's what he was telling the American people in 1971. These are the people we're dealing with in this courtroom, ladies and gentlemen.
And last, but not least, it was
Dr. Greenwood, their $200,000 expert, who said: Everybody knew.
Well, I can tell you seven people that didn't know. I showed it to you before. They were the seven CEOs of the tobacco companies not in 1950, not in 1960, and not in 1974. In 1994. They were in front of the U.S. Congress, and they raised their right hand to tell the truth; and they told the Congress and the American people cigarette smoking was not addictive and didn't cause disease.
And that, ladies and gentlemen, was a lie. That was designed to create doubt. There is no doubt, ladies and gentlemen, in this case.
We respectfully thank you for all the time and attention you've given and ask you to pay the same attention to Mr. Boyce as you did to me. And when you get this verdict form, the answer overwhelmingly on the scales that we put up, based on what the doctors and nurses who saw George, who cared and treated for George, not the high-paid experts have to say.
Every answer, ladies and gentlemen, should be "yes." Thank you for your time.



PLAINTIFF'S CLOSING ARGUMENT (REBUTTAL;
MR. WICHMANN: The defense lawyer got up and talked to you all about blame, and the
reason he did that is because the facts are against him. These are the questions you have to answer today. There's no question in here about blame. That's a Phase II issue. We will get to that after these three questions are answered.
And I guarantee you there's not going to be -- it's not going to be another week of Phase II. We're not going to call all those witnesses that Mr. Faxon told you we were going to call.
But let me point out one thing to you. He said nothing on the pathology report says lung cancer.
Baron, can you put the pathology report up, please? Yeah. Highlight it. Please.
Right there.
Does not rule out lung as the primary.
That was not correct.
Second of all, he said: No doctor made a diagnosis in the records of lung cancer.
Would you put up Dr. Wittlin's discharge summary, please?
Date of discharge. History of small cell carcinoma.
A little bit lower, please.
Discharge diagnosis: Small cell carcinoma of the lung.
Dr. Wittlin is a very busy cancer doctor. He's busy treating patients. That's why he's not here today.
But to the death certificate, please.
That's a diagnosis. They got up here and said there was no diagnosis in the records. You'll get that. Take a look at it. There's the death certificate: Small cell cancer of the lung, signed by Frederick Wittlin, certified, an official State of Florida document.
So what they said is not correct.
About this letter that Ms. Ciccone wrote to Dr. Hirsch, she got up there and told you:
I never paid attention to it. Well, she was trying to help gather evidence for her lawyers but the doctor said it had nothing to do with anything.
They talk a lot about blame.
The judge is going to give you an instruction. Here it is.
Baron, can you take that down, please?
Legal cause. Addiction need not be the
only cause. No blame in this phase. It's in Phase II.
Now they talked about PVD.
Would you put that slide up, please?
Okay. The instruction the judge will give you is that manifestation of symptoms or a diagnosis. 1994, 1995, 1996, William Jones described the physical symptoms that George Ciccone had with the pain in his leg, the claudication in his hip.
Mark Laliberte at his wedding said: My father was having difficulty getting up the second floor, he had pain in his leg. That was in January of '95. That's before the date. He also said: My father had trouble dancing because of his leg and his hip. That's before November of 1996.
And in 1998, he had the back surgery that they thought was causing his symptoms. Lo and behold, it didn't fix his problem because in 1999 he had -- finally -- had the PVD symptoms that cured his problem [sic].
Mr. Boyce said that the small babies clip was Philip Morris. Philip Morris, Philip Morris. No. Mr. Cullman was a member of The
Tobacco Institute that was the mouthpiece, the public relations entity for R.J. Reynolds. He was speaking in that capacity, not for another cigarette company.
Said no effort to quit. That's just not the evidence in this case.
Yes, please.
MR. PHILIPSON: One more time.
What number?
MR. WICHMANN: 001.
Right there.
You've seen it I don't know how many more times.
A little bit higher, please, a little bit lower.
This is Dr. Hirsch's record. Patient here for smoking cessation. Wants to stop. No major complaints otherwise. Impression, nicotine addiction.
Show them the date, please, Baron.
Okay. They said he didn't want to quit.
Dr. Hirsch already testified, I showed you that. I know I told you that I wasn't going to show you these medical records because you've seen them before. I apologize. But I think
that the evidence was a little misstated.
Not working again. So let me show you this one. This one we went over. This is from December of 1999, Dr. Hirsch talked about it.
He recently stopped smoking and is now using the patch.
The facts, the medical records are against them, so they're going to want to blame George Ciccone. That's a Phase II issue. The issue is was he addicted, did he have PVD before November 21, 1996, and did he suffer from lung cancer?
The most outrageous statement is to say that George Ciccone, as an 11-year-old boy, made a conscious choice to smoke cigarettes.
George was 11. You will get the ads that R.J. Reynolds put in front of him for Phil Silvers and for Lucky Strike, that his brother said: We sat in front of the TV as 11-year-olds and watched it and saw it, and his brother said: We were influenced. Everyone was influenced to smoke based on those ads.
It's offensive to say that an 11-year-old child can make a conscious choice. It's also offensive to say that an adult can make a
conscious choice when they don't have all the information that they need to make that choice because the tobacco companies for 50 years misrepresented that nicotine was addictive and misrepresented that cigarette smoking caused disease. That's not a choice.
He was addicted, according to his doctors.
He tried to quit, according to his doctors.
The records here, and he was unable. And Dr. Hirsch said that is not -- that is the classic sign of someone who is a severe -severely nicotine addicted. Addicted, trying to quit, unable to, relapsing, and trying back again. That was Dr. Cummings, that was his own treating physician, ladies and gentlemen.
Do I have any time left, Judge?
THE COURT: You have one minute, sir.
MR. WICHMANN: Ladies and gentlemen, you job as jurors is to follow the law that the judge instructs you on. And address these three questions. Questions of blame, questions of fault all go to the next phase of the trial.
I promise you it won't be a week. It won't be that long. That's when you get to hear what they knew and when they knew it, and that's
when you get to assign blame.
Thank you again for being such great jurors and coming down here and doing your civic duty.
