DEFENDANT'S CLOSING ARGUMENT
MR. BOYCE: Thank you, Your Honor.
May it please the Court.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
THE JURORS: Good afternoon.
MR. BOYCE: It's nice to see each of you, and because it's the last time I get to speak with you, I want to take a moment at the outset to thank each and every one of you for your attention and your willingness to serve as jurors in this case.
The American legal system would not work if it wasn't for people like you who are willing to put your lives on hold and come down and serve as jurors.
I'm here because it's my job.
Mr. Wichmann is here because it's his job, but not you. You're different. For many people, the price of citizenship is as easy as paying your taxes or going to vote. But not you.
You're different. And for that you should be proud, and for that you should all understand how grateful each and every one of us is.
And so on behalf of myself and Mr. Faxon and our team, Ms. Theriot, Ms. Kaufman,
Mr. Riddles and Ms. McKinniss and especially
the men and women who are the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, thank you.
You heard a little bit about the burden of proof, and Judge Tuter is going to instruct you on this once the case is over. But as we talked about at the very outset, there is no slight tipping of the scales.
The burden of proof is all with the plaintiff. They have to take their evidence from 0 to 51 percent on every single issue on the case. And we talked about this in voir dire. There is no slight tipping of the scales. The burden is theirs on every single issue.
And that's one of the most important things about being a juror. It's not just that you've all gotten up early to be here or that you've suffered through uncomfortable chairs or maybe even been brave enough to try the food down on the third floor. It's the promise you made to be fair and impartial, and it's the promise you made to decide this case solely on the facts and evidence that the plaintiffs prove from Mr. Ciccone.
This is not a referendum on the tobacco
industry. No matter how much Mr. Wichmann wants to make it that, that's not what this case is about.
This case is about one individual; it's about Mr. Ciccone. And at the end of the day your verdict has to be based simply on the facts and the evidence that plaintiffs have proved for Mr. Ciccone.
Now you saw the verdict form earlier, and as you probably figured out, there's really two cases in this trial. Let's talk about the first. It concerns peripheral vascular disease or PVD. Everyone agrees that Mr. Ciccone's PV[ was caused by smoking. But the inquiry does not end there. The case will end and you will go home if you find that Mr. Ciccone's PVD manifested itself after November 21, 1996.
MR. WICHMANN: I'm going to object, Your Honor. I object to that. That's incorrect.
Can I have a sidebar on that?
THE COURT: No, you cannot. Ladies and gentlemen -MR. WICHMANN: The case, there's three questions they have to answer.
THE COURT: Mr. Wichmann, Mr. Wichmann.
The jury will be charged on your responsibilities by me. Both sides can make arguments in the case. I will instruct you on the law what you must do when you retire to the jury room.
Go ahead, Mr. Boyce.
MR. BOYCE: Let me just back up and tell you what I mean.
You've heard Phase II, Phase II, Phase II over and over in this case from the plaintiffs. There is no Phase II unless plaintiffs prove they are entitled to it.
We just had the All Star game, so let me suggest this thought for you. You could look at Phase I as if it's the 162 games that a baseball team has to play to earn their right into the playoffs and Phase II is the playoffs.
But they're not entitled to Phase II. It's not up to Mr. Wichmann; it's not up to Mr. Depew. It's up to you. You decide whether we come back for another week to see Dr. Cummings aga and Dr. Kyriakoudes again and Dr. Feingold again.
That decision is yours. There is no Phase II in this case unless plaintiffs prove
that they're entitled to it.
Now we will go through each one of the questions on the verdict form. But I want to just spend a minute on the first issue, and it really boils down to a simple question, and that is, why did Mr. Ciccone smoke and why did he smoke for as long as he did without ever trying to quit?
Did he smoke because of an advertisement? Or did he smoke because smoking was part of his lifestyle, something he liked, something he enjoyed?
I want to point out some of the key evidence you saw that shows that whether you call smoking a habit or an addiction or a compulsive use or a behavior, that at the end of the day, Mr. Ciccone was a man who knew the risks of smoking and made a decision to accept those risks for himself.
Plaintiff wants you to think that everything you have to decide in this case is easy, and that's why they're always talking about Phase II. They want to get to Phase II so bad they can't help themselves. They don't have a right to that.
If they don't prove their case, this case is over, and you go home.
If it's as easy as plaintiff suggests, ask yourselves this question when you go back to deliberate. Ask yourselves why they brought 12 witnesses in a preliminary phase. If they're going to get to Phase II so easily, ask yourself why they brought six doctors, five fact witnesses, and Mrs. Ciccone.
It's not that easy.
They only want you to think it's easy because their case has no connection to the life that Mr. Ciccone led. To the life that the Ciccones chose for themselves. There's never been a connection.
We talked about this in opening statement. Their burden of proof can be thought of as a drawbridge, and they have to close that drawbridge. They have to connect Reynolds to Mr. Ciccone. And they never did. None of the statements you saw, none of the clips they played, there was never any evidence that Mr. Ciccone saw them or heard them or took some action upon them.
Two different train tracks. It's not real
life. It's not a smoker's story that you heard. It's a lawyer's story.
Think about all the positions they took in this case without ever proving to you that Reynolds caused Mr. Ciccone to smoke and cau him to smoke for more than 40 years without ever trying to quit.
First was addiction. Their experts suggest that addiction is just a numbers game. You heard it time and time again. You heard it from Dr. Cummings and Dr. Feingold,
Dr. Kyriakoudes. For them it's as simple as this. You smoke a pack or two packs a day for a certain number of years you must be addicted.
It's not that simple. But think about what that means for a second. For plaintiff's experts to conclude that you're being compelled to smoke, all they need to know is that you smoke a lot; they don't need to know who you are, what kind of life you've chosen to live, what you know. They don't need to know anything else about you other than some numbers.
That's what addiction means to them, and that's what's behind Dr. Hirsch's statement
from 1990.
Nothing shows it more than one of the tests that Dr. Cummings used when he was here. It's called the Fagerstrom test. He mentioned it on his testimony, he ran Mr. Ciccone through it and scored Mr. Ciccone for you.
But you might remember when Mr. Depew spent a lot of time criticizing me for a chart I used in opening about the dozens of people in Mr. Ciccone's life who had quit smoking and who Mr. Ciccone never asked for help, never asked them how they quit, never asked for their advise.
They said, Well, Dr. Cummings only smoked two or three cigarettes; he was never a real smoker; couldn't be addicted. I think they said it was a misrepresentation.
Let me show you how Dr. Cummings scored o the Fagerstrom test. How soon after you wake up? He gets a zero.
Do you find it difficult to refrain from smoking? He gets a zero. Which cigarette would you hate most to give up? Zero.
How many cigarettes per day? Zero. Do you smoke more frequently during the first
hours? Zero.
Do you smoke even if you are ill and in bed most of the day? Zero.
He gets a zero on every question. Let's see how he did. Very low dependence.
Zero to two is very low dependence. What kind of test is that? What kind of a test is it when a zero means you're low dependence? The only time that comes into play is when the general in the war on tobacco comes in here to advance his cause. It's the same as labeling someone who doesn't drink alcohol an alcoholic. It's meaningless.
If a zero means you're mildly dependent, it's not a test worth relying on, but it underscores what's really behind their allegations of addiction. And again, it's no connection to Mr. Ciccone.
Nothing shows how far afield their story is from Mr. Ciccone's real life than all the industry statements we saw in this case.
And I want to spend a minute at the outset to tell you one thing. Some of the things you've seen on TV in here are just stupid.
There is no way to defend some of that stuff.
When a Philip Morris executive goes on TV and says low birth weight babies might not be a bad idea, it's just stupid. There is no way to defend it.
But what's important in this case is that has no connection to Mr. Ciccone at all. You can't assume that some smoker saw it and took some action upon it.
You can only base your verdict on the facts that they have connected to Mr. Ciccone. And there's no evidence he ever saw that. But I don't want you to think for a minute that we're going to waste our time debating that statement. It's a Philip Morris executive on TV, and that's it.
But what's important is there was never a connection to Mr. Ciccone.
Now, I think you may remember this chart, and I want to go through it. I think it will show you how far afield is the lawyer's story that they're trying to pitch to you from the real life smoker's story that Mr. Ciccone's life was.
And you might remember this chart. They used it in the cross-examination of
Dr. Greenwood. We heard about industry statements for weeks in this case. We went from Dr. Cummings to Mr. Wichmann yelling at Dr. Greenwood about microphones in the dark day after day, hour after hour, statement after statement. But not one piece of evidence connecting it to Mr. Ciccone.
And look around the outside. There's Marlboro in the upper right corner. There's Anne Browder. Plaintiffs only got one thing right about this chart. They didn't draw arrows from the outside to Mr. Ciccone. And the reason they didn't is the evidence wouldn't let them.
They should have put a brick wall around the inside because there's a fundamental difference between what is on the outside and what's on the inside. And that fundamental difference is real evidence. Real life.
But look at what's on the outside.
We have Marlboro and Superman II.
Remember they talked about World War I? We've got billboards. We've got more Marlboro on the side. We have the CEOs. We have Anne Browder We have Jed Clampett and Lucille Ball. Jed
Clampett and Marlboro and Superman II. Think about that for a second. They started with World War I. We went from World War I to Superman II, and they skipped right over Mr. Ciccone.
If you look carefully in the bottom there you will see my favorite one, that's the Virginia Slims Championships. For many years Philip Morris sponsored a tennis tournament for female tennis players called the Virginia Slims Championships. And if you look really carefully you'll see Martina Navratilova and Chris Evert-Lloyd. Martina Navratilova and George Ciccone.
Plaintiff would have you believe that Mr. Ciccone smoked because Philip Morris sponsored a tennis tournament for women. Wh could be more different than a women's tennis tournament and the man that we heard Mr. Ciccone was in this case?
If you look carefully at the brand picture, I think that's a woman from the '20s.
It might be a flapper with a tennis racquet.
But think about that.
Plaintiffs can never close their
drawbridge of proof when you have Martina Navratilova on one side and George Ciccone on the other.
Women's tennis and George Ciccone. That's how far they're willing to go. That's how hard they have to stretch to try to connect the story that the attorneys have told you with the real life that Mr. Ciccone led.
And nothing says it more than Marlboro.
We must have heard Marlboro three dozen times in this case. Philip Morris this. Marlboro that. Marlboro was in the movies. Marlboro is a big brand. Mr. Ciccone never smoked Marlboro. He never smoked Philip Morris brands. He never smoked Marlboro. They're not here. But they want you to think that it mattered to him. They want to distract you from the life he led and the choices he made for himself.
The reason we put a brick wall on this chart is because there is real-life evidence connecting what is on the inside to Mr. Ciccone.
And you heard it for a long time here.
Let me back up.
You see on the outside that that's Mr. Horrigan, and he appeared on the Nightline program that you heard about in Mr. Wichmann's opening statement. Mr. Ciccone never saw that program, but you heard more about that.
You heard that in eight previous trials Dr. Cummings has used that same clip. You heard about after these trials plaintiff's experts get together with the attorneys and they practice their presentations, they analyze their tactics, and they try to improve their chances of winning.
Dr. Cummings has testified about that very Nightline in eight previous trials,
Dr. Kyriakoudes in two.
You also learned that Nightline has been on every weeknight since 1980. It's aired more than 4,000 times. Of all those 4,000 programs,
Mrs. Ciccone remembers one. She remembers the one that Mr. Horrigan was on. One out of more than 4,000.
But you also learn that her very first deposition she told us she couldn't remember where she heard it. She couldn't remember if it was TV or radio. She wasn't sure who it
was; she wasn't sure when she heard it.
After several corrections to her sworn testimony, in her last deposition she told us she could now see his face. She called him Mr. Hooligan, and she testified that she could see his face. Over the course of three depositions and a variety of changes to sworn testimony, she went from not being sure whether it was on the radio to being able to picture a man's face.
One show out of 4,000.
But again, Mr. Ciccone never saw it. He didn't watch the Nightline.
And don't forget, when this Nightline program aired, Mrs. Ciccone was living in a very rural area, she was getting up at 3 a.m., doing a lot of chores around the farm.
Nightline started at 11:30 and ran to 12:30 a.m. when Mr. Horrigan was on there.
You get to decide what weight to give those claims. You get to decide whether that was part of the real life the Ciccones led or whether that's part of the story that Dr. Cummings and Mr. Wichmann have created for Mr. Ciccone in this lawsuit for money.
But again, what's important here is Mr. Ciccone never saw it. He didn't see that program. There is no evidence connecting Mr. Ciccone to any of the stuff on the outside. Jed Clampett? Superman? World War I? Whi did they get this stuff? Where is the evidence that any of this mattered to Mr. Ciccone and the man that he was?
It's a lawyer's story. It is not a smoker's story.
The difference with this chart is the inside. The inside is what the evidence is in this case. And it's clear. I will just run through it with you quickly.
There is a little bar there that says "family." But you learned in this case that from the time Mr. Ciccone was a little boy his mother told him that smoking would stunt his growth. You heard from his brother Paul that from the very first time they smoked they knew that it was having an obvious effect on their body. You heard that in 1964 Mr. Ciccone and his brother discussed the Surgeon General's report. He was 18 years old in 1964.
You heard how in 1986 the warning labels
went on the side of the pack for the first time. Mr. Ciccone was 20 years old in 1966.
You also heard how in the early '70s, his brother Paul and he would watch some of the PSAs we've seen. We had R2-D2. We had Larr Hagman. There were a variety of commercials out there that were specifically directed to the risks of smoking, and we know Mr. Ciccone saw those. That is much different than Lucille Ball. That is much different than Marlboro and Superman II.
In 1971, Mr. Ciccone's father died of a smoking-related disease. In 1980 their close family friend, Elizabeth Spurling, "Boots," passed away from lung cancer, from smoking. The Ciccones knew that.
In 1985 the warning labels changed to state without a doubt that smoking causes lung cancer, and in 1990, Dr. Hirsch told Mr. Ciccone that he needed to stop smoking.
Remember what Dr. Cummings said when he was here. He said every step of that way,
1964, 1966, 1971, 1985, 1980, Mr. Ciccone did not try to quit. Not tried and failed; didn't try. He wasn't interested in stopping.
It's natural that his family wishes he had made different choices and had different priorities, but the evidence in this case is clear that for him quitting was not a priority. There's no evidence that he wanted to quit and couldn't, and nothing says it more than two decades of personal awareness of the risk of smoking followed by no effort to change his behavior.
I also want you to know that you learned a lot about what was behind this debate that the tobacco companies were in. Reynolds was in this debate where they were debating technical terms like addiction and causation. They probably shouldn't have been in that debate in the first place, and there is no doubt they were in that debate for way too long.
But I want to point out one thing to you. You've heard this about the website many times. It's actually 1999 when that changed. And this case presents an interesting opportunity for you. You get to look and see whether it made any difference to Mr. Ciccone.
You have smoking before Reynolds stated publicly that smoking caused disease and you
have smoking after Reynolds stated publicly that smoking caused disease, and that cutoff is 1999.
1999 is also important because that's when Dr. Pearl and Dr. Farber told Mr. Ciccone if he didn't quit smoking he might lose his legs.
So the website is out there to the public, all of the documents that you've heard advertised as a reason to get to Phase II go up on the website. Anybody can look at them.
It's 1999.
What happened after 1999? Not a single change in Mr. Ciccone's behavior. He wasn't waiting for word from Reynolds to quit. He wasn't waiting for word from Dr. Pearl to quit. And the best evidence of this comes from Mrs. Ciccone herself.
Did Mr. Ciccone tell you he wanted to stop smoking in 1999?
No.
Did you see Mr. Ciccone doing anything that led you to believe that he wanted to quit smoking at that time?
ANSWER: No.
He was not waiting for Reynolds' word.
None of this mattered to him. None of this matters to any real smokers. This is a lawyer's story. This is not real life. This is not a smoker's story.
But this case is very interesting, because you can look when you go back to deliberate, and you see whether Mr. Ciccone tried to change his behavior in 1999 or 2000 or 2001 and 2002. There's no evidence that he was trying to control his behavior and failing after those dates. It's a unanimous message from Reynolds and from his doctor. And the only thing that stayed the same was his smoking.
And Mrs. Ciccone again put it best. We asked her: Is there anything anyone could have told Mr. Ciccone that would get him to stop smoking?
And she said no.
In your opinion, nothing that anyone could have said to Mr. Ciccone that would have made him stop smoking. Is that true?
That's correct.
That's the plaintiff in this case. She admits that he didn't do anything to quit after 1999. She admits that he didn't do anything
that even indicated to her that he was interested in quitting after 1999, and she admits that there's nothing anyone could have said to him that would have changed his behavior. That should be the end of the case right there.
Now the medical records, as you've seen, repeatedly show that Mrs. Ciccone's opinion of her husband and his priorities were right. And again, in her own handwriting. Interested in stopping.
No.
We can call Mr. Ciccone's smoking whatever we want. We can call it addiction. We can call it habit. We can call it behavior. We can call it compulsive. It doesn't matter.
What matters is, he was not interested in changing. This was not a man who wanted to be saved from his smoking, and this was not a man who needed to be saved from his smoking. But that is Mrs. Ciccone's handwriting, and that is
1998.	1998.
He started smoking in 1958 or 1960. But in her own hand she says: Interested in stopping.
No.
Now Mr. Wichmann and Mrs. Ciccone are now in here trying to convince you that he couldn't stop. But outside of court, in 1998, in a doctor's office, where you can get help with quitting if you want it or you can get some assistance and change your behavior if you're interested in it, Mrs. Ciccone said: Not interested.
Not "not able," not "can't," not "addicted and can't stop."
Not interested.
So how do plaintiff's attorneys try to connect the dots when there is no evidence?
Well, that's where Dr. Kyriakoudes came in.
That's the assistant professor who came in here and told you that he had looked at a bunch of advertisements and a bunch of documents and his opinion was Mr. Ciccone was typical.
When I cross-examined him, I asked him if he had any evidence connecting any of the stuff he talked about during his testimony to Mr. Ciccone, and he said no, but Mr. Ciccone was typical.
And I asked him: What do historians call
this kind of opinion, when you assume that things might have been different if something else was said or you assume that everybody is the same?
And he said: "Counterfactual."
I agree. His entire approach to this case, plaintiff's entire attempt to connect industry statements, advertising, all the stuff they want to distract you with, their entire attempt to connect that to Mr. Ciccone is counter to the facts of his life. Counter to the evidence in this case. And Dr. Kyriakoudes admitted it.
First of all, we know Mr. Ciccone was not typical. And we went through this time and time again. Those advertising figures you saw about a half hour ago, those are total figures for all the tobacco companies.
From 1967 to 1987, Mr. Ciccone's main brand was Chesterfield Kings. Not made by Reynolds.
From 1987 to 2002, his main brand was Raleigh, which was made by Brown & Williamson which is part of R.J. Reynolds. But for 20 years he smoked a different brand, and after
Raleigh he smoked GPC.
Had any of you heard of Chesterfield or Raleigh or GPC before this case?
People don't know these brands for a simple reason. They're not promoted, just like Dr. Kyriakoudes advertised [sic]. They are not advertised. They are not supported. That's what Dr. Kyriakoudes told you.
I showed him more evidence of how Mr. Ciccone was not typical. What was typical for his generation was to switch to filtered cigarettes. He never switched to a filtered cigarette. He would rip the filter off of the cigarette.
Addiction doesn't cause anyone to rip a filter off of a cigarette. That's his behavior. But again, they just want you to assume he's like everyone else. They want you to fill in the blanks. They want you to close the drawbridge for them and you can't. The law will not allow you to rely on assumptions, to rely on supposition, to rely on things that are counter to the facts.
We also talked about how what's common for people in Mr. Ciccone's age group is to quit
smoking. There are more former smokers in that age group than there are current smokers. But Dr. Kyriakoudes wants you to ignore all that.
He wants you to pretend that Mr. Ciccone is just like everyone else.
They took another step. They said, well, he got a GED, maybe that's why he's addicted. Maybe that's why he doesn't want to quit. Remember that testimony?
Then they talked about, well, he didn't have a lot of money. And sometimes if you have a regular job it's harder to quit.
Is there anyone here who can honestly agree that Mr. Ciccone didn't have enough monej to quit smoking? That's how far they're willing to go to try to explain away the choices this man made for himself during his life.
What does having a GED have to do with quitting? What does having a regular job have to do with quitting? Nothing.
There is no connection. Plaintiffs are not suggesting that people with regular jobs are genetically different and unable to quit.
But that's how far they'll go. That's how hard
they have to stretch to try to connect the lawyer's story to the real-life story of Mr. Ciccone's life.
There's a quote that I think originally came from John Adams. It's been reattributed several times lately, and it's that's facts are stubborn things. Facts are stubborn things.
And the facts here are so stubborn that no matter how hard plaintiffs try to explain them away, they just can't. They can't get around them. The stubborn facts of Mr. Ciccone's life will not let them.
I hope you saw more in this case than what plaintiffs want you to focus on. I hope you saw that addiction is not a math problem. I hope you saw that people don't smoke because of Jed Clampett or World War I or Superman II.
I hope you saw that what matters is the person in there, and that person in this case was Mr. Ciccone. A man who wore cigarettes. You heard that from Dr. Hirsch. Mr. Ciccone was the kind of guy who put cigarettes in his sleeve and wore them to the doctor's office.
For Mr. Ciccone, cigarettes were part of his wardrobe. At the doctor's office.
I don't know about you, but when I think about somebody with a pack of cigarettes rolled in their sleeve, I think about James Dean or Marlon Brando. I don't think, There goes a helpless addict, unable to control his behavior. You think about tough men, men who took responsibility for their actions.
But when you wear cigarettes, the one conclusion that's fair is that this is a man who is at peace with himself, at peace with the choices he made, and proud of the life that he has chosen to lead for himself. There is no shame in that.
And that's what Dr. Abramson is really talking about. That's what they mean by a tormented smoker. They mean somebody that wants to change their behavior and is suffering stress because of an inability to do so. And that was not Mr. Ciccone. For him cigarettes were part of his life, something he liked, and something that he actually wore and told other people that he liked.
Now smoking, as you learned in this case, is truly something different. It's not like any other behavior. It's not something someone
makes you do. It is a personal choice behavior.
And that's just what Dr. Hammond said, way back in 1955:
(Video clip played as follows:)
VOICE: In my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers, and they are being warned. What they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. BOYCE: Just like the American Cancer Society said in 1966: Congress has acted. The next step is yours.
Just like the Surgeon General said time and time again: Cigarette smoking is a personal choice behavior.
Personal choice behavior such as smoking. Cigarette smoking is addictive, but the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior.
And just like Dr. Koop. Dr. Koop's the man who adopted the revised definition that includes nicotine and caffeine and a whole bunch of behaviors back in 1988. But this is
Dr. Koop today: The choice to light up is always yours. Ultimately you are the one that has control over your behavior.
From 1955 to today with Dr. Koop.
Cigarette smoking is a personal choice behavior.
Because it's a personal choice behavior, that's why the person matters. That's why the who you are matters. That's why the what happened matters. That's why your life matters. This is a man who smoked for more than 40 years.
Think about how much time Mr. Wichmann spent on that. They want you to think that he had a cigarette in 1958 and you fast-forward to 2002. They want to skip his entire life, the kind of man he was and the choices he made. The evidence in this case won't let them.
Now I want to switch gears for a moment, and we will come back to this first question.
But I want to switch gears for a moment and I want to talk about how Mr. Ciccone died.
Plaintiff's case essentially boils down to this: Mr. Ciccone smoked, smokers get lung cancer, Mr. Ciccone must have had lung cancer.
You learned it's not that simple. It's another math problem for them. You learned in this case that maybe one in ten smokers get lung cancer. 90 percent of smokers do not get that disease. You heard that from Dr. Cummings. They want you to say, well, smokers get more lung cancer than nonsmokers, and he smoked, it must be a cancer.
It's not that simple. Nonsmokers get a lot of cancer too. Smokers and nonsmokers alike get cancers like prostate cancer and stomach cancer. Cancer is out there.
But for them, it doesn't matter. They just want to go with the numbers, just like they do on addiction. It's the same when it comes to what caused his cancer.
I hope you enjoyed some of your time in this case. You really have been very patient and put up with a tremendous amount of technical information. And I will tell you right now, some of the questions you guys have asked have been terrific. I don't remember who it was, but one of them had "correct" at the end of it and that really made us all smile, because that's the way we ask questions. But
you guys have asked a bunch of terrific questions, and you've learned a tremendous amount about human anatomy and science.
Now that you know what Batson's plexus is, you actually know more about human anatomy t plaintiff's witness Dr. Gale. He didn't know.
He thought it might be nerves, thought it might be lymph. He finally gave up and said: I don't know. But you guys have paid attention in a unique and special way, and that's something we all agree on and that's something we're all grateful for.
But you learned in this case that there are basically four ways that doctors try to figure out where your cancer started. If you have cancer, there's four sort of things that they look at to try to determine where it started. And that's the metastatic spread, it's radiology, it's the symptoms you have, and it's pathology.
And on each one of these four factors, not only is the evidence against plaintiffs, it's so far against them it's forcing the drawbridge open. And we will go through them one at a time.
You learned that the very first time Mr. Ciccone complained about the pain that ultimately led to his diagnosis of cancer he complained about his lower back. He told Mrs. Ciccone that he was numb from the waist down. They went to the doctor, they took a picture of his lumbar spine, and they found the cancer. But the first symptoms he had, the first complaints of pain he had in the medical records and according to the testimony were in his lower back.
You also learned that Batson's plexus connects the prostate to the spine in a unique way, in a special way that the lungs are not connected to the spine.
And here are those pictures. I know that's hard to see, but you've seen it several times. But you can see that the prostate is connected right to the sacrum and right to the spine through the veins of the plexus, and this side view is a little bit better. But as Dr. Epstein explained this morning, these veins from the prostate grow right into the bones of the spine.
And when they took that lumbar spine MRI
in June 24th of 2002, Mr. Ciccone had cancer at all of these spots, from the bottom of his sacrum to the top of his lumbar spine. All of the spots where the veins that are connected to the prostate grow into the bones of the spine, he had cancer.
He came back and he had the bone scan on July 15th. Now we've all heard the expression "textbook example," but you saw this morning that what Mr. Ciccone had is literally a textbook example of what happens when prostat cancer metastasized through the plexus to the spine. And here's that chart. There is the textbook on the left and there is Mr. Ciccone on the right.
That's what happens when cancer in your prostate gets into the plexus and grows into the bones of your spine.
And the next chart shows you the plexus and Mr. Ciccone.
He has it at all of those spots including his skull. That is what metastatic prostate cancer looks like. When it gets into those veins, they are connected to the spine, shoulders, they go all the way up to the skull.
But that's what happens when metastatic cancer from the prostate gets into your spine.
Plaintiffs would have you believe that he had a cancer in his lung that no one ever found that got to a node and somehow from that node got all the way down to his sacrum.
They tried suggesting that maybe it was gravity. Gravity doesn't pull your blood down.
You learned that from Dr. Brewster. You learned that from Dr. Epstein. You learned that over and over again. You probably learned it in high school biology. Your heart pumps the blood around, and the veins and the lymph drain up and back to the heart. It's a closed system.
When blood pumps out here, it moves up in the veins. There is no downward flow here.
There might be some flow back and forth because they don't have valves. But you can see that this is a cancer that has started in his prostate and marched up his spine through the plexus. And it's at all those spots where the prostate is connected to the spine. And there's no evidence that the lungs are connected to the spine that way.
We talked about how cancer in the prostate could get to lymph nodes in the chest. And that's through the thoracic duct. When the veins go up the spine, they dump out into the thoracic duct. Dr. Cole showed you an MRI slice that had the two distinct lymph nodes on it, and it showed the cancer in the spine and the thoracic duct right there. That's how it gets to the chest.
Cancer in the sacrum is inconsistent with primary cancer in the lung. But cancer in a couple lymph nodes in the chest is totally consistent with prostate cancer that has spread through the veins of Batson's plexus.
And more importantly, remember how many times we heard that when you have small cell cancer, the way it shows up is as a molten wax. It's as if somebody poured wax into the area.
And you look at the chest and all you see are two little nodes. One is abnormally large.
One is right on the margins of being large.
But they are distinct. They didn't grow together. There is no molten wax. There is only one place that the molten wax shows up and that's in this picture right here.
The one on the right.
That area in the pelvis is what small cell carcinoma looks like. That's the molten-wax appearance. That's not going on in the chest.
Now I want to talk about the radiology.
And there was only one radiologist in this case and that was Dr. Cole. He didn't make $800,000 in this case. He's actually testified just twice. He's consulted on a bunch of cases, but he's testified in two cases. That should tell you something right there. He has come to court twice. Twice.
He came in and told you that from June of [sic] August of 2002, Mr. Ciccone had eighteen separate radiographic tests. Ten of those were specifically focused on the chest.
Here is the chart -- and you will have all these medical records. But from June to August he had lumbar spine X-rays, chest CTs, chest X-rays, MRIs of the thoracic and lumbar spine, on and on and on.
Every single one of those tests failed to detect cancer or a lesion or an abnormality of any kind in his lungs. No one ever found cancer in Mr. Ciccone's lungs. Not any of
those tests, not any of plaintiff's expert witnesses, not any of the doctors on the ground.
And you can see, we talked about this in opening statements. But again, the reports from this radiology makes it clear that they don't know the cause of the metastatic disease, the primary is unknown. They are recommendir PSA and bone scans because they're worried about his prostate. This is Dr. Hirsch on the left. I'll get you to Dr. Hirsch in a second.
The lung fields are clear. No lesions, abnormality, or cancer in the lungs. Lungs are clear, no lung masses. Normal chest.
In opening statement Mr. Wichmann suggested that, well, they're just listening to the chest with a stethoscope. You can't find cancer that way. But radiology does find cancer. Nothing is more sensitive than a CT scan. Chest X-rays, also a very good way to go.
But not only did they not find cancer, but they didn't even find a suspicious spot. They didn't find a lesion or an abnormality or anything. Time and time again the records say
the same thing: Lungs clear, lungs clear, lungs clear.
Dr. Hirsch examined Mr. Ciccone himself on June 24th. He gave him a physical exam and he concluded his lungs were normal. That's the doctor that Mr. Wichmann just spent so much time talking about in his statement.
Dr. Hirsch examined him on June 24th, gave him a physical exam, and concluded his lungs were normal and he sent him off to have his prostate checked.
Now I want to talk about the symptomology because that relates to some of these records. But this is Dr. Hirsch's record from June 28th, lungs normal. On July 8th, lungs normal.
July 8th is the last time that Dr. Hirsch ever treated Mr. Ciccone. He told us from the stand that he couldn't remember if he visited him in the hospital, but July 8th is the last time he ever saw him as a patient. He gave him a physical examination and he concluded lungs normal. That's July 8th.
And we talked about this all of the time:
Lungs clear, lungs clear. Respirations even and unlabored. Lungs clear, lungs clear, lungs
clear. Including records from the day he died.
I'm sure you're asking yourself, well, how did lung cancer get into the medical records? How did it get put in there and get repeated over and over again, and I want to make two points on that.
The first is you heard about Dr. Greenhawt and Dr. Atkinson and Dr. Wittlin. Those are three doctors that treated Mr. Ciccone for cancer.
Where were they in this case? If those men had made a diagnosis of cancer, where are they? Plaintiffs could have brought them in here. They brought you Dr. Hirsch.
Dr. Hirsch's records say lungs clear.
You didn't hear from Greenhawt. You didn't hear from Atkinson. You didn't hear from Wittlin.
I want to show you what I think happened and how this statement gets repeated in medical records up to and including the death certificate. We have a chronology here.
Mr. Ciccone shows up on June 24th. The report makes clear that the primary is unknown. He sees Dr. Hirsch on the 28th. Patient
refused a colonoscopy and rectal exam. And even Dr. Hirsch says "primary unknown."
He's recommending prostate tests in that record.
Move forward to July 8th, the lungs are clear. Rectal and genitalia exams were deferred. But July 8th is also the record where Dr. Greenhawt speculated that a primary tumor in the lungs is most likely given the history of smoking and asbestos exposure.
He says it, it's most likely. But he doesn't know. That's not a diagnosis.
We fast-forward to 7/15, when Mr. Ciccone shows up for the bone scan. And that's where it comes from. It says: Admitting diagnosis, history of lung cancer.
There is no history of lung cancer before July 15th. In all likelihood what happened here is the Ciccones had a conversation with Dr. Greenhawt. He probably told them what was in their medical record. It's most likely lung cancer with all the smoking and all the asbestos. You know how it goes when you show up for a doctor's appointment. You go to the window, they say: What are you here for?
Perfectly natural they'll say we're here because Mr. Ciccone has lung cancer.
But remember this chronology when you deliberate. History of lung cancer is the first reference in the medical records, and there is no test and no history and no reference to lung cancer before then.
Now, before we leave radiology and talk about pathologists, I want to make one more point. The judge told you a couple days ago that there's a bunch of films and radiology that's missing from this case and that the parties are not responsible for those records not being here.
But their absence is a problem for plaintiffs because they have the burden of proof. If you get back there and you're not sure whether he had prostate cancer or lung cancer, then Reynolds is entitled to a verdict as a matter of law.
If you get back there and you think, well, maybe it's this, maybe it's that, they haven't met their burden.
If you think another test may have answered this, and that test wasn't done and
that evidence isn't here, that is a problem for plaintiffs.
The absence of those records is a problem for that side because they have the burden of proof. They have to prove to you he had lung cancer. Even though it's their burden, we went further and we proved to you that he had prostate cancer. And that came from Dr. Epstein today.
And let me just take a minute here to compare Dr. Feingold, the man who calls himself the world's most desirable expert witness;
Dr. Cummings, who admits he's a general in the war of tobacco; Dr. Kyriakoudes, who says that all of his opinions are counter to facts, to a man like Dr. Epstein. And a man like Dr. Brewster. Those guys came from Harvard anc Johns Hopkins to testify in this case. Johns Hopkins.
If you had prostate cancer, Dr. Epstein would be one of the best doctors in the world that you could see. The best in the world. He does not make a living testifying as a witness.
But he came down -- and believe me, these men are not fans of tobacco. They are not here
because they think the tobacco companies deserve help. They're here because the facts and the evidence brought them here.
Now there's two pathology reports in this case. You will see them in the back. Neither of them say lung cancer. They both just say metastatic carcinoma.
And Dr. Epstein came down and he talked about two things. First he talked about the AR test, which he said -- explained to you that shows that this is a prostate cancer. That's a staining test that does not stain for lung cancer but stained positive for Mr. Ciccone's cancer. And that's a key difference between plaintiff's case and the defense's case.
Plaintiff's don't have a single staining test that differentiates between lung cancer and prostate cancer. But Dr. Epstein did. And that was the AR test, and it was positive on Mr. Ciccone's cancer.
Now there's one other point that I want you to remember when you think about Dr. Epstein. Unlike the fact that no one ever found cancer in Mr. Ciccone's lungs,
Dr. Epstein explained to you this morning that
he did find cancer in Mr. Ciccone's plexus.
And he showed you that slide. And just to refresh your memory, these are how the veins grow into the spine from the prostate through those veins to the spine. And there's a slice. That's one of Mr. Ciccone's veins from his plexus. And Dr. Epstein explained to you that the blue stuff is cancer. That's a vein of the plexus that's full of cancer, according to the head of urology pathology at Johns Hopkins University.
It's right there. There is nothing in the lungs, no matter how many times they want you to just look at medical records that state it. There's not a single test that shows it.
There's not a single piece of pathology.
There's not a single piece of radiology. But this, even though it's not our burden, this is proof of prostate cancer.
I want to move on now and talk about PVD. And on PVD there's only one issue for you to consider, and that's when Mr. Ciccone's PVD manifested itself.
Everyone here agrees that smoking is one of the reasons that Mr. Ciccone got PVD. But
at the outset remember this, remember how much time Mr. Wichmann spent on the medical records. The medical records say he got PVD in 1999. That's it.
If you want to take Mr. Wichmann's advice and follow the medical records, well, then this should be a very easy question for you. Your verdict should be for the defense on Question 2 because the medical records make it perfectly clear he's diagnosed with PVD in 1999.
Now it's not that simple. And I want to point out a few key pieces of evidence that you saw during this case.
And the first comes from Dr. Hirsch.
Dr. Hirsch saw Mr. Ciccone many times prior to 1999 and he never once documented PVD until 1999.
And Dr. Hirsch also explained that he wasn't alone, that there were many other healthcare providers, and none of them diagnosed PVD until 1999, not one.
PVD is as easy to diagnose, Dr. Brewster told you, as capillary refill, checking the pulse, shiny legs, hair loss on the legs. It is not a hard disease for a medical
professional to identify. But from 1988 to
1999,	not one single doctor found it.
Dr. Hirsch went further. You will learn in this case, as the judge will explain to you, what manifest means. It means basically to have symptoms. And Dr. Hirsch I think closed the door on PVD.
Dr. Hirsch said: You don't see anything earlier than 1998 where Mr. Ciccone's PVD symptoms are manifesting themselves, do you, Doctor?
ANSWER: No.
There it is. That's Dr. Hirsch. He no manifestation of symptoms before 1998.
And we remember the board, and I have it right here, where we have the class cutoff period, November 21, 1996. And you can see there that all of the medical records come up short from 1996.
Dr. Hirsch admitted in this courtroom that there were no symptoms before 1998. The medical records revealed that there are no symptoms of PVD before 1998.
Those are the Ciccones' own words. The Ciccones are the ones that went in and reported
those symptoms. And we will walk through though records individually. But before I get to those records, I want you to think about what Dr. Brewster told you.
If you were lucky enough to go to the Harvard Medical School, Dr. Brewster is the guy that teaches you about vascular issues. He would be your teacher. He does the surgery that Mr. Ciccone had on his legs every week.
He teaches Harvard medical students about this disease. And he came down here and he told you two important things. He said there's no way that Mr. Ciccone could have had PVD when plaintiffs claim he did, because he if he did, he would have lost his legs, which obviously didn't happen.
But then he walked through all of the symptoms that we've heard so much about, and he explained to you how they're all related to the back. He explained to you how couldn't dance at the wedding can't be PVD because he had the pain when he sat down. If the pain stays with you when you sit down, it's not PVD.
You can't walk to work with Mr. Jones, same thing. When he sits down, it doesn't go
away. That's back pain. Back pain is the one that radiates through your back and your hips and doesn't go away no matter what you do.
PVD, the main system is this thing called claudication, and the way you know it's claudication is it hurts when you're moving, and it stops hurting when you stop moving.
But Mr. Ciccone never had that. And remember the story about how he drove to the wedding and when he got out of the car he was in pain. That's not PVD. That's a bad back.
If you have pain from sitting too long, it's a bad back. And Dr. Brewster explained all of this to you.
Now these are the records that are reflected on this chart right here, and you might remember some of these.
In April of '98, Dr. Greenberg noted that Mr. Ciccone had increased symptoms [sic] about the right lower extremity for the last several months.
Several months from April -- do you remember when they went to the dictionary on some of these?
Here is the next one. There's cramping
and numbness with tightness and tingling in his right lower extremities with ambulation. He's had this pain for approximately seven months. Seven months from July '98, I suggested in opening statement, was January of '98.
Mr. Wichmann put up Webster's dictionary and wanted to debate what "approximate" meant with Dr. Brewster. I will give him the benefit of the doubt. Take ten months off. Take a year off. He's still short of the November 21st, 1996, cutoff. And again, these are records that reflect what Mr. Ciccone and his wife were telling their doctors.
October of '98, approximately a nine-month history. Take a year off. It's October '97.
Take a year and a half. They are nowhere close to November of '96.
And these are their own words. This is Mrs. Ciccone's handwriting. I know it's hard to read. But the Question Number 24 says: How long have you had the pain that you're currently experiencing?
And if you look on the left, it's classic symptoms of claudication. It's burning. It's pain upon exercise. And Mrs. Ciccone writes
seven months. There's no approximately this time. We can subtract seven from the seventh month of the year and know that Mrs. Ciccone is telling the doctors in 1998 that her husband has had the symptoms of claudication since January '98, more than a year after the class cutoff.
And don't forget where their whole PVD case started. It started with a letter that Mrs. Ciccone sent to Dr. Hirsch, and she asked for help.
And here it is: I'm writing to ask you to please go over George's files and see if there's any information in regards to his tobacco use prior or on November 21st, 1996.
In other words, his cough, high blood pressure, or any related artery clog he may have had due to plaque buildup from the tar and nicotine.
That's where their whole PVD case started. That letter means that if there's a record from November 22nd, 1996, they don't want it.
When Mrs. Ciccone came down here, I asked her: Where did you get that date? She couldn't remember. I asked her: Why did you limit the search, why didn't you just ask for
all the records? She couldn't remember. We know what that date's about. This is another part of the lawyer's story and the complete lack of connection to the real life that the Ciccones led.
But that's where their PVD case started, with a selective request for a selected and limited set of medical records.
Now I want to finish up by going back to the first question on the verdict form. And as we talked about, this is not about the tobacco industry. This is not about whether you like cigarettes, you don't like cigarettes, or like tobacco companies or don't like them. None of that has anything to do with this case. This case is simply about Mr. Ciccone and the life he led.
And there's a simple reason for that.
It's because in this country we have decided that cigarettes will be legal. They will be legal to make; they will be legal to sell; they will be legal to advertise.
Nothing about this case is going to change that. And it shouldn't have anything to do with your verdict.
But look at it this way. You met Dr. Cummings. He wants to ban smoking. He's worried about the air quality in Irish pubs.
From what you heard about Mr. Ciccone, do you think he would have any use for a man like Dr. Cummings? Dr. Cummings can't understand man who wears cigarettes. He doesn't get that.
He thinks Mr. Ciccone has made an incorrect choice, and he's the kind of guy that wants to take that choice away from Mr. Ciccone. But that's him. That's not this case. This case is not about banning cigarettes. This case is not about taking choices away from everyday Americans.
But ultimately the choice to smoke and keep smoking is one that Mr. and Mrs. Ciccone made for themselves. She still smokes today.
She was there with him every step of the way.
She bought him cigarettes. She brought them to him in the Bahamas. They smoked together. She made it perfectly clear to you that they knew the warning labels were on the pack and they didn't want to pay attention to them.
And here is her testimony. As you put it, your husband and you would sit down and smoke
You weren't going to sit there and read the packs. And she said: Correct. They're going to sit down and smoke.
Again, there is nothing wrong with this.
I don't want any of you to think that we're blaming the Ciccones for smoking or suggesting that they've done something wrong. That's not it at all. The point is that it's their choice to make and they made the choice to smoke and to continue to smoke.
The problem comes in when they come into a lawsuit for money and try to pretend that they were unable to do anything else, that Reynolds prevented them from making different choices or leading different lives.
And don't forget that Reynolds is far from the only tobacco in Mr. Ciccone's life. He smoked brands not made by Reynolds. He smok cigars. He smoked pipes. You heard testimony that people knew he liked pipes so much they would give them to him as a gift. He would get pipes as a gift. He kept a pipe collection that he gave to one of his daughters. One of his daughters has his pipe collection.
This is not just Reynolds. The idea that
Reynolds is driving this train as a legal cause of what happened to Mr. Ciccone is part of the lawyer's story; it's not part of the real life they led.
Now, we learned in this case that there are millions of people just like the Ciccones. They smoke, they know what they're doing, and they're not interested in stopping.
There's millions and millions of smokers just like them who don't want to quit.
You heard about it from Dr. Cummings,
65 percent of smokers don't try to quit each ear. You saw about it in DSM-IV, and you learned about it from the CDC where in 2000,
59 percent of smokers did not try to quit during the preceding year.
And the reason that's important is that step, taking a step to quit, is the first step in quitting. And that's why Dr. Cummings and the Florida Health Notes have the same opinion This is from 1965.
When I used this the first time,
Mr. Wichmann stood up and asked
Dr. Kyriakoudes, Well, wasn't Mr. Ciccone on a
ship? Remember that? It was 1965, he goes:
He was on a ship. How could he see the Florida Health Note?
We showed you, when he was on the ship, he's getting even more warnings. There's a giant red sign at the PX when he buys his cigarettes. But nonetheless -THE CLERK: One hour.
MR. BOYCE: -- the point is that -- thank you, sir -- here, no one else can make the choice for you. It's an individual decision.
The first requirement is the honest desire to quit.
And there is Dr. Cummings. The smoker is fully responsible for making the choice to quit.
And, once again, the theory plaintiff's attorneys have created for this case don't fit the real life that Mr. Ciccone led.
Between 1958 and 1998, Mr. Ciccone spent two days trying to stop smoking. Two days. Those are the two days in 1990 with Dr. Hirsch. He had a prescription. He had the patch. He went about a day and a half without smoking.
Now he went back to smoking not because he couldn't take it, not because he was unhappy
with his mood or was irritable. He went back because Mrs. Ciccone encouraged him to go back. She said: You're driving me crazy. Go across to the street to the 7-Eleven and buy a pack of cigarettes.
But think about what that means. Two days in 40 years.
There are 14,600 days in 40 years, and we have the calendar in the background. I know it's hard to see. But he spent two days out of almost 15,000 trying to quit. There is nothing wrong with that behavior. The only problem is when you try to pretend that that behavior is something different than it was. That's not a loss of control. That's an exercise of control.
Think about it this way. If you've met a friend in 1958 and they said, I really want to get a job, and you bump back into them 40 years later in 1998 and you go, Hey, what's your job? Well, no luck. What did you do to find a job?
Well, I spent two days in 1990 looking for work, didn't happen. I spent the remaining 14,598 days not even looking for work.
That would lead you to one conclusion:
That's a person that doesn't want a job. It's the same with a diet. That's the evidence from 1990 to 1998.
Now there's some dispute over what happened in 1999. He may have gone on the patch. There's a medical record that says he quit smoking.
I think Mrs. Ciccone cleared that up when she was here. She told you she doesn't think he stopped smoking in 1999, not once. She said she went to the worksite, saw him with the cigarettes rolled up in his sleeve and the patch on.
There's two important points there. He's not interested in changing his behavior and there's got to be something about smoking that he likes. That patch gives you nicotine.
Getting nicotine through the patch through his blood. But he's still smoking. There's got to be something else about it that he likes besides the nicotine. Otherwise there's no smoking on the patch.
But nonetheless, what's important to remember here is that as Dr. Cummings admits, as everyone else says, the first step in
quitting is making an honest decision to quit. And Mr. Ciccone was not interested in doing so. And nothing shows that more than out of 40 years he spent two days trying to change his behavior.
It should be clear to you that quitting was not a priority for Mr. Ciccone. But remember what we learned from the National Cancer Institute. As you go back to deliberate, remember that the difference between the people who quit smoking and the people who keep smoking is not addiction. And that comes from the National Cancer Institute in Monograph 15.
Remaining smokers were no more addicted than those who had stopped.
And wouldn't there be more evidence of quitting if, indeed, Mr. Ciccone was interested in it? Would we be debating what happened in
1998	or 1999? We're talking about 40 years of behavior.
If it was important to him, every witness would have a dozen stories about it. Oh, I remember the first time he tried. We saw his friends. They said: He never even told me he
wanted to quit. He just smoked. His friends knew him. He knew that they had quit.
Mr. Ciccone never asked them for help or advise or any of that.
Now, I don't want anybody to think that quitting smoking's easy. For some people it's hard and they struggle with it and they want to change their behavior and they have a tough time doing so.
And that's what this class is for. It's not for someone who has no interest in changing their behavior. There are smokers who struggle with it. There are smokers who don't. But the point is that Mr. Ciccone was neither one of those. Mr. Ciccone was somebody who was not interested, in his wife's own words, not interested in quitting. Not that it was easy for him. Not that it was hard. But not interested.
But I just want to make a few quick points.
We learned how there are no permanent brain changes from nicotine. This is the article we used with Dr. Cummings. Smoker's brain. Former smoker. They look the same.
Nonsmoker on the left. Former smoker on the right. Those receptors that we heard about.
They go back to normal. Those receptors, they come up any time you do something pleasurable. Caffeine does the receptors. Nicotine does the receptors.
Remember when Dr. Cummings admitted that that action in the brain is the same as when I go to Primanti's or when I watch an air show.
It's the same thing. Anything that gives you pleasure releases dopamine and acetylcholine in the brain. There's no permanent injury.
We learned from Dr. Cummings on his website that withdrawal from nicotine goes away in a couple weeks, maybe a month or two. It's temporary and it's a sign that you're on the road to recovery. That's plaintiff's expert,
Dr. Cummings. And in this case, Mr. Ciccone never had nicotine withdrawal.
On the two days in 1990 he wasn't smoking he was irritable. And that might be a form of withdrawal. But it wasn't too much for him.
There is no evidence that Mr. Ciccone said:
I'm going back to smoking because I can't take the withdrawal. The evidence is the opposite.
He was interested in it for one time and Mrs. Ciccone was not interested in putting up with him being cranky.
But his day didn't change. He went to work. He dressed himself. He did all his normal hobbies. That's not heroin or cocaine. We know better than that. Those are life-threatening withdrawal symptoms. That's where you could look and say that that person succumbed to the withdrawal. That's heroin. That's the monkey on your back. This is different. This is crankiness for a while.
And it's difficult for some people.
But the point here is that Mr. Ciccone never suffered any of these symptoms. The one time he tried to quit, his wife told him: Go back to smoking. She didn't quit herself. She didn't support him. She said: Go back to smoking.
By all accounts Mr. Ciccone was a good man. We saw from his brother Paul and his friend William Jones and Oscar Chaires, good men all around. I would suggest those are some of the most reliable witnesses plaintiff had in this case. Paul, Oscar, and Bill. Good guys.
They told you what Mr. Ciccone was like. They told you that he was the kind of guy who liked to drink, have a couple beers, go bowling, smoke some cigarettes -- that's just who he was. And there's nothing wrong with that. That's the man he was.
The problem comes in when their experts try to characterize him as a man unable to control his behavior.
But they also all agree that Mr. Ciccone took responsibility for his action. Paul said way back in the early '60s, no matter how you word it, it comes out the same way. We knew better and we still did it. That's his brother.
And guess what? If you fast-forward 40 years, Dr. Hirsch made the same conclusion. This is June 28, 2002.
Patient refuses to stop smoking, aware of the risks of cancer and death and accepts these risks.
And look at it this way.
1962, we knew better, we still did it.
2002, patient refuses to stop and accepts the risks.
That was Mr. Ciccone. He accepted the risks for himself. And that's what's important for you to remember in this case. It's natural that his family would look back and say, Well,
I wish he had different priorities or I wish he had different choices. This is about Mr. Ciccone, and nothing says it more than his brother in 1962 and his doctor in 2002.
I want to thank for you your attention so far, and I promise you I'm almost finished. If I'm not, the hook will be coming very soon.
THE COURT: In 3 minutes it will be.
MR. BOYCE: Thank you, sir. I knew it was close. I knew it was close. I forgot my little clicker here. I think I can do it in three minutes.
I have three points to talk about.
One of the things that I'm sure Mr. Wichmann doesn't like about opening is that I get the last word. And one of the things you can be sure is tough for us on the defense side is he gets the last word in closing.
I would ask you to remember three things. Remember three things when Mr. Wichmann gets here and tries to pretend that Johns Hopkins
and Harvard doctors are part of the tobacco industry, and just here to create doubt, or if he calls me more names. Remember these three things. Remember that Mr. Ciccone spent two days in 40 years trying to quit.
1958 to 1998, two days.
Remember that Mr. Ciccone never blamed anyone for his smoking. In 1999 his doctors told him that he had a smoking-related disease, and he had surgery for it. And when it was over, he didn't sue anybody. He didn't blame anybody. He didn't tell anybody that he wanted to sue or that he felt he had been wronged. He took responsibility for his actions and he moved on with his life. Just like Dr. Hirsch said in 2002. He had accepted the risks.
And that's why Mrs. Ciccone filled out this form, not interested in stopping. She knew him best.
But the last one I want you to remember is that the Ciccone family knew him best and they knew that he had accepted the risks of smoking.
In 1999 you saw the medical record where the doctor said they had found a weird mass in his appendix and they wanted to do surgery, and
five members of the Ciccones said it's not a likely option. That's not Mr. Ciccone. He knows what he's doing, he accepts the risk, but he's never going to let you do surgery.
He didn't blame anyone in '99, he didn't sue anyone in '99. But the family knew the man he was. And that's why they buried him with cigarettes. At the end of the day, when it was all over, they put cigarettes in the coffin with him. And that only makes sense if you look at it and see that the family accepted Mr. Ciccone for who he was. They respected the man that he was, and they accepted the fact that Mr. Ciccone had made choices for himself that they might disagree with, but ultimately they knew that they were his choices, and that he knew what he was doing, and that he wanted to do it, and that he wasn't interested in changing his behavior. And there is nothing wrong with that.
The only problem is when you come in with the lawyer's story about Marlboro and movies and Jed Clampett in commercials and try to pretend that that's the story of this man. The real-life story of this man is that he loved
smoking and was not interested in stopping and his family knew it and that's why there's cigarettes in his coffin.
I want to thank you again for your time and attention. I can't tell you how much we appreciate the way you have handled this case.
Each of us. You paid attention every day. You suffered through some tough testimony back and forth. You've been a terrific jury.
I hope you have enjoyed your time as jurors half as much as I've enjoyed the opportunity to present Reynolds' defense to you.
So on behalf of Mr. Faxon and myself and our team and the men and women of the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, thank you. I look forward to your verdict.
