MR. BASS: May it please the Court, counsel for R.J. Reynolds, counsel for Liggett.
Members of the Jury, we're back together this morning because after seeing and hearing all the evidence -THE COURT: Counsel, are you going to present evidence?
MR. BASS: I'm sorry, Judge. No evidence.
THE COURT: All right. Reynolds?
MR. GORDON: No additional evidence, Your
Honor.
THE COURT: Liggett?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Your Honor, Liggett intends to move in nine documents, which I'll share with madam clerk at this time.
THE COURT: Are you moving them into evidence?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Liggett intends to move them into evidence.
THE COURT: Any objection?
MR. BASS: None from the plaintiff, Judge.
MR. GORDON: None.
THE COURT: Liggett's exhibits for this proceeding are introduced into evidence.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Thank you, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Anything else then before the presentation of arguments?
MR. BASS: Nothing.
MR. GORDON: No, sir.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: No, nothing, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Then we'll have plaintiff's argument.
MR. BASS: Members of the Jury, I apologize. In the Olympics they call that false start.
Throughout the course of the trial, past three weeks, you sat patiently and attentively through jury selection. You were chosen as jurors. You heard opening remarks, evidence and closing remarks. The judge instructed you on the applicable law and you returned to the jury room, to your jury room to deliberate.
You deliberated and returned a verdict, a fair verdict. You compensated Mr. Clay, Teddy Clay for the loss of his wife. You compensated
Janie Clay for the loss of her friend and caretaker, and you compensated Larry Clay for the premature loss of his mother.
Your duty didn't end there. You recognized that. You recognized that when you checked yes as to both of these defendants to question nine on the verdict form yesterday afternoon. You saw
what was clear and convincing, that the conduct of Reynolds and Liggett warranted punitive damages.
You invited us back today because that conduct convinced you that both of these defendants deserve to be punished.
That's what this morning is about. It's about punishment. It's about punishing these companies for the harm they caused to Janie Mae Clay and her family. You, and only you, get to decide the extent of that punishment today.
Now, during the trial you saw a small portion of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company through their corporate witness, Dr. Figlar. And you saw an even smaller portion of Liggett Group LLC through the cross-examination of various witnesses by Mr. Rosenstein. But what you saw through cross-examination by Mr. Rosenstein and
Dr. Figlar, that's not the real RJR, that's not the real Liggett.
Of course, defense counsel for both would have you believe that they are a kinder, gentler company, and that the sins of the past are washed away. But we know that's not true. You know that's not true.
How do you know it's not true? Because you saw the internal documents. You saw their innermost thoughts, their truest thoughts when they thought that nobody else was looking, that's what they said. And that is what they thought the truth was.
Not only did you see Liggett's and RJR's innermost thoughts in their internal documents, you also saw their plan through their industry shield, their industry front. The Tobacco Institute Research Committee, the CTR and the TI that R.J. Reynolds helped found and Liggett contributed money to. That, Members of the Jury, is the real Liggett. That is the real RJR, and don't ever forget that.
Now, I'm not going to go over all the documents that you saw. I'm just going to give you a quick synopsis. You heard all the evidence
and you also know that plaintiffs didn't present any new evidence for this phase. Everything that you needed to hear, you've already heard.
But where did this begin? In 1953 at the Plaza Hotel in New York, very mid to late December, during the holiday season, the heads of the tobacco companies, not all of them, most major heads got together. And there they hatched a plan and that plan was to "how to establish public confidence, assurance and how to create it. How to free millions of Americans from the guilty fear that is going to arise deep in their biological depths every time they light a cigarette." That was the plan from the beginning, a devious plan to keep the public smoking. They developed the plan and from that moment on they implemented the plan.
Imagine if that meeting had gone different.
Imagine if they would have had benign or innocent motives that day. Imagine if they would have gotten together and talked about what they knew or what they were starting to do research on. Imagine how different things would have been and history would have been had that day produced something like you need to let the millions of
Americans know that are smoking that they could be harmed, that they could become addicted. Imagine how different things would have been.
You also heard about a promise to the public, the Frank Statement, in 1954. We also showed you video clips about public pronouncements saying, members of the public, if we find anything wrong in these cigarettes, we're going to take them out and we're going to let you know as soon as possible. We know that didn't happen.
We also heard about filters. Through the documents you heard that filters don't do a thing. In fact, there's a phrase for it, it's called the illusion of filtration, and that fit in right with their plan.
You saw that by 1958 scientists and representatives from each, Liggett and Myers, Arthur Little, TIRC, which R.J. Reynolds was a part of, you saw that scientists and representatives from each knew, with one exception, Dr. Greene, not a member of the TIRC, not a member of Liggett and Myers. "The individuals whom we met believe that smoking causes lung cancer by causation, we mean any
chain of events which leads finally to lung cancer and which involves smoking as an indispensable link."
1958, we saw this document before, but it is important. It's important because there's no doubt that this is when they knew. What's also significant about 1958? Janie Mae Clay was 14 years old. That's the year she started smoking. Imagine if the truth would have come out then.
Now, I'm not going to revisit every internal document that I showed you or that we showed you throughout the course of the trial.
You saw them, you had them back in the jury room with you, and you know from looking at them what they said and what they meant.
You know that after the Surgeon General's report came out in 1964 that the defendants waged a war on the Surgeon General. You know that continued all the way up through 1994 when they stood in front of Congress and raised their hands and swore to tell the truth and didn't. Each one of seven CEOs, one from Liggett, one from Reynolds included, said cigarettes are not addictive.
And then we know that finally in the late
1990s is when things started to crumble, the facade came crumbling down. During those years the tobacco companies' intent was to give, as
they say in their documents, smokers a psychological crutch to keep smoking.
That's devious. Why is that devious? Because they knew, they knew what it would take and the information that needed to be given to these addicted smokers to keep them smoking.
They manipulated smokers.
Dr. Cummings referred to it in his testimony a couple of weeks ago as a 50-year cover-up. Think to yourselves, when you're back deliberating the punitive damages award, think to yourselves, is that word really strong enough to describe what happened? In fact, are there any words that we have in the English language that can describe what these tobacco companies really did?
If you hadn't heard it for yourself, you probably wouldn't believe it. It was their deadly secret and they didn't share it with the world. Never forget, never forget that it wasn't until the late 1990s that they told what they knew. Never forget that. And also don't forget
that once they finally did, it was too late for Janie Mae Clay. She was already struggling for breath and already fighting for her life. Don't forget that this public admission was just over ten years ago. When you think about that, think about how different things could have been had there been a public admission in 1953.
Now, through the evidence these defendants have presented at trial, each has tried to keep y'all focused on the present day starting with their public admissions that nicotine cigarettes are addictive. Smoking cigarettes causes harm. That's what they did through cross-examination, as I referenced earlier with Mr. Rosenstein, and that's what RJR did through Dr. Figlar.
RJR paraded things in front of you like billions of dollars or a billion dollars, I forget the exact figure through Dr. Figlar, has been spent on harm reduction. Liggett has paraded a proclamation from the late Governor Chiles about their efforts, their recent efforts.
And I expect that when the lawyers for R.J. Reynolds and Liggett get a chance to talk to you that those are the kinds of things they're going to try to focus you on. I want you to ask
yourselves when you hear that argument, which I suspect you will, are we just supposed to forget the past? Are we just supposed to forget the past? No. You can't forget the past and especially you cannot forget this past.
Always remember, as I said earlier, always remember that as far as RJR is concerned, it wasn't until around 2000, turn of the century, new millennium that R.J. Reynolds admitted what they had to admit.
Liggett, on the other hand, is probably going to hang their hat, I expect, on the fact that they were the first, or so their lawyer says, they were the first to come clean,
quote/unquote. Those are my words. I m paraphrasing what he's presented to you all in openings statements. And maybe they do deserve to be treated a little bit differently for that.
We've heard some testimony about the disparity between these two companies in sales, in efforts, those kinds of things. So maybe they do deserve to be treated a little bit differently, and you all recognized that in your verdict yesterday when 60 percent of the fault was laid on R.J. Reynolds and ten percent was
laid on Liggett.
But while Liggett's lawyer is asking you to treat them differently, for you to basically tell them everything is okay, you told the truth, tuck them into bed, pat them on the back. That's what he's going to ask you to do. Remember that for many, many, many years prior, many years prior they played ball. They were right there, arm-in-arm with R.J. Reynolds, arm-in-arm with the tobacco companies.
Should the fact that one or two years before R.J. Reynolds came out and publicly admitted the harm, should that make any difference? No, it should not. The past, what they did in the past is too egregious.
Members of the Jury, this is from the jury instructions that His Honor read to you yesterday and you had in the back with you. It's final instruction 24. I just wanted to remind you of some of the things or some of the labels or words that you felt could be ascribed to the defendants' conduct, and you should remember that today.
"Conduct or policies causing loss to plaintiff was so gross and flagrant as to show
reckless disregard of human life. Conduct or policies showed such an entire lack of care that one or both of the defendants must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences. The conduct or policies showed an entire lack of care that one or both defendants must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded."
Again, reckless, indifferent. Those are the terms and labels that were given to you as guidance yesterday. And you knew that because that's what the evidence showed. So when you go back there today for this punishment phase, remember that. Remember that it's not what I said to describe them or what defense counsel from R.J. Reynolds said to describe them or defense counsel from Liggett. You know, you know what labels are ascribed to this conduct.
So what are we here to do? We already talked about that. Punishment. This is from today's jury instructions that you'll get before you retire to deliberate. It's titled punitive damages phase two, instruction three. It says, "If you decide to award punitive damages, the award should be no greater than the amount that you find necessary to punish R.J. Reynolds
Tobacco Company or Liggett Group LLC for the harm caused to Janie Mae Clay." There's a second element and we're going to get to that in a minute. I'm going to stop right there. The award should be no greater than the amount you find necessary to punish the defendants for the harm caused to Janie Mae Clay.
You are punishing RJR for their conduct.
We talked about what you did yesterday, the fair verdict, and that was to compensate the Clay family for their loss. Today is different. The duty and the task is different. This is to punish these defendants for what they did and for the harm they caused Janie Mae Clay and her family. You're the only jury, the only jury that will ever have a chance to do that. No other jury has a chance to punish these defendants for the harm they caused Janie Mae Clay and her family.
The second part of that instruction reads, "And to deter R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and Liggett Group LLC and others similarly situated from engaging in such misconduct in the future." So there's a second aspect to today.
The first is to punish and the second is
also to send a message of deterrence. Deterrence from doing these things that you have already done. Deterrence from doing the things that we, as a jury, know they have done. Not only to these defendants, but to other companies similarly situated.
How do we do that? You send a verdict that they will hear and that they will feel. That's what punishment and deterrence are all about. Doing something that results in a change in the future, a change for the better.
Now, what can you consider in determining this amount that we're talking about? The amount of money that's going to punish RJR and Liggett for the harm they caused to the Clay family and also to act as a deterrence.
There's some language that the judge will tell you. In making tnis determination you should consider the following, and there's two things to consider. "One, tne nature, extent and degree of misconduct and the related circumstances."
We know the nature, the extent and the degree of the misconduct and the related circumstances. The nature of the misconduct was
a preconceived conspiracy to commit fraud. The extent is evidenced by the length of time and the efforts that were sunk into this for the rewards that the tobacco companies obviously received.
And the third, the extent, rather the degree excuse me, the reprehensibility of their behavior answer the question about the extent of their conduct.
Second, consider the defendants' financial resources. Why should you consider this? Why
should this matter? Because as I said before, to punish and to deter future conduct, you've got to send a message. You've got to send a message.
It's no different than the attempt of -strike that. When someone gets a speeding ticket, they pay a fine. That's in hopes, in hopes, deterring future conduct. But I'm not talking about money that's the equivalent of a speeding ticket.
I'm talking about money that these tobacco companies will feel, will feel the loss of, will know that a message was sent to them, will know that even if they have any thoughts about doing the things they did in the past, which I'm not so sure they're past by the way, if they have any
idea about slipping back into those old habits, if they haven't already, they will know that people are watching and that the message has been sent and that they are on notice. That's what I'm talking about.
Now, there's another instruction, instruction four, please. This is the instruction that I expect defense counsel to focus on. "You should also take into consideration any mitigating evidence.
Mitigating evidence is evidence that may demonstrate that there is no need for punitive damages or that a reduced amount of punitive damages should be imposed against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company or Liggett Group LLC."
That's the evidence they tried to establish through Dr. Figlar and as I alluded to earlier and referenced twice now, Mr. Rosenstein did on cross-examination of witnesses. And I expect that that is what a bulk or majority of each gentleman or lady's presentation will be about, why we shouldn't have to pay, why we're better now. These things were done in the past. Look at all the things we're trying to do now. Look at all the things we've done now.
We put that cigarettes are harmful and addicting on our website. That's R.J. Reynolds. We received a proclamation from the governor about recent efforts. That's Liggett. Look, we have learned from our conduct. We're not going to do that again. R.J. Reynolds went so far as to put pictures of their CEOs up.
Ask yourselves why they did that. Because they're trying to convince you that they are different, but yet what is the reality? What is the reality?
Dr. Figlar came in here and he was the person that was anointed by anybody in the company, R.J. Reynolds. Mr. Norton referred to him as the company man. He was the person that was picked out of anyone, not the CEOs whose pictures they showed you, mind you. But it was Dr. Figlar, he came down here and he spoke for the company and what did he say?
Well, he didn't stand up and say, you know what, plaintiff's counsel, you're right. We did
some horrible things in the past, horrible things in the past, but I promise you we have made amends. No, he didn't say that. He said, in my opinion, R.J. Reynolds was acting generally as a
good corporate citizen. He said that. That is not a statement of a man who thinks anything in the past that was done was wrong.
He also said to Mr. Norton, yeah, I think R.J. Reynolds told the public and told the truth since 1953 on. We know that's not true. So what is significant about those statements? What's significant is, the man that's coming down here to speak for the company cannot even admit to the ills and the wrongs that were done in the 1950s. Does that show change? Does that show a recognition of past behavior? Does that show that they have learned? Ask yourselves that when you're thinking about it in the back there.
What else did he do? He tried to distance himself from Dr. Claude Teague, Dr. Alan Rodgman, research scientists just like him, by the way, who were with the company, the evidence showed, over 30 years. They went up the chain. They retired from R.J. Reynolds. He tried to distance the company from those documents, from what those gentlemen said.
That's what he said, just as important as I mentioned about what he did not say, he did not apologize. He didn't admit any past misconduct.
If Dr. Figlar, the company spokesman, can't admit that, then RJR has not learned. That's what a punitive damages award is all about because RJR has not learned. Well, it's time that they do learn.
You heard about Dr. Figlar addressing Premier and Eclipse. Those were two harm reduction techniques we'll call them. Well, kudos to them, right, for starting harm reduction techniques in the '80s. They should be applauded for that. Imagine if they had done that 30 years prior. Imagine if they had gone to the public and said, public, cigarettes are hazardous. We are going to try and make the first cancer free cigarette.
In fact, if you'll recall, there was a document that said, boy, wouldn't it be great, this is early 1950s, wouldn't it be great if we could create the first cancer free cigarette?
What we would do to our competition.
That shows a number of things. It shows, number one, that money is the only thing that matters. Number two, it shows the knowledge about the dangers of cigarettes. And it snows, number three, that that was something they could
have done and could have started back then. Granted technology was different, but they could have started it back then, and don't let them tell you that it's the filters. We know what a bunch of garbage the filters turned out to be and are.
But the carcinogens are only half the problem. There's another threshold problem that is just as important and that is the addictive nature of cigarettes. In fact, the majority of the trial was spent proving that Janie Mae Clay was addicted to cigarettes and that it was her addiction that killed her.
You've heard it over and over again that nicotine is the addictive agent in tobacco and nicotine is the reason that people smoke, and you saw documents discussing nicotine, for example. This one is SD328, "Moreover nicotine is addictive. We are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug." They're in the business of selling an addictive drug.
Another comment, and this is Mr. Teague talking about the role of nicotine there. Here we are. If you could blow that up, please. "Hence, the confirmed user of tobacco products is
primarily seeking the physiological 'satisfaction' derived from nicotine." Skipping down a little bit, "Thus a tobacco product is, in essence, a vehicle for delivery of nicotine."
The cigarette is a nicotine delivery device. It is a drug delivery device. It is an addictive drug delivery device.
Let's not get caught up on the fact that they're merely carcinogenic. I say merely, not to scuff at the fact that they're carcinogenic. But there are two sides to the story, so we're not to get caught up in this harm reduction because as you heard, there's an optimum amount of nicotine in cigarettes. Research was done on this optimum amount of nicotine.
R.J. Reynolds knows that they're not to let their cigarettes drop below this optimum amount of nicotine. Why? Because nicotine is a powerful, addictive drug we talked about. And two, if you drop below the optimum amount, you lose the smokers and you'll lose their money.
And that's what this is all about. Always remember that it was the addiction to nicotine cigarettes that led to Janie Mae Clay's death.
As I've alluded to now a couple of times, I
mentioned Dr. Figlar and I mentioned that R.J. Reynolds, we presume, will attempt to show you that they're the kinder, gentler RJR. And Liggett, you've heard from their defense counsel, he referred to them as mavericks of the industry and that they stand alone because they were the first. What they're trying to suggest is we don't need to be punished. We don't need to be deterred. We know from comments that that's not true.
When you start thinking about an appropriate amount to punish and deter, before we get to that point, I think you should think about something else. Strike that. Think about something else. Think about the defendants' theme in this case. The defendants' theme in this case is choice. That it was Ms. Clay's
choice to smoke cigarettes and, therefore, it was Ms. Clay's choice to die the way she did. But think about something else. Corporations have choices too. We know that.
This point in the proceeding is about the corporate choices that R.J. Reynolds made and that Liggett made. And choosing to lie to the public about health hazards of smoking and the
addictive nature, the defendants took all the choice away from Janie Mae Clay.
They didn't want her to have a choice when she started as a 14 year old, and they knew that once she was hooked, which wouldn't take very long because we heard about the effects of nicotine on the adolescent brain, they knew that they would have a customer for life. Mr. Denney said it on Monday, and I'll reiterate it again today. They want customers for life and tney know if she starts young, they're going to have you for life.
With each smoker all they see is a dollar sign. That's what matters to them, and that's why we're talking about punitive damages award in money today. We re talking about something that is going to hurt them, to make them take notice.
So how much is an amount that will appropriately punish R.J. Reynolds and Liggett for the harm they caused to the Clay family? How much is an amount that when they see it come across the desks at corporate headquarters, what's going to make them take notice? We're going to suggest to you an amount. We're going to suggest to you that amount is $30,000,000.
Now, we submit to you that $30,000,000 is an appropriate amount. Is that an amount that is going to financially ruin the corporations? No. Is that an amount that at corporate headquarters when they get it, they're going to take notice? Maybe, maybe not. But it should. It should because it sends a message that people are watching.
It sends a message that Janie Mae Clay was more than just a smoker addicted to their products. It sends a message that Janie Mae Clay was a daughter, that Janie Mae Clay was a wife, that Janie Mae Clay was a friend, that Janie Mae Clay was a friend and caretaker to her daughter by the same name. That's what that amount would say.
That's all I have, Judge.
