MR. PERSONS: Counsel. Mr. Cohen.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury.
Good morning. It's been a long journey.
Almost a month ago that we met, but I want to begin my remarks by thanking each and every one of you for your jury service. Second only to service in uniform is jury service in terms of citizen responsibility. And you've been most attentive throughout all of these proceedings, always on time and we thank you for that. On behalf of everyone involved, thank you, thank you, thank you.
When we began jury selection, you were read by the Court a few passages from the Constitution. And the judge also read you a quote from Thomas Jefferson. When reflecting upon the American justice system President Jefferson said, "I consider trial by jury the only anchor ever yet imagined by man, by which a government can be held to the principles of its constitution."
And during the course of the jury selection process, time and again the importance of fairness and impartiality is stressed. And it's somewhat fitting that it's Law Day because we are a nation of laws and not men. We are obliged to follow the law. And part of what I hope to share with you in the next several minutes that I have to spend with you is a discussion of the law as it applies to this case, along with a discussion of the evidence that's come in during the course of the trial.
And of course this case is about Helen Cohen, not anyone else, not some other smoker c smokers, but Mrs. Helen Cohen. And I hope that during the course of this trial we've presented evidence bearing on Mrs. Helen Cohen and her claims in the case.
Can everyone see that? I'm not blocking anyone's view of the screen?
Bottom line, this is a case for money damages brought by David Cohen and the issues for you to decide.
MR. GDANSKI: May we approach, please?
THE COURT: Yes.
(The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
THE COURT: He wants to make sure he gets back the slides.
THE CLERK: These are defendants' copies of the plaintiff's.
THE COURT: Okay.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
THE COURT: Sorry for the interruption.
We're ready to proceed in just a moment.
Ready, Mr. Persons?
MR. PERSONS: Yes, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Please.
MR. PERSONS: Is Mrs. Cohen a member of the Engle class? That's the first question on the verdict form.
The second issue for you to decide: Did Mrs. Cohen know or by reason -- by use of reasonable care should have known by May 5th of 1990 that she had COPD/emphysema and that there was a reasonable possibility the COPD/emphysema was caused by smoking? That's the second question. And we're going to take up the second question first in a moment.
Were the actions of the defendants a legal
cause of Mrs. Cohen's death? Remember during opening statement I talked about the distinction between medical cause and legal cause. So lega cause. Were the actions of the defendants a legal cause of Mrs. Cohen's death?
And last: Is Mr. Cohen entitled to money damages because Mrs. Cohen chose to smoke cigarettes despite knowing that smoking was dangerous and addictive?
Let's talk about some undisputed facts.
Natural tobacco has nicotine. Natural tobacco can be addictive. Natural tobacco can cause lung cancer and other diseases. It's not as though natural tobacco is somehow safer than manufactured cigarettes. It is not.
Roll-your-own cigarettes are as dangerous and addictive as commercial cigarettes sold by the defendants. That's just plain truth.
Cigarettes in the 1800s were just as dangerous and just as addictive as the cigarettes that are sold today, even though they had no additives, cigarettes today have additives, just as dangerous, just as addictive.
Additive-free cigarettes are not safer or somehow less addictive than cigarettes with
additives. Bottom line, there's no such thing as a safe cigarette.
You heard from Dr. Proctor, who shared with us in his testimony about tobacco and about cigarettes, and he said that ingredients and diammonium phosphate were no secret, there's no secret that these things were being added to tobacco and used in the manufacture of cigarettes.
He said that "additive-free cigarettes are not safer or less addictive than cigarettes with additives."
That's Dr. Proctor.
Now, a case has to be based on evidence and not argument, and so I want to run through some arguments that have been made and then juxtapose it with the evidence.
Cigarettes were advertised like virtually all consumer products. You heard a lot about cigarette advertising. But what you didn't hear is that other products were advertised by celebrities, by movie stars, by -MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object.
MR. PERSONS: -- athletes.
MR. GDANSKI: Not in evidence.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GDANSKI: Move to strike and ask for a curative.
THE COURT: Disregard the last statement.
MR. PERSONS: You heard about cigarette advertising. It had nothing to do with Mrs. Cohen because Mrs. Cohen started smoking not because of advertising, but because her father smoked and her friends smoked.
You heard from Gloria Levine [sic] who talked about being friends with Mrs. Cohen since she was 13 years old and the father smoking at the kitchen sink when they were 13 years old in Dorchester, Massachusetts. That's when she began to smoke. Didn't have anything to do with advertising.
Some people did not know about the risk and addictiveness of smoking. Mrs. Cohen knew smoking was dangerous and addictive before 1950.
Defendants made their cigarettes inhalable.
Well, the fact of the matter is cigarettes were inhalable ever since the 1800s. In fact, the Turkish used Turkish tobacco, which was a milder form of tobacco, and made cigarettes, and cigarettes by definition are inhalable, unlike
smoking a pipe or smoking a cigar.
Didn't originate with these defendants. In fact, RJ Reynolds didn't come into existence until 1913. After the Crimean War in the 1800s, that's when cigarettes became popular in England and in the United States. And they were Turkish cigarettes.
Nicotine changes the brain, that was one of the arguments that you heard, but brain changes do not measure the tools needed to quit. You'll recall, you may recall during my examination of Dr. DiFranza and he'd shown you the images from the rat scans and from brain scans and one of the things that's undeniable is that those scans don't measure persistence. They don't measure motivation. And persistence and motivation are the essential ingredients for quitting smoking.
Some people relied on the defendants' statements about smoking and health, but that doesn't apply to Mrs. Cohen because Mrs. Cohen was surrounded by warnings and knew the tobacco companies had to, in her son's words, fess up in 1964 when the Surgeon General's Report came out.
And you'll recall the testimony of Mr. Edward Cohen that Mrs. Cohen knew before
1964	that cigarettes were hazardous and that cigarettes were addictive, she knew these things, so it was no secret to her. This was no secret to the family when they discussed the '64 Surgeon General's Report.
Some smokers cannot quit. That's what Dr. DiFranza said. He said, half the smokers can't quit, but we know that doesn't apply to Mrs. Cohen because she did, in fact, quit. She didn't have a relapse. She didn't have any withdrawal effects, according to her granddaughter Dr. Rachel Cohen.
Mrs. Cohen quit cold turkey in 1990 after her diagnosis with COPD/emphysema and never smoked for the remaining years of her life. We know that. That's not something that one has to speculate about. That's a cold hard fact.
Let's talk about filters.
This is another issue that doesn't have anything to do with the case. You heard about the tobacco companies promoting filters. Well, the message about filters, much of that was done by the public health community in the '50s,
'60s, '70s and the '80s. The public health community urged smokers who chose not to quit 1
switch to filtered cigarettes based on the belief that filtered cigarettes reduced the health risks of smoking.
Mr. Cohen testified that Mrs. Cohen was already smoking filtered cigarettes before she saw any advertising about filtered cigarettes.
So it wasn't advertising that influenced her to switch to filters. It wasn't anything that the defendants put out, their ads, their marketing that influenced her decision to switch to filters. She did it before she ever saw any advertising for filtered cigarettes.
Dr. Proctor confirmed this. "Question: In fact, it was a common message from the public health community given to smokers through the 1950s, 1960s and even into the 1970s was that if you cannot quit, switch to a lower tar product, right?
"Answer: That's right. That's not the only message, but certainly an important message.
"Question: Sure. In that context the first message was, quit; the second message was, if you can't quit, won't quit, switch to a lower tar cigarette.
"Answer: That's correct.
"Even the Surgeon General gave that advice, right?
"That's right. That's true.
"In 1989 the American Cancer Society was advising smokers that they would be more likely to be able to quit smoking if they would switch to a low-tar and nicotine product, right?"
Dr. Proctor: "That's right.
"In fact the American Cancer Society was advising the public that if you switched to a low-tar and nicotine brand you were less likely to die of cancer, correct?
"That's right.
And specifically, less likely to die of lung cancer.
"That's right."
That's advice coming not from the tobacco companies, but coming from the American Cancer Society.
"In 1975 the Surgeon General of the United States wrote, 'Smokers of filtered cigarettes have been shown to have a lower risk of developing lung cancer than smokers of nonfiltered cigarettes, but the risk remains well above that of the nonsmoker,' correct?
"Answer: That's what was thought at the time by some people.
"Question: Well, Surgeon General stated it in the report of 1975, correct?
"That's right.
"Question: And, in fact, the Surgeon General repeated that view in 1979, didn't he:
"Answer: That's right.
"And then the view was repeated by the Surgeon General again in 1981, Surgeon General's Report, correct?
"That's correct."
So that's the message that was being delivered by the public health community about filters.
Now, what we do know about Dr. Proctor is that he gave generic testimony, nothing specific to Mrs. Helen Cohen. He did not know anything about what information Mrs. Cohen received at any point during her life about the dangerous and addictive nature of smoking. He had no knowledge of whether Mrs. Cohen ever relied upon any advertisements when deciding to smoke or to continue to smoke. He had no evidence about why or knowledge about why she chose a given brand
or switched brands. And he had no knowledge about whether Mrs. Cohen ever saw, heard or relied upon any statements from any -- the tobacco industry.
What we know from Mr. Cohen is that she didn't rely upon anything from the tobacco companies. We know from Mr. Cohen's testimony that nothing that was said or done by the tobacco companies affected Mrs. Cohen's smoking decisions, either the decision to start smoking, the decision to continue smoking, the decision to not quit smoking. We know that from Mr. Cohen's testimony.
So what you have here, you've heard a lot of evidence that pertains not to Mrs. Cohen, but perhaps to some other smoker, maybe a generic smoker.
MR. GDANSKI: Objection. It's improper.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PERSONS: Mrs. Cohen knew about the dangers and addictive nature of cigarettes before 1950. We know that because in 1949 she told Mr. Cohen that she was addicted. That was the first time he had ever heard that term used. 1950 was 38 years before the Surgeon General of
the United States declared that nicotine in cigarettes was addictive. So she was way ahead of the information that was disseminated by the Surgeon General. In 1950 she's already talking about being addicted.
Mrs. Cohen's smoking choices were not influenced by advertising or statements about smoking. We got that from Mr. Cohen.
Mrs. Cohen never expressed any confusion about the dangerous and addictive nature of cigarettes.
She never relied on any statements from the tobacco industry.
And in 1990 she had the motivation to quit.
Now I want to talk about the statute of limitations. And this is the second question on the verdict form.
The first issue, class membership, I'm going to talk about in a minute. But I want to talk about this issue and about the other medical issue, the lung cancer, first.
The defendants have the burden of proof on this issue. This is the only issue in the case on which the defendants have the burden of proof. Plaintiff has the burden of proof on
every other issue in this case. And we have the burden of proof by the greater weight of the evidence, and all we have to do is tilt the scales. That doesn't mean that we start out with the scales even.
We start out at a trial we want the people who are deciding the case to be neutral so one doesn't start out ahead of the other. But when it comes to burden of proof we have the burden to prove to you that Mrs. Cohen knew or reasonably should have known that she had COPD/emphysema and that it was possibly relate to smoking and that she knew this on or before May the 5th of 1990. And I humbly submit to you that we've carried that burden.
MR. GDANSKI: I object to the statement of personal belief.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GDANSKI: Move to strike.
THE COURT: Mr. Gdanski, sidebar, please. And Mr. Persons.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
THE COURT: Who's going to be objecting during closing? I'm not going to allow three
attorneys to object during closing for plaintiff. If you're objecting that's it, no one else will be objecting.
MR. GDANSKI: I'm not doing rebuttal, but I'll do objections.
THE COURT: It's your call. I'm not going to allow three attorneys to object.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I was not going to do the objecting, Steve and Jon wanted to object, I wasn't going to object -THE COURT: Mr. Gdanski will be doing -- one attorney, one party, one objection.
Okay. Mr. Woods?
MR. WOODS: I just want to know the ground rules -THE COURT: No, you guys have more than on party.
MR. WOODS: But I thought it was proper for an attorney to say "I would submit the evidence shows X." I don't think he says "I believe." I think it woud be proper to say -MR. GDANSKI: He said -THE COURT: No, you're right.
MR. S. DAVIS: I was going to raise the same thing.
THE COURT: No, you're right. I'm going to overrule.
MR. GDANSKI: There's a recurring phrase that's used it's "we know." That I do object to.
Mr. Persons has repeatedly used the phrase "we know" implying him and the jury are on same page on some basis of knowledge.
THE COURT: No.
MR. GDANSKI: He did. It was used maybe 10 times. I didn't object to it, but now that we're here I'd ask that it not be used going forward. "We know."
MR. WOODS: I think that's perfectly proper.
I think Mr. Schlesinger said over and over -THE COURT: Yeah, he kept over and over about "we know, we know, we know" -MR. S. DAVIS: It's just a reference to what's happening in the trial -MR. GDANSKI: You're overruling?
(Multiple persons speaking at one time.)
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
THE COURT: Objection is overruled for the record.
You may proceed, Mr. Persons.
MR. PERSONS: So let's talk about this COPD/emphysema. And this is instruction number 6 that you're going to have with you in the jury room, and I'm going to spend a moment to talk about it.
And this is what the judge is going to instruct you: "The next issue you must decide in this case is defendants' claim that plaintiff did not timely bring this lawsuit. To prevail on this claim defendants must prove by the greater weight of the evidence that Mrs. Cohen knew or by the use of reasonable care should have known before May 5th, 1990 that she had COPD/emphysema and that there was a reasonable possibility," not probability, but possibility,
"that the COPD/emphysema was caused by cigarette smoking."
The instruction goes on. "Mrs. Cohen knew or should have known that there was a reasonable possibility that she had COPD/emphysema caused by cigarette smoking if the COPD/emphysema manifested itself to her in a way that supplied some evidence of a causal relationship to cigarette smoking."
"Mrs. Cohen knew or should have known that
there was a reasonable possibility that she had COPD/emphysema caused by cigarette smoking if the COPD/emphysema manifested itself to her in a way that supplied some evidence," some evidence, "of a causal relationship to cigarette smoking.
"In making that determination, in determining whether she knew or reasonably should have known, you may properly consider what Mrs. Cohen knew prior to May 5th, 1990 concerning the health risks of cigarettes."
So you can go back to 1949 when she said she was addicted. You can go back to 1950 when the doctor told her she needed to quit smoking because she had a smoker's cough. You can go back to 1950 when -MR. GDANSKI: I object, Judge. It's improper. May we approach, please?
THE COURT: Yes.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. GDANSKI: It's only her knowledge about COPD/emphysema not her knowledge about addict going back to 1949.
THE COURT: Read the jury instruction.
MR. GDANSKI: But smoking causing what?
THE COURT: Read the instruction.
MR. GDANSKI: I did, it's smoking causing COPD/emphysema not addiction.
THE COURT: Based upon her knowledge of the health risks of smoking. That's the Jewett instruction. And that's why I gave the Jewett instruction.
MR. GDANSKI: Which we objected to, but I think the Jewett instruction has to be tied to, even in the worst case scenario, the actual disease not addiction.
THE COURT: Mr. Persons is simply reading from an instruction which is approved by an appellate court in the state of Florida, which I'm bound to follow.
The objection is overruled.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
THE COURT: Objection is overruled, for the record.
MR. PERSONS: You may properly consider what Mrs. Cohen knew prior to May 5th, 1990.
So you can go back to 1949, 1950 and you can go back to the time when she was carrying her son Edward in 1950, 1951, because he was born on
August 19th of 1950, and the doctors told her, Ma'am, you need to quit smoking.
You can go back to the '50s and the '60s and the '70s and the '80s when Mr. Cohen testified from the witness stand that he and Mrs. Cohen discussed the deleterious effects of smoking, the harm that it causes to the lungs.
You can go back to Linda Rose and her testimony about when she met Mrs. Cohen in Poughkeepsie, New York in 1979, 1980 time frame and she had a smoker's cough and that she knew that it was related to her cigarette smoking.
So you can use all of that information in arriving at, determining whether she knew or should have known that the COPD/emphysema was related to smoking cigarettes.
Let's talk about some of the evidence. The evidence shows that Mrs. Cohen knew or by the reasonable care -- by the use of reasonable care should have known before May 5th, 1990 that she had COPD/emphysema and that there was a reasonable possibility that the COPD/emphysema was caused by cigarette smoking. The evidence on this is crystal clear.
How do we know this? Well, let's start in
December, specifically December the 26th of 1989 when she first presents at the offices -- the doctors' office, Dr. Santini and Wasserman, who were in practice, family practice doctors, caring for the Cohens. And we're going to walk you through what transpired on each of these visits.
Each of these green checkmarks represents a day on which Mrs. Cohen saw either Dr. Santini or saw Dr. Wasserman and was treated for, diagnosed with COPD/emphysema. The six days that are consecutive in January, that's when she's in the hospital at Delray Community Hospital being treated for COPD/emphysema.
And then she's got these visits in February and a visit in March.
All of this transpires before the red-letter day of May the 5th of 1990. That's the cutoff date. All of this takes place before then.
Here's what Dr. Santini says that she tells her patients about their health conditions and any relationship between the health condition and cigarette smoking.
She tells them stop smoking. If you smoke, stop smoking. She says smoking can be
destructive to the lungs and cause difficulty breathing. She tells patients smoking can result in health problems, multiple medications and you can be placed on oxygen as a result of smoking. She tells patients continuing to smoke with emphysema will make the condition worse. And she says quitting smoking will improve your health. And she has every reason to believe that she told Mrs. Cohen these things.
Does she have a specific recollection of it?
No, she's seeing thousands of patients, but she knows this is what she's done ever since she graduated from the University of Miami Medical School in 1979.
So we have every reason to believe -- you can use your common sense -- to believe that she told Mrs. Cohen.
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object, that's improper.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. GDANSKI: Assumes facts not in evidence.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PERSONS: Dr. Wasserman, here's what h tells his patients. He tells his patients about the deleterious and harmful effects of cigarette
smoking. He tells them, stop smoking. That's number one.
Number two, smoking can cause emphysema a lung cancer. He tells his patients quitting smoking now greatly reduces the risk to health and reduces the risk of cancer. And he told patients who smoke that wheezing and shortness of breath and problems with the lungs are related to smoking.
And it's only common sense. If you're holding something that's got a fire that's six inches from your nose -MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object, that's improper.
MR. PERSONS: That's smoke.
THE COURT: He's referring to the cigarette. Overruled.
MR. PERSONS: Yeah, that's smoke. Instinctively you know smoke is harmful. When smoke occurs in the forest -MR. GDANSKI: I object. It's improper.
It's a statement of personal belief.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GDANSKI: Move to strike and ask for a curative.
THE COURT: Sustained.
Disregard the last statement.
MR. PERSONS: Animals, when there's a fire in the forest will run -MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object. This is not in evidence. It's improper.
MR. PERSONS: It's an analogy.
THE COURT: It's an analogy. Overruled.
MR. PERSONS: It's just an example.
So here we are. This is Dr. Santini and this is December 22nd, 1989. Positive for shortness of breath. Clear and few scattered wheezes. These are symptoms of COPD/emphysema symptoms of the disease. Discontinue smoking, that's the D/C, that's shorthand for stop smoking. So right there you've been told three days before Christmas in 1989 these conditions you're presenting with, the shortness of breath, they're related to smoking. The wheezing that you're experiencing, they're related -MR. GDANSKI: I object. That mischaracterizes the evidence. If we can approach, please.
THE COURT: Sure, of course.
(The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
THE COURT: What's the objection?
MR. GDANSKI: This is misleading. It's not in evidence. Counsel already made one -THE COURT: It's in the medical record.
MR. GDANSKI: There's no medical record in that record or from Dr. Santini that says that that she was told that the wheezing on that date was related to smoking, that is not in evidence.
More importantly, there was a representation on the calendar slide earlier that said that there was a note of emphysema or COPD in December o
1989,	also not true, not in the record.
THE COURT: I'll look.
MR. GDANSKI: He said, each of these entries are times where she had documented of COPD and emphysema. And that wasn't true either.
Is this the calendar we're looking at now?
THE COURT: No, this is the last one. He's saying, your symptoms -MR. GDANSKI: Keep going down when I objected, right there, she had been told three days prior to Christmas that these symptoms that she was presenting with were related to smoking. That's just not true. It's not in evidence.
It's not in the record.
MR. PERSONS: You can infer that from the fact she said discontinue smoking.
MR. GDANSKI: You can't infer that which is not in evidence.
THE COURT: I'm going to overrule the objection.
MR. S. DAVIS: Your Honor, we're going to have a long day if Mr. Persons and all of us are not permitted to take facts in evidence and ask the jury to inferences from them. We've got discontinue smoking, we've got wheezing -- it's a logical and fair argument -THE COURT: You're saying that Mr. Persons can't say that's related to smoking?
MR. GDANSKI: There's just no evidence to support it. Also the shortness of breath is not the same as emphysema and COPD.
THE COURT: He never said shortness of breath equals emphysema.
MR. GDANSKI: He said those are symptoms of COPD -THE COURT: Symptoms. He didn't say equals.
MR. PERSONS: It's in evidence.
MR. S. DAVIS: They just don't like the
argument.
THE COURT: Mr. Gdanski, your objection is overruled for the record.
MR. GDANSKI: Thank you.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
THE COURT: The objection is overruled, for the record.
Mr. Persons will continue.
MR. PERSONS: Thank you, Your Honor.
Dr. Santini told Mrs. Cohen about her health problems and the connection to her cigarette smoking.
(Video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: Did you tell -- would it have been your standard practice to tell Helen Cohen what findings that you had that day?
VOICE: Yes.
VOICE: For the shortness of breath for Helen Cohen, would you have had -- part of your standard practice, would you have had a discussion with her that cigarette smoking was playing some kind of role in the shortness of breath?
VOICE: Yes.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PERSONS: And here we have Mrs. Cohen was admitted to the hospital with COPD/emphysema on January the 22nd of 1990. And this is Dr. Wasserman's handwriting. She had asthmatic bronchitis. She had COPD. Those were the diagnoses. And the plan was admit to DCH, that's Delray Community Hospital.
Now, in order to accept the argument that Mrs. Cohen did not know that she had COPD/emphysema you would have to assume that Dr. -MR. GDANSKI: I object, Judge. This is attacking our arguments.
THE COURT: I'm sorry?
MR. GDANSKI: Attacking our arguments, I object.
THE COURT: Sustained.
Just slightly rephrase, Mr. Persons.
MR. GDANSKI: I move to strike.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: In order to conclude that Mrs. Cohen did not know that she had COPD/emphysema on January the 22nd of 1990 whs
she was admitted to Delray Community Hospital, you would have to assume that Dr. Wasserman didn't tell her what she was being admitted for.
After making the diagnosis of COPD and asthmatic bronchitis that somehow he didn't tell her what she was there for. And during the course of her stay at Delray Community Hospital and her treatment for COPD/emphysema that he didn't tell her what she was being treated for. Although many of the medications, and you heard the testimony, that she was administered during that stay were specifically for the treatment of COPD/emphysema. It defies common sense. And I encourage you to use common sense in evaluating the evidence.
Here's Dr. Wasserman.
(Video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: What were the symptoms that Helen Cohen presented with on that day?
VOICE: Sick times one month. She had a 2 plus wheeze with bronchi. Diagnosis, asthmatic bronchitis, COPD. Admit to Delray Community Hospital.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PERSONS: And that diagnosis followed her throughout her stay.
This is when she's admitted, 65-year-old white female COPD/emphysema with one month history of cough, phlegm, shortness of breath. Symptoms of emphysema/COPD.
(Video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: There's a history that you mentioned about cough, phlegm and shortness of breath.
Do you see that?
VOICE: Correct.
VOICE: Are those classic symptoms of COPD?
VOICE: Yes.
VOICE: And so did you believe on that date that Helen Cohen had COPD?
A. Yes.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PERSONS: All right. When she was discharged -- Mrs. Cohen was discharged on January the 28th of 1990. Here's the discharge summary from the hospital record, known to have emphysema, discharge diagnoses, asthmatic bronchitis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. She was seen during that stay by
Dr. Greene, the pulmonologist, the lung specialist, but the diagnosis didn't change.
It's still COPD/emphysema.
And, again, to conclude that she did not know that she had COPD/emphysema one would I top assume that Dr. -- neither Dr. Greene nor any of the nursing staff -MR. GDANSKI: I object, Judge. May we approach, please?
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
THE COURT: Yes, Mr. Gdanski.
MR. GDANSKI: There's a gross -- perhaps not purposeful, but a gross misstatement of the evidence taking place. And it impacts our response and position on the statute of limitations.
THE COURT: How so?
MR. GDANSKI: Dr. Greene was nowhere to be seen until 1994.
THE COURT: We'll just fix it.
MR. GDANSKI: I think in order to fix it counsel should inform the jury that Helen Cohen never saw --
THE COURT: No, this is not your closing.
This is Mr. Persons' closing. Counsel will not be doing that.
I'm going to sustain the objection and have Mr. Persons restate it.
MR. GDANSKI: We would move to strike the last testimony [sic] and ask for a curative.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
THE COURT: Mr. Persons is just going to restate the last statement.
MR. PERSONS: I sure will.
THE COURT: I'm going to sustain the objection, please.
MR. PERSONS: I will.
Dr. Berkowitz was the lung specialist who saw her during that six-day stay at Delray Community Hospital between January 22nd, 1990 and January 28th, 1990 and not Dr. Greene, but Dr. Berkowitz.
You'd have to assume -- to conclude that she didn't know following this six-day stay in the hospital that she had COPD/emphysema you'd ha to assume that Dr. Berkowitz, Dr. Wasserman, the hospital staff, no one informed her what she was
there for nor did they inform her upon discharge what she'd been treated for and what the medications she was to take once she was released, what they were for. Again, defies common sense.
(Video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: Why do you say that you believe that she knew of the diagnosis?
VOICE: She had a long-standing prior history of very heavy cigarette smoking which culminated in the disease, so she was aware of it.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PERSONS: That's her doctor. That's not an expert who was paid by anybody to come in and testify in the case. This is someone who cared for her over many years and still cares for Mr. Cohen. That's his testimony. He said she knew that she had COPD. That is un -- an unqualified answer. She knew she had COPD, according to her treating doctor.
She was diagnosed with COPD/emphysema aga on February the 12th, 1990. Here's the note. 2-12-90, diagnosis, emphysema. So again, she
would have been in the doctor's office, the diagnosis made in the chart, but somehow it was never communicated to her.
And here we have another note. This one is February 20th, 1990. Can't walk without shortness of breath.
And I believe it was represented to you during plaintiff's opening that Mrs. Cohen first experienced shortness of breath by walking in 1992. But here we have a note, a record, that is in evidence that will be with you that says,
"Can't walk without shortness of breath." And again, "emphysema."
"The asthmatic bronchitis has cleared." So we know it wasn't asthmatic bronchitis that was the reason why she stopped smoking because the asthmatic bronchitis had cleared. But the emphysema, once you have it it stays with you forever. You can treat the symptoms, but the disease remains.
(Video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: Relate to Helen Cohen in an office visit that she had with you on February 20,
1990.
VOICE:	Correct.
VOICE:	And what symptoms did she report on
that day?	
VOICE:	I feel better. A little short of
breath, can't walk without shortness of breath.	
VOICE:	And what was your diagnosis or
assessment?	
VOICE:	Emphysema, asthmatic bronchitis has
cleared.	
VOICE:	So that day did you still believe
that Helen	Cohen presented with and had COPD?
VOICE:	The diagnosis doesn't change.
VOICE:	Is that yes?
VOICE:	Yes.
VOICE:	Okay. And at that time did you
believe that that COPD or emphysema was
to smoking?
VOICE: Yes.
VOICE: And if Helen Cohen was smoking during that time period would you have told her that?
VOICE: Form.
VOICE: If she was continuing to smoke after her hospitalization related to an acute exacerbation of COPD I would have explained to
her the deleterious and harmful side effects of ongoing cigarette smoking and you need to stop.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PERSONS: And you have Dr. Wasserman again.
MR. GDANSKI: Object. Can we approach, please.
THE COURT: On the video? Sure, come on.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
THE COURT: That was part of the evidence, right?
MR. GDANSKI: It is, I just don't know where in the transcript that is. This is the problem with the slides if they just put a picture of a guy -MR. T. DAVIS: We went through all this yesterday, Your Honor. We gave him that information -MR. GDANSKI: No not -MR. T. DAVIS: We gave him that information.
MR. GDANSKI: No, not for the videos. The videos were just pictures.
THE COURT: But you didn't ask yesterday.
MR. GDANSKI: I didn't know that these were
extended videos from the actual deposition. If someone can just tell me the page and line -THE COURT: We discussed that.
MR. GDANSKI: That was just for sections where there were typed pages and lines, it didn't have the bottom left -THE COURT: Someone asked and -- I think Mr. Hammer asked and I don't remember who -MR. PERSONS: We went slide by slide and it was Mr. Bassett.
THE COURT: It was Mr. Bassett and he said, Judge, those are the videos.
MR. T. DAVIS: This is in evidence.
MR. GDANSKI: I'm just asking for the page line where they're from. Can you just give me those page and line?
THE COURT: He's got it. Fine.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
THE COURT: Objection is overruled. Let's continue forward.
MR. PERSONS: Thank you, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Please.
MR. PERSONS: And then this takes us to March 12th. Again, Mrs. Cohen is being treated
for COPD/emphysema. Helen G. Cohen, 3-12-90. Diagnosis, emphysema. All of this is before May 5th of 1990. All of these things take place before May 5th, 1990. It's not asthmatic bronchitis, it's emphysema. According to Dr. Wasserman, Mrs. Cohen knew that her COPD/emphysema was caused by cigarette smoking. And he asked her to quit. If she was still smoking at that time he asked her to quit.
(Video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: During the time period between December 1989 and March of 1990 during your care and treatment of Helen Cohen, did you determine that she had COPD, including shortness of breath and wheezing because of her cigarette smoking?
VOICE: Yes.
VOICE: And would it have been part of your standard practice to tell Helen Cohen that you believed that?
VOICE: Object to form.
VOICE: Yes.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I would make the same objection with regard to materials from counsel.
THE COURT: We've taken care of that,
Mr. Gdanski. We're taking care of it, okay. So that's fine. It's not an objection.
Let's continue forward, please.
MR. PERSONS: Thank you, Your Honor.
Now, Dr. Wasserman says that Mrs. Cohen's COPD/emphysema caused by smoking was self-evident. And that's a very -- it's a rarely used phrase. I don't -- you don't hear it in everyday conversation.
MR. GDANSKI: I object, Judge, that's improper.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GDANSKI: Move to strike and ask for a cure, please.
THE COURT: Disregard the statement statement, please.
THE COURT: You may continue, Mr. Persons.
MR. PERSONS: Self-evident. In the preamble to the Declaration of Independence Thomas Jefferson wrote about something being -MR. GDANSKI: Objection -MR. PERSONS: -- self-evident.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PERSONS: He said, "We hold these truth
to be self-evident" -- it's Law Day, we can talk about it. "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal and endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights, among them being life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness."
So what does self-evident mean? I looked at a thesaurus. Self-evident means clear -MR. GDANSKI: I object, Judge. May we approach?
THE COURT: Okay, sure.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. GDANSKI: Religious reference "endowed by their creator."
THE COURT: That's from the Declaration of Independence.
MR. GDANSKI: So what? It's still religious.
THE COURT: He can read from the Declaration of Independence. It's Law Day.
MR. S. DAVIS: You're kidding.
THE COURT: That's the objection? It's Law Day.
MR. GDANSKI: I also, Judge, object to
counsel saying "I looked up in the thesaurus the definition" -MR. S. DAVIS: This is done all the time.
THE COURT: Overruled. It's Law Day. (Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
THE COURT: Let's continue forward.
MR. PERSONS: Thank you, Your Honor.
And the thesaurus -- well, you can go on the Internet now and look up synonyms. You don't need a thesaurus anymore. So I looked on the Internet. And self-evident means clear. It means -MR. GDANSKI: Objection.
MR. PERSONS: -- cut and dry.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PERSONS: It means obvious. It means inescapable. It means patently true. And it means undeniable.
So when Dr. Cohen [sic] said that the fact that Mrs. Cohen's COPD/emphysema caused by smoking was self-evident by March of 1990, he meant it was clear, that it was undeniable -MR. GDANSKI: I object.
MR. PERSONS: -- that it was obvious.
THE COURT: "That's what the evidence shows."
MR. PERSONS: That's correct, Your Honor.
THE COURT: I'll sustain.
Just slightly rephrase that last statement, please.
MR. GDANSKI: Move to strike and ask for a curative.
MR. PERSONS: The evidence shows that when Dr. Wasserman stated that Mrs. Cohen's COPD/emphysema was caused by smoking was self-evident, he meant that it was clear, that it was cut and dry, that it was patently true, that it was undeniable and that it was inescapable.
(Video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: And do you believe it was self-evident that Helen Cohen had COPD or emphysema due to smoking when you saw her between December 1989 and March of 1990 because the symptoms of those conditions were present and manifested themselves?
VOICE: Yes, plus the smoking history.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PERSONS: Self-evident. Dr. Wasserman as of March of 1990.
Another reason why we know that Mrs. Cohen knew that her COPD/emphysema was caused by smoking is because Mr. Cohen told us so. "Did you know if Dr. Wasserman -- do you know if Dr. Wasserman told Helen she should quit smoking?"
And this is from his deposition that we read back during the course of this trial.
"Answer: Yes.
"Did Dr. Wasserman tell Helen she should quit?
"Answer: Yes.
"Question: Did Dr. Wasserman tell Helen that her COPD was related to her smoking?
"Answer: Yes."
And we know that Mrs. Cohen quit smoking in 1990 when she was diagnosed with COPD. Here's Mr. Cohen.
"Question: We're talking about after her COPD diagnosis in 1990. She quit smoking, didn't she, sir?
"Answer: Yeah.
"Question: And she quit for good, didn't
she, Mr. Cohen?
"Answer: Yes."
And as that instruction tells you, you can take into account anything that Mrs. Cohen would have known about the risks of smoking going all the way back. And we can go back. What Mrs. Cohen knew before May 5th, 1990 concernin the health risks of smoking, we can look at 1950.
"All right. In 1950 when Mrs. Cohen was pregnant, she was coughing quite a bit, wasn't she?
"Yes.
"And you were concerned about her coughing because you knew that the cigarettes had something to do with her cough, didn't you?
"Yes, I did.
"Question: And she went to see a doctor because of her coughing at that time, didn't she, sir?
"Answer: Yes, she did.
"Question: And the doctor told her that her smoking was causing her cough and told her to stop smoking.
"Answer: Correct."
Here we go to the '60s and '70s.
"When we left off, we were talking about the warnings in the '66, '67 time frame. And now I want to talk about the '58 to '72 time frame, sir. In the late '60s, early '70s you and Mrs. Cohen continued to talk about the fact that smoking was bad for you, correct?
"Correct.
"And you continued to talk about the fact that smoking could injure your lungs, right?
"Answer: Right.
"Question: And make it difficult for you to breathe.
"Correct."
And here's Linda Rose, 1979, 1980 time frame.
"Question: Did Helen tell you why she wanted to quit?
"Answer: Well, she knew that it was affecting her health. She was having trouble breathing. She was coughing horrendously. She was having trouble with her legs. And she knew that she needed to quit if she wanted to regain her health.
"Question: And all of that happened within
that first year.
"Answer: All of what happened?
"Question: Helen explained all of this to you within that first year.
"Answer: When I met her, she was aware that her cigarette smoking was negatively affecting
her health and it would be to her benefit to
quit."
Again, you can take into account all that Mrs. Cohen would have known prior to May the 5th of 1990 in determining whether or not she knew or she reasonably should have known that she had COPD/emphysema and that it was possibly related to smoking.
And so when you get to question number 2,
"Did Mrs. Cohen know or should she have known in the exercise of reasonable care, on or before May 5th, 1990, that she had COPD/emphysema and that there was a reasonable possibility that the COPD/emphysema was caused by cigarette smoking?
The answer should be "yes."
I submit to you that the evidence supports that answer. The testimony of Drs. Wasserman and Santini, the medical records, the testimony of Mr. David Cohen, the testimony of Ms. Linda
Rose support that answer.
I want to talk briefly about lung cancer.
Plaintiff failed to prove that Mrs. Cohen had primary lung cancer caused by smoking. There was no evidence of primary lung cancer detected in April 2005. No evidence of primary lung cancer in February 2006 hospital admission when she went in for pneumonia. There was no tissue biopsy or any other pathology to determine whether the lung was the primary site of the cancer. The cancer suspected in March of 2006 on a CT scan, but it wasn't confirmed by any test, study or analysis. There's no way to differentiate cancer in the lung cancer from pneumonia. We got that from Dr. Rosenkrantz.
Cancer detected in Mrs. Cohen's liver, there was no biopsy performed. And the cancer could have spread from her colon or her stomach to the lung, but no testing was done to determine where the cancer started.
MR. GDANSKI: I object, Judge. That misstates the evidence.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. GDANSKI: May we approach, please?
THE COURT: Sure.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: The last objection was overruled.
MR. PERSONS: I think we finished with cancer could have spread from the colon or the stomach to the lung, but no testing was done to determine where cancer started.
And here we have Dr. Rosenkrantz's trial testimony.
"'Question: And so in terms of trying to identify a specific mass that's in Helen Cohen's chest, we can't identify that by looking at the March 3, 2006 CT scan.
"'Answer: You can suspect it, you cannot be sure. You can't identify it. No.
"'Did I read that question and answer correctly?'
"'Answer: That's what it says.'"
"Question: You were asked the question: 'Question: With respect to the dense consolidation that is described in your March 3rd, 2006 CTA scan is there any way that you c differentiate what part of that is pneumonia versus something else? Answer: No.'"
And then we had Dr. Wright. He was asked about declining risk.
"Question: Let me repeat the question. You agree that 10 to 15 years after someone quits smoking their risk of lung cancer approaches pretty close to that of a person who never smoked, correct?
"Yes."
And so given that Mrs. Cohen had quit smoking some 16 years before her risk of lung
cancer in the spring of 2006 would have been comparable to, in his words, approaching pretty close to that of a person who never smoked. So couple that with the lack of any information to confirm what was suspected as lung cancer, I submit the evidence doesn't support a finding that Mrs. Cohen had lung cancer caused by cigarette smoking and that was a legal cause of her lung cancer and death. And that's question number 4.
Plaintiff failed to prove that Mrs. Cohen was a class member. I want to turn to that subject now.
And I used these hurdles in opening statement because in order to establish class membership there has to be proof of addiction and addiction causation.
For addiction plaintiff has to prove that Mrs. Cohen was addicted to nicotine. Well, there's no jury instruction on defining addiction. So that's going to be up to you, ladies and gentlemen, to determine whether or not the facts bear it out that she was addicted or wasn't addicted.
What we did in the course of this trial is
bring to you Dr. Dosovitz, Ira Dosovitz, a board-certified addiction psychiatrist who employed medical diagnostic criteria and determined in his professional judgment that Mrs. Cohen was not addicted.
The plaintiff presented evidence from Dr. DiFranza who disagreed.
Dr. Dosovitz, 80 percent of the people who come to see him, come to see him for smoking cessation, either they are addicted, he says 50 percent of them are addicted, the other 50 percent are not addicted but they want to stop smoking. He's in the trenches dealing with patients and dealing with these issues every day. He's also on the faculty at George Washington University Medical School where he teaches not only medical students, but he teaches other psychiatrists. He was of the opinion that Mrs. Cohen was not addicted.
And he said: There was no clinically significant imperative. He said: Smoking never interfered with her personal life. It didn't interfere with her relationship with her family and friends. She was able to function as a professional individual and she had good family
relationships.
She did not meet the medical diagnostic criteria for addiction. He sees patients who meet the medical diagnostic criteria for addiction and he talked about some of it. And he talked about the withdrawal effects that they suffer and how he has to put some of them in the hospital and maybe has to put some of them on medication to manage the withdrawal effects of their addiction. Mrs. Cohen did not have that kind of experience.
Now, addiction causation. For addiction causation the plaintiff would have to prove that addiction was a legal cause of Mrs. Cohen's COPD/emphysema. And the question becomes one of, was Mrs. Cohen an involuntary smoker -MR. GDANSKI: I object, Judge.
MR. PERSONS: -- who had no ability -MR. GDANSKI: I object, Judge. Restating the question. Move to strike and ask for a curative.
THE COURT: Sustained.
Disregard the last statement.
Mr. Persons will continue.
MR. PERSONS: Was Mrs. Cohen an involuntary
smoker who had no ability to stop smoking and prevent her own COPD/emphysema? Was Mrs. Coh caught in an addiction cycle with no way out, in other words, no way to quit smoking, no way to enjoy the beneficial effects of stopping smoking because she was in the throes of the addiction such that she had to smoke and smoke until she became sick? We submit the evidence does not show that.
Here's the class membership instruction.
"Addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of COPD/emphysema if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such COPD/emphysema, so that it can be said that, but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the COPD/emphysema would not have occurred."
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I'm going to object.
May we approach, please?
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
THE COURT: Simply reading from the instruction?
MR. GDANSKI: He is reading from the instruction and he's reading from it accurately, the problem is that the preface to it is "here is the addiction causation instruction." So if he wants to say "here's part of," that's okay.
But to say "here is the entire instruction" is improper when there's a concurring cause part of it. So if you want to say that here's part of the instruction, that's fine.
THE COURT: Let me hear a response.
MR. GDANSKI: It's misleading.
MR. S. DAVIS: It's the causation instruction on the legal cause for the addiction question. It's exactly what it is.
MR. GDANSKI: It's not "the," it's part of. There's the next paragraph. It's just a misstatement.
THE COURT: I'm going to overrule the objection.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
THE COURT: Objection is overruled.
MR. PERSONS: So that but for, but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine the COPD/emphysema would not have occurred. But
Mrs. Cohen's decision to continue smoking the COPD/emphysema would not have occurred. But fc Mrs. Cohen's not quitting the COPD/emphysema would not have occurred.
Now, one of the things cited by Dr. DiFranza in his testimony as an impediment, a barrier to quitting is withdrawal symptoms that people who are addicted to nicotine that they have these withdrawal symptoms that are such that they have to relieve them only by smoking.
Well, let's look at some of the testimony.
He admitted that heavily addicted smokers can and do quit. He admitted that being addicted doesn't mean a smoker cannot quit. He would never tell anyone it is impossible to quit.
Millions of heavy smokers have quit. And he says addiction does not impair a smoker's ability to understand warnings about health risks.
And we know that addiction doesn't prevent smokers from quitting because between 1955 and
1965	17.6 million smokers quit. We know between 1964 when the Surgeon General's Report came out and 1979 30 million people quit. That was in the aftermath of the '64 Surgeon General's
Report.
And you can recall Dr. Proctor's testimony about the campaign of misinformation. The campaign, the creating a controversy. Well, the evidence shows that the controversy wasn't successful with 30 million, because 30 million people decided to quit smoking in that 15-year time frame. And by 2012 60 million people had quit smoking. And these include people who are addicted, because, according to Dr. DiFranza, 90 percent of smokers are addicted.
So you can back up, and we had an exchange about this, you may recall, 80 to 90 percent -80 percent would be 48 million, 90 percent would be 54 million. So 54 million, according to his figure, of these 60 million smokers would have been addicted to nicotine, but they quit.
We know that in 1978 Mr. Cohen quit cold turkey after his heart attack. He was smoking two to three packs a day and he testified on the stand that he felt that he was addicted. He had been smoking for 35 years at that time. But after his heart attack his doctors told him he needed to stop smoking. Mrs. Cohen heard and understood this. This is some more information
you can take into account, by the way, in deciding question number 2 on the verdict form. And in 1978 Mr. Cohen immediately quit smoking cold turkey and never smoked another cigarette. No relapse. No overwhelming withdrawal effects, but quit smoking. And 1978 was 35 years ago.
So he's been a former smoker as long as he was a smoker.
Now, how is Mrs. Cohen different than those millions of smokers who quit smoking during the time that she was smoking? Were the cigarettes she was smoking more addictive than other cigarettes? No. We know the evidence is that all cigarettes containing nicotine are addictive.
Was Mrs. Cohen's brain effected differently than those smokers who quit? No.
Was Mrs. Cohen exposed to advertising that was different than other people, including the smokers who quit? No.
Did Mrs. Cohen not know about the risks of smoking cigarettes? No.
Did Mrs. Cohen smoke more than the smokers who quit? No. Because we got from the experts that heavily addicted smokers, heavy smokers can
quit.
Did Mrs. Cohen ever make a motivated quit attempt before 1990? No.
And that's not to disparage Mrs. Cohen, not at all, but that's just the evidence. In order to quit you've got to be motivated to do it and you've got to be persistent about it, and the evidence is she wasn't motivated. Dr. DiFranza tells us that, that her motivation came in 1990 following the COPD diagnosis. It was at that point that she was motivated to quit and she quit and she quit for good.
Now, causation of Mrs. Cohen's illness.
Mr. Cohen's admission, Mr. Cohen admits that Mrs. Cohen's actions relating to her efforts to quit smoking were a legal cause of her own COPD/emphysema and lung cancer and death. by saying you have partial fault, and they say she could have done more to quit smoking.
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object.
Can we approach and take that down?
THE COURT: Sure. Of course.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
THE COURT: What's the basis of the
objection?
MR. GDANSKI: I remember addressing this slide yesterday. And my recollection -- it was a long day -- my recollection -- for all of us -- is that it had to be modified to actually reflect the admission. I could be wrong, but I think that it had to actually reflect the admission and it doesn't.
My recollection of the objections yesterday is that when you show our admission it has to actually reflect language of the admission as it's contained in the jury instructions and this does not.
THE COURT: We'll take the slide down.
MR. GDANSKI: I'd ask for -- I mean, the problem is that it's out there, so I'd ask that Your Honor instruct the jury to disregard the last slide.
MR. BASSETT: I think the ruling was this was an interpretation of that admission that we can argue from.
THE COURT: I think you might be right,
Mr. Bassett.
(Multiple persons speaking at once.)
THE COURT: So I think there was a later one
that I asked to fix and not this one because I said you can make argument from it. I think that's correct.
MR. GDANSKI: In all candor, I don't remember. I don't think it is correct, but if that's the slide you're showing, I object. That is not our admission.
THE COURT: Well, I've already dealt with that yesterday, so it's overruled.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
THE COURT: Objection is overruled.
MR. PERSONS: And what this means is that Mrs. Cohen could have tried harder to quit and could have quit before she developed COPD/emphysema or lung cancer.
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I just need to object to that. It's improper.
THE COURT: Your objection is preserved and overruled.
You may continue, Mr. Persons.
MR. PERSONS: Thank you, Your Honor.
And Dr. DiFranza's generic testimony wasn't about Mrs. Cohen. He said -- he was asked, "Now, you discussed earlier that you think there
are some smokers who simply can't quit. But we can agree that Mrs. Cohen was not one of them because she did, in fact, quit smoking."
And he said, "Yes, she did."
And so in answering the question, was addiction a legal cause of Mrs. Cohen's COPD/emphysema, did Mrs. Cohen have the abi to quit but chose to continue smoking, or did nicotine addiction control Mrs. Cohen and leave her no choice, no matter how hard she tried, but to continue smoking until she developed COPD/emphysema?
And the evidence shows that Mrs. Cohen had the ability to quit but chose to continue smoking and therefore her choice to continue smoking was the legal cause of her COPD/emphysema, and not addiction.
MR. GDANSKI: I object, Judge.
Can we approach, please?
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
THE COURT: Go ahead, Mr. Gdanski.
MR. GDANSKI: I don't like objecting, but you can't misstate the question on the verdict
form. It's not "the," it's "a." It's improper.
You can't do that to a jury.
THE COURT: He's right.
MR. GDANSKI: You need to -THE COURT: No, I'll sustain the objection.
MR. GDANSKI: Ask for a curative.
THE COURT: I'm happy to do that.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
THE COURT: The objection is sustained, and Mr. Persons is going to correct the last statement.
MR. PERSONS: I sure will, and thank you for that.
Did Mrs. Cohen have the ability to quit but chose to continue smoking, or did nicotine addiction control Mrs. Cohen and leave her no choice, no matter how hard she tried but to continue smoking until she developed COPD/emphysema?
We know that Mrs. Cohen had the ability to quit because she quit. It was Mrs. Cohen's decision to choose to continue smoking -MR. HAMMER: Judge, can we approach a second, please?
THE COURT: Sure, Mr. Hammer.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. HAMMER: Judge, I'm trying to find that slide in here and it looks like it says either 64 or 84 at the bottom. And our 64 or 84 is not that slide.
MR. PERSONS: We went over that yesterday.
MR. WOODS: Your Honor, I think yesterday they actually had some slides that they took back to the hotel on mistake, on accident. And it's probably in there.
MR. PERSONS: Here it is.
MR. GDANSKI: So is all the numbering off?
THE COURT: I don't know about the numbering.
MR. PERSONS: They're off on mine, too.
MR. BASSETT: On this issue, it's closing.
Mr. Schlesinger called for slides differently than he remembered.
THE COURT: Is there a legal objection other than numbering?
MR. GDANSKI: No. There was one because when we were going through these -- the problem is on the screen there's a number, so we look at
the spot for the number and it's not there, so we jumped up and objected. Now we see it's there.
MR. BASSETT: It is true we did take out a slide or two based on your rulings, but it messed up the numbers.
MR. GDANSKI: Usually you keep the same numbering the same.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
THE COURT: Let's continue, Mr. Persons, please.
MR. PERSONS: Did Mrs. Cohen have the ability to quit but chose to continue smoking? Yes. The answer to that is yes. And the fact that Mrs. Cohen had the ability to quit but chose to continue smoking, that was a legal cause of Mrs. Cohen's COPD/emphysema.
We know she quit cold turkey in 1990 and never smoked another cigarette. We've established that.
And Dr. Rachel Cohen, Mrs. Cohen's granddaughter, was asked, "Do you know how grandmother quit smoking?
"I believe it got to a point that she was
having enough health problems with her breathing issues that she realized I have to quit now.
And she just decided I'm going to quit and she did."
And then withdrawal symptoms, and I've gotten a little bit ahead of myself, but Dr. DiFranza talked about withdrawal symptoms being a barrier or an obstacle to quitting and that many smokers, addicted smokers, find it difficult to quit because they can't deal with the withdrawal phase.
But here's what he said from the witness stand. He said: Withdrawal symptoms are temporary and can go away in a week. He said that nicotine addiction is like the flu. You feel miserable for two or three days and within a week you're back to normal, only better. He said: If you can stick it out for a couple of days you'll return to normal.
Now, that's the plaintiff's expert who came in and gave that testimony, the same expert who has written over 250 articles who has been cited by the Surgeon General in several reports, including the 2010 and 2012 Surgeon General's Reports who has contributed articles to the
Surgeon General's Reports, but this is what his opinion is to a reasonable degree of medical probability about withdrawal symptoms: It's much like the flu. Now, if someone has the ability to control and to manage -- and we're going to talk about some of the traits that Mrs. Cohen had, by all accounts, a very strong will, very intelligent, a very disciplined person. With the proper motivation could have quit and could have quit much sooner, before she developed an illness.
And here's what Dr. Rachel Cohen, the granddaughter, said about withdrawal symptoms. "And when your grandmother quit smoking, you never witnessed anything about her in terms of her physical characteristics or her physical symptoms when she quit smoking, correct?
"Correct."
She was described as the matriarch. She was clear on what she wanted. She was extremely strong and strong-willed. She was confident.
She was intelligent. And she was decisive.
Once she made up her mind about something, she did it.
Gloria Kline, life-long friend, as I said,
they went back to Dorchester, Massachusetts together when Gloria Kline was 13 and Mrs. Cohen was 15 years old. So she knew her a very long time. And she said, she chose to smoke. And when she said that, she said it in the context of, the rest of us girls -- because there were five girls in the neighborhood who began smoking around the same time; in fact, Mrs. Cohen was the first of the five to smoke -- they had all quit except Helen.
And she said Mrs. Cohen enjoyed smoking.
And there's nothing wrong with that. Even Dr. DiFranza conceded that there are some people who smoke and smoke heavily but they're not addicted, they simply enjoy smoking. And the evidence will show that Mrs. Cohen was one of those people.
And then she described the encounter with the other lady on a bench, a park bench, when they were at Boynton Beach. Listen, lady, if you don't like it, go sit someplace else.
That's not a comment of somebody who's a tortured smoker. That's not a comment of someone who is an involuntary smoker. But here's somebody who enjoys smoking and doesn't
want someone else to invade the space, and if they are discomforted by it then they need to go somewhere else.
And that was related by Gloria Kline in the discussion of Mrs. Cohen's enjoyment of smoking. Nothing wrong with that. She enjoyed smoking.
Now, we know that there are certain behaviors associated with motivation to quit.
How do we determine whether someone is, in fact, motivated to quit? And Dr. Dosovitz helped us with that. He said that when someone is truly motivated to quit, they'll announce the intention to quit to family and friends because you need the support of family and friends in order to manage this through the withdrawal symptoms, you need that kind of encouragement.
Said they'll formulate a plan to quit.
Well, we know in 1990 Mrs. Cohen formulated a plan to quit. She said, I've got three packs of cigarettes left, when I smoke those three I'm quitting, and she did. That's a plan. She hadn't done that before.
Setting a quit date. When I finish these three packs, I'm smoking between two and three packs a day, I'm quitting. So she set a quit
date. She'd never done that before.
Make a good-faith quit attempt, and she did, because she quit and she stayed quit. It was a sustained quit attempt. That's a good-faith quit attempt.
Throwing away your cigarettes, that was tantamount to it, and she didn't go and purchase any more. And she used to buy them by the carton. She didn't purchase a single pack after that.
Throwing away your ashtrays, well, she had never done that before. And we don't have any evidence as to whether she threw them out after she quit this time, even though she stayed quit.
Throwing away matches and lighters, this is what Dr. Dosovitz looks for in his patients that he counsels on quitting.
Seeking a doctor's help in quitting, we know that she was offered that when Mr. Cohen had his heart attack in 1978. You'll remember the testimony of Gloria Kline that after he had his heart attack and Mrs. Cohen was smoking outside and then she started smoking in the house again and he urged her to -- he offered to take her to see a psychiatrist to get some help quitting.
And she declined the invitation and said it wouldn't do any good. But that's an indicator of a motivation to quit smoking, if you go and seek help. A stop-smoking clinic, that's an indication that someone is motivated to quit.
So you have to be motivated to quit. You have to make the decision to quit in order to quit. You have to want to quit. And someone who wants to quit can pick up the phone and call a smoke...they could pick up the phone and call a smoking cessation clinic and make an appointment. But Mrs. Cohen didn't do any of these things. And so that's not someone who's in the throes of addiction and who is in an addiction cycle with no way out, because at no time did she ever manifest any of these behaviors, exhibit any of these behaviors that are reflective of the motivation to quit.
Now, Mrs. Cohen had motivation to lose weight, and I'm not suggesting that it was a food addiction or anything of that sort, but it illustrates the kind of discipline it takes to give up something. And it takes discipline to lose weight, especially that much weight. And she had a plan, she was motivated to do it,
unlike smoking. She developed a plan to lose weight, sought help outside, got in touch with Weight Watchers, went to the meetings, because that's required. She -- with smoking she didn't change her smoking behavior. With the Weight Watchers she changed her diet and controlled what she ate. Well, she didn't change her smoking. Focused every day and she lost a half pound a week over a three- to four-year period and then kept it off. That's discipline.
That's being strong-willed. That's being decisive. The same traits that had she applied it to smoking she could have quit.
And Dr. DiFranza said that when Mrs. Cohen was motivated to quit she did, in fact, quit.
"Question: History of present illness.
Okay. So it says the patient is a 65-year-old white female" -- he's just showing him a medical record -- "admitted. Known to have emphysema. Admitted with increased shortness of breath, productive cough, et cetera, et cetera, right?
"Have you seen this record before?
"Answer: No.
"So this would have been in January 1990 she had been diagnosed with COPD; is that correct?
"Answer: Yes.
"Question: Is that what you were referring to when you talked about motivation for her quitting at the time?
"And your answer was yes."
So that was the motivation to quit.
Had it been there in 1949, she could have quit.
"She was just as addicted in 1990 as she was in 1949, wasn't she?
"Answer: I would think more so."
So if she was more addicted in 1990 when she quit cold turkey without any withdrawal symptoms and never had a relapse, not even for a day for 16 years, then clearly if she's more addicted in 1990 she's less addicted in 1949, 1950, 1955, 1960, 1964, the Surgeon General's Report comes out, 1978 when Mr. Cohen has his heart attack to quit and could have quit back during that time frame.
So the evidence shows that plaintiff did not prove that Mrs. Cohen was addicted. And plaintiff did not prove that addiction to nicotine was a substantial factor in Mrs. Cohen's COPD/emphysema. In fact, the only
cause of the COPD/emphysema was her failure to
quit.
On the verdict form, question number 1, "Was Mrs. Cohen addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? And if so, was her addiction a legal cause of her chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? The answer is no. The evidence shows that addiction did not drive her to disease. It was a failure to quit.
Plaintiff failed to prove that Mrs. Cohen reasonably relied to her detriment on any statement by a defendant after May 5th, 1982.
And here's the instruction. Instruction number
11,	"The next issue on the verdict form that you will consider is whether Helen Cohen reasonably relied to her detriment on any statements made by a defendant after May 5th, 1982 which concealed or omitted material information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature, and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of her lung cancer and death or her COPD/emphysema.
"Helen Cohen's reliance to her detriment on statements by a defendant that concealed or omitted material information is a legal cause of
lung cancer and death or COPD/emphysema if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such lung cancer and death or COPD/emphysema so that it can reasonably be said that but for the reliance the lung cancer and death or COPD/emphysema would not have occurred."
And in the instruction there's a definition of what's a material fact.
It's in final instruction number 11. "In this case a material fact is one that is of such importance that Helen Cohen would not have acted as she did but for the concealment or omission."
That's a material fact. That it would drive Helen Cohen's behavior, that she would not have acted as she did but for the concealment or the omission.
And ask yourself, is there anything in any of the documents that were secret documents that had Helen Cohen known about them would have changed her behavior, would have added to her body of knowledge? The evidence shows that it would not have, because she knew about the addictive nature of tobacco and she knew that it
was harmful to her health and she knew these things long before 1982.
Here's what she knew prior to May 5th, 1982.
In the '40s Mrs. Cohen's parents continuously warned her that smoking was bad for her and told her to quit.
In the 1940s Mrs. Cohen said she knew smoking was addictive.
In the 1950s Mrs. Cohen's doctors and David Cohen told her to stop smoking during her pregnancies.
In 1960 Mrs. Cohen was told to quit for her son's health, because he had an allergy and one of the things he was allergic to was cigarette smoke.
In 1961 Mrs. Cohen's father died and she attributed it to smoking.
In 1964 Mrs. Cohen discussed the Surgeon General's Report and knew smoking was dangerous could damage the lungs and could cause cancer.
In 1978 David Cohen had a heart attack that he attributed to smoking and quit smoking.
So from the 1940s to 1982 Mrs. Cohen was surrounded by warnings about the risks of smoking.
And of course none of this was a secret.
Dr. Proctor testified, and the question was:
"So it's no secret that nicotine is in tobacco, right?
"Answer: Yeah, I wouldn't call it a secret.
"Question: No secret that smoking can be addictive, correct?
"Answer: That's right."
For hundreds of years the risks and addictive nature of tobacco has been public knowledge.
Tobacco contains nicotine.
Pharmacological effect of tobacco well known.
Use of the word "addiction," that's by Helen Cohen. So I mean, she's familiar with the fact that it's beyond habit-forming, addiction, in 1950.
The fact that it can be hard to quit.
That's been well known for a long time.
Advice on how to quit using tobacco. That's been around hundreds of years.
Slang terms for cigarettes like "coffin nails," that's been around for hundreds of years.
Risk of tobacco use being taught in the school, that's been around for hundreds of years, per the testimony of Dr. Proctor.
Been a lot of talk about advertising, and in particular youth marketing. And a lot of exhibits, documents, material from the Surgeon General's Reports about youth marketing. Well, ask yourself, what does it have to do with Helen Cohen? It didn't influence Helen Cohen's decision to start smoking. What influenced it was the fact that her father smoked. And Gloria Kline gave a graphic description of the father, who was disabled from working, sitting next to the kitchen sink smoking cigarettes and having difficulty breathing.
Mrs. Cohen stole her first cigarette from her father. Mrs. Cohen started smoking because her friends smoked. And that's the greatest predictive factor is if you've got a parent who smokes, you've got friends who smoke, chances are you will become a smoker, not seeing cartoons on TV with ads or ads in newspapers or magazines, that kind of influence. And that stands to reason, that's the heaviest influence on people.
Slang terms for cigarettes were used in the household and she was familiar with them. Here's David Cohen: "And you understood that coffin nail meant every cigarette that you smoke is another nail in your coffin.
"Answer: Correct.
"And you used the term 'coffin nail' in the presence of Mrs. Cohen, didn't you?
"At times.
"And it was your understanding that she knew what you meant when you used that word.
"Yes.
"You also heard the term 'cancer stick' used to refer to cigarettes, right?
"Yes.
"And you used that term with Mrs. Cohen, didn't you?
"At times."
And of course Dr. Proctor didn't know about Mrs. Cohen in particular, but he was asked this question by Mr. Bassett. "If there's testimony in this case that Helen Cohen heard these slang terms, that would not be information you'd be familiar with, correct?
"That's correct. I don't know one way or
the other."
And so much of what Dr. Proctor was talking about, in fact, all of it, was generic. It was generic. This was out in the environment. All of these ads were out in the environment. All of this information was concealed. But there's no connection between any of that and Helen Cohen. She wasn't influenced by anything the tobacco companies said or did, none of that affected her smoking behavior, her decision to smoke, her decision to start smoking, her decision to continue smoking and her decision not to quit.
And as opposed to a historian telling us what the public knew and did not knew -- know, what the public understood, we can look to the people who were there in realtime, because we've got Dr. Leroy Burney, who was the Surgeon General in 1957, Dr. John Heller, who was the director of the National Cancer Institute in 1957, and here's what they said about how well the public was informed about the dangers of smoking.
Dr. Burney, "Our position is that we have informed the public through the excellent
coverage of the press, radio and TV."
Dr. John Heller, "Newspapers, radio TV and other media have done an excellent job of covering this problem and a very objective job.
This is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public."
Now that's in realtime, the public was, in fact, informed.
And in 1957 Mrs. Cohen is 33 years old taking the newspaper, has a television, has a radio and reads magazines. And according to Gloria Kline -MR. GDANSKI: I object.
May we approach, please?
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
THE COURT: What was the objection?
MR. GDANSKI: I'm looking for that slide.
Are these documents in evidence? Someone could just answer the first question is the information in evidence? I know it's been a long trial, I just don't remember ever seeing that.
THE COURT: He's asking for the information
on the slide -MR. GDANSKI: They were Burney and -MR. WOODS: They were used in Proctor.
THE COURT: That's what I thought.
Mr. Bassett?
MR. GDANSKI: Really?
MR. BASSETT: Yes. Dr. Proctor agreed to those recitations exactly.
THE COURT: That's what Mr. Gdanski was questioning.
MR. GDANSKI: I have -- when I came up -MR. BASSETT: They're the slides we went over yesterday.
THE COURT: So it was gone over with Proctc and it was in the package?
MR. BASSETT: Yes.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
THE COURT: Objection is overruled for the record.
You may continue, Mr. Persons.
MR. PERSONS: Thank you, Your Honor. I'm going to try to speed this up because we're approaching the lunch hour.
And then the 1964 Surgeon General's Report
comes out. And the Surgeon General says cigarette smoking is causally related to lung cancer in men. A relationship exists between cigarette smoking and emphysema.
And we know that the Cohens as a family discussed the '64 Surgeon General's Report.
David Cohen talked about that -- Mr. David Cohen and Mr. Edward Cohen both talked about that from the witness stand. And so they would have been aware of this as early as 1964 that there was a link between cigarette smoking and emphysema.
And here's a clip from a CBS special report.
(Video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: This is a CBS News Extra on smoking and health, the findings of the Surgeon General's Committee.
VOICE: Almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked, but the attacks took a new turn 10 years ago and culminated in today's report by the Surgeon General's Committee. This, in summary, is what the committee says.
Cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men and data on women smokers points
the same way.
Cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis.
Cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases.
Male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it's not proven that smoking is the cause.
On the question of filters the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but it didn't exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed.
In short, the committee says, if you smoke cigarettes you increase your chances of dying early. The sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PERSONS: And here's the Boston Sunday Globe and it's above the fold. This was shown during Dr. Proctor's testimony. Smoking Menaces Health. So it was widely publicized.
And then here's Mr. Cohen's testimony about
it.
"During this discussion about stopping smoking, you realized the Surgeon General had concluded that smoking could cause lung cancer, correct?
"Answer: Correct.
"In fact, you and Mrs. Cohen discussed the fact that smoking could cause lung cancer, didn't you?
"Yes."
Here's Edward Cohen.
"Your mother told you that she was aware of the risks of smoking before the 1964 Surgeon General's Report, didn't she?
"Yes."
Here's the warning label 1966, "Caution: Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health."
And here's a public service announcement on
it.
(Video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
(Noises heard.)
VOICE: We receive many warnings in our life and sometimes they can save our life.
(Noises heard.)
VOICE: This message is brought to you by the American Cancer Society.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PERSONS: We know that the Cohens discussed the warnings on the cigarette packages.
"In 1966 or '67 when you first recall seeing the warnings you understood that cigarettes could make it difficult for you to breathe.
"Yes.
"You discussed those warnings with Mrs. Cohen, didn't you?
"Answer: "Yes, I did.
"Question: And it's your understanding from your discussions with Mrs. Cohen that she realized that those warnings meant that smoking could make it difficult to breathe.
"Right.
"Question: You also knew from those warnings that smoking could injure your lungs.
"Answer: Correct.
"And you and Mrs. Cohen discussed that too, didn't you?
"Yes, we did."
So there was a discussion about it. I'm
going to skip this just to save time.
And here's what Dr. Daniel Horne, who was over the Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health, who was responsible for disseminating information about the dangers of smoking.
Here's what he had to say in 1968. He said, "You could stand on a rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know."
And so you get to concealment it's good to bear in mind that you can't conceal something from someone that they already know. So you can't conceal addiction from somebody if they already know that cigarettes are addictive. You can't conceal the fact that it's harmful to your health if that's something they already know.
And so you can't conceal that from someone that they already know.
The public information campaign worked. You've heard a lot from Dr. Proctor about the campaign of misinformation that he says the tobacco companies engaged in. But here's the facts. In 1954 90 percent of the public had heard the risks of smoking. By 1957 the Surgeon
General made this statement, "The public was informed through excellent coverage of the press, radio and TV." And that's Dr. Leroy Burney that we showed you a minute ago.
By 1964 17.6 million people had quit smoking.
And then in 1966 the warning label goes on cigarette packages.
1968 that's when Daniel Horn made the statement about standing on the rooftop.
The warning label is modified in 1970 to say that smoking is hazardous to your health.
And in 1972 warnings in all advertising were placed. So if there's a magazine ad for cigarettes, there's a warning in there that smoking can be hazardous to your health.
In 1971 advertising on TV is banned.
And in 1978 we know that Mr. Cohen quit.
Between '64 and '79 30 million people quit smoking in the United States of America. So a psychological crutch didn't prevent millions of smokers from quitting, Dr. Proctor admitted that.
"Notwithstanding the psychological crutch that you made reference to earlier in your
testimony, the Surgeon General estimated that in the 15 years after the publication of the '64 report 30 million men and women had quit smoking, right?
"That's correct."
And the National Smoke-Out. This was covered by Newsweek magazine in 1970, March 2nd,
1970.	The Cohens are living in Randolph, Massachusetts. Their oldest son -- both their children are going to Randolph High School. And this is where the Great American Smoke-Out was born. This is where it originated was in Randolph, Massachusetts. So this is up close and personal.
1985 the warning labels are rotated. And I want to direct your attention specifically to the first one. "Surgeon General's Warning:
Smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema and may complicate pregnancy."
And it's very important to bear that in mind that that warning label was out there, because the judge is going to instruct you -- one thing she's going to instruct you, the Court is going to instruct you that cigarettes are a legal product, but the Court is also going to instruct
you that as long as the cigarette packs bear the federally mandated warnings, cigarette advertising from July 1, 1969 forward cannot be the subject of any claim that the advertising undermined or neutralized the warnings or made them less effective.
So it's very important to bear that in mind. Because the warning is here that smoking can cause emphysema. And if you're a smoker,
Mrs. Cohen was a smoker in 1985, she saw this warning every time she lit up. And so it was there and clearly evident.
Mrs. Cohen did not rely on statements from the tobacco industry.
Here's Edward Cohen's testimony.
"At the time in 1964 when the Surgeon General's Report came out, you knew about the dangers of smoking.
"Yes.
"True statement?
"Yes.
"In other words, when the Surgeon General's Report came out linking smoking with lung cance that was no big surprise to you.
"No.
"Question: You all discussed the report and that the cigarette companies had finally fessed up that smoking was bad for you, right?
"Right."
His words. As a family they met, they discussed the Surgeon General's Report and they said tobacco companies had finally fessed up.
He's 14 years old in 1964.
Mrs. Cohen never saw or relied upon anything the tobacco companies said or did. She never said she was misled, did not have enough information about smoking or relied on anything from the defendants.
There's no evidence than Mrs. Cohen was influenced by cigarette advertising. No evidence she was reassured to continue smoking based on anything that any of the defendants said.
Mrs. Cohen never told anyone that filtered cigarettes were safe. She never told anyone that light cigarettes or low-tar cigarettes were safe. Mr. Cohen never said that she thought smoking was safe. She never denied that smokin< was dangerous. Mrs. Cohen never denied that smoking was addictive. She never said that she
thought that any brand she smoked were safer than another brand that she smoked.
"Question: Did Helen tell that she had seen any advertisement for filtered cigarettes?
"Answer: No.
"You believe that any ads that Mrs. Cohen saw for filters would have been after she was already smoking filtered cigarettes, don't you?
"Answer: Yes."
Did Mrs. Cohen rely on any statement by the tobacco industry?
The Frank Statement? No.
Council For Tobacco Research statements?
No.
Tobacco Industry Research Committee statements? No.
Tobacco Institute statements? No, she did not.
Tobacco industry press releases? No.
Tobacco industry white papers? No.
Interviews given by the tobacco industry statements? No.
Tobacco statements about smoking and health? No.
Cigarette advertising? No, she didn't rely
on those things.
Question: She never told you -- this is directed to Mr. Cohen -- that any of the choices she made about smoking were affected by any statements made by RJ Reynolds.
Right.
By Philip Morris.
Right.
Lorillard.
I guess.
Or Liggett.
Correct.
No statement, never told him that any of the choices she made about smoking were affected by anything any of those companies said.
And so in answer to question number 11 on the verdict form, "Please state as to each defendant whether Mrs. Cohen reasonably relied to her detriment on any statement made by that defendant after May 5th, 1982 which concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects and or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and, if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of her COPD/emphysema."
The answer is "no."
No agreement amongst the defendants to conceal information about smoking influenced or impacted Mrs. Cohen's smoking decision.
Mrs. Cohen started smoking before the plaintiff claims there was an agreement to conceal. Remember the plaintiffs in opening statement and during Dr. Proctor's -MR. GDANSKI: Judge, that's improper. Can we approach.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, you've been very attentive. I was just going over the scheduling with the attorneys. I haven't given a break all morning. You guys are looking at me like, someone could probably use the bathroom.
What I was going to plan to do is plan to
give about a 20 to 25-minute break to have you guys, if anybody wants to go downstairs, help yourself to a cup of coffee in the jury room, use the restroom. We'll finish the defendants' closing, do the rebuttal. During the break I will have you order your food so your food will be delivered probably around 2:00 or so.
And is now a good time for a restroom break?
MR. GDANSKI: Maybe we have some confusion. May I approach?
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. GDANSKI: I thought we were going to see -THE COURT: Now or if they want to wait, that's what I was asking them.
MR. GDANSKI: But I thought we were going to see if they need a short restroom break right now and if they don't, Mr. Persons will finish -THE COURT: No, they're not going to break -MR. GDANSKI: Then I would request that counsel for Reynolds finish his closings now.
THE COURT: Without a bathroom break?
MR. GDANSKI: No, I don't want to have them wait. I think -MR. S. DAVIS: -- I'm sorry -THE COURT: That's what I was asking them. My question is if they want a break now.
MR. GDANSKI: How much time do you have left? 5 minutes?
MR. PERSONS: No. No.
MR. GDANSKI: Half an hour?
THE COURT: Yeah, so that's why I want to make sure that -- I'm putting it in their hands.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
[#DELETED RECESS#]
MR. PERSONS: Counsel, Mr. Cohen. Ladies
and gentlemen.
When we broke, we were discussing this slide. And you recall from Dr. Proctor's testimony that, according to Dr. Proctor, he testified that the agreement among the tobacco companies -- except for Liggett, Liggett was later on -- started in 1953.
And Mrs. Cohen started smoking before plaintiffs claim the agreement to conceal started. She said she was addicted before 1953. And she knew the risks of smoking before 1953.
So there's nothing about this agreement to conceal that she would have relied upon in making the decision to smoke or making -- or learning about the risks of smoking or addiction to cigarettes. She knew those things before. And again, you can't conceal something from someone that they already know.
So that brings us to question number 7. Please state as to each defendant whether Mrs. Cohen reasonably relied to her detriment on any act/statement made by that defendant after May 5, 1982, done in furtherance of that defendants' agreement to conceal or omit
material information concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. And if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of her lung cancer and death, and the answer to all of those is no.
In allocation of fault on the COPD question. Mrs. Cohen knew that smoking was dangerous and continued to smoke, had the ability to quit earlier and didn't; had the ability to quit at a time that would have prevented her COPD/emphysema. You remembe Dr. Wright talking about declining risk.
Edward Cohen talked about his mother being responsible for her choices. You acknowledge that your mother made the choice to smoke. And he said: No one twisted her arm.
And then Mrs. Cohen never blamed the tobacco companies. This is Mr. David Cohen.
You were asked a question, I think, about whether a tobacco company -- whether Helen told you she relied on anything the tobacco companies said. Did you have a conversation with Helen about whether or not she blamed the tobacco companies for her sickness?
ANSWER: No, I didn't.
And the evidence is they were a close couple, married 57 years, shared everything, and it would stand to reason that had there been a discussion about blame, surely that discussion would have taken place, especially after the COPD diagnosis. And especially after she was on oxygen.
But from the time of her diagnosis, at no time prior to the diagnosis and no time after the diagnosis was there ever a conversation about the subject of blame on the tobacco companies for a choice that she made about smoking and continuing to smoke.
Now I'm at a point to illustrate the choices. And this is in no way to criticize Mrs. Cohen's decision to make the choices that she made. This is just a -- the fact is that she made the choices. And the evidence is that she made these choices.
And this is evidence that the choice was not constrained, because there were several opportunities to quit. There were several opportunities to break away and to break out of that smoking.
She knew smoking was dangerous and
addictive before she met Mr. Cohen in the '40s.
The testimony has been they met in 1948, they got married on June 23, 1949. She told him before they got married -- she was smoking when they met, and she told him in 1949 she was addicted.
She had warnings from her family, and yet she continued to smoke.
She had warnings from the media. We talked about those. She could have chosen help in quitting, but she didn't. Warnings from doctors beginning in 1950 that we know about for sure, yet continued to smoke.
Warnings from the Surgeon General beginning in 1964, but continued to smoke. Warnings that would appear for the first time on the cigarette packages in 1966, but continued to smoke.
Warnings from her children. Warnings from her grandchildren. You remember Eva Dahan Rodriguez testified about warning, Dr. Rachel Cohen, Linda Rose testifying about warnings from the grandchildren about smoking, but yet continued to smoke. Warnings from her husband about smoking, yet continued to smoke.
And then perhaps most important, warnings from her own body, beginning with the smoker's cough traced back to 1950, when she saw a doctor who urged her to discontinue smoking.
Then she developed COPD/emphysema in 1990, a then the lawsuit against the defendants.
But those are choices. Choices that Mrs. Cohen made, despite the risks associated with the activity. And that's not to criticize her for doing so. You have the right to exercise that choice.
I began my remarks this morning with a quotation from the Declaration of Independence, and it speaks in terms of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
In this country, in your pursuit of happiness is drinking, smoking, gambling. Whatever activity that you want to and you're not harming somebody else, even though you may harm yourself, you can do it. That's just the way it is.
And so -- but this series of choices -and you look at the body of this, and you realize based on Mr. Cohen's testimony that she never blamed the tobacco companies.
And when you look at what the son said about nobody twisted her arm, it's clearly a choice.
And then you look at how she quit. Not just the fact that she quit, but how she went about doing it. Was that someone who was a -in the throes of addiction and had no way out who could say with certainty I'm going to smoke three packs and then I'm going to quit, and did so.
Now let's talk about -- yeah, nothing the defendants could have done would have prevented Mrs. Cohen's COPD/emphysema. Only Mrs. Cohei had the ability to prevent her COPD/emphysema, and she was 100 percent responsible for the choices that she made. Those were her choices.
Now we talk about punitive damages. Not because there's any evidence. We take the position that the evidence doesn't support it.
But we need to discuss it, because it's on the verdict form.
Punitive damages can be awarded only for any concealment or agreement to conceal. Only if you find that there's an agreement or agreement to conceal that was a legal cause of
Mrs. Cohen's illness. Then and only then can you even consider punitive damages. They can only be awarded to Mrs. Cohen's estate. They can't be awarded to some charity or some organization that's doing research.
MR. GDANSKI: I object, Judge. That's improper.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GDANSKI: Can we approach?
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
MR. GDANSKI: We filed a pretrial motion on intended use of monetary award, and where the money would go, and this is just an improper argument. It's improper.
I don't remember Your Honor's ruling by memory. I would suggest that it was most likely granted. Or that the defendants said they would not do that which was just done. So that was improper.
MR. PERSONS: I was talking from the slide. That goes to the estate.
MR. GDANSKI: Money won't go to charity, money won't go to a foundation, money won't gc
to research. That's not on the slide.
THE COURT: I sustained the objection.
MR. GDANSKI: It's more than just the sustained objection. It's improper. I would -- I think that it violates the pretrial order. And I would confirm that, of course, but I believe that it does.
I would request that it be stricken, request a curative. And I know there's case law to support -- one second. Hold on.
THE COURT: Do you want to check with Mr. Schlesinger before you make that motion?
MR. GDANSKI: Do you want me to? I would reserve on any other motions associated with that and I would ask that it be stricken and the jury instructed accordingly.
MR. WOODS: Any motion not made right no is waived, Your Honor.
MR. GDANSKI: Well, then, I need time to see if there's a true violation of a court order.
THE COURT: Do you want to take a minute to go back and check and make a motion?
MR. PERSONS: I don't mind moving on.
MR. GDANSKI: We would like to take a
break and look at the order.
THE COURT: The objection is sustained. MR. GDANSKI: You should instruct them now, accordingly.
(Sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:)
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, we'i going to keep talking at sidebar. The objection was sustained, for the record. Disregard the last statement.
Counsel will come back up sidebar in just a moment.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. PERSONS: May I continue?
THE COURT: Mr. Gdanski is deciding whether to make a motion or not.
MR. GDANSKI: I'm not going to make a motion.
THE COURT: Okay. That's fine. No motion made. Thank you.
(Sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:)
THE COURT: I sustained the objection. I read the curative.
You may continue, Mr. Persons.
MR. PERSONS: Thank you, Your Honor.
Here is the punitive damages instruction. Clear and convincing evidence is what it requires, punitive damages. And it differs from greater weight of the evidence in that it is more compelling and persuasive.
Then the Court will instruct you: As I have already instructed you, greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case.
In contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and has such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter at issue.
So if there's the slightest hesitation about the issue, then punitive damages aren't warranted, because it is of such weight that it produces a firm belief and conviction, without hesitation about the matter at issue.
And the Engle findings do not establish that Mrs. Cohen, Mr. Cohen is entitled to punitive damages. And should the defendants be
punished?
This came out through the cross-examination of Dr. Proctor when Mr. Bassett was cross-examining him, and he confirmed that the Council for Tobacco Research funded more than $300 million of research on health. CTR funded over 7,000 published articles, they funded research that the Surgeon General relies on.
They funded multiple Nobel Prize winners conducting the research. They funded research at universities across the country. And they funded studies on tobacco addiction going back to 1963.
Of course, the Surgeon General didn't determine that tobacco, cigarette smoking was addictive until 1988.
They funded studies that cigarettes cause disease.
So this is the Council for Tobacco Research that was funded by the tobacco companies for this research. Larson Haag and Silvette, beginning in 1961, the tobacco companies funded research about the health risks of smoking and addiction.
They continued this funding after 1964, three supplemental volumes. They summarized thousands and thousands of articles, chapters on smoking-related disease and death, including lung cancer, heart disease, COPD and nicotine.
And this was relied upon by the Surgeon General in producing the 1964 Surgeon General': report. And the Surgeon General acknowledged this in its 1964 report.
It says: The committee, however, does acknowledge its gratitude and deep appreciation and with sincere apologies to any individual inadvertently omitted. The substantial cooperation and assistance of the following:
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Brown & Williamson, Lorillard, Philip Morris, and Liggett.
The defendants have worked to make cigarettes safer. There is no such thing as a safe cigarette, but efforts have been undertaken to make cigarettes safer. The defendants collaborated with and implemented design features recommended by the public health community.
Between 1968 and 1978, there was the
Tobacco Working Group, which had people from the tobacco companies working with researchers for government. Proposals on free nicotine cigarettes and increasing nicotine and reducing tar, to lessen the adverse health effects of smoking.
Defendants worked to reduce the carcinogens in cigarettes, including the blend of the tobacco, use of reconstituted tobacco, porous paper, filter ventilation, expanded tobacco. All in an effort to reduce the harm that cigarettes cause.
THE CLERK: One minute left.
MR. PERSONS: Thank you, ma'am.
And we know from Dr. Farone, who said these design modifications were a good thing.
He testified in the plaintiff's case, but he said these things were good. This research was good. These technologies were good. And that the heat, not burn technology that Reynolds employed in the Premier and Eclipse cigarettes, that was a good thing.
Reynolds spent hundreds of millions of dollars developing Premier and Eclipse, heating, not burning the tobacco, and this
reduced carcinogens. But it failed in the marketplace, because nobody wanted it. It tasted like -MR. BASSETT: Dead fish.
MR. PERSONS: -- dead fish, and so the public didn't buy it. And consumers have a choice. They chose to smoke the cigarettes that burned tobacco, as opposed to one that heated it. So it failed. But Eclipse is still sold in the marketplace.
And Dr. Proctor tells us of a different time. On his cross-examination, he said there are no tobacco company sponsorships at sporting events or stadiums anymore. There is no advertising on billboards of cigarettes. There is no advertising on buses and no advertising at concerts.
He said also it's a different time today. Adolescents are more likely to have tried alcohol than cigarettes. Adolescents are more likely to have gotten drunk than tried a single cigarette. Adolescents are more likely to have tried an illegal drug than tried cigarettes. Prevalence of youth smoking is at its lowest point in 60 years. That's where we are today.
And that smokers today are not more addicted to cigarettes than the smokers in the '40s, the '50s, the '60s, the '70s, '80s or even the 1990s. And that's from plaintiff's expert, Dr. Proctor. So punitive damages aren't warranted.
The cigarettes have carried warning labels since 1966. The defendants have not disputed the dangers of tobacco for over a decade.
Punitive damages are not needed to prevent the defendants from concealing the dangers of smoking. It's widely known now, and all the information is posted on the Internet.
Nothing about the defendants' conduct had any impact on Mrs. Cohen's decisions, and there has to be a connection between what the defendants did and Mrs. Cohen in order to award punitive damages in the Cohen case.
So under the circumstances of this case, please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted -MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object. May we approach, please?
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
THE COURT: The last slide?
MR. GDANSKI: Made a comment right before it went up.
The jury can consider harm to others in determining whether or not to award punitive damages. I don't know that anybody here -- I don't know that the Court disagrees with that. That's why we didn't give the limiting instruction in Williams in this phase, because it only goes to amount. The statement made just now was that we have to only consider harm to Mrs. Cohen in awarding punitive damages. I object. I think that's a misstatement of the law.
MR. PERSONS: There has to be a connection, and there has to be a connection when you do that, because I just told them before that, we've got to find that there was an agreement to conceal. That has to be a nexus to Mrs. Cohen's -- there has to be a nexus between the concealment and Mrs. Cohen's injuries, and so we've got to have a
connection.
MR. GDANSKI: I didn't object to that.
But then at the end, when he says you have to find it was just to her, the jury can consider -THE COURT: The instructions -MR. GDANSKI: The instructions are silent on that, for that reason.
THE COURT: They objected, I gave them your instruction. I did it your way. Didn't give the defendants' instruction. You got your way.
MR. S. DAVIS: I will make the same argument, if it comes to me and is appropriate at the time. It is based directly out of the language in the instruction. There has to be intentional conduct directed to Ms. Cohen that is a substantial cause of her injuries.
MR. GDANSKI: I don't want to be blocked in suggesting that the jury can consider harm to others in determining whether or not there should be an award of punitive damages.
THE COURT: There may be objections to that. I gave the correct jury instructions, and Mr. Persons was simply referring to the
jury instructions in the case.
(Sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:)
MR. PERSONS: Question number 15 is wher we were when we had the sidebar. Under the circumstances of this case, please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against each defendant. And the answer for each defendant should be no.
(A video clip was played as follows:)
VOICE: In my opinion, people should be warned of the danger and they are being warned. What they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PERSONS: And that statement from Dr. Horn summarizes it best. It's their own business. It was Mrs. Cohen's own business whether she chose to smoke or not. And nobody else's business but herself.
I thank you for your time and your attention, and I'll turn it over to the next counsel.



MR. WOODS: First of all, I want to join Mr. Persons in thanking you for the time that you've spent taking time away from your busy lives to come and hear this lawsuit. You have been amazingly attentive with the questions you've asked. We can tell you've been paying attention to the evidence, and we appreciate that. I know both sides appreciate that.
As Mr. Persons said, this case is about Helen Cohen. It's not about a class of unnamec smokers. It's not about anybody in this courtroom -- or anybody outside this courtroom.
It's a case about Helen Cohen.
And when you were selected what seems like months ago, but weeks ago, you all took an oath to be neutral, listen to the evidence, and follow the law.
So I'm going to spend a little bit of time today talking about what I think the evidence shows and when you apply it to the law, I think where it will get you at the end of the case.
And so the three things I'm going to talk about. First of all, Mrs. Cohen was aware of the health risks of smoking. And not just that it could be dangerous, but also that it could be addictive.
And Mr. Persons walked through that evidence in great detail. I'm not going to cover all that ground again. But I am going to talk about it a little bit.
I'm also going to talk a bit about the fact that she had the ability to quit. Of course, you know by now, there was no dispute. She did quit. She quit in 1990, she quit after she was diagnosed with COPD.
And the evidence will also show -- the
evidence did show that her COPD/emphysema was diagnosed in January of 1990. She was treated for her COPD and emphysema for years afterwards, but it was first diagnosed in January of 1990, and there's no question.
There's no question but that she knew that her COPD/emphysema was caused by her years of cigarette smoking. I'll walk through some more of that evidence.
First of all, I want to talk to you about the risks.
I brought some boards to help me illustrate this through the verdict form. And there will be a few verdict form questions that will deal with the issue of awareness, where awareness will be relevant.
Hopefully everybody can see this. These are the verdict form questions. If you look at the concealment questions and if you look at the conspiracy questions, you'll see that they're pretty similar, in terms of requiring as to each defendant, and there are separate line items for the defendants, as to each defendant, whether the plaintiff has proved, because the burden of proof is on them, that
Mrs. Cohen reasonably relied on any statement made by that defendant.
And so, again, you look at separate evidence against separate companies. After May 5, 1982.
And so I want to mention one point and then move on. But I think you'll notice that when you go back to the jury room, very few of the documents that you've seen actually come from the files of Lorillard Tobacco Company.
But more importantly, as Mr. Persons has discussed, the evidence shows that Mrs. Cohen didn't make her decisions about smoking based on anything that a tobacco company said or didn't say. She made her decisions for her reasons.
And in terms of Lorillard, searching through the record, trying to find a statement by Lorillard Tobacco Company after May 5, 1982,
I found one. It was the Waxman testimony where you saw Congressman Waxman grilling the tobac executives in 1994 -MR. GDANSKI: I object to the characterization. I object.
THE COURT: Overruled. That's what
closing argument is for.
You may continue, Mr. Woods.
MR. WOODS: But remember, that was 1994. I'm not here to excuse what the Lorillard representative said.
But in this case on the question of whether Mrs. Cohen reasonably relied on what anybody from Lorillard said after May 5, 1982, she had quit smoking four years before that statement was made.
She had a lifetime of awareness that Mr. Persons has walked you through before that statement was ever made. That statement had n effect on her.
Now, I also want to talk just very briefly about the Lorillard smoking history in the case.
You'll recall that the -- I think the only testimony that you heard in terms of dates and times on the brands were from Mr. David Cohen.
I think you'll recall there was, I think, three years of Kent smoking back in the '50s, so 50 or 60 years ago.
And then I think you recall that the
Newport smoking, because those were the two brands for Lorillard in this case, Kent and Newport. The Newport smoking was not before 1976, it was after 1976, so after all the awareness evidence that you heard about.
But then also you recall we discussed some of the pictures, and I showed some of the pictures. And Newport had the cork filter.
And none of the pictures show her smoking anything with a cork filter.
So if she smoked Kent or -- if she smoked Newport after that time, certainly it was with other brands, and she was never shown in the picture with one.
But I want to move on, frankly, to more important issues in the case.
Now, you heard about -- you heard this evidence, and Mr. Persons, again, you know, we try to coordinate and we try to be efficient in bringing you the evidence. And so Mr. Persons has discussed all of this with you, and I'm not going to read these slides at you again.
You've seen the evidence, you've heard the evidence. You've seen it from the fact witnesses, you've seen it by videotape, from
family members that have come in, and then you've heard it from Mr. David Cohen and Mr. Edward Cohen. So I'm not going to go through all this again.
But what I want to do next is I want to talk about the fact that Mrs. Cohen not only quit and had the ability to quit in 1990, after she was diagnosed; but that really she had the ability to quit at any point in her life when she was sufficiently motivated.
This is a huge board. I asked Mr. Price back there who is helping me out with the graphics to get a board big enough so people could see it. He found the biggest board he possibly could get.
The first question on the verdict form -again, the first question and the second question on the verdict form you'll see when you get the verdict form, are both hard stops.
If you answer question number 1 no, the case is done.
If you answer question number 1 yes, but question number 2 no, the case is done.
So I would submit to you that the evidence does not support getting past question
1 or question 2 to get to these other questions that deal with reasonable reliance and those types of things.
But again, question number 1: Was Mrs. Cohen addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? And if so, was her addiction a legal cause of her COPD/emphysema?
And again, it's really sort of a two-part question, as Mr. Persons explained. The first question is: Was she addicted? Was she addicted?
You heard evidence on both sides. You heard from two expert witnesses, two medical doctors, Dr. DiFranza and Dr. Dosovitz. We've heard a lot about commonsense definitions of addiction.
The defense position is if you're going to come into a court of law, that you should apply a medical definition and not a lay "she smoked a lot" definition. But you know what? That's in your hands. That's in your hands.
But even if you find she was addicted, you still have to look at whether it was her addiction that was the legal cause. Whether the addiction was the legal cause.
Could she have quit? Could she have quit earlier? Could she have quit in time to avoid her smoking-related illness? That's the question.
The evidence shows clearly she could have quit earlier. There was nothing about her in 1990 -- her -- other than her motivation that was any different than prior to 1990.
As Mr. Persons explained, he walked you through the evidence from Dr. Proctor, cigarettes today are no more addictive, no less addictive than cigarettes from years ago. She was no more addicted, no less addicted in 1990, if she was addicted than any point prior to that. She could have quit earlier.
There's no dispute, there's no dispute that Mrs. Cohen was an impressive lady. I mean, you heard from her granddaughter, Eva, o the stand. You could tell from Eva that she had been raised well, and she had the qualities of her grandmother.
You heard other evidence, you heard from Rachel Cohen, one of her other granddaughters who was a medical doctor. Mrs. Cohen instilled in her grandkids the importance of education,
the importance of working hard, the importance of setting goals and meeting those goals.
And I think one of the best pieces of evidence, one of the most vivid examples of what I would call Mrs. Cohen's ability to quit smoking, her ability to set goals when she was motivated and when she wanted to accomplish something, was her weight loss. 90 pounds. 90 pounds over three years. Earning herself the nickname Half-pound Helen. Going back to Weight Watchers week after week, month after month for three years to lose weight because she wanted to lose weight.
Mr. Edward Cohen described what it took.
He lived through it. He was with her at the time in their house she went to Weight Watchers week after week. Totally changed her eating habits. If you think, going to the grocery store, do you pick up the cookies or do you pick up the vegetables?
For three years she picked up the vegetables, totally changed her eating habits, made daily choices to eat better and started cooking healthier. And kept the weight off for a long, long time.
I would submit to you that that shows that if she would have wanted to quit smoking, if she would have been truly motivated to quit smoking. And again, this is -- trust me, I'm not criticizing her.
If she had wanted to quit smoking, she could have and she would have quit smoking earlier.
I submit to you it's the difference between saying, I want to go on a diet. And I know food is not addictive. But I would submit to you that as hard as it is to quit smoking, it may be even harder to lose 90 pounds -MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object, not in evidence. Move to strike, ask for curative.
THE COURT: Overruled.
You may continue, please.
MR. WOODS: -- and keep it off.
Now, I think the evidence also shows that because Mrs. Cohen was an impressive lady an was able to do this, I don't think the evidence is going to show that that shows how addicted she was.
The evidence shows that she quit when she was motivated. And we know why she was
motivated.
This is from David Cohen ... do you know why Helen quit smoking?
ANSWER: Because she got ill and she was not feeling good, and she decided to quit smoking after they told her that she had COPD.
Now, memories can fade over time. You may recall this is actually from his deposition earlier that we reminded him of what he testified. Because when he came -- and this deposition was taken several months, I think more than a year before trial.
When Mr. David Cohen testified at trial, he says that his wife quit smoking in the fall of 1990, and he described an instance where he came home from golfing, and his wife just announced that she was going to quit smoking, and it really had nothing to do with the COPD diagnosis, and that COPD diagnosis was four years later.
Well, in his deposition, Mr. Cohen said she quit smoking because she was diagnosed w COPD. And as we've seen, and as I'm going to discuss in more detail, she was diagnosed with COPD in January 1990.
Now, we heard a lot about smokers and statistics, and 60 million smokers have quit and 80 to 90 percent are addicted, or maybe it's 50 percent are addicted. This case isn't about statistics, it's about one smoker. It's about Helen Cohen.
And as you recall from Dr. DiFranza -I'll skip this. You've already heard about how she quit. As Dr. DiFranza testified, she wasn't one of those smokers. His opinion was maybe there's some smokers that cannot quit. And maybe there are some smokers that cannot quit.
THE CLERK: Counsel, 15 minutes.
MR. WOODS: But that's not Mrs. Cohen.
I want to move on, and I want to talk about her COPD and emphysema, when it was diagnosed and when she knew that it was relate to -- almost got you -- related to her cigarette smoking.
And I'm going to walk through the medical records, a lot of the medical records. Not there yet.
And so I brought another very large board with the medical records from before May 5,
1990, that discuss her COPD diagnosis. We're also going to discuss -- sorry to turn my back on you -- what her doctors would have told her and what her family said and what other doctors said.
And again, this goes to question number 2 on the verdict form. And hopefully everyone can see this if I put it right here.
THE COURT: We have another easel, if you want to use it as well, Mr. Woods.
MR. WOODS: I'm going to write on that one. So very quickly, again, question number 2, the answer to this is no when the case is over.
Did Mrs. Cohen know or should she have known in the exercise of reasonable care on or before May 5, 1990, that she had COPD/emphysema, and that there was a reason possibility that it was caused by cigarette smoking?
Again, two parts. One, was she diagnosed? Did she know she had it? And, two, did she know that it was related to her cigarette smoking?
So I want to walk through some of that
evidence with you. You've seen some of it from Mr. Persons. But I want to go into it in a little more detail.
Now again, you've seen this. And the records that Mr. Persons showed you, I'm not going to belabor.
But again, she comes in in December of 1989 with classic symptoms of COPD and emphysema. Shortness of breath, scattered wheezes. Dr. Santini tells her, because of this, you should quit smoking.
A month later, she comes back. She's been sick for about a month. She comes back, this time she sees Dr. Wasserman, who is in practice with Dr. Santini. Remember,
Dr. Wasserman, he has a procedure every time h sees a patient. SOAP, subjective, objective.
The assessment and plan.
So his assessment at the time, asthmatic bronchitis, COPD. We're going to talk about this. Having two conditions at once, it happens all the time. People can have COPD. They can be diagnosed with cancer. People can have COPD, and they can also have diabetes. Just because you have one illness doesn't mean
that you also have another illness. But we'll talk about that more in a minute.
Again, they lived -- Dr. Wasserman and Santini's office was right across from Delray Community Hospital, so he admitted her into the hospital. This is the first record from the hospitalization, same day.
Dr. Wasserman. 65-year-old white female with COPD/emphysema with one-month history of cough, phlegm, shortness of breath.
Again, classic symptoms of COPD. You heard that, I believe, both from Dr. Wasserman and from Dr. Santini.
Now again, the next day, you see, again,
Dr. Wasserman's record, and you see COPD, asthmatic bronchitis, same RX, which means same treatment. And she's on oxygen.
So she is having breathing difficulties, she'd been short of breath. She'd been hospitalized because of her breathing difficulty, and now she's on oxygen in the hospital. They are trying to get her COPD under control.
Now, you heard a lot about pulmonologists. And pulmonologists are lung
specialists. No doubt about that. And Dr. Wasserman called in a lung specialist,
Dr. Berkowitz. This is his signature. This is Dr. Berkowitz.
This is Dr. Wasserman, this is Dr. Berkowitz coming in and consulting on the same case. And when you get a consulting pulmonologist, one way to think of it is as somebody to come in and sort of to look over your shoulder, see how it's going, make sure you're doing the right thing.
Because family practice doctors have a wide area of expertise. Dr. DiFranza was a family practice doctor, wide area of expertise.
But if you have somebody with lung conditions, you might bring in a specialist to get a consult to have them look over your shoulder, make sure you're doing the right thing.
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object. May we approach, please?
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
MR. HAMMER: Judge, first of all, there's
no evidence as to what Dr. Berkowitz did, looking over his shoulder. In fact, it's contrary, that we all know. We all know that the doctor calls in a specialist, not to look over his shoulder -- and this is misleading the jury.
MR. GDANSKI: There is no evidence.
THE COURT: Mr. Woods, did you hear the objection?
MR. WOODS: I think the objection was there's nothing in evidence -- it's a reasonable inference. He is looking at the same medical record as Dr. Wasserman.
He signed under the same language, where it says COPD -- and I'm going to get to this -says "continue present treatment."
THE COURT: I think the objection is looking over his shoulder.
MR. WOODS: Okay.
MR. GDANSKI: The whole concept of the interaction between the referring doctor and the specialist. It's just not in evidence.
THE COURT: I'll sustain the objection to looking over the shoulder. Because the rest is reading from the note, right?
MR. GDANSKI: Then read from the note.
We would ask that you instruct the jury accordingly.
(Sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:)
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, I sustained part of the objection, regarding the looking over the shoulder. Just disregard that part of the statement.
You may continue, Mr. Woods.
MR. WOODS: I'm not saying he was looking over his shoulder, Dr. Berkowitz, and this is his signature. You don't need to take my word for it, the next slide will show that.
Mr. Price, could you blow up right here where it says "continue present therapy"? If you can't easily here because of the way it is, that's fine.
Let me go back to this, continue present therapy. Dr. Berkowitz sees what? He's writing on the same piece of paper. He sees what Dr. Wasserman is doing. Dr. Wasserman h handwriting like mine. It's not very easy to read sometimes, but COPD is clear.
Dr. Berkowitz reads that, writes directly
underneath it: Pulmonary consult, continue present therapy.
And again, don't take my word for it.
Dr. Bruce Berkowitz, same date, January 22, 1990. That's his signature. That's his signature.
So the next record is from January 25,
1990. Again, COPD. Dr. Berkowitz: Will continue present therapy. And he signs it.
Dr. Berkowitz, the lung specialist, had to have known of the COPD diagnosis, it's written right there.
MR. GDANSKI: I object. No evidence of that.
MR. WOODS: It's a reasonable inference, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Rephrase -MR. GDANSKI: Can we approach?
THE COURT: Sure. Of course.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: That last objection was overruled, for the record.
MR. WOODS: Again, Dr. Berkowitz's signature directly under Dr. Wasserman's signature. COPD -- whether this is acute or asthmatic bronchitis, it's hard to tell. But Dr. Berkowitz must have seen that, said continue present therapy.
There are no doubt other records, no doubt other records from that same hospital stay, and on not every piece of paper does somebody write "COPD." Okay? No doubt abou that. You'll see that when you go back there.
But again, each of these records that I'm walking through clearly says emphysema, COPD/emphysema, COPD.
But you heard about a pulmonologist,
Dr. Berkowitz, and this is Dr. Berkowitz.
Dr. Berkowitz is looking at what Dr. Wasserman has described, what he's diagnosed, and he says: Will continue present therapy.
Now, again, in going back here, you heard from Dr. Rosenkrantz, and Dr. Rosekrantz, you remember, he came in and he was here mainly to testify about the lung cancer or the chest
X-ray -- not the chest X-ray, the CT from 2006, from 2005 and 2006.
Now, plaintiff's counsel also showed him his record from where he read a chest X-ray back in 1990, and they showed him that on that it said bronchitis, and they made the point it doesn't say COPD, does it, now? It doesn't say emphysema, does it, now?
Okay. Well, you see the diagnosis was bronchitis. And you remember that Dr. Rosekrantz hadn't seen the chest X-ray in 25 years. He was just going based on the medical record, the summary that was dictated at that time. He diagnosed bronchitis. Well, you heard from Dr. Santini: Is emphysema a form of COPD?
Yes.
And when you have COPD, what are some the classic symptoms?
Well, it could be a bronchitis, which is, you know, production of sputum primarily.
Along with both of them, of course, you have shortness of breath, difficulty breathing.
Is wheezing a classic symptom of COPD?
It can be.
What about cough with or without phlegm?
Yes.
Again, classic symptoms of COPD.
Now, you'll remember when Dr. Rosenkrantz came, he didn't know, he didn't know about the other records from January of 1990. When you are a radiologist, you are reading your radiology. He didn't know. He was not provided that record.
And more importantly, he was not here to testify that Mrs. Cohen did not have COPD in 1990. As I said, he's basically there to go over the 2006 chest CT.
Now, this is from when Mrs. Cohen was discharged from the hospital.
You'll see, it was pointed out it was dictated the day after she was discharged from the hospital. And it was transcribed a couple days after that. If you look at typed-up medical records, I think you'll see that's pretty consistent. Dictated one day. Tapes go into a pool, the transcription pool comes, they type them up later.
But the record is clear, signed by another doctor, Dr. Levin.
He finds history of present illness: The patient is a 65-year-old white female who was admitted -- known to have emphysema, who wa admitted with increased shortness of breath, productive cough, refractory to outpatient therapy. She is diagnosed and she is prescribed an inhaler, and she is discharged with a diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Again, asthmatic bronchitis, but also chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Now, you heard from both Dr. Wasserman and Dr. Santini about what types of medicines, and not just medicines, not pills or anything, but things that you inhale, what types of medicines that they diagnosed Mrs. Helen back in winter and spring of 1990 to deal with her, again, emphysema and COPD.
And Proventil -- and hopefully you can all see this -- Vanceril and Atrovent. Again, all prescribed for Mrs. Cohen's COPD.
I'm going to write them up here because you're going to see these time and time again in the medical records.
Again, Dr. Wasserman. And were those
inhalers given to her to treat her COPD due to smoking?
Yes.
And again, on the question of did she know ...
Would you have explained that information to Helen Cohen when you prescribed them to her
What the medications were for?
Yes, sir.
Yes.
And what would you have told her they were for?
Treating for the COPD/emphysema.
Again, diagnosed, hospitalized. In the hospital, put on oxygen and prescribed medication by her doctor.
This is a lady who came in short of breath, was hospitalized because of it, a smoker at the time.
You have to decide what the evidence shows ultimately.
I would submit to you that for doctors like Wasserman and Santini that you saw on video, that when a long-term smoker comes in to that doctor's office, they know they're
smoking. They diagnose them with COPD and emphysema. I submit to you the evidence is that they would have told her. And that's exactly what they said. I'll get to that in a minute.
Again, Dr. Santini, same thing. Those three inhalers for what?
For COPD.
Again, she comes back a couple weeks later, and she's diagnosed -- not diagnosed, but her diagnosis continues: Still being treated for emphysema.
She comes back about a week later, about eight days later: Can't walk without shortness of breath. Again, she's still having breathing difficulties. They are trying to get her COPD and emphysema under control.
This is important. She still has emphysema. The asthmatic bronchitis clears.
Again, you can have two separate diagnoses, you can have two separate illnesses. She still has emphysema. Her asthmatic bronchitis has cleared. She is still on two of the three -- she's still on two of the emphysema and COPD meds.
Again, she comes back a little bit later, still working with her, started to cough, pale yellow phlegm, light-headed and dizzy; again, classic symptoms of COPD. Emphysema.
Here also notes, she's having anxiety and depression. I would submit to you that's additional evidence that she knew about her diagnosis.
MR. GDANSKI: I object, Judge, no evidence of that. Move to strike.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. WOODS: Nine days later. And you sa this in Dr. Wasserman's testimony. She fills out a living will.
THE CLERK: 30 minutes.
MR. WOODS: And a living will is something that you fill out when -- to get instructions if you're too sick to be able to care for yourself to be able to make decisions.
Again, in the spring of 1990. I would submit to you that that was not happenstance.
MR. GDANSKI: Object, Judge, no evidence for that either. I object.
THE COURT: I'm going to overrule that.
You may continue, Mr. Woods.
MR. WOODS: Now, you'll recall Dr. DiFranza and -- Dr. DiFranza and Dr. Dosovitz, the two doctors that came in to talk about addiction. They didn't agree on much, but one thing that they did agree on is that Mrs. Cohen was diagnosed with COPD in 1990, and that that's why she quit.
This is Dr. DiFranza. This is their expert. He looked at all of the medical records, he looked at all of the depositions in this case, and that was the conclusion that he made.
Dr. Dosovitz, same conclusion. Quit because of COPD.
Now, again, this is -- let me go back.
All of these records that I've shown you up until now are all before May 5, 1990.
Now she goes on, and she continues to be treated for her emphysema and her COPD. Again she's on the same medications.
Now, this record was when it shows that she stopped smoking as of this time. It's unclear whether she stopped early or whether she stopped late, right before this or sometime previously. But we know she never smoked after
1990, and we also know that she stopped smokin after her COPD diagnosis, not four years before some COPD diagnosis.
And again, she comes back two years later, still being treated for COPD, still on the inhalers, and this is a note from Dr. Wasserman.
Now here is a note, this is the first time the plaintiffs say that she was diagnosed with COPD.
And again, this shows when she came in to Dr. Greene, and if you can see here: This is a 69-year-old white female, a patient of Dr. Wasserman. The patient has been under the care of Dr. Mark Stein in North Palm Beach, treated for asthma.
But she's on Vanceril, Atrovent and Proventil, on the COPD meds. She's also on oxygen; oxygen, one liter a minute. People aren't on oxygen for asthma.
Now, in terms of whether Dr. Wasserman and Dr. Santini would have told Mrs. Cohen that she had COPD, here's what the evidence was.
If you can play this.
(Video clip played as follows:)
Q During the period that you saw Helen Cohen between December of 1989 and March of 1990, would you have had the same pat conversation with h about the risk of smoking that you just described to us?
A Yes.
Q And again, would you have encouraged her during that window of time and that period that her COPD, her wheezing, and her shortness of breath wer related to her cigarette smoking?
ATTORNEY: Objection -A Yes.
Q During the time period between December 1989 and March of 1990, during your care and treatme of Helen Cohen, did you determine that she had COPD including shortness of breath, and wheezing because her cigarette smoking?
A Yes.
Q And would it have been part of your standard practice to tell Helen Cohen that you believe that?
ATTORNEY: Object to form.
A Yes.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. WOODS: Okay. Now, you've seen
evidence and you'll hear evidence that he can't say looking back 23 years, he can't say that he remembers sitting down with this particular patient on any particular day and telling her that he told her that her COPD was linked to her smoking. However, consider this. People are -- some people use seat belts, and they use seat belts all the time. It's their standard -MR. GDANSKI: I object, that's improper. THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WOODS: And it's their standard practice to -MR. HAMMER: Judge, can we approach? THE COURT: Sure.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: Objection is overruled for the record. We will continue.
MR. WOODS: Okay. Back to seat belts.
Some people wear seat belts. It is their practice to wear a seat belt. Every time they get in the car, they click it, they put their seat belt on.
If one were to ask a person like that 10 years ago, 5 years ago, not to mention 23 years ago, do you remember on January 15th, 15 years ago whether when you drove your car you had your seat belt on, a reasonable inference is click, they did, because they always put their seat belt on. The same situation applies here.
Now -MR. HAMMER: Judge, can we approach?
THE COURT: Sure.
MR. WOODS: Can you give me the next slide so I can play Santini.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. WOODS: Number 2. The one I was -THE COURT: We have to switch out boards. Hold on.
MR. WOODS: Actually, while he's getting that board.
Seat belt analogy, click, that's one analogy. There are innumerable analogies. Somebody puts on their shoes every morning. Lots of different analogies. But again, both Dr. Wasserman and Dr. Santini testified that they would have told Helen Cohen about her -that her COPD -- first that she had COPD, and that it was caused by her smoking here is what Dr. Santini said.
I'm sorry, can you play that?
(Video clip played as follows:)
Q What is the date of discharge?
A January 28, 1990.
Q Is it your opinion that on this date that Ms. Helen Cohen had COPD or emphysema?
A Yes.
Q Based upon your standard practice of what you had -- what your conversations were with patients back in 1989 and the early part of 1990, do you believe that you talked with Helen Cohen about stopping cigarette smoking?
ATTORNEY: Object to form.
A Yes.
Q I'm sorry, can you answer again?
A Yes.
Q And do you believe that she had -- at that time that she had symptoms of chronic obstructiv pulmonary disease or emphysema?
A Yes.
Q When you had your standard conversation with patients about harmful effects of cigarette smoking, since you graduated from medical school in 1979, did you -- as part of that discussion, would you have a discussion that for a patient with emphysema,
that if they continued to smoke, that the emphysema would get worse?
A Yes, that would probably be something I would have told them.
Q Now -- and do you believe you conveyed that to Helen Cohen, given your standard practice of having that discussion with patients who smoke?
ATTORNEY: Object to form.
A Yes.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. WOODS: And again, not just do you
believe you would have, but she said: Do you
believe you did? And she said yes. Sorry.
(Video clip played as follows:)
Q Let's assume that Helen Cohen did have between 80- and 100-pack years of smoking. One thii we know is that she quit smoking in -- in 1990, right, which would have been 16 years of cessation before death, right?
A Correct.
Q And by the way, she quit very soon after you told her she had COPD and she needed to quit, right?
ATTORNEY: Object to the form.
A Yes.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. WOODS: Now, counsel -- I think four different people have told me up at sidebar that I misspoke when I said yes versus no.
MR. HAMMER: Objection as to what was discussed at sidebar. That's totally improper.
THE COURT: Sustained. That's fine.
Continue, Mr. Woods.
MR. WOODS: Counsel reminded me. I misspoke. The answer to question number 2 should be yes, not no. I apologize for misspeaking. But the answer to that question is yes.
Now -- okay. Again, Mr. Cohen testified:
Do you remember Helen being diagnosed with COPD?
Again, this was from his deposition that then we showed -- reminded him at trial.
Do you remember Helen Cohen being diagnosed with COPD?
Yes.
Do you remember the name of the doctor who diagnosed her?
Dr. Wasserman, not Dr. Greene.
Dr. Wasserman is his primary care doctor
too, so it's not like he was confused at the deposition of who the doctor was. He knows who Dr. Wasserman is. He said the name of the doctor who diagnosed her with COPD was Dr. Wasserman, and that was back in January of 1990.
Mr. Cohen, before trial, again agreed:
Did Dr. Wasserman tell Helen that her COPD was related to her smoking?
Yes.
Those are not my words, those are Mr. Cohen's words.
THE CLERK: Counsel, five minutes left.
MR. WOODS: Thank you.
Do you know if Dr. Wasserman -- do you know if Dr. Wasserman told Helen she should quit smoking?
Yes. Again, this is David Cohen.
Did Dr. Wasserman tell Helen she should quit?
Yes.
Did Dr. Wasserman tell Helen that her COPD was related to her smoking?
Yes.
So again, we have at the time of
deposition, Mr. Cohen agreed that Dr. Wasserman had diagnosed his wife with COPD in January of 1990; and that he told her that it was caused by her smoking.
Dr. Wasserman said the same thing.
Dr. Santini said the same thing.
Dr. DiFranza -- again, plaintiff's own expert who had reviewed all of the medical records, all of the depositions, agreed that she was diagnosed with COPD and emphysema in January
1990.
And of course Dr. Dosovitz, the defense expert, agreed as well.
Mr. Cohen recalled it differently at trial, but before trial and all of the other witnesses agreed that she was diagnosed in January of 1990.
Everybody also agrees she quit after she was diagnosed with COPD, not four years before she was diagnosed with COPD.
Clearly, she was diagnosed with COPD/emphysema in 1990, January, the winter, the spring in 1990.
Mr. David Cohen said that, Edward Cohen -- you remember that, again, at trial, he
said that he had a specific recollection from 23 years ago of his mother quitting smoking, watching a football game and got a phonecall, and the kids did the victory dance.
But you'll recall that in his deposition prior to trial, that he said that she quit before the summer of 1990.
In my mind, it doesn't really matter which it was, because the important thing is she quit after her diagnosis. She quit because of her diagnosis in 1990. She did not quit four years before her diagnosis, again.
Medical records show 1990. All of the witnesses agree it was 1990, and that it was after, after she was diagnosed with COPD.
You may see a mammogram record that says in the lower corner "smoker" in June of 1990.
And you heard Dr. Dosovitz how sometimes these computer records can just go -- once the information is in there, it keeps going. We know she wasn't smoking in 2004.
But regardless, whether it was September, June, January of 1990, it was 1990. It was after she was diagnosed.
Now, I want to talk to you very
briefly -- I've been talking a lot about Helen Cohen. I want to talk a little bit about Lorillard, because issues -- and again, I don't think the evidence supports getting there, but if it does, to issues of comparative fault, company conduct, punitive damages, things like that. I want to talk a little bit about what the evidence has shown with regard to Lorillard.
You remember Dr. Proctor on the stand.
And he talked a lot about Dr. Wynder and Graham, the scientists that did the 1953 mouse skin painting studies that were critical research back at the time.
Well, even after those findings came out, Lorillard was working with those doctors, actually supplying cigarettes to Dr. Wynder, even after the findings in 1953 with the mouse skin painting study experiments.
Lorillard was working with Dr. Hoffman, another highly-respected researcher at the time, working with Dr. Spears, doing work on phenols.
You saw that Dr. Spears and Lorillard published the results of that. They continued
that work throughout the 1960s, and Wynder and Hoffman even cited to the research done by Dr. Spears, an important Lorillard scientist at the time.
Again, you heard about Lorillard's submissions to the Surgeon General in 1963. Again, Lorillard identified various compounds in smoke, including benzopyrene, which Lorillard identified as a potential carcinogen.
Not my words, all of this Dr. Proctor agreed with when he was on the stand.
You heard about product placement, and you heard that cigarette commercials, up until
1971,	were on TV.
You may recall the 1960s Dick Van Dyke Kent commercial. Well, after cigarette commercials were taken off the air in 1971, Lorillard had a policy not to do product placement. You recall me showing a few of those examples to Dr. Proctor, and he agreed that there were many more letters just like this one.
Again, Dr. Farone. You saw his videotape. He was the ex-employee of Philip Morris. He agreed Lorillard's use of filter
technology to reduce tar delivery is a good thing. Use of porous paper to increase ventilation, again, that is a good thing.
Now, to be clear, I'm not asking you to like cigarettes, and I'm not asking you to like tobacco companies. But you -MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object to that.
It's improper.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. WOODS: You've had the instructions on the law and you've seen the evidence, and what the evidence shows. And so I do ask that on question number 1 that you answer no; that Mrs. Cohen is not a class member.
And on question number 2, the statute of limitations question, that you answer that yes, because the evidence clearly showed that Mrs. Cohen was diagnosed with COPD/emphysema ii January of 1990, and she knew that it was caused -- not just reasonably should have known, knew that it was caused by smoking, and that's why she quit.
Again, I want to thank you for your time.
That's all I have.



MS. KASCHEL: May it please the Court, counsel, Cohen family.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
Okay. Ladies and gentlemen, as counsel for Liggett, first of all, I really appreciate the opportunity to speak with you directly about this case.
Thank you for listening to what I have to say and hearing a little bit about my client and the evidence in this case.
You haven't heard a lot from me, and in part there's good reason for that. Plaintiff's case, their evidence really hasn't had a whole lot to do with my client.
And I won't repeat the general defense issues well expressed by the other defense counsel. I've been happy to let on many issues the gentlemen for defense sort of do the heavy lifting on general defense issues, so to speak. But let me get straight to the point about Liggett.
Folks, on liability, plaintiffs have a separate burden of proof as to each defendant in this case. And they have completely failed
to meet the burden of proof that they have against Liggett.
In fact, the vast majority of plaintiff's evidence, their proof, has either -- had nothing to do with Liggett. And I'm talking about the documents you've seen, the demonstrative slides, statements and videos. They've come from companies other than Liggett. They've come from organizations in which Liggett wasn't a member, they've come from businesses that Liggett didn't hire.
And at times, actually, plaintiff's evidence actually specifically excludes Liggett from the very issues that plaintiffs contend are so critical to their case.
But, first, allow me to talk a little bit about where Liggett fits in with Mrs. Cohen's smoking history.
Can I have slide 1, please?
I want to talk about Chesterfield, which is one of two brands at issue in this case.
During the 50 years of smoking that Mrs. Cohen did, we have direct evidence,
Mr. Cohen's testimony, that Mrs. Cohen did smoke Chesterfield from 1948 to 1950.
And Mr. Cohen told us that at that time she smoked only one pack a day for two years, in contrast to the two to three packs of cigarettes she smoked later on of other brands.
At the time she was smoking Chesterfield -- she began smoking Chesterfield in 1948 -- she was 24 years old, an adult.
It was the second brand smoked after eight years of smoking non-Liggett brand. And the evidence is that Mrs. Cohen switched from unfiltered Chesterfields to filtered Marlboros in 1950.
And we have no evidence that after 1950 Mrs. Cohen smoked Chesterfield again.
And L&M is the one other brand mentioned in this case that Liggett also used to make.
L&M was mentioned sort of in a laundry list of brands Mr. Cohen talked about. And, of course, understandably, it must be very difficult to remember the specifics of the smoking of someone else, of what they did.
However, plaintiffs have the burden of proof here. And when it comes to L&M, we only have a sort of vague mention. We don't know when, how long, what time period Mrs. Cohen
smoked L&M.
In fact, slide 2, please.
Edward Cohen, Mr. Cohen's son, of course, he testified he was able to remember six brands that his mother smoked: None of them being a Liggett brand, none of them being L&M.
So that's all the smoking history we have as to Liggett in this case.
Now, I would like to talk to you about the evidence that relates to Liggett as a company. And most of that evidence came through Dr. Proctor.
Dr. Proctor, in his testimony, either excluded Liggett in some of his testimony or told us that Liggett conducted itself, the word "differently," as a tobacco company.
Dr. Proctor gave the opinion, he did tell us that there's an alleged conspiracy, there was conspiracy borne in the 1950s he said, after Dr. Wynder's research first came out.
And he relied on a few key events that occurred back then to support that statement.
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object, sidebar.
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
MR. HAMMER: Use of the word "alleged conspiracy" is in direct contradiction to the findings. Counsel cannot say that there was no conspiracy. There was a conspiracy, and it's improper for them to say otherwise. Whether or not Liggett was a part of that at the beginning is a question, but to say an alleged -THE COURT: I think -MR. HAMMER: She used the word "alleged conspiracy," Judge. It's improper.
THE COURT: We can have her fix that.
MS. KASCHEL: I will rephrase it. My argument is -- Liggett's part of the conspiracy is -- the time frame is still up in the air. I mean, don't talk about -THE COURT: I will sustain -- do you have the objection?
MR. HAMMER: I do.
THE COURT: I will sustain the objection. MR. GDANSKI: The way to correct is, "We joined the conspiracy."
THE COURT: Remember, you don't get to make their closings for them, Mr. Gdanski.
Good try.
(Sidebar discussion concluded, and the
following was held in open court:)
THE COURT: I will sustain the legal objection and Ms. Kaschel is going to rephrase, please.
MS. KASCHEL: Dr. Proctor gave the opinion that a conspiracy was born in the 1950s, and he relied on a few key events in support of that opinion.
Slide 3, Will, please. Let's take a look at these events.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, can we have couns use the mic. It's hard to hear her.
THE COURT: Can everybody hear Ms. Kaschel? Okay.
MR. HAMMER: I can't.
MS. KASCHEL: I would like everyone to hear, that's for sure. Okay.
So the key events that Dr. Proctor spoke about in support of his opinion about a conspiracy was this 1953 Plaza meeting where certain tobacco companies got together. And Dr. Proctor told us that Liggett, although invited, did not attend that meeting.
Liggett did not form the Tobacco Industry
Research Committee.
Liggett did not publish the Frank Statement you've heard so much about.
Liggett did not hire the PR firm Hill &
Knowlton. You saw a lot of documents that came from Hill & Knowlton. Liggett did not hire that firm.
Dr. Proctor told us that Liggett was a CTR member, which was the subsequent organization to the TIRC in 1964, and was a member for three-and-a-half years. And CTR was in existence for over 45 years. So the evidence is, as Dr. Proctor told us, Liggett sort of checked out the CTR for three-and-a-half years, and then left in 1968.
And what he told me when I asked about Liggett quitting the CTR, he told us that Liggett dissociated itself from the group.
So first of all, these events are not evidence of a conspiracy in the 1950s, and Dr. Proctor's opinion that Liggett dissociated itself, I argue -- I am arguing is not evidence of an ongoing conspiracy.
Now, Dr. Proctor also talked about another industry group, the Tobacco Institute,
or the TI.
He told us that along with many other groups, companies not being sued here today, that Liggett was a member. What does that really mean? What does your membership mea
Well, let's talk about the money that went into the TI. Dr. Proctor told us that the companies funded the TI with a lot of money. Okay? And when I asked Dr. Proctor about Liggett's role in funding the TI, he told us that the TI was based on market share, and because Liggett has always had a small fraction of the market share compared to the rest of the industry, Liggett contributed actually very little.
Can I have slide number 4, Will, please?
In fact, after Proctor told us that Liggett paid less than 1 half of 1 percent of all contributions made. Now I'll leave this evidence up to you, but clearly Liggett did not have a significant role in the Tobacco Institute. And there is no evidence that any Liggett executive or member of Liggett controlled what the TI did or agreed with everything the TI did. It was a member, yes.
Now, what Dr. Proctor told us Liggett did spend a lot of money on is its own independent research on the link between smoking and cancer.
Will, can I please have Dr. Proctor's testimony at page 410.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, can we approach, Y Honor?
THE COURT: Sure.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: All right. The objection is overruled.
MS. KASCHEL: Thank you, Your Honor. So what I was speaking about was the money Liggett spent on its own independent research as an alternative to joining the TIRC, it decided to conduct its own research and hire outside consultants to research the link between smoking and cancer.
And when I asked Dr. Proctor about the money Liggett spent on this research, this is what he told me.
Can you bring up the slide, please?
QUESTION: Back to some research. Instead of joining the TIRC, Liggett had its own independent response to the cancer risk information that was coming out in the early '50s; is that right?
ANSWER: That's true.
And Liggett's response included a very large scale investment in biological and chemical testing of cigarettes, correct?
ANSWER: That's right.
QUESTION: And there are documents th you're familiar with that show that Liggett spent even more money on its own biological testing program than the rest of the industry combined; is that right?
Well, I know they spent a lot on biological testing. I don't know if it's more than all of them combined. But they certainly spent a lot."
So plaintiff claims that when it comes to cancer research, all of these companies said
one thing internally and another thing to the Surgeon General, and that's just not supported by the evidence.
For instance, in Dr. Proctor's testimony, there are documents in evidence showing that Liggett collaborated with Dr. Wynder himself, the Surgeon General, American Cancer Society. and outside renowned scientists when the scientific community was just learning about the link between smoking and cancer.
You heard from Dr. Proctor about Liggett's submission of nine volumes of research that represented -- it was actually a summary of the research it had done for ten years, and it turned that research over to the Surgeon General in 1963, wherein Liggett specifically identified certain cancer-causing compounds.
And the Surgeon General's committee relied in part on Liggett's disclosure in its landmark 1964 Surgeon General's report where Liggett's contribution was specifically recognized.
Will, can I have Liggett 231 -- 219. I'm sorry.
This document is in evidence.
Please blow it up and highlight a little
bit.
This document is dated 1963, from the Department of Health, Education and Welfare. And it's signed from the person referenced by,
I believe, Mr. Hammer yesterday, the assistant Surgeon General James Hundley. It was sent to Dr. Kensler, a scientist that worked for a company that Liggett consulted with.
It says: We feel that the simple acknowledgment of the receipt of the nine volumes which you submitted to us is not sufficient. Please accept on behalf of Liggett & Myers Tobacco Company and Arthur D. Little, Inc., our special gratitude for the tremendous time, effort and expense in the production of this material for our use. We are equally grateful for the most excellent oral presentation made by you and Dr. Raymond Hainer on May 3rd. Again, many thanks.
So in fact, the evidence is not that Liggett concealed this information, just the opposite. It actually sought the public spotlight by presenting the research it did to
the most preeminent scientific authority in our country at the time. And it was proud of the recognition it received for its work.
And as the evidence shows, Liggett had continued to do things differently and in contrast with the rest of the industry.
For instance, Dr. Proctor told us Liggett volunteered to turn over its internal documents. Liggett also does its packaging a bit differently, including listing the ingredients on its carton. It's the only company to do so.
You learned that Liggett independently made statements about smoking and disease and addiction in the mid 1990s, before the other companies and before Engle even went to trial.
Finally, on conduct. I just want to highlight what the evidence actually does not say about Liggett.
Can I have the next slide?
Now, the first bullet point. No Liggett company documents.
I did my best, and I'm sure plaintiffs will correct me if I'm wrong, I did my best at the beginning of this trial to count and keep
track of the evidence that plaintiffs brought into evidence that are company documents.
I can count -- I didn't count Surgeon General reports, medical records, things of that nature, but internal company documents.
And my count was upwards of 50 documents.
And very tellingly, there's not one document with Liggett's letterhead. Not one internal Liggett document. Okay?
Now, I do have to mention there is one document -- just one -- that does have the title L&M Perspective that was shown to you with Dr. Proctor. It came from Arthur D.
Little. And I contend, Liggett contends that there's nothing wrong with that document.
The information in it was submitted to the Surgeon General in submission; however, the point is, it didn't come from Liggett. And when Dr. Proctor was asked if it came from Liggett, he said that it came from a company close to Liggett.
That's fine enough. But close misses the mark. It's still not a company document from Liggett. And that's what the evidence is here.
You also saw no statements or videos from
a Liggett representative. You saw no evidence.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, objection. That's not the case at all.
THE COURT: Sure. You want to come sidebar?
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: Objection sustained for the record, and Ms. Kaschel is going to make the last statement again.
MS. KASCHEL: Correction, and I do apologize to counsel.
There was a Liggett representative at the Waxman hearing video that you did see. Okay?
And let me move on.
There is no evidence that Liggett ever placed its products in any movies. There is no evidence that Liggett used cartoons in advertising or in any other way. And there is no evidence that Liggett used ammonia in its products.
And on that, I would like to pull up the Proctor slide.
When Dr. Proctor was asked about ammoni by Mr. Gdanski, the question was: "We were talking about ammonia for a second. I just want to clarify. All of the companies put ammonia in cigarettes at some point except for Liggett?
ANSWER: I believe that's correct. Yes, in different forms."
And just a few other things that don't pertain to Liggett. There are so many.
But this promise to stop selling cigarettes, whatever that business is, Liggett didn't say it. It's a quote from a company other than Liggett. Okay?
And the terms "zephyr," "INBIFO,"
"cologne," the name Claude Teague, all have no connection to Liggett, okay? It's just not evidence against Liggett.
As this case demonstrates, where there's such a lack of evidence, plaintiff should not be awarded money simply because they decided to bring this lawsuit against four different tobacco companies.
And as justified in this case, certainly a company should not be found liable just because they are named a defendant within an industry when the plaintiffs have not met the burden of proof that they have. They have to prove their case, and they failed to do so.
Now, I just want to take a second to sum up here, to talk about the verdict sheet. And just to add in on the COPD issue. It's Liggett's position that the evidence very well
summarized by Mr. Persons and Mr. Woods demonstrates that Helen Cohen knew or should have known that she had COPD and, accordingly, you should answer to verdict question 2 if you get there, the answer should be yes.
Defendants have actually met their burden of proof on this issue.
And to skip around, but it's important here because the evidence is a little bit different as to Liggett, questions 11 and 12 ask about acts and statements by these defendants relied on by Mrs. Cohen.
If you happen to get that far, I would respectfully ask that you put no as to Liggett. There is just no evidence of Liggett acts or statements that could support such a finding.
And ladies and gentlemen, there's certainly no grounds for punitive damages as to Liggett.
The bottom line is, the verdict sheet is your domain. I'm not going to write down what numbers you should put down and where you should put them. Although I might add that the evidence in this case gives you a basis, gives you grounds to find that the only number in
this case that is appropriate to Liggett and the other defendants is zero.
But all I can really do is ask you to rely on the evidence, not argument, and not even sympathy in determining whether you shou award Mrs. Cohen's family money in this case.
Ladies and gentlemen, that's all I have.
But I must end by telling you that it really has been an honor to try this case before you in Judge Sasser's courtroom.
Thank you for your time and the sacrifices you made so that we would be able to try this case, a long case, but a very efficient case. And I thank you for considering specific evidence as relates to Liggett.
That's all I have.


MR. S. DAVIS: Folks, the counsel for the other companies have covered many other points that apply with equal force to Philip Morris.
I appreciate very much their presentations.
I'm not going to repeat what they said. They covered it very, very well, and it saves me the time of having to go back through it.
There is one claim and one claim only against Philip Morris. There is no claim for negligence, there is no claim for strict liability, there is no claim for fraudulent concealment.
What does that mean? It means that there is no claim in this case that smoking Philip
Morris cigarettes caused Ms. Cohen to get sick and to die. No claim.
So that one claim is the agreement to conceal or omit information about the health risks of smoking and its addictiveness. I'm going to spend some time on that claim.
But first I want to just cover one thing -- actually, I want to cover very quickly statute of limitations. I want to go to the conspiracy claim that is the one claim against Philip Morris, and I want to spend a little time on punitive damages, and then I'll be done.
Just a couple of things on the statute of limitations. You have learned in this case -and I'm not going to repeat -MR. HAMMER: Judge, can we approach?
THE COURT: Sure.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: There is no objection.
Mr. Davis may continue.
MR. S. DAVIS: Okay. The statute of limitations claim, affirmative defense, the one that the defendants have the burden of proof on, same burden of proof that they have on their claims, greater weight of the evidence.
The statute of limitations defense applies to all of the defendants, including Philip Morris. But just to reiterate, in terms of the claims of the plaintiff, there is only one claim, and that is the claim relating to the agreement to conceal the health risks and addictiveness of smoking that I'm going to deal with.
Two quick points, though, on the statute of limitations. The first is the importance of
that date, May 5, 1990.
May 5, 1990. You heard the argument, you saw the records, you heard the evidence wonderfully summarized by Mr. Persons and Mr. Woods that Mrs. Cohen either knew or should in the exercise of reasonable care have known that she had COPD/emphysema on or before that date, May 5, 1990, and that there was a reasonable probability that that COPD/emphysem; was caused by smoking.
My point is just about the date. The date May 5, 1990, is the law. It's the law.
It's in your instructions, it's in your verdict form. It's the law that you have said you will apply to this case. That's where it comes from. That's my only point. It seems like law day was a pretty good time to make that point.
And the second is just the burden of proof is the same burden of proof, on us, that they have on them, greater weight of the evidence.
Now, I would like to focus on what's been called the conspiracy claim. It's the only claim against Philip Morris.
And the question that you will be asked to resolve is question 7 on your verdict form.
I would like to put it up here.
You'll notice that in these earlier questions, Philip Morris isn't listed. That's because there is no claim under those questions.
You get to question 7, and that's where the claim comes. And you will be asked to decide against -- with respect to Philip Morris, as well as the other defendants.
Please state, as to each defendant, whether Mrs. Cohen reasonably relied to her detriment on any act/statement made by that defendant after May 5, 1982.
That's another date, May 5, 1982. Done in furtherance of that defendants' agreement to conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of her lung cancer and death.
That's the question that you will be asked to resolve against Philip Morris, as well as the other defendants.
You will be aided in that decision by instruction number 12, which relates to that claim. The Court instructed you that when you get to this issue, you will consider whether Ms. Cohen reasonably relied after a statement made after May 5, concealed or omitted material information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature, taken in furtherance of defendants' agreement to conceal or omit and whether it was a legal cause.
Now, I want to talk with you about the evidence that bears on that claim.
The only brand of Philip Morris cigarettes that Mrs. Cohen smoked regularly was Marlboro. I know there was discussion of Philip Morris. Mr. Cohen testified that she smoked it for about two months at some point later in her life. But the only brand that she smoked regularly was Marlboro. He testified that she began smoking Marlboro sometime in 1950, after her son Edward was born.
He testified that she stopped in 1953 and switched to another brand.
So what we are dealing with in terms of Philip Morris smoking history is sometime after
Edward was born in 1950 until she switched to another brand in 1953.
Now, Dr. Proctor, the first witness, told you that the first public statement that the tobacco companies took in furtherance of the conspiracy to conceal information was the Frank Statement in January of 1954.
There was, by the way, as was pointed out, no evidence that Ms. Cohen ever saw or heard of the Frank Statement.
But the point is that by the time the conspiracy on which this claim is based began, according to Dr. Proctor, Ms. Cohen had already put down her Marlboro, Philip Morris brand cigarettes, and she never smoked them again.
But there's more. Because not only -MR. HAMMER: Judge, can we approach, You Honor. I have an objection.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: You may continue, Mr. Davis. MR. S. DAVIS: Okay. Let me back up.
Ms. Cohen smoked Marlboros from sometime after Edward was born in 1950 until she switched to another brand in '53. She smoked Benson & Hedges at some unspecified period for two months, sometime later in life. That was the testimony of Mr. Cohen.
You've seen the question that is the claim on conspiracy against Philip Morris and you've seen the instruction.
I want to talk to you about the brand history.
The point I was making is that the conspiracy, according to Dr. Proctor, the first public statement pursuant to the conspiracy, in
furtherance of the conspiracy, which is the language of the instruction, was in January of
1954.	And by that point, she had put down her Philip Morris Marlboros and never picked them up again.
But there is more. And this is where the date becomes important. The plaintiff must not only show that Philip Morris made statements in furtherance of the conspiracy that somehow impacted Mrs. Cohen and her smoking decisions. He has to prove under the law that those statements were made after May 5, 1982. That's another date that is the law.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, objection. Can we approach, please?
THE COURT: Certainly.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]