CLOSING ARGUMENT
MR. PAIGE: Thank you, Your Honor.
May it the please the Court?
THE COURT: Yes.
MR. PAIGE: Thank you.
Counsel.
Good morning, everybody.
As you know, I'm Gary Paige. And, actually, with Adam and Alex and Tamika and -and this is Baron Philipson. He works with us. I never introduced him. I apologize -- and on behalf of Ms. Cohen, we all sincerely appreciate you all being here.
We know that everybody is busy. Everybody has jobs and things to do and places to be, and to come here and sit here for this long and listen to lawyers arguing, it takes a lot, and we appreciate it. Wnen I say "we," I know I speak respectfully on behalf of all the Defense
attorneys and the Court as well. We know it's a lot out of your life to be hear and listen to this. But this is -- as I think you know, it's such an important issue. It's important to both parties. It's important to the Defendants and so important Ms. Cohen.
Tomorrow you all will go back to your lives, your jobs, and do what you do. And maybe you tell a story or two about some crazy attorney who said something or some witness and you'll chuckle about it. But, in time, you will forget about us.
Mrs. Cohen will not. This is her only day in court. She can't come back. This is our opportunity to speak to you and ask that you not look the other way and you don't just pat the Defendants on the back and say: Hey, this was a big misunderstanding, or it's okay, we
accept that type of behavior, we accept corporations who lie as being okay in our society, we accept corporations who deceive to make money while they know people are dying, that's okay.
We know that's not okay. You can be a doctor or a lawyer or a teacher, business
owner. People know -- you don't need me to tell you -- that what they've done is really the worst of the worst. It's been decades, and their conduct has been nothing short of despicable or evil is the only way to describe it.
450,000	Americans are dying -- that's in America only -- are dying every year because of their product. And they ve lied about it.
MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: 450,000, it's a number, you know, we throw around. You know, 450,000.
It's 450,000 real people and it's a real number which they've known about as they've decided deliberately to make money and look the other way and not tell the truth. And if you can just put that in perspective to how -- how much -- how wrong they knew their conduct was, how heinous and reckless and indifferent they knew their conduct was.
If you think about it, if there was three 747s -- this is how much 450,00 people is. If you had three 747s crashing every day for a year, every day you turned on the news and
found out three jets crashed every day for a year, that's 450,000 people. That's what they've done. That's what they've done and they've looked the other way and they've known all along. They've known for decades.
And they had many opportunities. Many opportunities to do what was right. They didn't have to wait until they were told in 2000 to do what's right. They could have done what was right decades ago. And they made a deliberate decision.
If you look at their documents, you'll see this is not some one person or two person.
This was a conspiracy, the worst conspiracy.
It was an industry that sat down and made the decision that, hey, profits are much more important to us than human lives. Profits is all that matters to us, making money. Anybody could say that, if you don't nave a conscience. Anybody could do that, if you don't care about people.
But that's not right. That's wrong. And I think you don't need me to tell you that. I know you don't need me to tell you that.
So today you all have so much power.
You're six people from the community who heard all the evidence. You're going to hear the instructions from the Judge and today you are
the judicial branch of the government. You decide what's right and what's wrong. You have an opportunity to make something wrong right. You've have an opportunity to make something that's injustice just. And you have a right to -You know, Ms. Parker has said all along this is about money, this is about money.
That's the only thing they care about, is money. That's why they did this, for money. It's about money to them. It's been about money for them for 50 years. That's what it's about, it's about money to them.
So Ms. Cohen, my client, she's now an older lady. She comes to court. She's asking for justice. This is her day in court to ask you, with all your responsibility and all your power, not to look the other way, not to say -not to go back and say we did -- we looked the other way, we told Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds that we accept their behavior as being okay in our society.
You know, another thing I want to say -I'm going to talk about the verdict form and some of the evidence. Some of this, what I'm going to now, is probably -- it is a little repetitive because I know you all have paid attention to the evidence. And I want to go over some of the evidence and the verdict form.
But -- and I think I said this in Phase 1, but I am proud of Robin for bringing this case to court. You know, she could have -- it would be easier for her not to sit here and listen to all these lawyers and have people say that her husband didn't care, that he was a risk taker, because he opened a business or had a bar, he was some risk taker and he didn't take his blood pressure medicine. She deserves to be here. Regardless what anybody says, she deserves to be here, and I think she's proven that today beyond any doubt.
And it really was -- I tell you it kind of says a lot about their experts when you hear -and I want to talk about their experts a little bit. I don't want to spend too much time on it because I know you all heard the testimony just like I did. But when you hear, like,
Dr. Beckson or Professor Ford, when I'm questioning them, a lot of times -- and I know the Judge maybe -- not maybe -- gets a little aggravated that I get too excited. And I apologize if I do. And I hope you don't hold that against my client if I did. And probably I should calm down at times. I've been told that before. It's not the first time.
But their experts, they wouldn't answer a question. You know, it gets frustrating. And I thought at times it was me, but I know when you all would proposed your questions to the experts, they kind of really rambled the same way with your questions as they did with mine.
So I don t take it that personally.
But the one thing that Beckson said that I thought was real insulting and I did not -- I know Ms. Cohen did not appreciate it after being a widow and bringing a case, a legitimate case like this, and having him say that her husband was not motivated to quit. We know all the things he did. He went to hypnosis. He went to classes. He tried special cigarettes. He did the best he could do. Could he have tried harder? Yes. Everybody could try
harder. I've said that and I'm going to accept some responsibility for that.
But when Dr. Beckson said that this as all about shutting up his wife, he was just trying to shut up his wife, you know, that just shows the callousness of what their experts will say. They'll say anything. They'll try anything to try to convince you that she doesn't deserve to be here. And I'm proud of her for not shutting up, for standing up for her rights and coming forward and bringing this case to you and explaining and letting you see what type of industry this is and what type of companies they are and what type of experts they have to come in and support their claim.
We've accepted responsibility from day one. I know Ms. Cohen, when they asked her at one point do you accept responsibility for your husband, she said no. She thinks her husband did the best he could. He listened to them.
He started smoking in 1940. He smoked for 30 years, over a quarter of a century before the first warning went on a pack, real warning.
You know they had the caution. But before the real warnings went on a cigarette, he was -- he
was addicted. And they know -- if you look at their memos, they know, with addicts, they could provide them crutches and doubt and give them rationales and reasons to deny.
People who smoke, anybody who smokes will tell you, oh, I smoke because it makes me feel good, it's my choice, it's my decision. They don't understand what we know now. They don't know what nicotine does. They don't know that the things that they think are good, that it calms them or the addictive nature of nicotine. And people who smoke, they want to stop. And a lot of them can't. Some can. That's great. A lot of people can. They say a million people a year stop. But there's 50 million people smoking.
So there's 49 million who -- I think they said 70 percent want to stop. Nobody wants to be an addict. Nobody wants to subject themselves to that. They don't -- even their own documents say they know people don't speak for the taste. That's not why people are smoking. They're because they're addicted. That's it. They smoke because they're addicted.
He cared about his family. He helped his daughter with school projects and so forth.
And people who are addicted, they try to teach their children right from wrong. But that doesn't mean they're not addicted. And that doesn't mean that they're careless people.
So, you know, we've accepted responsibility. And because Mrs. Cohen is looking at that time from a different angle -she lived with him. She knows he tried to stop. I know when Ms. Parker asked her was your husband at fault and she said no, well,
I'm sure she doesn't think that he was at fault.
But I know, from trying these cases, that, you know, despite what he did and despite the fact that he tried and despite what he was told, that he was lied to, at some point, everybody can try harder. And so he did choose to try to quit at times. We all know he chose to try to quit.
But, you know, choices is a two-way street. It's not one way. He's responsible for his choices. But they're responsible for their choices. They're responsible for their
lies, for their deceit, for their conduct.
They can't stand up here and say, you know, we didn't know anything, how dare he believe us, he was stupid enough to believe us, how could he believe us.
Well, they know. They were doing research. They know there was 25, 30 million people smoking who believed them. They did the polls. They knew what was going on. That's why they were lying. And they were making money by lying. That's why they were doing it. They knew people were dying. They knew they were lying. And they just did like a risk cost analysis and said, hey, we are going to lie, people are going to die, and we're going to make this money, and it's worth it to us. They're responsible for that. You can't come to court later, knowing for decades that people believed you, and say somehow dare he believe us. That's just not accepting responsibility.
People need to be able to say accept responsibility. There's nothing wrong with it. You don't have to wait until you get to closing arguments to acknowledge that your lies and deceit and your manipulations were killing
people as you were making money. And the only one in this court who voluntarily accepted responsibility was a very first pleading that was filed in this case on behalf of Ms. Cohen. She accepted responsibility, through her lawyers for her husband's share of responsibility.
And we will never ask -- and I'm going to talk to you about what we think is fair apportionment of where the liability lies. But
at some point, you know, that s your decision. You can take what I suggest to you and accept it or can you reject it. You can find some median that makes you all -- what you all think is proper.
But Ms. Parker has made it clear they accept -- despite the findings, the findings in this Court that they were negligent, that their product was defective and unreasonably dangerous -- the Judge has told you that.
That's not me. That s a court finding. That's the law. They were negligent. That means that they were careless. They didn't act like a reasonable, careful company would act knowing what they knew. A reasonable company would do
things differently than what they did. They were negligent. They're strictly liable. They had a defective unreasonably dangerous product that they sold and marketed and didn't do anything about it. And they concealed, they conspired, entered into a conspiracy to agree with each other to lie. And they did that. Despite that Ms. Parker stood up here time and time again and said the Defendants do not accept any responsibility. They accept no responsibility.
You will have to let them know, by your verdict, if you think that's right. If you think that's right for a company to lie and cheat -- and really they're stealing money. They're taking money from innocent people who are dying by telling them lies. If you think that's okay, you let her know by your verdict.
I trust -- I strongly suggest that you will not do that.
So I want to talk, the verdict form, a little bit about what we proved and what the verdict form is going to look like.
The first question on the verdict form talks about negligence. And, as you know, they
were determined to be negligent. We put in evidence -- you know, we can't just rely on the finding. We can't say, hey, they were negligent and sit down. We have to show you evidence. So that's why the case takes a little bit longer than maybe we would like it to be.
But the question is -- you have to state whether the negligence was a legal cause or contributed to his death. And this is what they did.
We know when they knew -- they knew -- you know, they were selling their products for decades. And in the '50s, '53, that famous mouse painting study came out. And they all got together and they had a choice to make at that point. They could have chose to come forward and tell the public -- look where -By the way, look where we are now with cigarettes and public health. 16 percent of the people smoke, as opposed to 60 percent.
Okay? Everybody knows the truth now. Smoking clinics, smoking aids, medications, truth ads on T.V., no advertisements on T.V.
Well, that could have been 50 years
earlier. We didn't have to wait until now to have all the truth ads on T.V. We didn't have to wait until now to get to where we are with smoking. It's taken decades and people have died as they've lied. And that's unreasonable, the way they've acted. A reasonable corporation can't do that. That's just not right.
So what they did is they got together at the Plaza Hotel and they issued this Frank Statement. Now, the Frank Statement could have been frank. It could have been honest. And they said, at that point, they accept responsibility. That's a first and last time they accepted responsibility. So here they're saying they're responsible for people's health. But when Ms. Parker gets up, she's going to say they're not responsible.
But they did accept responsibility in 1953. And they could have said: And we want to you know there is proof. People, there is proof. We're going to put warnings on the cigarettes. We're going to come forward and we re going to get the proof out to people.
You need to know what's going on here.
And they didn't do it. They lied. They started this massive campaign of lies, of doubt and confusion. And it's -- when I say "doubt and confusion," you've seen their documents. That's not me. That's them talking. That's what they wanted.
And 1964, the Surgeon General's Report comes out. They could have embraced that report. They could have said: Hey, look, at this point, come on, guys. Let's tell the public the truth. Let's act reasonably. Let's not be careless -- which is what negligence -somebody was negligent or careless. Let's act responsibly. Let's not just worry about money. Let's worry about people dying. We're human beings here. Sit in a board room with other people and say it's not just our lives, our families that we're feeding. We're affecting other people's lives and families. Let's not just worry about how much money we can make today. Let's worry about other people providing for their family, make sure their fathers and mothers are there to provide for their families. They could have acted responsibly.
And so when the '64 Surgeon General's Report comes out, they say: Well, we got this report -- they know from their documents people are dying. This is 25 years before the '88 Surgeon General's Report comes out. And we have the documents. They know it's a drug.
And they say: We got to provide smokers with a psychological crutch, rationale so they continue to smoke. Give them reasons to doubt, be confused. Give them issues so they can be in denial.
And that's a document. It's in evidence. I'm going to talk about it later.
So this is where they decided, where they made a choice. They made a choice. Can we responsible people? Can we be responsible citizens in this community? Or can we just be liars and not give a hoot about what happens to our fellow citizen? And that is what careless, uncaring corporations do.
So -- and they say, well, it didn't affect them. That's what they're going to say.
They're going to say, well, maybe we were negligent, maybe we were careless, but there's no evidence it really affected Nathan Cohen.
There's no proof. The whole thing, there's no proof. That's what they're saying in the Frank Statement. Well, that's what they're going to tell you today. There's no proof.
You know, they knew, when they issued the Frank Statement, there was proof. And they know that there's proof that this affected Nate Cohen. But they're going to tell you there's no proof. Let us out on a technicality, please let us out because they can't prove it beyond a reasonable doubt.
We don't have to prove it beyond a reasonable doubt. We know that at this time, while being negligent and careless, there was 25, 30 million other Nate Cohens who believed them. They knew that all along. And you have heard from the family and they said he believed that. And that's all the proof you need.
You've seen the curves of all the people who were smoking and then it went down. You know, people were believing them for decades. And addicted smokers believed them, trusted them. They bought into their doubt and confusion. They bought into their psychological crutches and they were affected.
And families, like Nate Cohen, were affect.
They ruined this man's life. They took it upon themselves to say, hey, we don't care Nate Cohen. We don't care Robin Cohen. We care about making money and we're going to be so careless that we don't care what we did. We're going to go ahead and just ruin people's lives, ruin their families because we care about our bottom line and our shareholders, who probably were smokers too.
So we submit to you that it's pretty clear that, Question 1, you have to answer yes for both of them.
The second question is the strict liability question. And there's a finding that they placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. That's a
finding of law. That they -- their product with all of its nicotine, with all of its inhalability -- you probably don't remember this, but it used to be cigarettes were not inhalable. And then they invented this flu curing thing and it became inhalable and then people started dying.
MS. PARKER: Objection.
MR. REILLY: Objection. There's no evidence to that.
MR. PAIGE: Dr. Burns said that.
THE COURT: Excuse me. That's for to you respond to in your answer. You've had three weeks of testimony and they present that to the jury.
Continue.
MR. PAIGE: You may recall that there was a time where people weren't smoking cigarettes. There were other forms of tobacco that were being used, and then people started smoking cigarettes, and they had nicotine, and people were becoming addicted, and people weren't stopping.
Well, this has been determined, by this Court, this is a finding of law. This is not me saying it. The products they sold were defective and unreasonably dangerous. And if you think about it, it's the only product that you could buy -- you know, they say it's a legal product, a legal product. Being legal doesn't make it right. Being legal doesn't mean you can lie about it. Being legal, just because you can -- you have the ability to make
something legal doesn't mean you can run around and lie and deceive and do what they did.
The bottom line is it was a defective and unreasonably dangerous product. They put it on the market. And it's the only product in the world that, if you use as it's instructed, if you use it as they intend for you to use it, you will become addicted to it and you will die. That is the product that they are selling. They know, if you use it as they tell you to use it, you will become addicted to it, which is good for them -- they make more money -- and then you will die, which is bad for them but then they get somebody else to take your place. So they're okay.
So this a product -- and if you think about it, if you go back into the '40s and the '50s when they were selling this product to Nate Cohen -- he was 14 years old. He's 14 years old. This is 30 years before there's any warnings. They have this product that's going to make this little kid addicted to it and they're using Santa Claus, sports figures, and movie stars to market this product. They don't do that anymore. That's why I talking about
that things are different now. But that's how they marketed this product to Nate Cohen.
You know, they'll claim -- you've heard a lot about only -- it's not really that defective or dangerous. Only 1 in 11 people get lung cancer. How bad is it really? 1 in 11, that's not that many. But we know, of the other ten people, they get stomach cancer, pancreatic cancer, throat cancer, tongue cancer, bladder cancer, emphysema, COPD, heart disease, strokes. This is not a safe product. And they could do a lot of things.
Ms. Parker talked about lowering the nicotine levels so people don't get so addicted, in her opening statement. We could lower the tar and nicotine levels. Well, if they lower the nicotine levels, people won't be as addicted. They'll make less money. But that will be a good thing because people won't die. So they're making a decision that they're going to keep doing what they do to the nicotine to keep making money. And it's the same thing with the tar and the inhalability. Make it so they can't inhale it. They have a lot of options they can do. But they decided
that profits are the most important thing to them.
I want to talk about the conspiracy and concealment, which are claims on the verdict form as well. And these are -Is that the only question or is there another one after it?
So this is the concealment question and this is a finding: Concealed or omitted material information knowing that it was false, misleading, and failed to disclose material facts concerning the health affects or addictive nature of their product.
You know, they did that for decades. They hadn't admitted until 1999 and 2000 that their product even caused lung cancer and was addictive. And all along, like I said, they're doing polls. They're looking at the polls.
They re doing polls. They're doing risk cost analysis and making decisions what to tell the public and what not to. Some people have to be forced to tell the truth. And this was an industry that was forced to tell the truth.
And some people -- you know, for whatever reason, people -- there are good people and bad
people. And what they've done was -- nobody would say this was good thing to do.
Next one is they entered into an agreement. This is the conspiracy.
So all these questions, you know, have to do with whether there was a conspiracy and all these concealment. And we put on evidence of that for you all as well to show what they were really doing. And, again, the same numbers that we've shown you about all the millions of people and all -- I'll show you a board that we have.
This is in evidence. But there's
50 million smokers. This is in 1954 and 1964. You know, there's 35 million of them and 23 million of them, according to the polls, did not believe that cigarettes caused lung cancer. It's not just Nate Cohen. It's not like he's some outlier, who's some risky guy who's crazy. He's really just like millions of other people.
There's nothing -- nobody says that the people who believed it were right or the people who didn't believe it were right. People are different -- have different minds. Some people may be not as addicted. Maybe some people are
light smokers. He was a heavy smoker. He was highly addicted. I don't know what goes through people's minds. But there were millions and millions and millions of addicted smokers who they knew were buying their story. And it went into the '70s. You know, there was still millions of people in the '70s.
So this is in evidence and this shows all the different polls from 1954 and it has different -- these are all adults and then this is just cigarette smokers. So they differentiate between the two groups. Because cigarette smokers, for some reason, because they're addicted or because they believe in the doubt and confusion easier than people who aren't addicted, have a lower believe level.
So they're usually trailing behind, is what occurs, because they're being fed this -- lies and are more likely to believe it because they're addicts.
So what do they do? We know that they went to the Plaza Hotel. We know they went to the Plaza Hotel in 1953 and they made a choice. They formed Hill & Knowlton, their PR film; they hired TIRC, their scientific body; and
they went on this campaign of doubt and confusion. It was deliberate. They made a decision and they knew what it meant to innocent people.
All you have to do is look their own documents. All of these documents are in evidence, every one of them. And you know there was a reference that we couldn't put in all the documents. Well, you know how long it took to put these documents. Can you imagine how much longer we would have been here to put in every single document? I wish we could have.
But, you know, this is just details. They're talking about confusion and providing misleading statements. They knew back in 1968. If you look at this document, it's really critical. Our basic position is subject to the charge and may be subject to the finding one day. Well, this is the day. Now they're subject to the finding that we're making false and misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes.
So they knew this, back in 1968, that what
were doing was wrong. They knew one day
they would be caught and they just added up the math and said, you know what -- who's the risk taker here? Is it Nate Cohen or is it them?
So they're taking risks with people's lives to make money and tney knew it all along.
Here we are getting the story out. You'll see the newspaper articles that are in evidence. Creating doubt. Let's face it.
We're interested in evidence that denies the allegation. Doubt is our product. This is what they did. And it wasn't a coincidence that, while all these internal documents were going on, that these type of public statements were being made.
(Whereupon, a video clip was played to the jury as follows:)
We can detect just as much as the Surgeon General. And we'll cooperate in every way.
Are you saying then -- which are removable by a filter?
Well, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. I don't think the industry admits there are any bad elements. If there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General,
through the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope we may found them. And if they are found, they will be removed. But at this point we did not know them.
(Whereupon, the video clip which was played to the jury concluded.)
(Whereupon, a video clip was played to the jury as follows:)
We -- we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that. Because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
Do you believe that cigarettes are safe? Have they been proved to be safe, AAMr. Cohen?
I believe they have not proved to be unsafe.
(Whereupon, the video clip which was played to the jury concluded.)
(Whereupon, a video clip was played to the jury as follows:)
We asked Philip Morris, R.J. Reynolds,
Brown & Williamson, and Lorillard to appear on this program. None would. They told us to talk to the Tobacco Institute. The institute said Anne Browder would speak for them
The case is still open. The jury has not come in.
It may not be harmful. You're not convinced.
It may not be or it may not be. We don't
know.
(Whereupon, the video clip which was played to the jury concluded.)
(Whereupon, a video clip was played to the jury as follows:)
Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no?
It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer.
All right, sir.
Has not been causally established.
Cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
Despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established.
No causal relationship between cigarette
smoking and heart disease?
No. As a matter of fact, there are studies that -- while we are accused of being a associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over ten years that would say again that science is still puzzled over these forces.
(Whereupon, the video clip which was played to the jury concluded.)
(Whereupon, a video clip was played to the jury as follows:)
Mr. Campbell, you were also deposed, and you said, quote, "To my knowledge, it has not been proven that cigarette smoking causes cancer. This is a rather passive and puzzling approach, especially in light of the consensus, not by some, but all the scientific community. Will you ever being convinced and what evidence are you waiting for? And let's have the microphone passed over.
Yes, I may be convinced. We don't know what causes cancer in general right now. So I think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may found out some relationship, but -which has yet to be proven.
(Whereupon, the video clip which was played to the jury concluded.)
MR. PAIGE: So those were all statements were the '60s, '70s, '80s as late as 1994 where they were doing that for reasons that we all know now.
Here's the filter board and I want to just speak about it real briefly. There was evidence in this case that maybe filters do work. And, as you recall, Dr. Proctor testified that, with filters, smokers learn to compensate. They suck more or they smoke differently or they smoke more cigarettes. But they will get their nicotine.
The point of the matter is they don't.
And this is again part of the defectiveness of the product, but it's also part of the reliance of Mr. Cohen. He relied upon them. And although they did not implement this thing about the color changes, that we know of, back
in 1953 to the filter -- we have no convincing prove of it -- it just shows what they were thinking.
And in 1966, they're talking about what's really important is the illusion of filtration.
These documents are in evidence. They're talking about the illusion of filtration.
That's the most important thing, the illusion that smokers think that it's helping them, because then they're going to smoke more and they'll make more money.
But they did a poll 1970 which said 58 percent of smokers believed that the filters were reducing their risk. Then, if you go down to 1976, their own internal documents admit that, in most cases, which is what Dr. Proctor said, the smoker of a filter cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine as he would have gotten from a regular cigarette. He has abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on the grounds of reduced risk to health.
So they know that -- he started smoking in the '40s. People were smoking filterless cigarettes. And then there was this big switch for these filters that was supposedly helping.
So all these things the tobacco companies did they did for a reason. And each time they did it, they did it with a conscience -conscious indifferent to the consequences. Everything they did, they knew what the
consequences were but they didn't care. They never cared. Until today, they care. Now they care. They care what you're going to do. So we're here now because Ms. Parker is all concerned that this is now going to be about money. So, for the first time, they're caring.
We suggest to you, most respectfully, that you let them know, by your verdict, by awarding fair compensation, that they should have cared a long time ago. They could have stopped this many times over the decades and saved Nate Cohen and others like him. And that's when they should have cared. Not today. Not now. It's a little too late.
So it comes down to really apportionment of responsibility. How much are you going to award is R.J. Reynolds responsible, how much are you going to award is Philip Morris responsible, and how much will you say Nate Cohen is responsible? And, you know, you may think right now, okay, I think it's going to be, you know, whatever, I'm not even going to -- you all have your own minds. Everybody has a opinion as to what you think should be fair. And I'll go back and talk as one group
and I'm sure you'll work it out. We put the other chart that we think kind of will help talk about, you know, how you should apportion responsibility.
But actually, before I get to that chart,
I want to say two things.
You have to realize, when Nate Cohen started smoking in 1940, he was doing nothing wrong.
May we see the board with it? The concurrent cause board first.
It's not one or the other here. It's not Nate or Philip Morris. It's not Nate or R.J. Reynolds. You could apportion fault. We spoke about that at beginning of the case.
It's not all or nothing. This is the law. You'll get this -- it's what's called a "concurring cause instruction." You get this with every claim. You'll get it with a strict liability, you'll get it with a conspiracy claim, and you'll get it with a concealment claim. The negligence with the strict liability, whatever the claim is, does not have to be the only cause. It could operate in combination with the acts of others.
So you can have more than one cause. You could have Nate being negligent and them being negligent. You could have Nate should have tried harder, but they shouldn't have lied.
You can have Nate should have started trying to quit earlier, but they should have fixed their product. It could be a combination. That's what we've tried to explain from the beginning.
But when we -- I'm going to talk about what Nate did wrong. I'm not going to hide from it. But when we -- and I don't think him being five-foot six, 186 pounds, or him having his blood pressure a little high, respectfully. I know there's been some videos of that, but that's not the issue here. I think you all know that.
The real issue is how responsible is he for what happened. And when he started smoking in 1940 at 14 years old, he was doing nothing wrong. He didn't know. He didn't know that he would be -- he didn't know he was going to become an addict. He didn't know he would be a lifelong customer of Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds.
Kids don't realize that. They're smoking.
They're kids. They think it's cool. Lacy Ford is the only one in it courtroom who didn't realize that smoking is being portrayed at times as glamorous and fun and thing to do. He was denying tat he even knew that. It was absurd.
If I can see the board.
This is what was going on when Nate was smoking -- when Nate started. You had Santa Claus smoking, doctors smoking, Lou Gehrig smoking. This was the world he lived in when he started. It was a different society.
60	percent of men were smoking. And it was a choice he made as a kid, but he had no idea what he was getting into. He did not know that he would be a lifelong customer. He did not
know he would become addicted. He did not know. He was not a scientist. He was not a chemist. He was not producing a product. He was just a kid. And when he started smoking, like any other kid who started smoking, they obviously know a lot more.
THE CLERK: Fifteen minutes, Counsel.
MR. PAIGE: The other thing I want to talk about is -- when you talk about what he did
wrong -- they also talked about how addictive nicotine is. And here are their documents.
You know, these are all in evidence and I went through them pretty quickly.
But their own documents, you know: "We don't want to tout it as a drug." "It is, of course." "Nicotine is a dominant desire". "Nicotine satisfaction". "It's a potent drug". "Think of the product as nicotine". "A cigarette pack is a storage container for a day's supply of nicotine". "It's a dispenser for a dose unit of nicotine". "Very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine, its addictive nature and it's a poison".
"The thing we sell most is nicotine."
The last one there: "We can never be comfortable selling a product that most of our customers would stop using if they could." So they've known all along how addictive it is.
And so when you talk about what Nate did, we have to talk about who he was when he started, and the fact is that it's undisputed that he was addicted to this drug. And if we can put that in proper perspective, I think that we need to.
I'm not going to play -- you've seen the Surgeon General where he talks about, you know, it's addictive as cocaine and heroin, and the '89 report, which is in evidence, specifically says this is not about free choice. This is not about free choice. They've had choices to make and an addict doesn't have the same choices as a corporation who is making money.
He can choose to try to quit. Some people are successful. A lot of people are. And he tried. But he can't determine his fate. He's not God, he's just a man, and a lot of people fail. He tried.
So I want to talk about apportioning the fault. This is confusing. Actually, I changed the board last night because it was even more confusing than this, believe it or not, so I try to explain it.
But from 1940 to 1952, if we can just look at this, we know that that was a time even before the mouse painting studies. So we have a 12-year period of time where he's smoking R.J. Reynolds product and we know it's a defective and unreasonably dangerous product that causes addiction and kills. During those
12 years, he certainly did nothing wrong and
actually, quite frankly, neither did Philip Morris. So for the first 12 years, if you're going to apportion fault, that goes to R.J. Reynolds for the first 12 years.
For the next 11 years, '53 to '63, that's when really the doubt and confusion was going on. They started this whole complain of doubt and it was before any Surgeon General's Report, before any warnings on cigarettes, before anybody really knew. And at that time, again, there was 35 million Americans smoking who didn't believe it.
And so, at that point, you really -- we're suggesting you really still can't say Nate Cohen did anything wrong. He's smoking and it's 25 years he's smoking before there's even a Surgeon General's Report on the topic.
But -- and he's smoking R.J. Reynolds product, but Philip Morris is involved in this conspiracy of doubt and confusion. They're not blameless. I respect Mr. Reilly. He knows I do. But he wasn't smoking their product, but they were in on it. R.J. Reynolds may have started the conspiracy, but they were all too
happy to follow.
So during this time period we think R.J. Reynolds should get two-thirds of the responsibility and Philip Morris one-third because it's their product.
Then we go to 1964 to 1984. That's a time period where there was a Surgeon General's Report. 1970, they did put -- I think it was '66. It was like caution. But, in '70, it was a real warning that was on cigarettes. And, you know, there's evidence during that time period that he really didn't try to quit yet. Maybe he was naive. Maybe he was stupid.
Maybe he was in denial. Maybe he was thinking it wouldn't happen to him. I'm not his -- in his mind.
But we're suggesting that he should have tried to start quitting -- that a reasonable jury can decide that, in 1964, he should have tried to start quitting a little bit earlier than he did. So at that point -- but you still have the conspiracy, the lies, the doubt, and so forth. So we think because he smoking RJR's product, because they're involved in the conspiracy, they buy 50 percent; Philip Morris,
they're involved in the conspiracy; and Nate could have been trying at that point. So, at that point in time, he starts to be responsible.
And then from '85 to '93 -- and then '94, he died. But we have another nine years where he's trying to quit. He goes to two American Cancer Society seminars, hypnosis. There's evidence he tried the patch, some gum, cold turkey, hard candy, fake cigarettes. He's trying to quit. And despite the fact he's trying as best as he knows how, we're still
accepting some responsibility, because every man can try harder. Okay? So we're still not trying to run from what Nate Cohen could have been done more. In hindsight, if he could do better, I'm sure he would have. If he could have known that if he would have tried one more time, I'm sure he would have. But he tried the best he knew how.
So during this time period, it's Philip Morris' cigarettes he's smoking and that's why we gave them more blame during those nine years.
And there's a formula, if you take each of
the percentage -- which I'm not that good at but there's smarter people on the jury who may be able to figure this out. But it comes out
61	percent for R.J. Reynolds, 25 percent for Philip Morris, 14 percent for Nate Cohen.
That's how the math works out. That's just how it adds up.
And if you think that Nate Cohen should bear more responsibility, we will accept that. We will accept that. We will accept whatever you decide. If you decide he should bear less, that's fine, too. Whatever you decide, this is just kind of a chart how we -- it's difficult thing to apportion fault. You can't say a third, a third, a third. You can't compare somebody who can't quit with somebody who lied. You can't say that somebody who tried to quit, like Nate did, is just as responsible for somebody, who for 50 years, was lying to make money. That's not a fair comparison. So this is what we think would be fair. But, again, we would respect anything you do. Anything you award, we will not -- we will understand.
So this is Nate Cohen. He's a real human being. He's a person. He had feelings. His
family had feelings for him. They loved him.
He loved them. And it's not just a nobody.
He's a person. But he's just one of many who was affected by this -- as I think somebody described it, it was an epidemic caused by the tobacco companies. So I think that was what the American -- one of those societies that one of the Defense experts were a member of called it "an epidemic fueled by the tobacco industry."
I think I said this before, but if you can go back to the jury room -- this is about compensation. It's about justice. It's about doing what's right. You all know that. And if you go back and restoration instead of compensation, if you could restore what happened, if you could make all the hurt go away, all the pain go away, you know, it would be better. But you can't.
So, for Mrs. Cohen, this is -- there's no more of significant loss that you can have. If her husband can come back and you could wave a wand back there and he walked through the door
and say let's get out of here, honey, let's get away from these lawyers and let's just go home,
she would be so happy. I assure you she would. She can't. It cannot happen. It's impossible. So we have no restoration. We only have compensation.
And I could ask for as much money as I want. I could say give a hundred million dollars, give $50 million. But we feel that fair compensation for this type of loss, for this significant loss would be $10 million for Mrs. Cohen for the harm they caused her family and her. And $10 million, we submit to you it shouldn't be a penny more, but not a penny less for compensatory damages for the pain and suffering they've caused this family.
Again, like I said, there is no limit for what we can ask for. We could says he's blameless, give a hundred million dollars. But we want to be realistic. We think that's a fair number, in light of the harm they caused.
I want to talk about punitive damages now. This is different. This is -- and I don't want -- when we talk about compensatory damages, that's one thing. A punitive damage is to punish somebody. And when you are talking about punitive damages, they need to
know, by your verdict, that you don't accept their behavior.
They need to know, by your verdict, that you're telling them: No, we didn't tolerate lies like that. We don't tolerate doubt, confusion when people's lives are at stake. We don't tolerate it when we're going to take an innocent man and ruin his life and do this for the sake of making money.
That's punitive damages.
And in order to be entitled to punitive damages, to punish them so they know the difference between right and wrong -- these are big companies, and in order for them to know the difference between right and wrong, you can't just punish them by saying, okay, we're going to give you a million dollars or $2 million. They don't feel that. They know that that's not punishment to them. That is not punishment. We have to prove that they're reckless conduct where they showed an indifference to human life was clear and convincing evidence.
This is all of their documents summarized. These are all their people who have been on
T.V. This was a conspiracy for 50 years. They could have stopped it at any time and lives would have been saved. And they decided not to. And by clear and convincing evidence, this is reckless conduct that is not acceptable, and in society, it should not be condoned. It should be: Hey, we excuse you. We're okay with this. We'll teach our society, we'll
teach our community that, this is type of conduct, we're okay with it. We think it's okay. It's not reckless.
Well, it's not okay.
THE CLERK: Five minutes, Counsel.
MR. PAIGE: So -- and if we can, just show the Waxman hearings real quick.
This is not a big misunderstanding. This is not a mistake. This is them swearing to Congress.
(Whereupon, a video clip was played to the jury as follows:)
Let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. Let me ask you first -- and I'd like to just go down the row -- whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. I heard
virtually all of you touch on it. Just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
AAMr. Johnson
Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of "addiction." There is no intoxication -We'll take that as a "no." And, again, time is short. If you could just -- I think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. We just would like to have this for the record.
I don't believe that nicotine or our products are addictive.
I believe nicotine is not addictive.
I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
And I too believe that nicotine is not addictive.
(Whereupon, the video clip which was played to the jury concluded.)
MR. PAIGE: I submit to you, respectfully, they are not above the law. They're no better than anybody else. The law applies to them. They're liars. They lied. They lied to Congress. They lied to the public. They lied
to every smoker. Everyone. And that's not acceptable.
And I submit to you they need to be punished. The evidence is that -- by clear and convincing evidence that this conduct is not -is not acceptable. It's the worst of the worst, the evilest of the evil, and they did it all in the sake of making money, which is the worst reason to do something like this. It's the worst reason. You don't do that. You just don't do that. And it's been 15 years, 16 years, and nobody has ever said they're sorry to Mrs. Cohen. Nobody ever apologized, said we shouldn't have done this.
So I submit you cannot punish them by awarding an insignificant amount. You cannot punish them. It has to be a significant amount. Other cigarette companies are watching. It wasn't iust them. There were
other cigarette companies lying too. They need to know, by your verdict, that this conduct -MS. PARKER: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: -- is not acceptable.
So, again, I could say give $200 million
in punitive damages, a hundred million to each company, and that would really punish them.
They would feel that. But that's too much. Under the law, I really can ask for three to four times compensatory damages.
MS. PARKER: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: So we would ask, respectfully, that you give 30 to $40 million in punitive damages, divided amongst them however you see fit, and these companies will know. They will know that this is not acceptable, that it will not be tolerated, and it's considered highly improper.
I'm going to sit down now and then Mr. Trop actually has a couple of words to say on behalf of Ms. Cohen. And when Ms. Parker stands up here and starts blaming Mr. Cohen, the victim, again, I just want you to think, each time she blames him, when -- when will they accept response responsibility.
I thank you all so much. It's almost like we know each other. We have been together four weeks and I know all of you have different personalities and you'll work out a fair
verdict back there. But you have so much power and you have a right, a responsibility to go back there and tell them you do not accept this behavior, you will not accept their lies. And I thank you very much for your time and all of your attention. Thank you.



MR. TROP: Good morning.
You know, like, Gary Paige and I knew we were going to split up our time, so what we decided was he would go first and I would kind of pick up and talk about some things that maybe he didn't hit on. But he was very thorough. And I'm really, as I'm going over the checklist in my mind, thinking -- hearing him hitting all these points, I kept thinking, you know what, they know this. They know this. They know this. Every time we make a point, you know, they know this. They were sitting here. I saw them. They were asking questions. They know this. And really this might be the case where you don't even really need a closing argument. Because you know it. You've seen it. I'm still going to give one, so don't get too excited. But I m going to make it briefer than I thought.
What we're here to do is to hold these Defendants accountable finally. We want to hold them accountable. As the Judge told you at the beginning, we're the lawyers here. What
we say here isnt evidence. But what we say is important, because we're talking on behalf of and with the authority of our clients. And so when we accept responsibility for Nate Cohen, we're doing that with the authority of Robin Cohen. And when they get up and they accept no responsibility for their clients, they're doing that with the authority and with the instructions of their clients. So we're here now asking you to give them responsibility, to show them that they're responsible, and to do that with your verdict.
You know, we've been through this trial. It's been three weeks. You haven't heard a hint of an apology from them. Not a hint.
MS. PARKER: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. TROP: I mean, I don't know what they're going to say when they come up. But I doubt there's going to be any kind of apology. I'm not talking about "I'm sorry for your loss"
type of apology. I'm talking about "I'm sorry for what we did" type of apology. It's like if you have a child and he does something terrible and he steals something, he steals a baseball glove from another kid, and you tell him you're going to go apologize. In addition to some other things, you re going to apologize. You don't expect him to say to the other kid, I'm sorry that you lost your glove. You expect him to say I'm sorry that I stole your glove. And so I'm anxious to see if there's any kind of apology today to Mrs. Cohen, or any kind of acceptance of responsibility.
We know our clients. They know their clients; we know our clients. Our clients with good people. Nathan Cohen was a good man. He was a good husband. He was a good father. He was a good friend. He was a good man. He was a good person. He was kind. He was gentle.
He was funny. He was caring. He wasn't famous. He wasn't, you know, some kind of superstar, some kind of celebrity. But to Robin Cohen, he was the most important man in the world. And they took him from her. And they should be held responsible. They should.
Now contrast these good people with what you've heard about these Defendants. What good things have they done? Are they caring? No. They're the opposite. They don't care at all. They haven't cared in their history. They don't care today.
Hold them responsible. They're the kind of people -- they're companies. But companies are made up of people -- that they have a product that is killing people. And horrible deaths. And killing tnem by the millions. And they know it. And they're keeping it a secret and they're lying about it. And they're, on top of it, bragging amongst themselves, secretly, that: Look how addictive it is.
Yeah. More money for us. Look how addictive this horribly hazardous product is.
And, you know, I know they put an expert that said -- there's no issue that he was addicted to this product and that the addiction killed him. That's the law. But they put up an expert that says, oh, well, you know, it's not -- it's kind of addicted or I think he said the "so-called addiction." Well, we have -- I don't know if can I find it here, that last
exhibit. Well, I'll put it up on the board.
Yesterday afternoon when you went home, another document went into evidence. It's kind of proof that, when you go home early, we actually are working. That document came in that you didn't see come in. Will you put that -- this is Philip Morris' Web site. And in the Web site, Philip Morris cites to an FDA finding from 1995. It's an interesting date, because that's right around the time just after Nate Cohen died.
So it shows what the status of addiction was at the time he died. I pulled this up yesterday from the Web site. Look at some of the highlighted portions. Look at that first highlighted portion. Let's talk about how serious an addiction nicotine is.
"A smoker who makes a serious attempt to stop smoking has less than 5 percent chance of being off cigarettes a year later. Each year in the United States, 15 million people try to quit smoking, but less than 3 percent have long-term success."
Now, this is the United States Food and Drug Administration. It's not someone that's
getting paid a hundred thousand dollars to come and testify. This is the FDA -- Philip Morris summarizing the FDA's findings on their Web site. Look down there. I don't know how well you can see it, but -"Almost half the smokers who undergo surgery for lung cancer resume smoking."
So half the people that have their chest cut open and doctors go in and cut out tumors and parts of their lung and sometimes their whole lung, half of them start to smoke again.
"Even after smokers have their larynx removed" -- their voice box removed -"40 percent of them trying smoking again."
Now, they're going to come in here and they have come in here and said people smoke because they like the taste of the cigarettes. They got to do something with their hands.
They know that's not true. That's a lie. It's just another one of their lies. People smoke because the nicotine.
Can you imagine the guy without the larynx: Oh, are you smoking because of the taste? I mean, he couldn't answer you because he has no larynx, of course, but maybe he has
one of those boxes. "But people don t smoke for that reason and they know that.
"Even among adults who express a strong desire to quit smoking and who receive optimal medical care" -- the best medical care -- "only half of the patients studied were able to stop smoking for as long as one week. And the long-term failure rate was more than 80 percent after patients were withdrawn from nicotine replacement."
So if they were given the patch, as soon as the patch comes off, 80 percent of them fail.
That's Mr. Cohen. They know that.
So what are their defenses in this case? And I'm not talking about the early defenses with, you know, lymphoma and then he had some rare disease that only Mediterranean men in their middle ages with HIV get, you know. You remember all that. Talking about their defenses now. It's a twofold defense.
The first thing is he didn't really try to quit. It was half-hearted attempt. They have no testimony to that effect. They've got no evidence, but they keep saying it. It s like
innuendo, despite the fact of what family has said. Everybody who knew him said he tried very hard.
And then their second thing is, well, he did quit. There's some medical records that showed that he quit. It didn't make any difference. He would have been very sick by that point, but they kept pointing -- I found that very interesting in the medical records. They're talking medical records of Dr. Centurion, Dr. Gonzalez, Dr. Rayna. Those are the medical records.
Now, in Phase 1, those were the guys that committed malpractice and basically killed him, according to them, right? In Phase 1, those medical records were completely unreliable. Remember? It's not a mass. He doesn't mean mass. They kept talking about how unreliable the medical records are. That didn't work out so well for them.
So, in Phase 2, they do an about-face and they're talking about, oh, look at these medical records.
And what's the import of those two defenses. Obviously, Robin Cohen knows. She
lived with her husband for 38 years. She knows whether he tried to quit smoking, whether he was serious about it, and whether he did quit smoking. And her daughters know that. So if what they're saying is true, that he didn't try to quit smoking or he gave an half-hearted attempt and that ultimately he did, well, then she's lying. Right? That's what they're saying. She's got to be lying and her daughter has to be lying.
Can you imagine R.J. Reynolds and Philip
Morris are going to sit in a courtroom and say somebody else is lying, the most prolific liars you can ever imagine? But it's even more than that, because they're all three saying it, the two daughters and Robin. They're -- all three kind of had the same description of what happened.
So they must have been conspiring to lie. It's almost like a bad joke, isn't it? Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds sit at a table next to each other and point over there and say, look, there's somebody who is conspiring to lie. They've been found by the Court in this case to be conspiring to lie, and to lie. And they're
going to point at the Cohen family and say they re conspirers and liars? Imagine.
And they're doing this -- they lied and they're lying about nothing insignificant.
It's worst thing in the world. They're selling a product that they know is killing people, horrible deaths. And they're keeping it to themselves. And it's highly addictive. And they're keeping that to themselves for decades, until the day he died. The Waxman hearings you just saw, that was the same year he died. So they're not only lying, they're lying under oath, and they're lying under oath in front of Congress.
And the sad part is their lies worked.
They know they worked. You saw the documents. They're bragging to themselves that their lies are working. You saw the polls. You know how many millions of Americans believed it. But you saw that graph that's in evidence.
Can you put that up?
And I know that one of the jurors asked the same question yesterday of the witness about that graph. I promise you I was going to say this anyway. I'm not stealing your
material.
But look at this graph. Okay? Just look at the dates at the bottom. The black one is the amount of cigarettes smoked. It does go up. It goes go up in the -- see the '50s? It takes a little dip there right around in the mouse painting. Then it goes right back up, because they're lying. And it stays steady with little dips until basically the '80s, early '80s, early to mid '80s, and starts going down early '80s. Right? So everybody was -not everybody, but a ton of people were believing that. And that's when Nate Cohen started to quit, too. Early '80s. It wasn't just him. It was everybody.
And this expert had some theory: Well, you know, that's the total amount cigarettes, but the percentage of cigarette smokers was less in those years. Well, that's true, because new smokers who had the information, people that would start smoking, didn't start because they got the information then.
But the people that were already addicte like Nate Cohen was in 1980 who had been smoking 40 years, those people weren't
quitting, or very few of them were. And they had a hard time.
THE CLERK: Seven minutes, Counsel.
MR. TROP: Thank you.
So, yes, we're here about money damages. And we're going to talk to you and we have talked to you about money damages. And there's two reasons for that.
One reason, that's all we have. That's what the Court -- that's what courts do.
That's our option, talk about money damages.
And just as important, we're talking about money damages because that's their language. That's all they understand, is money. Twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week no matter what the consequences, no matter what the misery, no matter what the moral issues, that's what they talk about, 24 hours a day.
Plaza Hotel, that was about money. When they came up with those fake organizations to lie to the public, that was about money. When they're bragging to themselves about the nicotine in the papers, that was about money. When Robin Cohen and her husband are sitting in a doctor's office finding out that he's going
to die, they're still counting their money.
When Robin Cohen is caring for her husband literally ripping the balls and sockets out of her shoulders caring for her dying husband, they're thinking about money. When she buried her husband of 38 years, they're still thinking about money.
So, yeah, now we're going to talk about money and we're going to ask you to show them, with your verdict, something about money. Because that's their language and that's all they understand. We want you to show them what they did to this family and we want to you teach them that they're not going to do that again.
I thank you very much for your time. I'm going to sit down now.



REBUTTAL ARGUMENT
MR. PAIGE: Good afternoon.
So, the law is really not that complicated. There's a lot of instructions.
You are going to go back there. There's a lot of smart people on this jury. You will figure out the law. The law is simple: It's what's
right and what's wrong. That's really the law.
I wasn't always a lawyer. I actually put myself through law school as a roofer, and I understand these legal instructions.
MS. PARKER: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: I understand these instructions perfectly well. And I can tell you the law in this case is important. And the law in this case, why we fought so hard in Phase 1 was because the law in this case has been established. There is no "ifs", "ands" or "buts" about the law in this case. They were negligent. They were wrong. They were careless. It's a defective and unreasonably dangerous product. They entered into a
conspiracy and they re liars. That s the law in this case. That's not complicated. That's the law. That's what this Judge told you. That's not me. That's the law in this case.
I have 15 minutes. I have notes and I can only read half of them. Hopefully, I'll be done in 15 minutes. Should be.
You know, Mr. Reilly did say at one point -- I wrote it down -- that he
acknowledged. To be honest with you, I'm still unsure what he acknowledged. There was something he acknowledged at some point. But I never heard -- well, first of all, I didn't hear RJR acknowledge anything. They haven't acknowledged anything, except that it's 100 percent the fault of Mr. Cohen. That's the only thing they will acknowledge.
And if you think about their defenses in this case, about who would be deserving to R.J. Reynolds, who would be deserving, the same thing they say about Mr. Cohen they would say about anybody. They could apply to anybody. People who quit? Oh, well, see, they quit.
The people who couldn't quit. Well, they should have been able to quit. You think you can't find people -- everybody who his a little bit overweight is uncaring and a risky person.
The defenses they have, that R.J. Reynolds will not acknowledge one single thing in this case, not one thing would, apply equally to anybody in the world.
Miss Parker was telling you -- there's a part on the verdict form where she was telling you why it should be no to each question. I
don't know if you remember that. The thing is I was thinking, when would they ever say yes?
Here's a case where Judge has instructed you what they did. Oh, say, they haven't given you any proof. Proof.
Mr. Cohen is dead. He can't tell you -he can't come to court. They killed him. He can't come to court now and tell you 100 percent with certainty what he relied upon. That's impossible. If that was the standard of proof, we wouldn't be here. The standard of proof is what's more likely than not. I do not have to prove my case by 100 percent certainty or reasonable degree of reasonable doubt.
That's not the standard. It's what do you think is reasonable. What more likely than not occurred; 51 percent. That's it.
So, can I bring to you proof that Mr. Cohen can come take that witness stand and tell you, yeah, I remember that person saying that? Or this is what I did? It's impossible. They know it's impossible. That's why they keep saying it. We brought his family to you. That's all we have. We brought polls to you that show the way he acted was reasonable; the
millions of other acted. That's the best I
can do. I can t bring him back.
You know, Philip Morris is saying they did nothing wrong. And I have the utmost respect for Mr. Reilly. Not so for Philip Morris. Philip Morris, what they're saying right now is, hey, look, let us escape free. There's no evidence that we did anything wrong.
And the problem with that is and when he was saying that it reminded me one of my favorite movies, A Few Good Men. I don't know who saw that movie. But it was a great move. And at the end, there was -- it was like a conspiracy. They killed this soldier. And at the end, the two soldiers are trying to get off. And the bigger soldier said to the little soldier, the problem is, you know, we didn't speak up. We didn't do what we should have done. We sat back and we joined in.
That's Philip Morris' problem. They could have changed history. They could have changed the world. And they were all too happy to go along with this conspiracy. That's their problem and they know it.
Would the conspiracy have gone on, you
know, with six companies instead of seven? No. If Philip Morris, would have, in 1953 said, hey, you guys, we're not going along with this, we don't care -- we care more about human life than money, this never would have happened. We would be 50 years ahead of our time. There probably would be no smoking right now, quite frankly. Smoking is going down and down and down. In 10 years it'll be 5 percent,
3 percent. It's going to keep going down because there's more education coming out, more quit aids coming out.
So, for Philip Morris to come forward and say, you know, we didn't do anything, we didn't do anything, that's the problem: They didn't do anything. They didn't say anything. They omitted all the material facts. They had the facts. They knew the truth.
Mr. Cohen didn't. They want to say, oh, well he should have known better. He should have known better. They knew so much more than him. We never said -- and if I ever said it, I apologize right now. I don't think I ever said Mr. Cohen didn't hear certain things; that he his head in the sand. But they didn't. They
didn't have their head in the sand either.
Mr. Cohen may have heard things. But you know that he had to hear both sides. And that's what they wanted. They wanted this doubt and confusion. They wanted that. That made money for them. That's how they sell cigarettes.
It's in their own documents and it was working.
So, what did Mr. Cohen do wrong?
Miss Parker is saying from 1940 he should have been quitting. He was 14 years-old. What was he supposed to do at 14 years-old? He's watching his idols, watching Ronald Reagan,
Frank Sinatra. You looked at the ads. He s talking about -- Mr. Reilly is talking about why did they bring these ads to you. We brought those ads to you to show it was a different world. It was a different place he lived in. He came from a different place, different era. And that's it. Just shows that Mr. Cohen was doing, he was could not quit. At that time, it would be -- it wouldn't even be in the realm of thinking that he would know in the '40s that this is something he should start trying to quit.
In the '50s, you know, probably not. And
we've said, and I showed that you chart, in 1964, you know what -- 1964 on, I don't think anybody would say that there wasn't some evidence out there that maybe he should have started trying.
But there's evidence out there that they should have stopped lying. To just sit there and say, well, he didn't care, he didn't try -there were millions and millions and millions -- his families said that he had doubt. And whether he started trying in the '70s or '80s, even their own expert said it wouldn't have made a difference. Dr. Beckson said that.
So this is the instruction. Again, this is the law. It's not one or the other, like they want you to believe. If it's one or the other, I could -- if you want to see risky behavior, I could come here and say pick one or the other. Pick Mr. Cohen or pick the liars.
Go ahead, it's one or the other. I'm not going to do that, because number one, that's not the law. And number two, I would never do that Mrs. Cohen.
We firmly believe that the evidence is
that the negligence of Mr. Cohen in combination -- which is exactly what we admitted from the very beginning. Here's our admission -- in combination with the conduct of the Defendants was a contributing cause.
That's it. That's the law. That's the law in the case. It doesn't have to be one or the other. It can be both.
THE CLERK: Five minutes, Counsel.
MR. PAIGE: I want to talk about nicotine real quick. They talk about all these people that quit, you know, 3,000 people quit everyday. I don't know how many of those people relapse, how many people die anyway, how many were light smokers. All I know is there's
49,997,000	who aren't. And most people can't quit. Most people try. A lot of people quit.
A lot of people don't. That's not the issue in the case.
The issue is it's a highly addictive drug. It's not so easy to just say -- for some people it is -- but for a two-pack-a-day-smoker for 50 years, who smokes first thing in the morning as
soon as he gets up, he is highly addicted. His chances of success were as low as they come.
Their own expert admitted. Or wouldn't admit -- he wouldn't even admit the UCLA website, where he works, is authoritative. But it's a highly addictive drug.
And if you look at their documents, and they're all in evidence, people aren't smoking -- regardless of what Miss Parker says, just look at the documents. If you look at Exhibit 22, it's an important document. And it says nicotine satisfaction is the dominant desire, as opposed to flavor or other satisfactions. The dominant specification should be nicotine delivery.
They know when people say, I like it, it relaxes me, that's the nicotine. They know that. You know that. Their documents say that so, to come forward and just say, oh, there's these crazy people out there. Smoking rates have gone down by 60 percent to 16 percent. There's all these crazy people here who don't care about their family and they're just smoking so much because they love the taste, it's ridiculous. And they know it. They know that's not the case. He was addicted. He could have tried harder. We've admitted that
from day one. I've never heard them ever admit, ever, that they did anything wrong to this family.
They didn't suggest another number. And after I hear the way that they carry on in their closing statement, I really think that we asked for too little money, quite frankly. I leave it up to you to do what's fair and do what's right. I have so much more to go through. I can't even read my writing, quite frankly. It'll take me that long to try to figure it out. By then, my time will be up.
I have something here about filters. Filters are working, I guess, according to them. More people are dying now than ever.
Used to be 300,000. It's now up to 450,000 Americans.
MR. REILLY: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: 450,000 Americans smoking these filters that are working so good are dying. You be the judge and tell them if you think their filters are really working.
The product -- like I said, it's a legal product. They say it's a legal product. Well,
you could put a car on the market that's legal. If you put something on that's defective about that car, you got to fix it. If there's tires that are defective, they have to recall it and fix that. They have products that they know they can fix. They don't have to manipulate nicotine. They don't have make it so inhalable. They could fix their problem. But
the problem for them is the minute they fix it, they make less money. Less people die. Less people smoke as much. But they make less money. So, they don't want to do that. So, hey, it's a legal product. We followed Congress. We put the required warnings on there. So excuse us for all our lies. Excuse us for going public and saying that we didn't agree with our own warnings.
He had a cigarette machine in a bar that he was a part owner for, and now all of a sudden they want to you believe he's a cigarette manufacturer. It's almost like he's the cigarette man. He's the cigarette designer. He owns a bar in the '60s. There's a machine in the lounge. He's a part owner.
And that becomes the focus point of
Miss Parker's defense, that she should not get justice today. An injustice should now be performed by this jury because her husband was naive enough in the '60s to have a cigarette machine in the lounge of his bar. Thank you, Miss Parker, but we would hope you will reject that argument.
THE CLERK: One minute.
THE COURT: Fifty-five seconds.
MR. PAIGE: All right, you guys, I'll finish. I know I have more to say in here, but I think you all get the point. And I on behalf of everybody, I appreciate your time, and I know you will do the right thing.
Thank you very much.
