           CLOSING ARGUMENT BY THE PLAINTIFF
          MR. ROSENBLUM:  May it please the Court.
          Good morning.
          Let me first say on behalf of Mr. Crawford and
     our side of the case -- but I think I can also
     speak in this instance on behalf of R.J. Reynolds
     and its attorneys because I know that we all feel
     the same way about this issue -- which is thanking
     you for your close attention and your service in
     this case.
          Even though it has been a little bit shorter
     than we initially told you it was going to be -- we 1957 initially thought it was going to be about three
     weeks -- we recognize that two weeks is a very,
     very long time for anyone, and we know it's a big
     commitment, and we very, very much appreciate your
     attention.  We notice that you're paying attention,
     you're taking notes.  Everyone has noticed it, and
     we very, very much appreciate that fact.
          I'm going to speak first about a few issues
     relating to class membership, and then Mr. Alvarez
     is going to speak probably after a break about some
     other issues.
          So let me talk to you about class membership.
          As His Honor told you, the first issue you
     have to decide in this case is whether or not
     Mr. Crawford was a member of the Engle class.  And
     in making that decision, you're going to answer a
     couple of questions which I'm going to talk to you
     about in a moment.
          But what I want you to keep in mind first and
     foremost is that class membership has nothing to do
     with fault, and class membership has nothing to do
     with whether or not Mr. Crawford was aware of the
     health effects or health risks of smoking.  That
     has nothing to do with class membership.
          Once you determine that Mr. Crawford is a 1958 class member, then you're going to be asked
     questions about comparative responsibility, and
     that's where issues about fault and awareness come
     in.  But they don't come in in determining whether
     or not he was addicted to nicotine, and they don't
     come in in determining whether or not smoking
     cigarettes was a cause of his -- I'll say
     "laryngeal," just because I'm used to saying it
     that way -- his laryngeal cancer.
          I want you to keep that in mind because I
     suspect that when R.J. Reynolds has an opportunity
     to address you in its closing argument, Mr. Belasic
     is going to spend a lot of time talking about what
     he thinks the evidence has shown about what
     Mr. Crawford knew or what Mr. Crawford believed or
     what Mr. Crawford was told by others.  And that has
     nothing to do with what I'm talking about right
     now, which is class membership.
          So the first question is going to be:  Was
     smoking cigarettes a legal cause of
     William Crawford's laryngeal cancer?
          And the first thing I want to talk to you
     about is what we have to prove in the case.  And
     the Judge has already told you that this is our
     burden.  "The greater weight of the evidence" means 1959 the more persuasive and convincing force and effect
     of the entire evidence in the case.
          And the reason why we have the scales there is
     because greater weight of the evidence really just
     means that whoever tips the scales 51 percent has
     proven the case by the greater weight of the
     evidence.  This isn't a criminal case where you
     have to prove something beyond a reasonable doubt.
     This is a civil case in our civil courts, and
     because of that, this is the burden of proof we
     have to have.  We just have to tip the scales ever
     so slightly, 51 percent, to prove to you --
          MR. BELASIC:  Object to the "51 percent."
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. BELASIC:  It's not in the instruction.
          MR. ROSENBLUM:  We just have to tip it ever so
     slightly, 51 percent, to prove to you that
     Mr. Crawford is in fact a class member.  In doing
     so, the first thing we're going to talk about is
     whether or not smoking cigarettes was a cause of
     his laryngeal cancer.
          I pause a little bit when I say "a cause," and
     I'm going to explain to you in a moment why I say
     that because you do not have to find that smoking
     cigarettes was the only cause of his laryngeal 1960 cancer.  It only has to be a cause of his laryngeal
     cancer.
          And His Honor, Judge Dresnick, already read to
     you an instruction where he said to you that
     smoking cigarettes is a cause; it doesn't have to
     be the only cause.  It has to be found as a cause,
     and it can act in combination with other causes.
     I'm going to explain that to you in a moment, but I
     want you to keep that in mind as we start talking
     about what the evidence was in this case.
          So what is the evidence about whether or not
     his laryngeal cancer was caused by smoking
     cigarettes?
          Well, let's start with this:  You heard the
     testimony -- or you heard the deposition testimony
     read to you of Dr. Califano, and you heard about
     Dr. Califano's qualifications.  I won't go through
     all of that with you right now, but you know what
     he does.  You know that he treats head and neck
     cancer; that he lectures internationally on this
     topic; that he's performed between 100 and 200
     total laryngectomies, which is the ultimate
     procedure that Mr. Crawford had; that he teaches
     other doctors.  You heard about all of that.
          But one of the things he started out telling 1961 you is that 90 percent of the time, patients with
     laryngeal cancer smoke cigarettes.  In other words,
     90 percent of all laryngeal cancers are caused by
     smoking cigarettes.
          Now, there's been no evidence to the contrary
     presented in this case.  You've heard nothing by
     the other side or by any other doctor that said,
     "wait a minute, that's not true; it's only true
     that 20 or 30 or 10 percent."  You've heard nothing
     other than the fact that 90 percent or more of all
     laryngeal cancer is smoking-related.
          If we stopped right there, if that's all I had
     to say to you about whether or not Mr. Crawford's
     laryngeal cancer was caused by smoking, in light of
     the fact that you know he smoked -- and we're going
     to talk about his smoking history -- if I said
     nothing else, that's the greater weight of the
     evidence.  The greater weight of the evidence is
     51 percent that I have to prove.  And I'm starting
     off by telling you that 90 percent of every
     laryngeal cancer is smoking-related.  I could stop
     right there, but we're not going to stop there
     because you heard additional evidence of additional
     reasons why it's smoking-related.  So we start with
     the fact that 90 percent or more are 1962 smoking-related.
          But then Dr. Califano discussed with you the
     other reasons why it is smoking-related; not just
     because of some statistical association, but the
     real reason and the additional reasons why it's
     smoking-related.  He told you he took into account
     Mr. Crawford's smoking history.  He took into
     account the cell type.  You remember he discussed
     the squamous cell carcinoma, what that means?  It's
     sort of a flattened appearance, et cetera.  He said
     that's almost always associated with
     smoking-related cancers.  He described the fact
     that the tumor was what he called
     "well-differentiated," and he said that's a
     hallmark also of a smoking-related tumor.  It's a
     well-differentiated tumor.
          And he ruled out other causes which I'm going
     to talk to you about now.
          You remember that Dr. Crawford [sic] said
     there really aren't that many known causes of
     laryngeal cancer, but there are a couple that he
     wanted to talk about.
          So not only are 90 percent of all laryngeal
     cancers smoking related, and not only is
     Mr. Crawford's cancer smoking-related because of 1963 these other reasons, but he ruled out the other
     causes.
          You remember there was some testimony about
     the HPV virus, the human papillomavirus.  Well,
     that's not an issue in this case.  It's an issue to
     the extent that he talked about it and ruled it
     out.
          And you heard the testimony, and there's been
     nothing to the contrary.  Mr. Crawford's slides
     were tested.  There was no HPV virus.  End of
     story.  HPV has nothing to do with this case.
          Now, one of the other causes that you heard
     some testimony about was this issue of drinking
     alcohol.  And I want to discuss this with you
     because I'm going to tell you two things about the
     issue of alcohol:  Number one, it has nothing to do
     with Mr. Crawford's laryngeal cancer; number two,
     even if you think it did, it doesn't matter.  I'm
     going to explain that to you in a second as well.
          But this is what the testimony is about
     alcohol:  The first thing you heard -- and, again,
     this is all completely unrebutted, undisputed; you
     heard no evidence to the contrary from the other
     side -- that it is exceedingly rare to find a
     patient who has developed laryngeal cancer who 1964 drank alcohol and that did not also smoke
     cigarettes.  In fact, it's so rare that you see it
     about 5 percent of the time, about 5 percent of
     patients.
          So when we talk about the greater weight of
     the evidence, we start with the fact that
     95 percent of the time, you are not going to have a
     person develop laryngeal cancer from consuming
     alcohol, no matter how much alcohol, without also
     smoking cigarettes.  So we start with that.
          And then when it comes to how much alcohol you
     would have to drink in order for alcohol to
     actually cause laryngeal cancer, how much would you
     have to drink in order for it to cause that cancer?
          And again, this is completely unrebutted.  You
     heard nothing to the contrary; no contrary evidence
     from Reynolds, from any doctor that came in and
     said Califano is wrong, this is not the case.  This
     is the case.  This is the only evidence in the
     case.
          You would have to drink four alcoholic drinks
     a day for a period of decades.  Decades.  There is
     absolutely no evidence in this case whatsoever that
     comes close to anything that even resembles that.
     Nothing at all. 1965 And, of course, Dr. Califano told you that
     alcohol, in his opinion, did not contribute in any
     way to his laryngeal cancer.
          But this is the part I want to talk to you
     about right now.  Remember, I said I was going to
     say two things.  I was going say, number one, it
     played no role; and, number two, even if you think
     it did, it doesn't matter.  Here's that part.
          What Dr. Califano said was the combination of
     cigarette smoking plus alcohol intake has a
     magnified effect that is greater than either
     substance alone in being associated and causing
     laryngeal cancer.
          What that means is if you drink alcohol and
     you smoke cigarettes, you have a greater likelihood
     of developing a smoking-related laryngeal cancer.
     Because what Dr. Califano then said -- this is what
     he was asked.  He specifically was asked:  If a
     person drinks alcohol and smokes cigarettes and
     that person develops laryngeal cancer, what would
     your opinion be regarding whether the smoking of
     cigarettes was a substantial contributing factor to
     the development of the laryngeal cancer?
          And his answer was it would be a substantial
     contributing factor. 1966 So even if there is some suggestion or if
     you're struggling and you're thinking to yourself,
     Well, you know, I'm not sure; maybe this alcohol
     thing might have contributed in some way, the only
     way that Mr. Crawford loses on this question of
     whether or not smoking cigarettes caused laryngeal
     cancer is if you believe and you find that he would
     have developed his laryngeal cancer if he never
     smoked a cigarette.  If he had never picked up a
     cigarette, would he have developed laryngeal
     cancer?
          And there is no evidence in this case at all
     that would support that finding or that conclusion.
     The conclusion is clear that it's from smoking
     cigarettes.  That's what Dr. Califano told you.
     You've heard nothing to the contrary from
     R.J. Reynolds.
          And even if you think that alcohol may have
     played a role, remember, the burden here and the
     question is:  Did smoking cigarettes play a legal
     cause?  Was it a legal cause, not the legal cause.
     It doesn't have to be the only cause.  That's what
     His Honor, Judge Dresnick, just told you about.
          You also talked about some other risk factors.
     I bring this one up because I found this one 1967 somewhat interesting.
          You may remember that when Dr. Califano's
     deposition was read to you, there were questions
     that were asked of him at the deposition by one of
     the attorneys for R.J. Reynolds, Mr. Murphy.
          Mr. Murphy asked Dr. Califano questions about,
     well, is asbestos exposure a potential risk factor
     for developing laryngeal cancer?  And when you
     heard that testimony, you may have been thinking to
     yourself, well, that's interesting if asbestos
     could be a risk factor for laryngeal cancer.  I
     wonder if Mr. Crawford was ever exposed to
     asbestos.
          Well, Dr. Califano's deposition was taken on
     August 14th of 2003.  A month before that --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  2013.
          MR. ROSENBLUM:  I'm sorry, 2013.  I apologize.
          A month before that, a month before Mr. Murphy
     asked those questions, R.J. Reynolds had responded
     in writing to some of our questions, which we read
     to you, which we put into evidence, and
     R.J. Reynolds was asked:  Do you have any
     information that William Crawford has suffered from
     or was exposed to asbestos?
          And their answer was:  Reynolds states it's 1968 not in possession of reliable information
     suggesting that plaintiff has been exposed to
     asbestos or suffered injuries as a result of
     asbestos exposure.
          A month before, they were asking about, what
     about asbestos?  R.J. Reynolds had already said to
     us, "There is no asbestos in this case."
          So there is no asbestos in this case.  It's
     just not an issue.
          You may have heard this testimony about this
     gastroesophageal reflux disease, what they refer to
     as "GERD."
          I bring this up because when Mr. Murphy
     questioned Dr. Califano, he asked him:  Is GERD a
     potential risk factor for the development of
     laryngeal cancer?
          And Dr. Califano said, "No, actually, it's
     not.  It's something that we're studying, but it
     really isn't a risk factor."
          And then Mr. Murphy showed him a study and
     said, "Well, what about this study that suggests
     it?"
          And then there was some discussion about why
     that study didn't apply because they didn't examine
     heavy smokers. 1969 And then Dr. Califano said there are tons of
     other studies that say the exact opposite.
          My point in bringing this up is simply that
     what you're hearing from R.J. Reynolds or what
     you've already heard and what you will hear, I
     suspect, in their closing argument is that it's
     everything but smoking.
          That he developed laryngeal cancer because of
     asbestos, well, wait a minute, that can't be right
     because we admit there was no asbestos.
          He developed laryngeal cancer because of GERD,
     gastroesophageal reflux disease, but the only
     expert called in this case, the only expert called
     in this case said no, that it wasn't GERD; it was
     smoking cigarettes, and GERD has not been proven,
     has not even been proven to do that.
          No, it wasn't cigarettes, it was alcohol.  But
     there is no evidence that he smoked four -- I'm
     sorry, that he drank four drinks a day for decades.
     And if even if you think alcohol played a role, the
     only evidence in this case on that issue is that
     the best it does is it magnifies the effect of the
     cigarettes, causing the laryngeal cancer, which
     makes it smoking-related.
          We've already talked about this. 1970 Let me pause just for one second and say that
     I think it's significant that they didn't call a
     single witness to testify that his laryngeal cancer
     was not caused by smoking cigarettes.  I'll tell
     you why.
          I expect one of the things you might hear is,
     "Well, look, it's not our burden.  We as the
     defendant, R.J. Reynolds, we don't have to prove
     anything, so we're not going to call an expert.  So
     it's their burden to prove it."
          I want you to think about the fact that they
     did call an addiction expert, which we're going to
     talk about in a moment.  Reynolds didn't sit back
     and say, "Wait a minute, we don't need to call an
     addiction expert to try and convince you that he
     wasn't addicted to nicotine.  It's not our burden
     of proof."
          But when it comes to this issue, I'm guessing
     you might hear that.
          So the first question you're going to be
     asked, the first class membership question you're
     going to be asked is:  Was smoking cigarettes a
     legal cause of William Crawford's laryngeal cancer?
          And I submit to you that the overwhelming
     evidence, the only evidence in this case, is that 1971 yes, it was, and you should answer yes to that
     question.
          The next two questions deal with addiction,
     and they're also part of the class membership:  Was
     he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and
     was an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine
     a legal cause?  There you see the word "a" again;
     not the only cause, a cause.  A cause.  Which is
     what the judge has already told you.
          Now, both of these questions have to be
     answered in the affirmative.  In other words, both
     of these questions have to be answered "Yes" for
     him to be a class member.  I'm going to talk to you
     about both of them.
          First, I said to you in my opening statement
     that what's not going to happen in this case is you
     are not going to be told by His Honor,
     Judge Dresnick, that this is what addiction means;
     this is the definition you must apply for
     addiction.
          Remember, I said to you addiction is whatever
     you find it to be, based upon the evidence.  So you
     are not going to be told that in order to believe
     that he was addicted to nicotine and cigarettes,
     you must apply the DSM-V -- which Dr. Samuel talked 1972 about, and we'll get to that in a second -- you
     must go through these criteria; and if he doesn't
     meet them, he's not addicted.  You're not going to
     be told that.  In fact, you're not going to be told
     you have to use any particular definition.
          So was he addicted?
          Let's start with this -- I think you saw this
     in opening statement:  The difference between how
     much a social smoker smokes versus how much an
     addicted smoker like William Crawford smoked over
     his smoking lifetime.
          You heard he started at 7 years old, smoking a
     few cigarettes a week.  And by the time he was 15
     years olds, he was a pack-a-day smoker.  And he
     went up to a pack and a half.
          These are some of the same factors that you've
     already heard the evidence that we talked about in
     opening statement, but this is what came out in the
     evidence:  That he smoked regularly for 38 years;
     he smoked a pack to a pack and a half a day; that
     he smoked when he was sick.  You remember that
     testimony where he said that even when he was sick,
     he smoked his cigarettes.  He smoked the last thing
     before he would go to bed and the first thing when
     he woke up.  He smoked in bed.  He smoked at home. 1973 He smoked at work.  He smoked in his car.
     Immediately before and after church.
          It took him over a year when he tried in 19 --
     at the end of 1988, it took him over a year to
     actually successfully quit smoking, and I'll talk
     to you about that in a second in the context of
     what Dr. Samuel had to say about that.
          He tried cold turkey, he tried chewing gum, he
     tried eating candy, he tried Nicorette.  He tried
     long walks to get his mind off of smoking.  He
     attended the American Cancer Society class to stop
     smoking.
          His family told you, Janet -- you heard his
     daughter -- he was addicted.  Mr. Crawford told you
     himself he was addicted.
          He started cutting down.  And when he tried to
     cut down, this is what would happen.  What would
     happen when he tried to cut down?  Was it as simple
     as him putting down a cigarette and walking away
     for the last time?
          When Mr. Belasic was questioning Mr. Crawford,
     it almost seemed as though the theme was, he made
     up his mind one day, he put down his pack of
     cigarettes, he walked away, and he never smoked
     again.  But that's not the evidence.  That's not 1974 what happened in this case.
          You heard that what happened is when he would
     try and stop smoking, he would get nervous, he
     would get irritable, he would get upset.  He felt
     like he was having withdrawal symptoms.  He felt a
     strong urge to smoke.  He had trouble getting along
     with his family.
          Now, you did hear the testimony from
     Dr. Henningfield, who we played, who is an expert,
     clearly an expert, on nicotine addiction.  And you
     heard his videotaped deposition, and we wanted you
     to hear this really for two reasons.
          One of the things Dr. Henningfield told you
     was you don't have to be an expert to diagnose
     addiction, nicotine addition.  You don't have to be
     an expert.  Remember, he said that to you.  Anybody
     did do it.  You look at these factors.  And that's
     why we didn't call an expert to say that
     Mr. Crawford was or was not addicted.  That's your
     decision.  That's your job.  You decide whether or
     not he was addicted based upon the facts.
          But it's helpful to understand some basic
     parameters about addiction that Dr. Henningfield
     did talk to you about.
          So he told you a couple of things that are 1975 important:  That people were misled and did not
     make an informed choice in the '60s, '70s, and
     '80s.
          Here's a good one:  Just because you're able
     to quit does not mean that you're not addicted.
          Dr. Samuel, by the way, the defense expert,
     agreed with the same thing.
          Why is that important?  Because you heard
     multiple times in this case that 50 million people
     have quit.  Fifty million people have quit.  Almost
     as if saying, "well, none of them were addicted
     because they quit."
          And we know that that's not the case because
     we know that Dr. Samuel, on the defense, and
     Dr. Henningfield both agreed that the fact that you
     quit doesn't mean that you weren't addicted.  That
     makes common sense because whether you apply this
     to nicotine or whether you apply this to heroin or
     cocaine, if a person was using heroin and they are
     ultimately able to stop using it, you're not going
     to say, "Well, they stopped; I mean, clearly,
     they're weren't addicted.  It wasn't affecting
     them.  They stopped."  Or they were using cocaine
     and they stopped.  They stopped, so that's it.
     They weren't addicted. 1976 That's not the case.  That's not the science
     of addiction, and both experts agree upon that.
          What he told you was that if a person smokes
     more than 11 cigarettes a day, they would get
     prescribed the highest dose of a nicotine patch.
     And if they smoked greater than 25 cigarettes a
     day, which Mr. Crawford testified he did, they
     would be prescribed the highest dose of nicotine
     gum.
          Why does that matter?  A person who is
     addicted needs the highest dose of nicotine gum;
     not a person who is not addicted.
          Here's something interesting.  He also told
     you when he talked about what nicotine does to the
     brain, the actual physiological changes to the
     brain, he said they looked at the MRIs, the scans
     of the brains, of smokers and nonsmokers.  This is
     something that they saw which was really
     incredible, that smokers' brains had 400 percent
     more nicotine receptors in them.  You could
     actually see it on a scan.  It's not someone doing
     a study on rats.  These are human brains.  People
     are looking at them and saying, "When I look at a
     smoker's brain, they have 400 percent more nicotine
     receptors in the brain." 1977 And in terms of how addiction leads to
     disease, how does it cause disease,
     Dr. Henningfield told you:  Addiction is the
     interface.  That's the word he used, "interface,"
     between cigarettes and disease.  It drives the
     smoking that causes you to develop disease.
          I'm going to talk to you about Dr. Samuel, the
     defense expert who you heard yesterday on the issue
     of addiction.
          A couple of things about Dr. Samuel.  You know
     you did hear that although he's treated a lot of
     patients, I think after a little bit of wrangling,
     he did admit that in fact he's only treated one,
     maybe two patients solely for nicotine dependence.
          He was saying, "Well, I treat thousands of
     patients that have all kinds of problems, including
     nicotine dependence."  But when he was asked:  "How
     many have you really treated just for nicotine
     dependence or nicotine addiction," the answer was
     "Well, I think I treated one or two."
          He hasn't published in this field.  He has not
     lectured on nicotine addiction.  He is a
     psychiatrist who treats patients.  That's what he
     does.  He doesn't hold himself out as an expert on
     nicotine addiction. 1978 He advertises his services.  I know he doesn't
     agree with the word "advertises" services.  He
     doesn't think that's what he's doing.  But whether
     it's an advertisement or not, he certainly doesn't
     hold himself out as a person who has any particular
     expertise in the issue of nicotine addition.
          He's not been asked to consult by the
     Surgeon General, the National Institute of Health,
     or any other governmental agency on issues of
     smoking and health or nicotine addiction.
          And he also admits that being able to stop
     doesn't mean you were not addicted.  So the fact
     that Mr. Crawford stopped -- let's just pause there
     for a second -- the fact that he stopped smoking
     doesn't mean he wasn't addicted according to
     Dr. Samuel, their own defense expert.  And
     Dr. Henningfield, of course, agrees with that
     because that is a correct statement.
          So it's not a simple as, well, wait a minute,
     he's stopped.  So he can't be addicted.  It's
     absolutely not that.  Yes, he did stop, and he was
     addicted, and Dr. Henningfield and Dr. Samuel both
     agree that the fact you stop doesn't mean you
     weren't addicted.
          I found it interesting that the one study that 1979 Dr. Samuel relied upon when he was testifying --
     you may recall this -- there was some testimony
     about a study and some -- they were testing some
     agents.  It got a little bit confusing.  But what I
     thought was interesting about the study is that, if
     you remember this, the study that he was
     referencing actually cited Dr. Henningfield.
          I think at one point, Mr. Alvarez, if you
     recall, there was something up on the board.
     Mr. Alvarez said, "Oh, that actually -- the study
     you're talking about actually cites
     Jack Henningfield," the expert that the plaintiff
     called on nicotine addiction.
          And he said, "Yeah, that's right.  It does."
          Dr. Samuel has minimized Mr. Crawford's quit
     attempts because what he basically says is -- and
     it's clever -- what he basically says is, "look,
     this guy tried one time to quit."
          Now, you heard that he tried for over a year
     to quit, so how do these things exist together?
     How is it possible it took him a year to quit, but
     he tried one time to quit?
          But, you see, if you turn that into one big,
     long quit attempt, which is what he said, he said
     he made up his mind at the end of '88, and that was 1980 one attempt to quit.  And even though it took him
     14 months or it took him a year, that was one quit
     attempt.
          And then he says, based on that, he tried to
     quit one time in his entire life.  And based upon
     that, he was never addicted.  He never had the
     motivation to stop smoking because he only really
     tried once.
          But you heard the testimony of Mr. Crawford.
     It wasn't that he put down his pack of cigarettes
     on one day in 1988 and then he never looked back.
     That wasn't the testimony.  The testimony was he
     had relapses.  He told you this.  He relapsed
     multiple times during that year.  That's why it
     took him a year.  It didn't take him a day.  It
     didn't take him a week.  It took him a year.  It
     relapsed multiple times.  He had to taper down.  It
     wasn't easy.  It wasn't as simple as I've decided
     that I'm now motivated, I want to quit, I'm putting
     them down, and that's it, and I'm never looking
     back.  That's the way Dr. Samuel presented to you
     how Mr. Crawford stopped smoking.
          It's up to you to decide whether you think
     that's consistent with the evidence or not, and we
     don't think it is.  I think the fact that 1981 Mr. Crawford testified it took him over a year to
     quit smoking, I respectfully disagree with
     Dr. Samuel.  I don't think that that's one quit
     attempt.
          MR. BELASIC:  Objection to counsel's opinion,
     Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. ROSENBLUM:  I thought perhaps the most
     telling thing that Dr. Samuel said, the most
     telling thing he said in evaluating whether or not
     you want to believe everything he had to say is
     when Mr. Alvarez asked him, "Let me ask you a
     question.  Let's assume that Mr. Crawford smoked
     two packs a day, three packs a day, four packs a
     day -- four packs a day, that's 80 cigarettes a
     day -- four packs a day for 50 years, I want you to
     assume that to be true.  In your opinion, would he
     be addicted to nicotine?"
          And he said no, not based on those factors
     alone.
          Do you remember that, when he said that?  Four
     packs a day for 50 years.  And Mr. Crawford still
     wouldn't be addicted, according to Dr. Samuel.
          One of the things the Judge will talk to you
     about, and he already did, is you may consider a 1982 number of things when a witness testifies,
     including the demeanor of the witness.  Now, it's
     how the witness came across, how they testified.
          I think what you saw was Dr. Samuel didn't
     really like answering questions.  A lot of
     things -- a lot of his responses were, "Can I
     explain that?"
          "Dr. Samuel, where do you work?
          "Well, can I explain that?"
          "Dr. Samuel, well, did you read Mr. Crawford's
     deposition?
          "Well, can I explain that, please?"
          There didn't seem to be that much frankness,
     and he seemed --
          MR. BELASIC:  Objection.  Counsel's opinion.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. ROSENBLUM:  There really didn't seem to be
     that much frankness and forthcomingness in the way
     he testified.
          And he couldn't even admit some basic things.
     This is what the Judge has already read to you:
     You may properly consider, you may consider the
     demeanor of the witness while testifying; the
     frankness or lack of frankness, intelligence, the
     interest the witness may have in the outcome of the 1983 case, the means and opportunity the witness had to
     observe, et cetera.
          And I think one of the things that he also
     said -- I think you remember this -- was when
     Mr. Alvarez said:  "Have you ever been asked to
     testify on behalf of a plaintiff's lawyer in a
     tobacco case?"
          And he said, "No, I think that would be a
     conflict of interest."
          Do you remember he said that?
          Now, why would that be a conflict of interest
     unless you've chosen sides?  There is certainly no
     conflict.  According to Dr. Samuel, he's calling
     balls and strikes.  He's an umpire.  He's just
     sitting back and saying "they're addicted or not
     addicted.  I'm here to tell the truth, and I don't
     have any ax to grind one way or the other."
          But he told Mr. Alvarez that working for a
     plaintiff's lawyer would be a conflict of interest.
     There is only a conflict of interest if you've
     chosen a side.
          You heard about different tests for addiction.
     We'll go through them very, very quickly.
          I think the facts themselves, without applying
     any test, would convince you he was addicted to 1984 nicotine and cigarettes.
          But you heard about the Fagerstrom test, and
     you saw some of these questions that -- this is
     what Dr. Henningfield talked about -- how soon
     after you wake up do you smoke your first
     cigarette?
          And Mr. Crawford said within the -- actually,
     what Mr. Crawford said was within the first two
     minutes of waking up, but certainly it's within the
     standard of five minutes of waking up.
          And Dr. Henningfield explained to you how
     significant that is.  Remember, he told you two
     things.  He said, number one, the amount you smoke;
     and, number two, how soon after you wake in the
     morning do you have your first cigarette?  Those
     are the two biggest indicators of your level of
     addiction, of whether or not you are really heavily
     addicted.
          So we look at this:  Do you find it difficult
     to refrain from smoking in places where it's
     forbidden?
          Yes.  He talked to you about that.  He would
     go outside to smoke.  When he went over to his
     daughter's house, she didn't want him inside, so he
     would go outside. 1985 Remember, difficulty doesn't mean impossible.
     In other words, it's not like he was able to put
     the cigarettes down for the whole day and say I'm
     not going to smoke.  "Difficult" means you have the
     craving, "I feel the need to smoke, I'm going to
     smoke before church, I'm going to smoke after
     church, I'm going to smoke outside, I'm going to
     smoke outside of the restaurants once they tell me
     I can no longer smoke in the restaurants" where he
     initially did smoke.
          Which cigarette would you hate the most to
     give up?
          He told you the first in the morning.
          How many cigarettes do you smoke a day?
          We put 21 to 30.  That's a pack to a pack and
     a half, but if a pack is 20, it's an insignificant
     difference.  Whether you think it's 11 to 20, 20 at
     the high end, or 21 to 30, we're talking just a
     difference of a number of cigarettes.
          Do you smoke more frequently during the first
     hours?
          Yes.
          Do you smoke even if you are so ill that
     you're in bed most of the day?
          And the answer was yes. 1986 So you look to see how he scored.  And you can
     see that his score clearly is very high dependence
     based on this Fagerstrom test if you think this
     test is even relevant if you want to look at a
     test.
          Then we talk about the DSM-V criteria.  We
     talked about Dr. Samuel and is he believable, will
     you give weight to his testimony?
          One of the things I think you should consider
     is he said that Mr. Crawford didn't meet any of the
     criteria.  Do you remember that testimony?  He
     didn't meet any of it.  There wasn't a single thing
     in the DSM-V that he believed Mr. Crawford met.  So
     I want to go through a few of them to see if we
     agree.
          One criteria was tobacco was often taken in
     larger amounts or over a longer period of time than
     was intended.
          You recall Mr. Alvarez asked him, well he
     began smoking at 7 years old; do you think that
     when he was 7 years old, he intended that he would
     be smoking all the way into his 50s?
          And then the doctor said, "Well, wait a
     minute, wait a minute.  You're taking this out of
     context.  That's not what it means." 1987 But that's what it says, and this is the
     testimony:  He gradually built up from a few
     cigarettes per week to one and a half packs a day
     over the span of 45 years.
          Second one was:  Is there a persistent desire
     or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control the
     tobacco use?
          And you heard about that.  He cut back, he
     relapsed, he cut back.  He was actually successful
     after multiple failed quit testimonies.
          A great deal of time is spent in activities
     necessary to obtain and use tobacco.  Dr. Samuel
     wouldn't even give this one to Mr. Crawford.  You
     saw we talked about a great deal of time.  We went
     over this with you, the thousands of minutes and
     the amount of time and the number of cigarettes and
     how much time and the number of days.
          But Dr. Samuel says, "No, this does not meet
     even that criteria."  Did he spend a lot of time?
     No.  He didn't even spend a lot of time.
          Craving or strong desire or urge to use
     tobacco.  And he told you -- these are some of
     things you've heard before -- he smoked while he
     was sick, in restaurants, in his office, at the
     movies, before and after church. 1988 Recurrent tobacco use in situations which are
     physically hazardous; example, smoking in bed.
          I want to pause for a second on this one
     because I think you probably remember this.
          Mr. Alvarez showed this to Dr. Samuel, and he
     said, "Dr. Samuel, Mr. Crawford told you there is
     no question in this case that Mr. Crawford smoked
     in bed, right?  In fact, he smoked every night in
     bed.  Isn't that true?"
          And Dr. Samuel said, "Yes, that's true.  I
     remember that."  There is nothing to the contrary.
          Mr. Alvarez said, "Okay, so this says
     "Recurrent tobacco use in situations in which it is
     physically hazardous."  And the example given by
     the DSM -- we didn't have this; this is actually
     what it says in the DSM -- it says, "for example,
     smoking in bed."
          So Mr. Alvarez naturally said to Dr. Samuels,
     "So naturally, at least we must agree upon this
     one, right?
          Wrong."  Dr. Samuel then said -- and you'll
     recall this -- Wait a minute, I asked him about
     that.  And I specifically asked him:  "Did he put
     his cigarette out before he went to sleep?  And
     since he told me he did, it's not physically 1989 dangerous, and therefore he doesn't meet that
     criteria."
          I know you remember that.
          And then there is two other criteria.
     Tolerance, meaning that a need for an increased
     amount of tobacco.  We've already talked about the
     fact that he increased and increased during his
     smoking and withdrawal symptoms, which we talked
     about, and you've seen that from the evidence.
          We talked about nicotine.  Is it addictive?
     Now, everyone -- Dr. Samuel says nicotine is an
     addictive substance, but let's talk about how
     addictive it is.  These are just things that you
     see in this case.
          The National Institute of Drug Abuse:
     Nicotine is highly addictive.  The World Health
     Organization:  That tobacco contains a highly
     addictive psychoactive ingredient -- psychoactive
     ingredient -- nicotine.  This is from the World
     Health Organization.
          The Center for Disease Control, CDC:
     Cigarettes are designed for addiction.  Nicotine is
     the highly addictive drug in cigarettes that keeps
     people smoking, even when they want to quit.
          And the Surgeon General:  Nicotine is a highly 1990 addictive drug.  It keeps people smoking, even when
     they want to quit.  Research suggests that nicotine
     is as addictive as heroin, cocaine, or alcohol.
          Now, Dr. Samuels says, "wait a minute.  It's
     not really like that because when you're getting
     off of heroin, it's much worse when you're getting
     off of the nicotine."  That may be true.  There may
     be more severe withdrawal when you're getting off
     heroin or alcohol, he was talking about, or
     cocaine.
          But there is no denying -- and this is from
     the Surgeon General as well -- that nicotine is as
     addictive as heroin, cocaine, or alcohol.
          So when Mr. Crawford smoked a pack to a pack
     and a half a day for 38 years and 7 years before,
     beginning at 7 years old, he was ingesting this
     substance, this poison, that is as addictive as
     heroin, cocaine, or alcohol.  And he continued to
     smoke it for at least 38 more years.
          And he tried to quit, and he had withdrawal
     symptoms, and he smoked even when he was sick, but
     he wasn't addicted.  The pharmacologic and
     behavioral processes that determine tobacco
     addiction are similar to those that determine
     addictions such as heroin and cocaine.  That's the 1991 Surgeon General.
          And we talked about cigarettes are designed
     for addiction.
          Can you play the video?
          No?
          Just some more information:  Nicotine is a
     drug that is a profitable, highly addictive drug.
     Teens are more sensitive to nicotine.  Addiction is
     a disease, not a free choice.
          And this is from the Surgeon General:
     Nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that
     individuals persist in using tobacco products.  The
     prevalence of individuals diagnosed as
     nicotine-dependent is higher than that for any --
     for any other substance abuse disorder.  Any abuse.
     Heroin, cocaine, all of those combined are not as
     addictive in terms of the prevalence -- of the
     dependence as nicotine.
          And here is what -- here is really what the
     industry has to say about how important nicotine
     is; how really, really, really important it is:  A
     cigarette that does not deliver nicotine cannot
     satisfy the habituated smoker and cannot lead to
     habituation and would therefore almost certainly
     fail.  Health claims alone without flavor or 1992 nicotine cannot sell cigarettes.  Most smokers
     would rather quit than switch.  Tobacco products
     contain nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of
     physiological effects.
          "Our industry" -- this is R.J. Reynolds
     talking right here, R.J. Reynolds -- "Our industry
     is based on design, manufacture, and sale of
     attractive dosage forms of nicotine."
          What you're going to hear -- back in, I think
     it was 19 -- I think it was 1980, back in September
     of 1980, the industry was talking amongst
     themselves and saying the following:  That the
     matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a
     prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer
     cigarette case.  We can't defend free choice if the
     person was addicted.
          I suspect you're going to hear when
     Mr. Belasic gets up that Mr. Crawford made his
     choice.  It was a free choice, and he wasn't
     addicted.  And that's what they were saying back in
     1980.
          You've already heard from the Surgeon General,
     the '88 report.  It is addiction.  There is no
     question.  It's similar to drugs like cocaine and
     heroin, and there is no question about that. 1993 Can you play this or not?
          MR. ALVAREZ:  We have about seven minutes.
     Yeah, go ahead.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  What happened to the volume?
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Go to the next one.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Go to the next one.
          MR. ROSENBLUM:  And when we talk about legal
     cause, addiction being a legal cause of injury --
     and Judge Dresnick read this to you -- contributes
     substantially.
          Did the addiction play an important role?  But
     for the addiction, if he was not addicted to
     nicotine, would he have smoked a pack to a pack and
     a half a day for over 38 years and develop
     laryngeal cancer?
          This is how addiction legally causes laryngeal
     cancer:  Mr. Crawford was addicted to nicotine, he
     smoked, the smoking causes laryngeal cancer, and he
     had his voicebox removed.
          Dr. Califano, the only expert called in this
     case and called by us on the issue of whether or
     not his laryngeal cancer was smoking-related, gave
     an opinion on this.
          Here's what he said:  I asked him, "I'll ask
     you to assume, Doctor, two things for my next 1994 question.  I want you to assume, number one, that
     William Crawford was addicted to nicotine and
     cigarettes.  I want you to further assume that as a
     result of his addiction, he smoked approximately a
     pack per day for approximately 40 years.  Based on
     those assumptions, do you have an opinion to a
     reasonable degree of medical probability as to
     whether or not William Crawford's addiction to
     nicotine was a substantial contributing cause of
     his laryngeal cancer?
          "ANSWER:  Yes, it was.  That's how addiction
     causes disease."
          These are the questions you're going to be
     asked after the first question about whether it was
     caused by smoking cigarettes:  Was William Crawford
     addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?
          The answer is yes.
          Was an addiction to cigarettes containing
     nicotine a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer?
     That means that if you think that he enjoyed
     smoking a little bit or if you think he smoked for
     some reasons that have nothing to do with
     addiction, you still answer this -- you still
     answer this question "yes" because if addiction
     played a role, did it play a substantial role?  Did 1995 his addiction play a role?  The only way you answer
     no is if you say his addiction had nothing at all
     to do with his smoking, just like his smoking had
     nothing at all to do with his laryngeal cancer.
          Thank you, Judge.


     CLOSING ARGUMENT BY THE PLAINTIFF (Continued)
          MR. ALVAREZ:  May it please the Court,
     counsel:
          Good morning. 1996 So I just want to pick off -- start off with
     where Mr. Rosenblum left off.
          And once you establish, once we've proven to
     you that he's a class member -- and I submit to you
     that we're not going to prove it just by the
     greater weight of the evidence; I mean, I think we
     blew the doors off that.  We're way past that.
     This is -- this is a very clear case of addiction
     causing someone to smoke for over 40 years and that
     the type of cancer that he had was caused by
     smoking.  This isn't a close call on that.
          So once you decide that he is a class member,
     the Judge has instructed you that you have to
     accept the law of this case.  You have to follow
     the law.
          The law in this case is that R.J. Reynolds has
     already been found negligent.  R.J. Reynolds sold
     or supplied cigarettes that were defective and
     placed cigarettes on the market that were defective
     and unreasonably dangerous.  You have to accept
     that.
          You have to accept that they concealed or
     omitted material information not otherwise known or
     available, knowing that the material was false or
     misleading or failed to disclose a material fact 1997 concerning the health effects or addictive nature
     of smoking cigarettes or both.
          And fourth -- and this one is key and
     crucial -- that they agreed with other tobacco
     companies to conceal or omit information concerning
     the health effects and addictive nature of
     cigarettes with the intention that smokers and the
     public would rely on this information to their
     detriment.
          This is the law of the case, and you have to
     accept it.
          We do not have to prove to you that the reason
     he began smoking was because of anything that
     R.J. Reynolds said.  That's not our burden.  We
     don't have to prove that to you.
          Their product sustained his addiction.  They
     fertilized the soil, so to speak, okay?  They
     created this atmosphere that smoking was normal in
     the '40s and '50s and all the way through.  They
     created that for a purpose, for a specific purpose:
     To get young people to start smoking, to get young
     people to think it's cool.  It's the "in" thing to
     do.  They made it glamorous in the movies.
          And the whole time, the whole time, they had
     one purpose in mind:  To keep people smoking, keep 1998 people addicted.  And they were going to stop at
     nothing, at nothing, including but not limited to
     destroying internal documents, so that it doesn't
     ever see the light of day in a courtroom.
          And luckily, some of these were spared, and
     we're able to prove to you document by document,
     year by year, that this conspiracy existed.  And
     not because we're saying it; by their own words and
     admissions through many documents.  We have them
     now, and we're able to prove this conspiracy.
     There may be many conspiracies that you never could
     prove.  This is one that we could prove.
          Destroy all formal reports and the like.
     Remove certain reports from the research files.
     The successful defense of our present and future
     suits.  As an alternative to invalidation, we can
     have the authors rewrite those sections of the
     report which appear objectionable.
          That's evidence of the conspiracy.
          And when they had research that was going to
     come back bad for them, they had a plan for that,
     too:  Compare the cigarettes with cigarettes made
     ten years ago to show that the new products were
     less hazardous.  The writer felt that the legal
     implications from such a study would be tremendous 1999 and would preclude industry participation.
          They knew that if they came up and
     participated in studies that showed that smoking
     caused cancer or it was addictive, that they were
     going to get sunk.  So they purposely didn't
     participate in any of those studies that they knew
     that was going to come back bad for them.
          They shut down research.  They shut down
     research when they knew it was going to come back
     bad for them.  These are the documents.  They're in
     evidence.  They're in evidence.  Please look at
     them.  Please look at them.  There is a box --
     you're going to get a box full of documents.
     They're in there.  I mean, we gave you snippets of
     it, but they're there.
          The conspiracy existed, and it's documented in
     their own words.
          What would they do when the Surgeon General --
     there is the hypocrisy -- there is a hypocrisy of
     this whole argument because for almost 50 years,
     the tobacco industry and R.J. Reynolds denied that
     smoking caused cancer and it was addicting.  For
     50 years, they told everybody in the world, It's
     unproven.
          We're going to show you all of that. 2000 But then, but then they come into the
     courthouse, and they say this man from Greensboro,
     Alabama should have known.  He should have known.
     He should have known that smoking was bad.
          And then when the Surgeon General comes out
     and says smoking can cause cancer, they attack the
     Surgeon General.
          This is what they say:  "We must learn to
     distinguish the real facts about tobacco from
     unjustified, emotional campaigns based on the
     health scare technique."  That's R.J. Reynolds.
          We believe that the number one problem is the
     extent to which these officials knowingly mislead
     the American public; the Surgeon General's
     statement that there is no honest disagreement
     among experts on effects of smoking is false.  It
     is a gross insult to the scientific community.
          That was their position, to call the
     Surgeon General that he wasn't serving the American
     people; that he was giving them false information,
     when the opposite was true.
          Claims that cigarettes are addictive,
     irresponsible, and a scare tactic:  The claim that
     cigarette smoking is a drug addiction similar to
     cocaine and heroin or alcohol use is irresponsible. 2001 They called the Surgeon General
     "irresponsible."
          The message to the American public and in
     particular American youth is that using illegal
     drugs such as crack or heroin or alcohol has the
     same risk of addiction is smoking.  To convey this
     message is to invite disaster and trivialize the
     serious drug problem faced by society.
          And so what was their whole purpose?  Why did
     they -- why do they target young people?  Why do
     they target young people?  Why?  Because they knew
     there was a product that they were making; that if
     you used as directed and smoked as much as you
     wanted, which is what they wanted you to do so that
     their company could get rich, what would happen?
     They would die.  Thirty, 40, 50 years later, people
     would die.
          What did they have to do?  They called them
     "replacement smokers."  That's the word they called
     them, "replacement smokers."
          So they targeted the kids.  These are our
     replacement smokers.  These are the ones we want
     for the next 30, 40, years.  When they're done with
     them, we'll keep marketing to the young people.
     That was the scheme.  That was the conspiracy. 2002 That's why this case is so egregious.
          Young adult smokers are the only source of
     replacement smokers.  Line up these students as
     consumers.  School days are here.  Line up the most
     popular students.  There is no doubt from their own
     internal documents that they were targeting kids as
     the replacement smokers for the future.  That's
     wrong, and they should be punished for that.
          We had deliberately played down the role of
     nicotine; hence, a nonsmoker has little or no
     knowledge of what satisfaction it may offer him and
     no desire to try it.  Instead, we somehow must
     convince him with wholly irrational reasons that he
     should try smoking in the hopes that he will find
     himself then discovering the real satisfaction
     obtainable.
          So after you decide that he's a class member,
     there will be three questions that Mr. Rosenblum
     told you about.
          The next question is:  Well, who is
     responsible, and how much?
          And the question is:  Please state the
     percentages of any fault that was a legal cause of
     Mr. Crawford's -- of William Crawford's laryngeal
     cancer that you charge to R.J. Reynolds Tobacco 2003 Company and William Crawford.
          And, you know, there are two sides to every
     story.  When you hear somebody got divorced, it's
     usually both sides are responsible to some degree,
     right?
          And here's where you get to decide
     percentages.  We've admitted some responsibility,
     and we're saying, you've got to put something down
     for Mr. Crawford, and we want you to put something
     down for Mr. Crawford because maybe he should have
     tried harder and sooner to try to quit.  So we
     admit that.
          But you know what?  He didn't know the truth
     from them.  They didn't come out and tell the truth
     until ten years after he quit smoking.
          So a lie is not the same thing.  When you
     compare a lie to what he should have done, it's two
     different things.  So the large majority of fault
     in this case belongs to the defendant, not to
     Mr. Crawford.  Judge him on who he was and how he
     grew up and where he grew up and what he believed
     and who he believed.
          And I would suggest to you that the number
     should be closer to 95 percent for R.J. Reynolds
     and 5 percent for William Crawford.  That's a fair, 2004 reasonable breakdown when you talk about someone
     who is lying and someone who is listening.
          Now, we've seen some of these.  They made it
     normal.  They made smoking normal.  They marketed
     it to young people like Mr. Crawford.  That's what
     they did.
          Here's some of the things that you saw.
          Go ahead, please, and play the video.
          (Video played.)
          MAN:  Tens of thousands of doctors in all
     parts of the country, in every state of the Union,
     doctors in every branch of medicine, were asked:
     What cigarette do you smoke, Doctor?
          The brand named most was Camel.
          Yes, according to this survey, more doctors
     smoked Camels than any other cigarettes.
          MAN:  Do you inhale?  Then you're better off
     smoking Phillip Morris.  And here's how you can
     prove it.  Light up a Phillip Morris.  Take a puff.
     Get a good mouthful of smoke and slowly let the
     smoke come directly --
          (Singing.)
          MAN:  Mickey Mantle, what you do you say,
     Mickey?
          MAN:  It's not hard to say why more folks 2005 enjoy Camels than other brands.
          WOMAN:  Don't say "cigarettes."  Say
     "Phillip Morris."
          MAN:  Pall Mall?  Is there any other kind?
          WOMAN:  Not for you, there isn't.  Nothing but
     the best for Mr. Ricardo.
          MAN:  I've got a better idea.  Let's take a
     Winston break.  That's it.  Winston is the one
     closer cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a
     pack.  Winston's got that sense of blend.
          MAN:  Yeah, Fred.
          (Singing)
          WOMAN:  -- is good smoking.  I sure wish you
     could taste it.
          WOMAN:  I am tasting it, Grannie.
          MAN:  Your mouth feels clean, your throat
     refreshed.  The finest leaf tobacco, mild,
     refreshing menthol, and the world's most thoroughly
     tested filter.  That's --
          WOMAN:  Do you think we had something to do
     with that?
          MAN:  Yeah.  I think that --
          WOMAN:  Cigarette manufacturers don't make
     movies.
          MAN:  What do you think, that the movie maker 2006 just showed Marlboro on his own?
          WOMAN:  Perhaps the movie-maker was a Marlboro
     smoker.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  This is how he grew up.  This
     was the world back then, a world that was shaped, a
     world that was created by them; by the billions of
     dollars they spent in advertisement over the
     decades; billions that they spent to create this
     atmosphere of normalcy.  And millions of people,
     millions of people believed it, including William
     Crawford.
          And we talked about -- the conspiracy started
     in 1953 and didn't stop until the year 2000.  They
     had an opportunity.  They had choices.
          Corporations have choices, too.  And they made
     a choice and things could have been different if in
     1953 they would have told the world and
     William Crawford that smoking had been proven and
     that it was dangerous for you.  The world would
     have been a different place.
          It's fortunate for us that cigarettes are a
     habit they can't break.  Boy, wouldn't it be
     wonderful if our company was the first to produce a
     cancer-free cigarette?
          This is 1953.  They knew it.  But they had the 2007 gall in 1954 to publish this frank statement and
     say there is no proof that cigarette smoking is one
     of the causes.
          And right before the Surgeon General's report
     was being -- going to be published, the
     Surgeon General asked the tobacco industry:  Send
     me a list of all of the constituents in smoke, in
     cigarettes, that are cancerous.
          And they respond -- I'm sorry.  Okay.  And
     they respond that none of the chemical substances
     listed there, to our knowledge, has been found by
     scientists' research to be harmful to the health of
     a smoker in the amounts reported to smoke.
          The problem with that is that was in 1963,
     right before the Surgeon General report came out.
     Okay?  Two years before -- their own research shows
     that carcinogens are found in practically every
     class of compound in smoke.  Present technology
     does not permit selective filtration of
     particular -- particularative smoke.
          So they knew, and I think we have a list here.
     And there is a list there of all the things that
     they knew caused cancer that they listed
     internally.  But what they told the Surgeon General
     was that none of their things caused cancer; none 2008 of the compounds in smoke caused cancer.  They
     lied.  They knew they were lying when they did it.
     They knew they were lying when they did it.
          And this whole campaign of creating doubt and
     controversy was done on purpose.  And let me tell
     you why it was done on purpose.
          If you have an addictive smoker and they hear
     two competing messages -- they hear one message
     from healthcare officials saying, "Look, smoking
     can cause cancer.  It's dangerous."  Right?
          And you have an addicted smoker, and the maker
     of the product is spending billions of dollars
     marketing and telling you, "no, it hasn't been
     proven.  And just in case, if it is, we're going to
     put a filter on it.  And if you smoke a filtered
     cigarette, you're going to be fine."
          If you have an addicted smoker who is hearing
     these two competing messages, which one do you
     think an addicted smoker is going to accept?  And
     they knew it.  And that's what this campaign of
     controversy and doubt was all about.  They knew
     that and said, "All we've got to do is give them a
     reason.  All we've got to do is give them an
     excuse."
          The most important story, type of story is 2009 that which creates doubt on the cause and effect
     theory of disease.  And then they come up and send
     out these things called "Tobacco and Health
     Research."  They send them to doctors and
     scientists, and they came up and say these
     alternative theories.  They say everybody born in
     March -- we did a study.  People who were born in
     March, they have a higher chance of getting lung
     cancer.
          Every possible theory except smoking they put
     out there so scientists, doctors, and the public
     would doubt that smoking caused cancer.  It was a
     purposeful, intentional way to get people to doubt
     it so that people addicted to smoking would keep
     smoking; keep buying their cigarettes.  They spent
     $50 million on the TIRC, the CTR, on this campaign.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  500.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I'm sorry, 500 million.
          For nearly 20 years, the industry has employed
     a single strategy to defend itself on three major
     fronts:  Litigation, politics, and public opinion.
          While the strategy was brilliantly conceived
     and executed over the years, helping us win
     important battles, it is only fair to say that it
     is not nor was it intended to be a vehicle for 2010 victory.  On the contrary, it has always been a
     holding strategy, consisting of creating doubt
     about the health charge without actually denying
     it.
          That's a confession.  That's a confession.
          They had all of their talking heads out there,
     every chance they could, talking about it.  And
     from 1970 to 1994, every chance they had, they went
     on TV, they were in the newspapers, everywhere,
     casting their web of doubt so they can catch as
     many addicted smokers and keep them smoking.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  You skipped two slides.  I
     don't know if you wanted to -- you're missing
     about -- go ahead.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  That's okay.  Let's go.  Let's
     hear from them.  Let's hear their own words.
          (Video played.)
          MAN:  Will you accept an interest in people's
     health as a basic responsibility paramount to every
     other consideration in our business?  And that's
     where we send --
          MAN:  If we do find any of it we consider
     harmful, and so far we have not.  We'll remove
     these from smoke and still retain the pleasure of
     your favorite cigarette. 2011 MAN:  We want to be the detectives just as
     much as the Surgeon General and anybody, and we'll
     cooperate in every way.  (Inaudible) Tar and
     nicotine, I don't think the industry admits there
     are any bad elements; that there are bad elements
     through our laboratories, through the Surgeon
     Generals, through the AMA.  Through acts of God and
     luck, we hope we may find them; and if they are
     found, they will be removed.
          MAN:  There is no program that I know of to
     try to help people to stop smoking.  We do talk to
     the question of whether or not cigarettes are
     hazardous.  We do not believe that cigarettes are
     hazardous.  We don't accept that because when, as,
     and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is
     identified as being injurious to human health, we
     are confident that we can eliminate that
     ingredient.
          MAN:  Do you believe that cigarettes are safe?
     Have they proven to be safe, Mr. Cullman?
          MAN:  I believe they have not been proven to
     be unsafe.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  These guys have no shame.  These
     guys have no shame and no regard for human life.
          And from 1970 to 1994 -- 2012 Is this the one we just played?
          MR. PHILIPSON:  No.  We didn't play it.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Let's hear more from their own
     words.  I think sometimes you don't want to hear it
     from me.  I'm telling you to read their documents
     and listen to them.
                   (video was played)
          MAN:  The cause of lung cancer is, as yet,
     unknown.  In fact, no one knows what causes lung
     cancer.
          MAN:  And as far as I'm concerned, the bottom
     line is that we simply don't know.
          WOMAN:  The case is still open.  The jury has
     not come in.
          MAN:  It may not be harmful.  You're not
     convinced.
          WOMAN:  It may be or it may not be.  We don't
     know.
          MAN:  It is not known which cigarettes cause
     cancer.  It has not causally been established.
          MAN:  Do cigarettes cause cancer?
          MAN:  I don't know if they do or not.
          WOMAN:  I'm not in a position to give you a
     diagnosis or an answer.
          MAN:  We don't know what causes cancer in 2013 general right now, so I think that we may find what
     causes cancer and we may find some relationship
     which has yet to be proven.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I mean, the documents are the
     confession.  These are the lies and the documents
     are the confession, and we got them.  We got them.
     And now you've seen them, and you're obligated to
     follow the law in this case and do what's right and
     fair.
          And they can make -- they can make a safer
     cigarette.  They can take nicotine out.  They could
     reduce the level of nicotine so that it's not
     addicting.  It's within their power and control to
     do it.  They can make a cigarette that's higher in
     pH so people don't inhale it.  They can do all of
     those things to make a safer cigarette, but they
     choose not to because they want people to continue
     to smoke and get addicted to the nicotine so that
     people keep buying their cigarettes.
          This whole thing about filters was a scam from
     the beginning.  They knew it.  They knew it was a
     scam from the beginning.  In 1950, there was less
     than 1 percent of all cigarettes sold in America
     had filters on them.  They knew -- that was part of
     their campaign to get people to think that, Well, 2014 if this is something bad, put a filter on it, and
     it will take all the bad stuff out when they knew
     that wasn't true; that the filter doesn't make the
     cigarette safer.  In fact, it makes it more
     dangerous.
          So let me tell you, one of the questions,
     4 and 5, are related, and they're very important
     questions.
          Number 4 is:  Did William Crawford reasonably
     rely to his detriment on any statements of material
     facts made by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company that
     concealed or omitted material information
     concerning the health effects of cigarettes or
     their addictive nature; and if so, was such
     reliance a legal cause of Mr. Crawford's laryngeal
     cancer?
          Well, you know what?  They confessed to it.
     They confessed to making those statements.  And you
     heard from Mr. Crawford that he believed them.
          Now, the next question is --
          THE COURT:  You have about 12 minutes --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I may need more time.
          Was any statement referred in Question 4 on
     which Mr. William Crawford reasonably relied to his
     detriment made after May 5, 1982? 2015 So you're probably going, What's this
     May 5, 1982?  We haven't heard any evidence.
          And you haven't.
          May 5, 1982, has a legal significance in the
     case but has nothing to do with your consideration
     with regards to -- don't speculate, Well, I didn't
     hear anything about the facts in the case about
     May 1982.  It has legal significance for us.
          Let me tell you why.  You heard his testimony.
     He kept believing up until he started to quit in
     1988, until he was -- he got older.  He's 53 years
     old, he started getting more health conscious.  He
     said, "You know what -- for some reason, at that
     age, at that time, because when you're 20, you
     know, you don't think the same way as when you're
     30.  And when you're 30, you don't think the same
     way as when you're 40.  And when you're 40 --" and
     you could do the math and keep going up and up.
     People change the way they look at things and the
     way they see things.
          By the time he was in his 50s, he finally came
     around.  Okay?  He finally came around, and he
     stopped believing.  But that didn't mean that they
     stopped their lies because they continued their
     lies all the way through, past May 5, 1982.  And 2016 let me show you the evidence of that.
          (Video played.)
          MAN:  (Inaudible) it was not only American's
     position but your position that cigarettes weren't
     injurious to health; is that accurate?
          MAN:  Through my tenure?
          MAN:  Yes.  That is so.
          MAN:  That's something American Tobacco wanted
     the public to believe; is that correct?
          MAN:  Yes.
          MAN:  There's a statement that the tobacco --
          MAN:  We issued that statement, yes.
          MAN:  As far as you're concerned, a person is
     justified in relying on that statement.
          MAN:  Yes.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  A person is justified on relying
     on that statement that cigarette smoking does not
     cause disease.  The president of American Tobacco
     Company is saying that.
          Do you remember the admissions that we showed
     you about how much money?  Look what happens after
     1982, okay?
          The figures -- actually, they spend more
     money.  After 1982, they spend more money getting
     the word out.  Look at that.  It goes from a few 2017 hundred thousand dollars to millions of dollars
     after 1982.  They ended up spending more after 1982
     to get the word out, to cast doubt and confusion,
     to tell people that filters worked better.  And
     those are the figures.  Look.  They go from '81,
     5 million to 8 million.  It peaks out at 16 million
     in 1990.
          And here's more evidence of their post 1982
     reliance evidence:  Communications have been on the
     up trend this year.  Our four speakers covered a
     quarter of a million miles, logging nearly 800
     appearances including 300 hours on the air.  Our
     public -- our new publication unit turned out a
     dozen new publications and distributed over a
     quarter of a million copies.  The Tobacco Observer
     has reached a circulation of 86,000.  Our films
     have been seen by about 750,000 people this year
     for a cumulative audience of three and a half
     million.
          They had a strategic plan to continue their
     lies past 1982, and Mr. Crawford continued to
     believe until 1988.
          And this is what he said:  "And do you believe
     those statements when you continued to smoke in the
     50s, '60s, '70s, and in through the late '80s?           "ANSWER:  Yes, I did."
          This was his testimony here in this court.
          "Now at some point, did you stop believing the

     tobacco companies?
          "ANSWER:  Yes, sir.
          "And when was that?
          "It was the latter part of 1988."
          Well after 1982.
          "And why did you smoke filtered Winstons and
     Kools?
          "Well, the advertisement was that they -- if
     there was something wrong with them, they would
     take out -- the filter would take out the bad stuff
     in cigarettes."
          They wanted him to believe that.  I mean, the
     whole world "filter" means that:  It takes
     something out.  You filter something out.
          And there is more testimony over and over
     again that he said it wasn't proven.  He saw it on
     the TV.  Saw it in newspapers.  You remember his
     testimony.
          So the next question has to do with:  Did
     Mr. Crawford reasonably rely to his detriment on
     any act taken in furtherance of the conspiracy of
     R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's agreement with
25 2019 other tobacco companies or organizations to conceal
     or omit material information concerning the health
     effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature;
     and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of
     Mr. Crawford's laryngeal cancer?
          And the answer to that is yes, because they
     weren't alone.  They went in cahoots with other
     tobacco companies.  They helped form the TIRC and
     the CTR and the Tobacco Institute.  They were
     shoulder-to-shoulder, neck-and-neck with these
     guys.  This was a conspiracy, industry-wide, never
     seen before.
          And did any of these acts referred to in
     Question 6 on which Mr. Crawford reasonably relied
     to his detriment occur after May 5, 1982?
          The answer to that is yes.  They continued on
     until 2000.  He stopped smoking in 1989.
          And this is 1994, four years after he stopped
     smoking.  This is evidence of the conspiracy.
          (Video played.)
          MAN:  Would you raise your right hand.
          Do you swear that the testimony you're about
     to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
     but the truth?  Please consider yourself to be
     under oath. 2020 MAN:  Let me begin my questioning on the
     matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive.
          Let me ask you first, and I'd like to just go
     down the row, whether each of you believes that
     nicotine is not addictive.
          MAN:  I heard virtually all of you touch on
     it.  And yes or no:  Do you believe nicotine is not
     addictive?
          MAN:  I believe nicotine is not addictive,
     yes.
          MAN:  Mr. Johnston?
          MAN:  Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine
     clearly do not meet the classic definitions of
     addiction.  There is no intoxication --
          MAN:  We'll take that as a no.  Again, time is
     short.
          If you can just -- I think each of you believe
     nicotine is not addictive.  I would just like to
     have this for the record.
          MAN:  I don't believe that nicotine from our
     products are addictive.
          MAN:  I believe nicotine is not addictive.
          MAN:  I believe that nicotine is not
     addictive.
          MAN:  I believe that nicotine is not 2021 addictive.
          MAN:  And I, too, believe that nicotine is not
     addictive.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I mean, this is one of the
     clearest evidence of the conspiracy when you had
     the heads, the CEOs, not just a chemist saying that
     when they're own internal documents say that we
     know that it's addictive.  And we know what we're
     pedaling is addictive, and we know that if we stop
     putting nicotine in cigarettes, we're going to go
     out of business.
          So one of the things that we talked about in
     voir dire is compensatory damages.  In our system
     of justice, in the civil justice system, it's not
     an eye for an eye.  The only thing we can with come
     in here and ask you for is money damages.  That's
     what we have to do.  This is the how our system
     works.
          And so you have to figure out -- you have to
     come to an agreement on what is a fair and
     reasonable amount that should compensate
     Mr. Crawford for everything that he suffered up to
     this point and going on into the future.
          He's had a hole in his neck for 21 years.  He
     breathes through that hole.  He lost one of the 2022 things that is so fundamental to being a human
     being, which is the ability to speak with your own
     voice, to be heard in your own voice.  That is
     such -- it's to the core of how we are and how
     people see you and hear you, and that's been taken
     away from him.
          And not an hour goes by or a day goes by where
     he doesn't have to go underneath that handkerchief
     and expel mucus from his throat, day in and day
     out.
          And you have to be the judge of what you think
     is fair and reasonable, based on what he's gone
     through.  And I'll suggest to you that what he's
     gone through is significant; that no amount of
     money can compensate him for that.  But your job is
     to try to find an amount that's reasonable in light
     of the evidence.
          And I can only make a suggestion.  Okay?  You
     may think it's too low, you may think it's too
     high, or you may think it's just right.  But I will
     tell you this:  What we're not doing is giving you
     a number that's high, saying, "well, we're going to
     go high because we know that you're going to go
     lower."  We're going to tell you what we think is
     fair and reasonable and just in light of the 2023
     evidence and the enormous suffering that this man
     has gone through and will continue to go through
     every day of his life and what he's gone through
     for the last 21 years of his life.
          To just ask a -- to answer a simple -- just to
     say yes to anything, he's got to put a machine to
     his throat.
          And we think the amount of 15 million is fair
     and reasonable in light of the evidence.
          THE COURT:  In one minute, you'll be at 45.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I've got, like, five minutes
     left.
          Thank you, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  All right.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  The last question we're going to
     ask you to do -- talk about is punitive damages.
          And the standard is clear and convincing
     evidence, you know, should -- we have to prove that
     we're entitled to punitive damages are warranted in
     this case by the clear and convincing evidence.
          The Judge read you that standard, and that is:
     Conduct causing loss, injury, or damage to
     William Crawford that was so gross and flagrant as
     to show a reckless disregard of human life.
          Well, if lying, lying about the health effects
25 2024 of your product so that you can make a product and
     continue to sell it for decades and make people
     sick and die and have them lose their vocal cords,
     if that's not flagrant, if that's not intentional,
     then nothing is.
          The conduct showed such an entire lack of
     care, of conscious indifference to the
     consequences, wanton or reckless disregard for the
     safety and welfare of the public, reckless
     indifference to the rights of others, equivalent to
     an intentional violation of those rights, that's
     exactly what they did.
          So when you're asked -- this is the last
     question:  Please state whether you find by clear
     and convincing evidence that punitive damages are
     warranted against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
     under the circumstances of this case.
          When you check this "Yes," make it the biggest
     check mark of them all.  Make it big because this
     case screams for punitive damages.  If there is a
     case where a corporation should be punished for
     their lies --
          MR. BELASIC:  Objection to counsel --
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  You heard the evidence in this 2025 case, and you decide whether R.J. Reynolds should
     be punished for their lies and for the harm that
     they caused Mr. Crawford.  And the punishment is to
     deter other companies so they don't act the same
     way that they did.
          Please make that check mark the biggest one.
     Thank you.
          THE COURT:  All right.  Thank you.
          We're going to take another short break.
     We're going to take ten minutes so that -- so that
     Mr. Belasic starts at 11:30.
          I am going to order lunch for you all so at
     whatever time it arrives, we're going to break, and
     you'll go into the jury room and eat some pizza.  I
     hope everybody likes pizza.  So we're going to have
     that.  And it arrives when it does, but I asked for
     it to show up at about noon.
          And he'll break, and then he'll continue his
     closing.  We know about your problem at 1:30, and
     so well take a ten-minute break now.
          You're in the middle of closing arguments, so
     remember my instructions.  Do not begin
     deliberating or discussing until you've heard all
     of the closing arguments and my final instructions
     and go in there finally to begin to deliberate. 2026 That's the first time you can discuss this case
     with each other.
          All right.  Let's take ten minutes.


          MR. ALVAREZ:  May it please the Court,
     counsel:
          I've only got a few minutes left.  I had the
     pleasure of being the first one to address you all,
     and I'm going to have the pleasure of being the
     last lawyer to address you.
          We didn't get a chance to play the video of
     the Surgeon General, General Koop.  We'd like to
     play that right now for you, please.
          (Video played.)
          MAN:  -- told so frequently by the cigarette
     industry that smoking is a matter of free choice.
     You start when you want, and you quit when you
     want.  But anybody who's ever smoked knows that is
     not true.  What does the record, the longtime
     record, say is the most dangerous age to get hooked
     on tobacco?
          MAN:  The indications are very clear that the
     people who are most heavily addicted to nicotine
     and have the greatest trouble quitting are those
     who began smoking at age 14 or 16.  I think the
     studies all over the world in every country and
     every culture, the younger you start, the greater 2361 the addiction, and the more difficult it is to
     quit.
          MAN:  You said that you consider tobacco as
     addictive as cocaine or heroin.  Isn't that an
     overstatement?
          MAN:  No.  I think the evidence is very clear
     if you understand what we're talking about.
          Addiction is a specific physiologic problem.
     And the manner in which you become addicted to
     nicotine is exactly the same manner in which you
     become addicted to cocaine or to heroin.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Thank you.
          Mr. Belasic put up some portions of
     Mr. Crawford's trial testimony regarding him
     acknowledging or knowing the risk in 1970 when the
     warning labels came out, and that he knew and
     understand and appreciated the risk of the
     warnings.  I'd like to read to you, if we could,
     what he also said.
          "So did you quit smoking or try to quit
     smoking in the 1970s when you saw the warnings
     because you got scared, or because you were
     concerned that you were spending too much money?
          "ANSWER:  Spending too much money."
          The next portion of his trial transcript: 2362 "Now, Mr. Belasic asked you some questions about
     the Aflac policy, right?
          "Correct.
          "Was the policy just for cancer, or was it for
     other things, too?
          "It was a cancer policy.
          "QUESTION:  And what -- were you concerned
     that just in case it wasn't -- it hadn't been
     proven, that you wanted to -- you took out an Aflac
     policy?
          "ANSWER:  I did.
          "And when did you -- and when you took out the
     Aflac policy, did you know that -- were you
     convinced that smoking caused cancer, or did you
     believe it was unproven?
          "I believed it was unproven, and that's not
     the reason for the policy."
          And I said, "What was the reason for the
     policy?  Tell the members of the jury.
          "My wife wanted to take it out -- take it out
     because so many members of her family had cancer,
     and she was concerned that we needed it, and that's
     the main reason.
          "So did the main reason have anything to do
     with smoking? 2363 "ANSWER:  No."
          And why is this important?  Because he made a
     connection saying, well, in 1970 he knew, and he
     went and got the Aflac policy.
          Do you remember him saying that?
          The warnings came out in 1970.  The Aflac
     policy was in 1974, four years later.  Does that
     sound like someone who saw a warning, got
     concerned, and ran out and got a policy?  He waited
     four years.  One thing had nothing to do with the
     other.
          He said that none of his family members said
     anything about him being addicted.
          Can you please put up the testimony of Janet
     Cook, his daughter.
          "Did you believe your father was addicted to
     cigarettes?
          "I know my father was addicted to cigarettes.
     I just don't believe it.  I know that.
          "So your thought -- so you thought your father
     was addicted?
          "Yes, to cigarettes, to nicotine.
          "When did you first believe your father was
     addict -- was an addict?
          "Probably in the '80s." 2364 And this is a woman who is a social worker,
     who works with people with dependency issues.
          And also, about the drinking, this whole
     drinking thing, look what she says about that.
          "How much alcohol would he typically drink
     when he drank?
          "A few beers.  Two or three beers.
          "Did you ever see your father drunk?
          "ANSWER:  Never in my life.
          "Did you ever consider your father to have a
     problem with alcohol?
          "ANSWER:  Not at all."
          Now, he showed you two records from basically
     the same -- two records, two months apart in 2008.
     In 2008.  That's 16 years after he already had his
     vocal cords removed.  Sixteen years.  And those two
     records, when you put them in context with the
     hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of medical
     records -- and there are people on this jury who
     have -- who work in hospitals --
          MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Look at the medical records.  Go
     through them.  You'll see that the overwhelming
     number of notations on there is that he's a social 2365 drinker.
          Mr. Belasic said that it wasn't a secret that
     smoking caused cancer; that no one told him
     anything he didn't know.
          Well, that was the problem, okay?  The problem
     is, that's the whole purpose of the conspiracy.
     The whole purpose of the conspiracy was to cast
     doubt.  They knew it wasn't a secret.  They knew
     the information was out there.  The whole purpose
     of the conspiracy was to get people to doubt it.
     And in fact, that position that they're taking in
     court that everyone knew, that isn't the position
     that they were espousing in the '50s and the '60s
     and the '70s and the '80s and until -- and in the
     '90s.  That wasn't the position.  What they were
     saying is it wasn't proven.
          Today in court they're saying, "Yeah, it's
     proven, and he should have known."  But that's not
     what they were telling people back then.  That's
     not what they were telling people back then.
          And if it was so well known, and if it should
     have been so well known to a man from Greensboro,
     Alabama, don't you think it should have been that
     well known for the executives and the scientists at
     R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company?  If they are telling 2366 you he should have known, the same goes for them.
     The only difference is that they knew the truth,
     and they lied about the truth.  That's the
     difference.
          There was a slide up there about that we
     didn't test him for some sort of gene type in the
     pathology that would have come out that it was
     smoking.
          Hey, trust me, if that test would have come
     back positive that it wasn't for smoking, we would
     have heard about it.
[#DELETED OBJECTION DIALOGUE#]
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Thank you.
          The defendants had, just like we did, had the
     ability to test for those things.  Both sides had
     the ability to test for those things. 2372 Now, with regards to the causation, all we
     heard was, well, it could be GERD.  It could be
     alcohol.  It could be asbestos.  But, you know,
     they had -- they don't have a burden of proof of
     anything.  But if they wanted to prove it, one of
     the things they could have done is they could have
     called a doctor instead of just cite to a website
     to say that his cancer was caused by GERD, or his
     cancer was caused by alcohol, or his cancer was
     caused by asbestos, when there's no evidence of
     that.  None.  Zero.
          And even if it was alcohol, and even if it was
     GERD, the overriding factor is always the smoking.
     And the legal cause instruction, or the concurring
     cause instruction, says that it could work and
     operate with other factors and things.
          So even if you think that maybe GERD did it or
     maybe the alcohol did it, according to the law, the
     concurring cause instruction, if it operated with
     smoking, it is a legal cause.
          And with regards to laryngeal cancer being
     caused by smoking, there is no dispute in this case
     that that's what it is.  It's a finding in this
     case.  It's one of the things that the Judge read
     to you.  There is no dispute that smoking can cause 2373 laryngeal cancer.  There is no issue whatsoever in
     this case.  It's a finding.  You get a copy of the
     jury instructions; it's going to be in there.
          They read a portion of Dr. Califano's
     deposition, which said it wouldn't have made a
     difference if he smoked filtered cigarettes or
     unfiltered cigarettes; he still would have gotten
     the cancer anyway.  That's the whole point.
     Filters don't keep you safer.  You smoke believing
     that filters do something, filter out, but they
     don't.  That was the whole point.  Filters didn't
     work.  And they were sold to smokers in the '50s
     and the '60s and all the way through the '90s as a
     safer alternative when, in fact, they weren't.
          He talked about how they cooperated with the
     government and the Tobacco Working Group.  But we
     showed you a document that showed that Murray
     Senkus, the guy who was in charge of it -- what did
     he say?  He say, "I'm only joining if" -- "and I'm
     telling you right now, if me joining, I'm never
     going to admit that smoking causes cancer."  That
     was their cooperation.
          And with regards to making -- they said -- the
     criticism was that the government didn't agree to
     allow them to develop a safer cigarette.  The 2374 problem with a safer cigarette that they were
     trying to develop was, it may have decreased the
     amount of lung cancer.  But what the study showed
     is -- do you know what it increased?  The number of
     heart disease.  And what's the number one killer?
     Heart disease.  Heart disease actually kills more
     people than lung cancer.  That's why the government
     didn't bless it.
          Here's the other thing:  They put part of the
     Surgeon General report in there that said that if
     you quit for ten years, your risk of getting cancer
     comes back to a nonsmoker.  And that's true.  And
     that's what makes this case so egregious.  Because
     if they would have told people earlier, if they
     would have confessed the truth, more people would
     have quit.  There would have been more than
     50 million Americans quitting.  If they would have
     started in 1953 or 1966 when the first labels, or
     '70 or '85, or when the Surgeon General reports
     came out, if they would have told people the truth,
     more people would have quit sooner, and more cancer
     and more harm and more suffering would have been
     avoided.
          And we don't have to prove to you that
     anything that Reynolds did caused him to start 2375 smoking as a child.  We don't have to prove that.
     That's not part of the conspiracy.  Once the
     conspiracy started, he continued to smoke because
     of the conspiracy.
          Here's the other thing that doesn't make
     sense:  If everyone knew, and it wasn't a secret,
     okay, because you've got to think that these
     tobacco executives are smart people.  They're very
     sophisticated.  They're very, very smart.  They
     spend -- you know, they have a lot of resources to
     spend in research.  If they're so smart, and
     everybody knew, then why did they spend half a
     billion dollars trying to convince people that
     smoking hadn't been proven to be dangerous?  Why
     would they throw money away like that if everybody
     knew?  If everybody knew, these smart executives,
     why would they spend half a billion dollars?
          The question about reasonably relied.  Well,
     that whole scheme of them, they knew that tobacco
     companies may have some credibility issues, so
     that's why they got scientists and doctors that
     people would trust to get out the word that smoking
     hadn't been proven.
          And remember that?  Of the 14 doctors that
     came out and signed that study, 13 of them were on 2376 the payroll of the tobacco company, and the other
     one they didn't know because he was Russian, and
     they couldn't check.  That's how they got the word
     out.
          So was it reasonable for Mr. Crawford and
     millions of other people to rely on doctors and
     scientists and tobacco companies and other people
     who were saying that it hadn't been proven back in
     the '50s and the '60s and the '70s and the '80s and
     into the '90s?
          THE COURT:  Get ready to wrap up.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I am.  I'm going to go to the
     last thing.  I have more, but I'm going to wrap up
     now.
          Mr. Belasic said that he wanted you -- that I
     wanted you to give my client $15 million.  I don't
     want you to give him anything.  I want you to do
     justice.  I want you to be fair.  I want you to be
     just in this case.  And if you think $15 million
     isn't just, and you think it's more or less, he's
     going to accept whatever verdict you render him.
          Thank you.
