MR.  BELASIC:  You  arrived  at  your  verdict  late 
Friday  afternoon. 
I  had  all  weekend  to  think  about 
it. 
I  probably  thought  about  it  every  single 
minute  I  was  awake,  and  so  did  the  people  at  R.J. 
Reynolds,  including  the  vice  president  --
THE  COURT: 
We're  worried  about  you  tripping 
on  the  cord. 
MR.  BELASIC: 
-- some  of  the  people  at  R.J. 
Reynolds,  including  the  vice  president  of  the I Page 2604 
company,  Dr.  Figlar,  which  we  brought  today. 
And  I 
heard  your  message. 
It  was  unmistakable  in  your 
verdict. 
I  know  what  you  found, 
I  know  the  amount 
that  you  gave,  and  so  did  R.J.  Reynolds. 
And  I  want  you  to  know  -- I  can't  lie,  I  had 
hoped  that  you  would  reach  a  different  verdict. 
I'm  sure  you  know  that;  you  know  my  position. 
That 
doesn't  matter. 
You  were  the  judges  of  the  facts,  as  Judge 
Dresnick  told  you,  and  your  decision  lS  final,  and 
nothing  that  I  say  here  today  should  be  interpreted 
to  challenge  the  verdict.  Reynolds  is  not 
disputing  your  verdict.  Reynolds  respects  your 
verdict. 
Dr.  Figlar  and  I  and  all  of  the  attorneys 
thank  you  for  being  here.  You're  now  in  your  third 
week.  And  nothing  that  I  talk  about  has  anything 
to  do  with  your  verdict  in  Phase  1. 
That  is  done, 
and  it  will  not  be  challenged. 
When  we  started  off  this  case,  one  of  the 
first  questions  that  Mr.  Rosenblum  asked  to 
Dr.  Proctor  was  something  about  presentism,  and  he 
asked  him  to  explain  it.  Dr.  Proctor  said,  not 
surprisingly,  it  means  that  you  can't  assume  that 
what  happened  In  the  past  is  the  same  as  today. 2605 
And  you  can't  assume  that  the  way  people  act  and 
behave  today  is  the  same  as  the  past. 
And  in  this  case,  what  the  plaintiffs  talked 
about  was  how  it  was  like  in  the  1940s  when 
Mr.  Crawford  snuck  that  first  cigarette  with  his 
older  brother.  That  was  70  years  ago.  And  in  the 
1950s,  when  he  became  a  regular  smoker;  that  was  60 
years  ago.  The  people  who  were  alive  in  the  '40s 
and  '50s  which  were  runnlng  tobacco  companies  are 
either  dead  or  long  gone. 
And  no  one  can  dispute  that  there  lS  a  huge 
difference  today  between  what  the  tobacco  companles 
say,  between  what  the  tobacco  companles  do,  and 
what  they  showed  you  back  in  the  1950s. 
And  just  think  about  it,  remember  what 
Mr.  Alvarez  said  In  opening?  There  was  no 
Internet.  Today  there  is  an  Internet.  Anybody  can 
go  on  and  see  the  position  and  information  about  a 
million  things. 
If  you  go  on  Reynolds'  website, 
they  say  smoking  causes  cancer.  They  say  smoking 
is  the  leading  cause  of  death.  They  say  smokers 
who  want  to  avoid  those  health  risks  should  quit. 
They  say  smoking  is  addictive  right  on  their 
website. 
Dr.  Proctor  said,  well,  everyone  was  smoking I Page 2606 
back  then.  We  know  today  that  it's  a  small 
fraction.  And  you  just  heard  youth  smoking.  Well, 
teenagers  still  smoke,  as  they  likely  always  will. 
It  is  at  the  lowest  it's  been  in  history  since  they 
started  keeping  the  statistics. 
Dr.  Proctor  reminded  you,  well,  all  of  the  ads 
were  on  TV;  they  were  everywhere.  And  now  we  know 
there  haven't  been  adds  on  television  for  40  years. 
When  I  asked  Dr.  Proctor,  he  admitted  there 
are  hardly  any  print  and  advertising  ads.  That's 
why  you  don't  see  ads  on  billboards,  you  don't  see 
them  in  newspapers.  They're  hardly  in  any 
magazlnes. 
And  all  of  those  things  are  not  disputed  by 
the  plaintiff  and  their  experts. 
So  let's  apply  presentism  today. 
Now,  let's  review  what  your  verdict  told  us. 
And  none  of  this  is  disputed.  The  first  thing  you 
found,  and  it  was  very  clear,  lS  that  you  found 
that  Reynolds  concealed  material  information,  and 
that  harmed  Mr.  Crawford.  You  answered  yes  on 
those  questions,  and  we  know  that. 
Judge  Dresnick,  however,  is  instructing  you 
and  ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  jury  instructions 
this  time,  they're  not  like  the  last  time.  They're 2607 
only  three  pages  long. 
I  know  you've  been  very 
careful  in  making  all  of  your  decisions. 
I'd  ask 
that  you  look  at  each  of  these  three  pages  because 
unlike  Phase  1,  there  are  some  very,  very  specific 
instructions  about  what  you  actually  can  -- what 
you  should  consider  and  what  you  can.  And  one  of 
the  things  that  the  Judge  will  tell  you  is  that  In 
awarding  punitive  damages,  you  should  consider 
Mr.  Crawford's  conduct. 
And  we  know  what  you  found.  He  had  already 
admitted  that,  In  this  case,  his  actions  were  a 
partial  proximate  cause;  not  making  excuses.  But 
when  you  decide  whether  any  punitive  damages  are 
awarded  on  top  of  the  $9  million  that  Mr.  Crawford 
already  has,  the  Judge  is  instructing  you  that  you 
have  to  consider  both  sides'  conduct,  and  I  simply 
ask  that  you  look  at  the  whole  context. 
Now,  Mr.  Alvarez  said,  well,  you  found 
entitlement  so  you  should  award  punitive  damages. 
But  this  is  the  instruction  from  the  Judge.  You 
don't  have  to  award  any  punitive  damages.  He  says 
specifically,  "You  may,  in  your  discretion,  decline 
to  assess  punitive  damages." 
In  other  words,  the 
Phase  1  verdict  was  about  compensatory  damages. 
It 
does  not  require  you,  as  Judge  Dresnick  tells  you, 2608 
to  award  anything  further. 
And  let's  talk  about  this.  Do  you  remember 
Mr.  Alvarez  just  said,  well,  they  brought  a  guy  in 
to  say  they've  changed.  And  he  reviewed  every  type 
of  change;  what  they  can't  do,  they  no  longer  have 
the  freedom  to  make  their  cigarettes  without  the 
FDA  approving  it,  they  no  longer  have  the  freedom 
to  put  in  an  ingredient  without  the  FDA  approving 
it.  Cigarettes  that  are  sold  today  have  warnings. 
They're  subject  to  the  regulation  from  the 
beginning  they  make  the  cigarette  to  the  end  time 
when  they  sell  it  by  the  Food  and  Drug 
Administration,  and  all  Mr.  Alvarez  had  to  say  lS 
that  doesn't  matter. 
That's  what  he  said,  that 
doesn't  matter. 
But  it  does  matter.  And  don't  take  my  word 
for  it.  This  lS  the  Judge's  instruction.  Right 
on  -- I  think  it's  on  page  3  or  2,  you'll  look  for 
it.  This  is  what  the  Judge  is  instructing  you. 
If 
you  are  considering  to  award  any  punitive  damages, 
the  Judge  says,  "You  should  consider  the  extent  to 
which  Reynolds'  conduct  has  changed."  You're  being 
instructed  by  the  Court  to  consider  that  Reynolds' 
conduct  has  changed. 
And  the  instruction  says,  "You  are  entitled  to 2609 
conclude  that  misconduct  that  occurred  In  the 
distant  past,  60,  70  years  ago,  and  involved  actors 
who  are  no  longer  associated  with  Reynolds," 
meanlng  those  people  are  dead  and  gone,  "need  not 
be  punished.  Make  no  bones  about  it,  Mr.  Alvarez 
isn't  right.  As  the  Judge  said,  you  should 
consider  the  change  in  the  company. 
Now,  Mr.  Alvarez  says,  well,  we  need  to  deter 
and  we  need  to  deter  other  companies.  Now,  of 
course  there  is  no  evidence  in  this  case  that  some 
other  company  that  doesn't  sell  cigarettes  is 
sitting  around  saying,  well,  we're  going  to  keep 
doing  bad  things  unless  Mr.  Crawford  gets  a  lot  of 
money. 
I  mean,  there  is  no  evidence  in  this  case 
that  some  other  company  is  waiting  to  see  if  the 
tobacco  companies  have  millions  of  dollars  In 
damages  awarded  to  them. 
I  mean,  there  lS  no 
evidence  at  all.  That's  just  something  that  lS 
that's  just  something  that  was  asserted. 
But  what  you  ought  to  look  for  is  to  determine 
whether  or  not  the  punishment  that  he  emphasizes  lS 
necessary.  Whether  or  not  it  is  necessary  to 
punish  Reynolds  to  stop  the  conduct  that  you  found 
was  wrong  in  the  first  place,  and  that  was 
concealing  information. I Page 2610 
Now,  I'm  gOlng  to  talk  about  a  few  of  those 
things,  and  I  wanted  to  talk  about  what  lS  the 
purpose  of  punitive  damages  and  what  are  the  legal 
standards. 
I  want  to  review  some  more  of  the 
Judge's  instruction,  and  has  the  plaintiff  actually 
proven  that  punitive  damages  should  be  awarded  In 
this  case.  As  he  said,  this  is  Mr.  Crawford's 
case,  but  there  are  6,000  more  cases  behind  him. 
Let's  be  clear,  the  only  person  that  would  get 
this  money  or  the  only  person  that  is  requesting 
the  money  is  Mr.  Crawford.  Those  damages  can  only 
be  awarded  to  the  plaintiff.  They  can't  be  awarded 
to  somebody  else. 
And  this  is  what  Judge  Dresnick  tells  you; 
that  if  you  decide,  if,  to  award  punitive  damages, 
they  would  be  in  addition  to  the  compensatory 
damages  you've  previously  awarded. 
You  decided  that  Mr.  Crawford's  injuries 
deserved  $9  million  in  compensatory  damages.  And 
compensatory  damages  are  called  that  for  a  reason; 
they're  to  compensate  the  person  for  his  injuries. 
You  obviously  found  his  injuries  were  very  serlOUS, 
but  you  are  instructed  that  whatever  you  determine 
would  be  a  full  amount  of  compensation,  you  should 
award,  and  that  your  award  should  fairly  compensate 2611 
him.  And  you  have  decided  that. 
So  in  other  words,  you  have  already  reached 
your  determination  that  the  full  amount  of 
compensation  for  his  injuries  lS  $9  million. 
Now,  $9  million  is  a  lot  of  money  to  anyone. 
All  you  have  to  do  is  think  about,  in  America 
today,  people  talk  about  -- or  grow  up  saylng,  I 
want  to  be  a  millionaire.  A  million  dollars  lS  a 
lot  of  money.  A  million  dollars,  a  dream  of  some 
people  to  accumulate  a  million  dollars.  We  have 
game  shows  like  "Who  Wants  to  be  a  Millionaire?" 
It's  a  lot  of  money.  And  to  get  $1  million  in  one 
swoop,  on  one  day,  and  not  trying  to  accumulate  it 
over  60  years  lS  even  more  rare. 
Now,  you've  awarded  Mr.  Crawford  not  1  million 
or  2  million  or  3  million,  but  $9  million.  And 
common  sense  tells  us  there  really  can't  be  any 
dispute,  $9  million  is  an  credible  amount  of  money. 
Now, 
that  was  for  his  , 
lnJurles, 
, 
, 
and  you  found 
his  injuries  were  serious.  But  once  agaln,  you 
decided  as  the  judges  of  the  facts  that  that  was 
the  full  and  fair  amount  that  would  compensate  him 
for  his  injuries. 
$9  million  puts  Mr.  Crawford  In 
a  tiny,  tiny  fraction  of  Americans  as  far  as 
wealth.  You've  made  him  now  a  wealthy  man,  but  you 1 fully  compensated  him. 
Now,  punitive  damages  are  different.  They're 
not  compensation.  You've  already  done  that. 
And  here's  what  Judge  Dresnick  instructs  you. 
Page 2612 
"You  should  not  award  punitive  damages  if  you 
conclude  that  those  purposes,  punishment, 
deterrence,  will  be  satisfied  by  Reynolds' 
compensatory  liability." 
You  have  already  decided  that  Reynolds  should 
pay  an  enormous  amount  of  money  to  Mr.  Crawford. 
You  know  that  there  are  another  6,000  plaintiffs 
coming  behind  him. 
MR.  ALVAREZ:  Objection,  Judge. 
THE  COURT:  Sustained. 
MR.  BELASIC:  There  is  no  evidence  In  this 
case  that  giving  Mr.  Crawford  one  dollar  more  in 
his  bank  account  will  change  Reynolds'  behavior. 
And  more  importantly,  there  lS  no  evidence  that 
giving  Mr.  Crawford  another 
what,  he  wants  three 
to  one.  He  asked  for  another  27  million. 
So  let's 
think  of  it.  They  want  Mr.  Crawford  now  to  have 
$36  million  instead  of  $9  million. 
Is  there  any 
evidence  that  giving  Mr.  Crawford  that  $36  million 
will  change  something  that  Reynolds  hasn't  already 
changed?  There  is  no  such  evidence. 2613 
As  Mr.  Alvarez  said,  you  cannot  award  punitive 
damages  for  harm  suffered  by  any  other  smoker.  And 
that's  what  the  Judge  is  instructing  you  here. 
I 
think  this  is  also  on  page  3  of  the  instructions. 
And  it  says,  "You  should  not  include  punishment  for 
harms  suffered  by  other  smokers  who  may  bring  their 
own  claims  for  punitive  damages  in  other  cases." 
You've  heard  that. 
But  all  of  this  talk  today  was  about  other 
smokers. 
It  was  about  some  unknown  women  who  had 
to  go  to  a  party  for  something  called  Camel  9  who 
had  to  sign  something  to  get  past  the  bouncer  to 
show  they  were  over  the  age  of  21.  That's  what 
they  showed  today.  Camel  No.9,  lip  balm,  or  I 
guess  berry-flavored  lipstick.  That  has  nothing  to 
do  with  Mr.  Crawford.  He  quit  smoking  25  years 
ago.  He  started  smoking  70  years  ago.  You  cannot 
include  punishment  for  harms  to  other  smokers. 
That  can't  be  part  of  your  decision  in  this  case. 
And  yet,  all  they  talked  about  today  was 
different  types  of  Camel  brands  and  different 
assertions  that  someone  else  was  smoking. 
But  then  Mr.  Alvarez  got  up  and  said,  well, 
it's  all  about  William  Crawford. 
It  didn't  look 
that  way  when  they  were  asking  questions  to 2614 
Dr.  Figlar. 
Your  money,  any  money,  if  you  choose  to  glve 
him  even  a  dollar  cannot  be  awarded  to  public 
health  agencles,  it  won't  go  to  a  clinic  to  stop 
people  from  smoking,  it  won't  go  to  an  anti-smoking 
organization. 
It  can  only  go  to  Mr.  Crawford.  And 
so  they  want  another  $27  million  to  Mr.  Crawford  on 
top  of  the  $9  million  of  full  compensation  that 
you've  already  decided. 
Now,  is  it  necessary  to  glve  Mr.  Crawford  more 
money  than  the  $9  million,  the  staggering  amount 
he's  already  been  awarded?  Would  punishing 
Reynolds  with  extra  payments,  would  it  help  people 
quit  smoking?  Would  it  fund  any  stop-smoking 
program  or  cancer  research?  No.  And  would  it 
lmprove  the  public  health?  Would  it  make 
cigarettes  safer?  Would  that  punishment  have  an 
effect?  It  wouldn't. 
And  if  it  would  have  an  effect,  if  paylng 
money  -- lS  there  any  evidence  that  $9  million  for 
one  smoker  has  not  already  accomplished  that? 
What  Mr.  Alvarez  says  and  what  Mr.  Rosenblum 
talked  about  today  are  other  smokers.  They  don't 
address  the  fact  that  you've  already  determined 
that  Mr.  Crawford  has  been  fully  compensated. 1 Mr.  Alvarez  mentioned  that  the  purpose  lS 
Page 2615 
punishment  and  deterrence. 
I  want  to  ask  -- I  want  to  point  out  to  you 
another  one  of  Judge  Dresnick's  instructions; 
that's  punitive  damages  can  be  awarded  against 
Reynolds  based  on  one  type  of  behavior.  And  that's 
your  finding,  fraudulent  concealment.  You  decided, 
and  we  are  not  challenging  your  verdict,  that 
Reynolds  concealed  something  from  Mr.  Crawford  that 
caused  him  to  develop  his  cancer.  That's  what  you 
found,  and  that  is  the  only  thing  that  you  can 
punish  Reynolds  for.  Not  for  selling  a  cigarette 
that  has  pink  in  it  or  not  for  selling  a  cigarette 
that  has  menthol  In  the  filter.  Only  for  the 
conduct  that  caused  him  harm. 
But  look  what  that  conduct  lS. 
It  was 
concealment.  Dr.  Proctor  said,  look,  in  the  '40s 
and  '50s,  you  weren't  telling  people  that  it  could 
cause  cancer.  You  weren't  warning.  There  were  all 
of  these  ads  on  TV,  there  were  guys  from  the 
tobacco  institute  that  went  on  TV  and  said  it's  not 
proven. 
Is  that  the  case  today?  It's  not. 
We  know  that  now  Reynolds  tells  smokers  it 
causes  cancer,  it  causes  heart  disease,  it's 
addicting.  We  know  that  Reynolds  -- there  is  no 1 such  thing  as  the  Tobacco  Institute. 
It  was 
disbanded.  We  know  that  CTR  and  TIRC,  they  haven't 
Page 2616 
existed  for  15  years. 
Now,  what  Mr.  Rosenblum  was  asking  about  lS 
legal  conduct.  Selling  cigarettes  is  legal.  And 
Judge  Dresnick  tells  you  that  the  manufacturing  and 
sale  of  cigarettes  is  a  lawful  activity  protected 
by  federal  law.  But  what  Mr.  Rosenblum  asked  about 
lS  selling  cigarettes. 
You  cannot  base  your  judgment,  you  cannot  base 
a  decision  on  whether  to  glve  them  punitive  damages 
based  on  legal  activity.  You  know  that  if  there  lS 
an  advertising  campalgn  that  is  permitted  today,  it 
has  to  go  past  the  FDA.  They  have  the  power  to 
regulate  marking. 
It  has  to  go  past  the  Attorney 
Generals  in  what  they  call  the  MSA, 
the  Master 
Settlement  Agreement.  You  have  two  different 
watchdogs  policing  the  tobacco  companies  today. 
You  cannot  punish  them  for  what  is  still  lawful 
activity. 
Now,  on  these  instructions,  you  should 
consider  any  mitigating  evidence.  You've  heard  the 
mitigating  evidence  in  terms  of  the  amount  of 
money,  the  effort,  the  decades  that  it  took  for 
Reynolds  to  develop  a  safer  cigarette.  You  saw  the I Page 2617 
evidence  that  the  government,  In  fact, 
believed  it 
was  safer,  that  it  reduced  the  risk  of 
cancer.  You 
saw  what  the  government's  reaction  was. 
Let's  get  down  to  the  main  question.  You 
found  that  Reynolds  concealed  information  and  that 
it  harmed  Mr.  Crawford.  Are  punitive  damages,  lS 
giving  Mr.  Crawford  millions  of  additional  dollars 
into  his  bank  account,  is  that  needed  to  prevent 
Reynolds  from  concealing  information  today?  You 
know  that  the  Judge  tells  you,  contrary  to  what 
Mr.  Alvarez  said,  that  you  should,  should  consider 
the  fact  that  Reynolds  has  changed. 
We  know  Reynolds,  it's  a  new  company. 
It's 
not  the  same  company  before.  The  merger  with  --
you  have  a  merger  with  Brown  &  Williamson,  you  have 
the  new  parent,  RAI.  You  know  there  are  new 
executives  and  new  scientists. 
Reynolds  is  located  at  401  North  Main  Street 
In  Winston-Salem. 
If  you  go  into  that  building, 
Claude  Teague  is  not  there;  he's  dead. 
If  you  go 
into  that  building,  Alan  Rodgman,  who  wrote  some  of 
those  documents,  he's  not  there.  He  wrote  those 
things  60  years  ago.  He's  probably  90. 
In  fact, 
none  of  the  people  that  they  showed  in  the  '40s, 
'50s  and  '60s  are  at  the  company. 1 Remember  they  played  you  the  video  of  Robert 
Page 2618 
Heimann?  He's  dead. 
Jim  Johnston  is  the  man  who  In  1994,  20  years 
ago,  he  was  in  front  of  Congress;  he's  gone. 
It's 
a  new  company. 
Let  me  ask  you,  if  you  punish,  if  you  punish 
Reynolds  by  glvlng  more  millions  of  dollars  to 
Mr.  Crawford,  who  will  you  be  punishing?  The 
people  that  did  the  wrongdoing  that  you  found  60 
years  ago? 
MR.  ALVAREZ:  Objection,  Judge. 
THE  COURT:  Overruled. 
MR.  BELASIC:  You  have  to  decide  if  your 
punishment  has  a  purpose  because  none  of  those 
people  are  at  the  company  anymore.  The  people  you 
punish  are  people  who  never  participated  in  what 
you  found  was  wrong. 
We  know  all  of  those  organizations  are  gone. 
The  conspiracy  that  Dr.  Proctor  talked  about,  he's 
said  it  ended  in  1999.  That's  14  years  ago.  He 
said  that  none  of  those  organizations  exist. 
And 
that's  why  you  don't  see  someone  going  on  a 
television  show  and  saying,  oh, 
I  think  it  hasn't 
been  proven,  smoking  and  cancer. 
Instead,  you  hear 
Reynolds  saying  flat  out,  it  does.  You  see 2619 
Dr.  Proctor,  smoking  causes  cancer,  smoking  lS 
addicting.  You  go  on  their  website,  they  say  that. 
None  of  those  examples  that  they  gave  you  from 
someone  gOlng  on  Nightline  or  60  Minutes  or  20/20 
can  happen  again  because  the  companies,  including 
Reynolds,  all  agree  that  smoking  causes  disease, 
because  there  is  a  warning  on  every  pack,  because 
none  of  these  programs  and  none  of  these  spokesmen 
exist  anymore,  and  mainly  because  the  government  of 
the  United  States  has  a  watchdog  called  the  Food 
and  Drug  Administration  that  has  the  authority  to 
control  what  the  companles  say,  what  they  do,  and 
what  they  make. 
No  amount  of  money  lS  gOlng  to  make  Reynolds 
disclose  documents  any  more  than  they  have.  You've 
heard  from  Dr.  Proctor  that  there  are  14  million 
documents  that  were  disclosed.  None  of  them  were 
disclosed  in  the  '50s.  Giving  Mr.  Crawford 
another,  what,  $27  million  Mr.  Alvarez  is  asking 
for,  won't  make  any  more  documents  appear.  They 
have  been  produced.  Will  punishing  Reynolds  make 
Reynolds  admit  that  smoking  causes  cancer?  They  do 
admit  it.  Will  punishing  Reynolds  make  Reynolds 
disclose  documents  on  their  website  so  that 
everyone  in  the  country  can  see  them?  They've 2620 
already  done  it. 
Will  punishing  Reynolds  make  them  take  ads  off 
of  television  like  you  saw?  They  were  taken  off  40 
years  ago.  And  so  there  isn't  any  evidence  in  this 
case  that  the  punishment  will  have  a  purpose. 
The  purpose,  and  the  only  purpose  we've  seen 
when  he  said  punishment,  the  end  result  is  that 
Mr.  Crawford,  already  nine  times  a  millionaire, 
will  get  even  more  money. 
You  heard  all  about  the  FDA,  and  they  have 
brought  authority.  They  can  shut  the  plants  down, 
they  can  shut  the  manufacturing  process  down,  they 
can  stop  an  advertising  campaign,  they  can  change 
the  ingredients  in  cigarettes,  they  can  reduce  the 
nicotine  in  cigarettes.  The  authority  and  the 
freedom  for  Reynolds  to  act  as  it  wants  has  been 
taken  away  by  the  United  States  government.  And 
now  the  FDA  regulates  them  just  as  if  they  were  a 
prescription  drug  from  the  manufacturing  to  the 
sale. 
That's  the  Surgeon  General  saylng  that  it  was 
a  landmark  change  in  the  law.  And  you'll  see  it 
restricts  tobacco  marketing  and  sales  to  youth. 
That's  the  Surgeon  General  saying  that  the  FDA  can 
eliminate  the  constituents  in  smoke;  they  could 1 reduce  nicotine  if  they  wanted  to.  And  we  know 
they  can  shut  down  the  company,  they  can  shut  down 
the  plants,  they  can  shut  down  the  sales.  All  of 
those  authorities  are  new. 
None  of  those  existed 
Page 2621 
In  the  1950s. 
And  no  amount  of  money  to  Mr.  Crawford  lS 
going  to  change  what  has  already  been  changed. 
Reynolds  is  a  changed  company,  admitting  that 
smoking  causes  disease,  the  facts  that  you  found 
were  concealed,  and  under  subject  to  the  strict 
enforcement  power  of  the  United  States  government. 
You  heard  if  they  ever  want  to  make  a  new 
tobacco  product,  they  need  to  submit  it  for 
approval,  an  approval  of  the  FDA  that  could  take 
years. 
So  if  they  want  to  make  a  new  product,  an 
alternative,  it  could  take  years  to  approve.  But 
if  the  FDA  wants  to  come  in  and  shut  down  the 
plant,  they  can  do  that  on  a  surprlse  inspection. 
If  the  FDA  says,  you're  violating  the  law,  they  can 
say  that  now. 
I  wanted  to  remind  you  of  this:  How  many 
companies  in  America  can  you  think  of  that  have  to 
pay  for  their  own  policing? 
$5  billion,  the 
industry  will  pay  in  just  the  next  ten  years  to  pay 
for  the  FDA  to  police  it.  They  are  paying  for 1 their  own  policemen.  They've  lost  the  ability  to 
freely  control  how  they  make  cigarettes,  what  goes 
in  them  and  what  they  say,  and  they've  lost,  or 
will  lose,  have  $5  billion  taken  away  to  have  the 
Page 2622 
FDA  police  that. 
Now,  would  punishing  Reynolds  add  more 
enforcement  power  to  the  government  that  can  shut 
the  industry  down?  Would  giving  Mr.  Crawford 
millions  of  dollars  additional  to  put  in  his  bank 
account  over  what  you've  already  found  as  full 
compensation,  would  that  give  the  FDA  more  power  to 
shut  the  industry  down?  No,  it  wouldn't. 
And  so  the  question  today,  when  you  look  at 
the  purpose  and  whether  any  purpose  other  than 
enriching  Mr.  Crawford  would  be  served  by  glvlng 
him  more  than  the  staggering  $9  million  that  he's 
already  been  awarded,  the  answer  under  that 
evidence,  I  submit,  should  be  no. 
You  saw  a  lot  of  disputes  with  the  Surgeon 
General.  Remember  how  many  times  they  said  in  the 
'60s  and  '70s,  they  would  send  somebody  out  and 
say,  we  disagree  with  the  Surgeon  General?  That's 
not  the  case  today. 
If  you  go  on  the  website,  as 
Dr.  Figlar  explained 
DEPUTY  CLERK:  Counselor,  five  minutes. 2623 
MR.  BELASIC: 
If  you  go  on  the  website  as 
Dr.  Figlar  explained,  it  says  that  smokers  should 
rely  on  the  Surgeon  General. 
It  even  gives  you 
links  to  go  to  the  Surgeon  General.  We  agree  with 
the  Surgeon  General  that  smoking  causes  cancer,  but 
it's  addicting.  We  advise  smokers  to  get 
information.  And  again,  Mr.  Alvarez  says  this 
doesn't  matter. 
But  Judge  Dresnick  instructs  you  you  should 
consider  Reynolds  change  in  conduct.  And  you  are 
entitled  to  conclude  that  misconduct  that  occurred 
60  or  70  years  ago  doesn't  warrant  any  punitive 
damages.  Nothing  and  no  amount  of  money  and  no 
punishment  that  will  give  Mr.  Crawford  millions  of 
dollars  will  change  what  has  already  been  changed. 
In  1950,  if  you  told  the  companies, 
$10  million  or  you  admit  smoking  causes  cancer,  we 
could  talk  about  whether  that  would  change  the 
companles.  But  now,  they  already  admit  it.  They 
already  comply  with  the  warnings.  They're  already 
regulated.  They  already  turned  over  their 
documents  to  the  Attorney  Generals  of  the  United 
States.  And  so  there  is  no  evidence  in  this  case 
that  anything  would  be  deterred. 
Are  punitive  damages  necessary  to  stop 2624 
concealment  now?  No.  They're  not  concealing  now. 
Is  it  necessary  for  them  to  try  to  design  a  safer 
cigarette?  They're  under  the  FDA's  regulation  now 
for  the  design  of  their  cigarettes. 
You've  seen  the  website.  These  are  all  of  the 
things  that  Dr.  Proctor  said  should  have  been  told 
50,  60  years  ago.  They  are  now  all  on  the  website 
telling  every  single  smoker  it  causes  cancer;  if 
you're  worried  about  risks,  you  need  to  quit. 
It 
glves  them  advice  on  how  to  quit.  And  now  we  heard 
today  that  Reynolds'  scientists  are  working  on  a 
company  that  actually  sells,  sells,  smoking 
cessation  products. 
If  asked,  what  are  you  doing  now  to  help 
people  quit,  there's  the  answer.  They're  working 
at  Niconovum  to  sell  things  like  nicotine  gum  and 
nicotine  replacement  products. 
You  heard  what  Dr.  Proctor  said. 
50  years 
ago,  that  would  have  been  unheard  of  for  a  tobacco 
company  to  spend  money  and  develop  products  so 
people  could  quit  and  never  buy  their  product 
agaln. 
No  amount  of  money  glven  to  a  smoker  made  that 
change. 
It's  already  happened.  And  there  lS  no 
need  to  punish  Reynolds  for  something  that  they've 2625 
already  changed. 
We  know  that  ingredients  are  turned  over,  and 
that  every  smoker  can  go  on  the  website,  pick  their 
brand,  and  be  told  exactly  what  ingredients  there 
are.  And  the  FDA  regulates  and  ensures  those 
ingredients  are  safe  in  the  amounts  that  are  in  the 
smoke. 
In  conclusion,  when  you  think  about  punitive 
damages,  how  can  there  be  a  punishment  without  a 
purpose?  It's  a  different  scenario,  but  pretty 
much  all  of  us,  we  only  have  experience  when  it 
comes  to  punish  and  punishing  children.  We  don't 
do  it  for  no  reason.  There  has  to  be  a  legal 
purpose  here,  too.  When  you  think  about  it,  we 
haven't  disputed  the  dangers  of  tobacco  in  14 
years. 
Is  punishment  necessary  to  do  that?  It's 
already  occurred. 
To  warn  smokers?  It's  already 
occurred.  Punishment  wasn't  necessary.  To  conceal 
documents,  was  punishment  necessary?  It's  already 
happened,  that  they  have  already  disclosed. 
14  million  documents  are  turned  over,  and  no 
punishment  can  make  them  turn  over  those  documents 
twice. 
Now,  there  lS  no  evidence  here  that  punitive 
damages  are  needed  to  deter  the  conduct,  because 1 let's  say  putting  pink  In  an  advertisement  for  a 
brand  that  almost  no  one  smokes,  Camel  No.9,  let's 
say  that  was  determined  wrong.  The  FDA  yanks  that 
product  off  the  market  place.  Giving  $27  million 
Page 2626 
to  Mr.  Crawford  isn't  going  to  change  that. 
I  want  to  just  talk  finally  about  one  thing 
agaln.  You  saw  that  the  tobacco  companles  or  that 
R.J.  Reynolds  makes  about  40  cents  a  pack.  Look 
what  takes  up  half  of  it.  Half  of  the  money,  when 
somebody  buys  a  pack  of  cigarettes,  goes  to  the 
government  of  the  United  States  or  the  state 
government  of  Florida  and  the  other  states.  Half. 
Look  at  the  tiny  fraction,  7  percent  of  that,  7 
percent  is  profit.  About  half  goes  to  the 
government.  The  government  makes  many,  many  more 
times  the  money  off  of  the  sale  of  a  pack  of 
cigarette  than  the  company  that  made  it. 
If  they  don't  sell  it,  the  government  loses 
many  times  more  money  than  R.J.  Reynolds. 
It's  the 
government  who  is  now  regulating  and  in  charge  of 
the  manufacturing  and  the  design  and  the  marketing 
of  cigarettes. 
Now, 
lS  any  amount  of  punishment  gOlng  to 
change  that  fact?  The  companies  give  half  the  cost 
of  a  pack  of  cigarettes  to  the  government.  They're I controlled  and  regulated  by  the  government. 
No 
Page 2627 
amount  of  punishment  or  extra  money 
(Telephone  interruption.) 
THE  COURT:  That's  not  me.  That's  a  phone 
call.  A  wrong  number,  I'm  sorry. 
MR.  BELASIC: 
I  thought  that  was  the  hook, 
Your  Honor. 
THE  COURT: 
It  happens  periodically. 
(Interruption  in  the  proceedings.) 
MR.  BELASIC: 
I  think  that  was  my  mother 
calling. 
$2  billion,  a  staggering  amount  of  money. 
That's  how  much  R.J.  Reynolds  has  paid  the  State  of 
Florida,  to  the  government,  to  use  as  it  sees  fit. 
And  whatever  general  purpose,  whether  it's  roads  or 
stop  smoking  programs,  that  money  and  those  sale  of 
cigarettes  are  going  to  the  State.  And  the  State 
Attorney  general  can  enforce  that  Master  Settlement 
Agreement.  And  the  taxes  that  go  to  the  federal 
government  and  the  billions  of  dollars  that  are 
paid  to  the  FDA,  the  federal  government  can  enforce 
that. 
No  amount  of  money  -- you've  already  glven  him 
$9  million.  Another  $27  million  can't  change  what 
has  already  been  changed. I So  the  total  payment  lS  20- to  $30  billion. 
Think  about  whether  that's  punishment.  That's 
money  that's  been  taken.  Tobacco  companies  are  In 
the  business  to  make  a  profit. 
That's  money  that's 
Page 2628 
been  taken  from  the  company  --
MR.  ALVAREZ:  Objection,  Judge. 
THE  COURT:  Are  we  about  ready  to  wrap  it? 
MR.  BELASIC:  We  are.  We're  in  the  last 
couple  of  minutes. 
$27  million  they  asked  for. 
And  yet,  there 
are  6,000  more  cases. 
MR.  ALVAREZ: 
Objection,  Your  Honor. 
MR.  BELASIC: 
Let  me  --
THE  COURT: 
Overruled. 
MR.  BELASIC: 
Now,  would  punitives  damages 
make  people  more  aware?  Of  course  not.  Would  it 
improve  the  public  health?  There  lS  no  evidence. 
Could  it  possibly  make  cigarettes  safer  to  give 
Mr.  Crawford  money?  Would  it  stop  people  from 
starting  or  cause  them  to  stop  to  give  Mr.  Crawford 
$27  million?  No. 
It  wouldn't  ban  cigarettes. 
Could  it  make  Reynolds  more  transparent  when  they 
turned  over  the  documents  and  they're  on  their 
website? 
You  haven't  seen  evidence  of  any  valid  purpose 2629 
other  than  to  simply  say,  70  years  ago,  you  found 
he  was  injured  because  of  conduct.  And  you've 
already  found  that  he  was  fully  compensated. 
Now,  in  conclusion,  there  isn't  any  evidence 
to  say  that  somebody  that  is  making  another  type  of 
product  is  sitting  around  waiting  to  see  if 
R.J.  Reynolds  gets  punished. 
If  they  are,  anyone 
that  has  read  the  paper  knows  that  they've  had  to 
pay  billions  of  dollars. 
So  this  idea  that  some 
other  company  will  change  its  conduct  if 
Mr.  Crawford  becomes  even  more  wealthy,  there  lS  no 
basis  at  all  for  that. 
Is  this  any  evidence  that 
other  companles,  not  in  the  tobacco  company 
business,  would  change  their  behavior?  There  lS  no 
evidence  of  that. 
Would  punishment  change  Reynolds  In  a  way  that 
was  different  from  what  you  found  they  did  wrong  In 
the  '50s?  That's  already  changed.  And  so  the 
answer  lS  no;  it's  a  punishment  without  a  purpose. 
And  you  should  exercise  your  discretion,  you  should 
follow  the  Judge's  instruction  to  consider  the 
change  in  the  company,  and  you  should  award  zero 
punitive  damages.  You've  already  fully  compensated 
him  with  an  enormous  amount  of  money,  $9  million. 
But  if  you  decide  that  Mr.  Crawford  should  get 2630 
even  more  money  than  you've  already  determined 
fully  compensates  him,  if  you  decided,  then  we 
submit  that  the  maximum  limit  for  that  would  be 
another  million  dollars.  He's  already  received 
$9  million.  Anything  above  that  is  not 
compensation.  And  $1  million,  by  itself,  lS  an 
enormous  amount  of  money. 
So  it's  a  punishment  without  a  purpose,  and 
there  is  no  evidence  that  it  would  deter  or  change 
the  behavior  of  the  companies  that  has  already 
changed. 
I'd  ask  you  to  award  no  punitive  damages. 
But 
if  you  do,  award  some  amount  between  zero  and 
$1  million. 
It  was  very  hot  here  today.  Maybe  some  of  us 
had  a  hard  time  staying  awake. 
I  know  I  did  when 
it  hit  about  95  degrees  over  there. 
It's  the  third 
week.  You  paid  a  tremendous  amount  of  attention. 
I  thanked  you  from  the  beginning  for  volunteering, 
because  you  didn't  volunteer,  you  were  drafted. 
I 
thank  you  for  stepping  up  to  the  call  of  duty. 
