                   CLOSING ARGUMENT
         MR. SCHULTZ:  Thank you, Your Honor.  Counsel.
    Ms. Danielson. Good morning, everybody, and welcome back.
    Today is the day you get the case after hearing all
    the evidence that you sat through for the last
    couple of weeks.
         I would like to echo the judge's comments.  I
    told you in opening you'd be thanked many times.
    I'm going to thank you again.  You have been very
    attentive.  You have asked lots of questions, and
    that's great.  We understand you maintain an
    interest in the case, an interest in the evidence,
    and we appreciate that.  It's been a long couple of
    weeks for all of us, but today is the day you get to
    decide.
         When you walked in a couple of weeks ago, you
    might have asked yourselves, and it's not an
    unreasonable question, "What in the world is
    somebody bringing a lawsuit against a tobacco
    company for over a man who smoked for many years and
    died from lung cancer?"
         This case has been about answering that
    question, and you've now seen all the evidence in
    the case.  Lamar Danielson never saw the evidence
    that you saw in this courtroom.  All of those
    documents from Philip Morris, all the documents from
    TI and TIRC remain secret throughout his lifetime. He didn't know what you learned in this trial
    about addiction or about what Philip Morris did and
    the engineering of its cigarettes.  The TI was alive
    and well when he passed away.  Just a few months
    before he was diagnosed with lung cancer, the heads
    of the cigarette companies, including Bill Campbell
    from Philip Morris, went before Congress and said,
    "We believe nicotine is not addictive."
         We know from their documents for many, many,
    many years before that that wasn't true.
         But it was an untruth that they told all of
    Lamar Danielson's lifetime, and we'll talk about
    what impact that had on Lamar.
         The Danielson family is seeking justice from
    you in this courtroom as a community -- members of
    our community, peers within our community.  This is
    their only chance to seek justice from you.
         And we're very proud that Mrs. Danielson and
    the Danielson family chose us to come into court and
    present this case to you.
         Lamar Danielson paid with his life for his
    fault in this case.  And we've all seen that.  We do
    accept some fault, and I'll talk about it in a
    moment for Lamar Danielson.
         And one of the jobs you will have is to compare his fault to the fault of Philip Morris based on all
    the evidence that you've seen.
         Philip Morris accepts no fault, and they don't
    have to, when they come into this courtroom.  It's
    our burden.  We accept that burden.  We've met that
    burden in this case.
         You've now seen evidence -- I would imagine you
    had no idea before you came in here -- in the 1930s
    Philip Morris is studying the literature on smoking
    causing disease.  In the 1950s before Lamar
    Danielson is ever born, they're well aware of the
    mouse-painting studies and the other evidence that
    you saw.
         Despite all of that knowledge, you saw that
    they went after kids.  They redesigned Marlboro
    based on a recommendation from the Roper polling
    organization on how to get 15-year-old kids, and
    they got a lot of them over Lamar Danielson's
    lifetime.  And Lamar Danielson was one of them, and
    he became addicted at a very young age.  And he died
    at a very young age as a result of that addiction.
         Philip Morris, through the engineering of its
    products, through its advertising, made it as easy
    as possible to start smoking, as hard as possible to
    quit smoking, and as easy as possible to relapse. And we saw all of that with Lamar Danielson.
         Now, you saw this in the opening statement, the
    issues in the case.  The first one that you will
    have to answer on the verdict form -- and you heard
    a lot of evidence on it -- is whether addiction to
    Marlboro cigarettes was a legal cause of Lamar
    Danielson's death.  That's the question that you'll
    have on the verdict form.
         And as I pointed out at the very beginning of
    the trial in opening statement, it's undisputed that
    smoking Marlboro was the medical cause of Lamar
    Danielson's death.  Philip Morris doesn't claim that
    he died from embalming fumes or fumes from a gas
    grill or because he waited too long to go to the
    doctor or anything else.  Smoking Marlboro
    cigarettes was the cause of his death.
         So the real question for you is whether
    addiction to Marlboro cigarettes substantially
    contributed to that heavy smoking that we all agree
    took his life.
         And you know now why I use the phrase
    "substantially contribute" because in that special
    definition of cause in a courtroom, legal cause,
    that's what we have to prove.  It can be many
    things, but if addiction is one of the reasons that he smokes and it substantially contributed to his
    smoking, then it is the legal cause of his death.
         And you heard in opening statement and in jury
    selection we start out even in the case.  These even
    scales.  We have to put evidence on the scale.  And
    if we put evidence that even tips the scale ever so
    slightly in our favor on any given issue, then we
    win on that issue.  That is the greater weight
    burden in this case.
         So what did we put on the scale on this
    question of addiction?
         We brought you three of the top experts on
    nicotine and addiction in the country.  Dr. Hurt
    from the Mayo Clinic, who ran the Nicotine
    Dependence Center for more than 15 years; who has
    published hundreds of articles, has actually gone
    out and researched nicotine, researched addiction
    and how it affects the human body; and helped more
    than 50,000 people who came through that clinic
    during his tenure.  You heard that testimony from
    him.
         Dr. Cummings, who got all the documents from
    the New York Attorney General, cancer researcher at
    Roswell Cancer Institute, who also wrote nearly
    400 articles on the subjects that he talked to you about, also treated thousands of people for nicotine
    addiction.
         And Dr. Burns, who was the last expert to
    testify, who wrote the 1975 Surgeon General's Report
    and has been involved as an editor or reviewer on
    every single report in the 40 years since then.
         These are the -- the best experts you can find
    on these issues, and they came in here and talked to
    you.  And what they told you is consistent with what
    they've told the rest of America through their
    publishing and medical journals and scientific
    journals, through their publishing in Surgeon
    General's Reports and NCI monographs -- that's the
    credibility that they bring into this courtroom.
         We also brought you testimony of Lamar
    Danielson's friends, family, coworkers, who gave you
    all the addiction evidence, all of the behaviors
    around Lamar Danielson's smoking that prove the
    addiction in this case.
         The question, then, is, did Philip Morris put
    anything on the scale that counterbalanced that,
    that brought it back to even?
         Because if they did not, then we win on the
    issue of addiction.
         Philip Morris cross-examined our witnesses. You saw some Reader's Digest articles.  You heard
    60 million people quit.  We've never said addicted
    smokers can't quit.  Lamar Danielson eventually did.
    And they brought you Dr. Daphne Dorce.
         Dr. Dorce has a fine education.  She helps
    people with addiction problems.  Addiction problems
    are very serious problems.  It's good work, and she
    should be proud of that, but that's not the issue in
    the courtroom.
         The issue in the courtroom is the evidence that
    she brings and the credibility behind her opinions.
    And you can judge that credibility based on how
    consistent or inconsistent they are with other
    sources.
         You heard her on cross-examination admit her
    opinions on the most fundamental issues in this case
    are at odds with the Surgeon General, with the
    National Institute of Drug Abuse, with the National
    Institutes of Health, with the Centers for Disease
    Control, with the World Health Organization.
         She doesn't believe most smokers are addicted,
    like every one of those organizations does.  And how
    could she?  Because if she came into the courtroom
    and said most smokers are addicted, would there be
    any question in your mind Lamar Danielson was one of them?
         If most are addicted, like the CDC and the
    Surgeon General say, is Lamar one of them or is he
    one of the minority smokers, the social smoker, the
    casual smoker, who can take or leave cigarettes, who
    doesn't have that compulsive need, which Dr. Dorce
    told you yesterday morning is feeling the need to
    smoke on a daily basis.  That's how she defined
    compulsive smoking.
         That is compulsive smoking, and there's no
    question in this case Lamar Danielson was a
    compulsive smoker.
         Dr. Dorce has never published in the area of
    nicotine addiction; she's never published in -- on
    the objects of addiction at all.  She's never talked
    to anyone about nicotine addiction, she said, other
    than as part of some other presentation outside of a
    courtroom.
         And she doesn't share her opinions -- the ones
    that she shared with you, how she interprets the
    DSM, what the DSM means, none of that has she ever
    shared outside of a courtroom in a tobacco trial.
         And you can ask yourself, why is that?
         You know, I asked her, "Isn't there a process
    where if you're too busy to write articles" -- although she told us, "Nothing in my career has ever
    prevented me from publishing."  She hasn't, but even
    if there were something preventing her, there's a
    process where she can take the testimony she gave
    you in this courtroom and has given in other
    courtrooms and subject that to peer review, simply
    send up it up and find out what other psychiatrists
    think about what she's saying about the DSM, what
    she's saying about addiction, and how her opinions
    are at odds with the public health community.
         She's never done that.  And you can ask
    yourself why.  Does that affect the credibility of
    her opinions that she's not willing to put them out
    there to be subject to scrutiny or criticism by her
    peers?  Our experts have done that hundreds and
    hundreds of times.
         She told you she has a busy clinical practice.
    Dr. Cummings and Dr. Hurt have busy clinical
    practices, and they've treated thousands of patients
    as well.  So you'll have to decide whether that's a
    sufficient explanation for that.
         The standard that she brings into the courtroom
    is the DSM.  And you heard a lot about the DSM.
    It's a psychiatric manual intended to diagnose
    mental disorders, even though she told you herself most people don't go to psychiatrists for nicotine
    addiction.  And not all psychiatrists even use the
    DSM, but that's the manual she brought in.
         I asked her on cross-examination, "Isn't it
    true the DSM-5 -- the newest one that just came out
    a couple of years ago -- has never been
    independently established as reliable or valid?  And
    she admitted it has not.  They're still studying
    that, is what she said.
         So we don't have any evidence that DSM-5, this
    newest version of DSM, is reliable or valid in the
    first part; but, more importantly, she uses it in a
    way that the DSM itself says you cannot.
         Dr. Hurt told you on his direct examination
    that you have to have a clinical interview in order
    to apply the DSM.
         And, excuse me.  I know you-all don't have
    water, but... I just have to take a sip.
         The first thing I showed Dr. Dorce on
    cross-examination -- I walked over and put the DSM
    on the ELMO and showed her this quote.
         "On the basis of the clinical interview, text
    descriptions, criteria, and clinician judgment, a
    final diagnosis is made."
         And I said, "Dr. Dorce, I know it's not your fault, but you never had a chance to do a clinical
    interview of Lamar Danielson that is required by the
    DSM, correct?"
         And she said, "That's correct."
         And there's a reason that you have to have a
    clinical interview on the DSM.  Dr. Hurt talked
    about this on his direct.
         If you just look at the first three criteria --
    these are 6 out of the 11 -- what did Lamar
    Danielson intend?  What was Lamar Danielson's
    persistent desire?  Did he have a strong desire or
    urge?  It's not possible to say, no, no, no, unless
    you ask Lamar Danielson.  That's why the DSM says
    you have to do a clinical interview.
         Dr. Dorce said in her practice she does a
    clinical interview with everyone who comes in.  "An
    extensive examination" was the phrase that she used.
         She can't do it here.  You heard from Dr. Hurt
    it's not appropriate to use the DSM in this way.
    And you heard from her that the clinical interview
    is required, but that's not what she did.  Instead
    there's a substitute of questions asked largely by
    lawyers of cigarette companies of witnesses, many --
         MR. GERAGHTY:  I would object to that as not in
    evidence, that last comment. THE COURT:  (After perusing realtime) I'll --
    I'll sustain the objection to the particular
    question -- or the statement that "there's a
    substitute of questions asked largely by lawyers for
    cigarette companies of witnesses."
         Thank you.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Many questions asked in depositions years after
    the fact substitute for the clinical interview.
         Did Dr. Dorce show you anything in the DSM that
    suggested that's appropriate?  You didn't see any
    evidence of that.
         You'll hear in the instructions this case comes
    on the heels of the Engle Class Action.  And it's
    taken many years for us to get to the courtroom,
    through no fault of Philip Morris, no fault of --
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object to
    the comment as not evidence and irrelevant.
         THE COURT:  I'll overrule the objection.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  -- through no fault of Philip
    Morris and no fault of Mrs. Danielson.
         But those are just the facts.  And so, as it
    turns out, through no one's fault, we're asking
    people their memories of very specific events over
    the course of the lifetime many years after the fact.  That is not a substitute for a clinical
    interview under the DSM.
         The Judge will also tell you you can accept or
    reject the opinions of any expert in this case, ours
    or Dr. Dorce.  Or you can give them whatever weight
    they deserve.
         You don't have to agree with Dr. Dorce's
    assessment of the DSM.  Look at the first question
    up here.
         "Tobacco is often taken in larger amounts or
    over a longer period of time than was intended."
         Did you see evidence in this case that Lamar
    Danielson smoked longer than he intended?  He told
    his wife in the 1990s he quit.  Around 1992 he was
    absolutely done smoking, and he continued to smoke
    after five days.  You heard all the evidence on the
    withdrawal symptoms around that.
         Did he really intend to quit for five days and
    come unglued and pace the floors and go through what
    he went through just because he was going to go back
    a week later because he liked the taste of Marlboro?
    That doesn't fit with the evidence.
         You can infer from the evidence in this case
    that he smoked longer than he intended.  You can
    also infer there's a persistent desire.  And you know there are unsuccessfully efforts to cut down or
    control tobacco use.
         Dr. Dorce mentioned a four-month to one-year
    quit in 1987.  Ask yourself if that's the evidence
    you saw in this case.
         We heard about quits from Becky Wiggins of a
    week in 1987, a week in 1988; Roy Wiggins said he
    remembered him once or twice quitting for a week.
    Beverly Milsted recalled him quitting for a month.
    Lawana Joyner said he had a quit in early '80s.  All
    of those quits were unsuccessful.
         And they satisfy this criterion, "Craving or a
    strong desire or urge to use tobacco."
         He told Ricky Stokes during the quit after his
    diagnosis that he could eat a cigarette.  If that's
    not a craving, ladies and gentlemen, what is a
    craving for tobacco?  Do social smokers feel like
    they could eat a cigarette when they're not having
    one?  That is addiction, and that criterion, you can
    find from the evidence, is satisfied.
         Tobacco use is continued despite having
    knowledge of a persistent or recurrent physical or
    psychological problem that is likely to have been
    caused or exacerbated by tobacco.
         Small cell lung cancer is about the worst problem you can get from smoking.  And you heard in
    the evidence in this case, Lamar Danielson on
    Friday, November 4th of 1994 was told he had a mass
    in his chest.
         He believed it was cancer.  He went to Lawana
    Joyner on the way home to tell Mrs. Danielson about
    it and said, "Here are my cigarettes.  I'm done
    smoking."
         The very next day he tells his son Billy, "I
    have cancer," and he's smoking a cigarette.  The day
    after that he gets a call from the hospital and they
    say, you need to come in, this is bad.
         He's too scared and nervous to drive so he
    asked Ricky Stokes to drive him to the hospital; and
    he smokes a cigarette on the way to the hospital.
         Tobacco use after knowledge that you have a
    problem.  That's what the evidence in this case
    showed.  Dr. Dorce gave tolerance as a satisfied
    criterion.  There's no real way around that.
         People who have never smoked can't smoke a pack
    and a half or two or three packs a day.  And
    withdrawal as manifested by taking nicotine or
    cigarettes to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms;
    and those are some of the withdrawal symptoms.
         And I would submit to you the evidence shows Lamar Danielson had all of those and many more.
    Mrs. Danielson told you on one of his quits he said
    his teeth hurt.  He couldn't concentrate.  Other
    people said he was coming unglued.  He was driving
    his family crazy because of the withdrawal symptoms
    that he was having.
         All of these criteria are satisfied based on
    the evidence in this case.
         And I asked Dr. Dorce yesterday on
    cross-examination, what about the DSM that applied
    when Lamar Danielson was alive?  Why are we using a
    2013 DSM for a man who was alive and smoking in the
    1980s?
         It first came out in 1980; and I asked her, the
    DSM 3, the first version, did it require clinically
    significant impairment or distress?  No, it did not.
    And one of the reasons it would not is because
    people wouldn't get distressed about smoking in the
    1980s.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, this is not
    evidence.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  It's an inference, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Hang on, please.
         I'll sustain the objection to one of the
    reasons it would not is because people wouldn't get distressed about smoking in the 1980s.  The jury
    should disregard that statement.  Thank you.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  Ask yourself this:  If you can
    smoke virtually anywhere; you can smoke in your
    home; you can smoke at work.  There are almost no
    restrictions.  You can smoke on airplanes; you can
    smoke in restaurants.  How many problems would Lamar
    Danielson have from smoking that impaired him?
         Very different world today.  There are lots of
    places you can't smoke.  Clinically significant
    impairment and distress makes a lot of sense in a
    2013 version of the DSM; and it makes sense that it
    wasn't in the 1980 version of the DSM.
         That's the version that if he had gotten to a
    doctor, a psychiatrist, to be diagnosed in the
    1980s, it would have been applied to him.
         So it is the wrong test and it's used in the
    wrong way.  No clinical interview when even
    Dr. Dorce admits that that is required.
         Now, on the other hand, you heard from Dr. Hurt
    that the Heaviness of Smoking Index is far and
    away -- those are his words, far and away -- a
    better tool for assessing dependence, especially
    under the circumstances of this case.
         Time to first cigarette and cigarettes per day. Because it's objective.  You don't have to ask
    what's in Lamar Danielson's mind to answer that.
    And it's been established through scientific study
    and research and scientific publications as
    reliable, valid, and predictive.
         Dr. Cummings told you exactly the same thing;
    and neither of them said it was used as a screening
    tool.  Dr. Cummings has treated thousands of people
    for nicotine addiction, and he uses the Heaviness of
    Smoking Index.
         Lamar Danielson, if you use the one to one and
    a half packs a day estimate, scores a 5 out of the
    6, high addiction on the Heaviness of Smoking Index.
    If you use the two packs or more, which many people
    testified to, including Lawana Joyner who kept a
    spreadsheet of his smoking for his Marlboro miles,
    then he would be 6 out of 6.
         So ask yourself:  Why would it matter what
    happens if somebody is a zero or a 1?  Does it mean
    everybody has addiction?  That's not the case that
    you're here about.  You're here about a man who
    scored a 5 or a 6 on a scale out of 6.
         And this also relates to this whole definition
    versus diagnosis.  The CDC -- you heard from
    Dr. Cummings and from Dr. Dorce that the CDC and the Surgeon General and NIDA don't send out armies of
    doctors to assess people under the DSM in order to
    compile information on the number of people addicted
    to nicotine in this country.
         You can use the definition; you can use the
    HSI; you can use the DSM.  These are all valid ways
    to determine addiction.
         Dr. Dorce on this point, just like the others
    that we talked about, is at odds with the Surgeon
    General, at odds with the CDC, and at odds with the
    National Institute on Drug Abuse.  Only Dr. Dorce
    says you have to have the DSM diagnosis in order to
    apply the Heaviness of Smoking Index.
         You didn't hear that from Dr. Hurt.  He's a
    medical doctor.  You didn't hear it from
    Dr. Cummings.  You didn't hear it from Dr. Burns,
    who's a medical doctor.
         And you've got a diagnosis in this case from
    Dr. David Burns, who's been writing Surgeon
    General's Reports for 40 years.  He diagnosed
    Mr. Danielson with addiction and he told you in no
    uncertain terms it caused his death.  Dr. Burns
    doesn't use the DSM.  And you don't have to use the
    DSM.
         The jury instructions in this case don't tell you to diagnose Lamar Danielson with addiction.  The
    jury instructions don't say to use the DSM.  The
    verdict form doesn't ask you was he ever diagnosed
    with nicotine addiction or can you diagnose him with
    nicotine addiction?
         The question is:  Was he addicted and was it a
    legal cause?  You don't even have to all agree on
    what the definition is if you unanimously agree that
    he was addicted.
         You'll be told -- as I mentioned before, you
    can accept or reject any expert's testimony.  You
    don't have to accept the DSM or the Heaviness of
    Smoking Index.  The Court just told you the jury
    instructions will say to you bring your common sense
    to these issues.
         And if you apply your common sense -- if we
    were talking about methamphetamine or crack cocaine
    and somebody's dosing themselves hundreds of times a
    day with that drug, is there any question that's
    addictive behavior that you're talking about a drug
    addict?
         Well, nicotine is a drug; and you've heard in
    this trial it is more addictive and addictive in the
    same ways as other drugs of abuse, and it causes
    more death than all other addictions combined. You can use your common sense.  You don't have
    to have the DSM.  You can diagnose under the
    Heaviness of Smoking Index; you can diagnose under
    the DSM; or you can simply use your common sense.
         And the evidence in this case would tell you
    this is textbook addictive behavior.  These are the
    very slides that I showed you with Dr. Cummings that
    we walked through with him.  I'm not going to walk
    through all of this with you again.  You've seen it.
         But you see the heavy smoking.  You see smoking
    first thing in the morning before his feet would hit
    the floor because his brain has been deprived of
    nicotine.  His different quit attempts, the ways he
    tried to quit.
         Mr. Danielson didn't have Chantix in the '80s.
    He didn't even have patches.  He didn't have
    Wellbutrin.  He didn't have vaping.  Those
    alternatives were not out there.
         He did use chewing gum.  He used mints.  He
    used lollipops.  He was riding his bike in a suit
    because he was having a craving for a cigarette.
         He wanted to quit.  He was motivated to quit.
    Does that sound like somebody who is not motivated
    to quit?
         But he failed because he was heavily addicted to nicotine.
         And you heard this evidence many times and many
    ways:  When Mr. Danielson quit smoking, it turned
    him inside out.  He became the opposite of his
    normal personality.  And these are all quotes from
    the people in his life, friends, family, coworkers,
    of the difference between Lamar Danielson when he
    was smoking and when he wasn't smoking.
         And Becky Wiggins, you heard her deposition
    read.  Ms. Holman in our office came in and read it.
    She said she knew Lamar was smoking again on one of
    his quits because he was suddenly calmed and he was
    back to being Lamar.
         And the reason it works that way is because his
    brain was changed by nicotine at a very young age.
    And Dr. Hurt told you about this.  Dr. Cummings
    spoke about it as well.
         Kids who take up smoking who don't know the
    long-term consequences bathe their brains in
    nicotine day in, day out for years on end.  It's a
    choice, quote/unquote, made by a teenager whose
    brain has not yet finished developing.
         Dr. Dorce told you that part of the brain
    that's not finished developing in a teen affects
    judgment.  It affects the ability to foresee long-term consequences.  It affects impulse control.
         That's why nearly 90 percent of people who
    smoke regularly started smoking as teenagers; and I
    think the evidence is pretty clear that Philip
    Morris understood that.
         You heard about up-regulation and
    down-regulation about nicotine receptors and you-all
    asked a lot of questions about that.
         Dr. Dorce told you there are alcohol receptors,
    opiate receptors.  And Dr. Hurt told you that is
    true; but nicotine, he said, is unique in biology.
    It's different from all of those others because when
    people take other drugs of abuse, when they drink or
    if they're shooting heroin, those receptors
    down-regulate in response to that.
         Nicotine receptors up-regulate; you get more of
    them.  And when you quit smoking, yes, after six or
    eight weeks they will down-regulate.  They'll go
    back to their normal number that they were before,
    but they are permanently changed.
         And you heard that from Dr. Hurt.  That
    indelible memory -- neuroplasticity, the indelible
    memory is how he described it.
         The nicotine receptors in a smoker's brain,
    even after they've quit and they've gone back to the normal number, are still permanently altered.
    That's the power of nicotine and that's what was
    happening to Lamar Danielson.
         You saw this slide a couple of times in the
    trial and that is a core question for you when
    you're talking about this:  Was he a social smoker
    or was he an addicted smoker?  Did he smoke
    compulsively?  Feeling the need to smoke every day,
    is what Dr. Dorce said.
         Because it's that compulsive smoking that leads
    to all the lifetime exposures of the toxins in
    smoke, and that's what causes lung cancer.
    Dr. Burns told you that.
         There's no safe level of smoking.  But you
    don't see small cell lung cancer in 15-year-old kids
    because they haven't been smoking two packs a day
    for 25 years.  Those are the people who get cancer.
    That's exactly what happened to Lamar Danielson.
    And it's because addiction is part of who he was
    from a very young age.
         I mentioned this a moment ago:  Surgeon General
    of the United States, "Nicotine dependency through
    cigarette smoking is not only the most common form
    of drug addiction, but the one that causes more
    death and disease than all other addictions combined."
         And Dr. Burns told you in this case there's no
    question that Lamar's death was caused by his
    addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine.
         Dr. Cummings similarly told you if it wasn't
    for the addiction he wouldn't have had that kind of
    exposure that we saw.
         I showed you this in opening statement.  This
    is the jury instruction on what it means when you
    answer question one.  What does it mean to say that
    it was a cause?
         And the important part in the plaintiff's case
    is that addiction need not be the only cause as long
    as it contributes substantially.
         So you can -- you've heard all this testimony
    about enjoyment, relaxation, stress relief.  Philip
    Morris's acts, which certainly, as we'll talk about
    in a moment, contributed to Lamar Danielson's
    smoking.
         All of those things can be causes.  But if
    addiction is one of them, then the answer to the
    first question on the verdict form is yes.
         And let's face it.  You heard from Dr. Dorce,
    herself -- enjoyment, relaxation, stress relief,
    suppressed appetite -- those things don't magically evaporate when you become addicted to nicotine.
         People who are addicted experience all of those
    things.  You bet Lamar Danielson enjoyed smoking.
    He was addicted to it.  Of course he enjoyed
    smoking.
         Even if enjoyment, relaxation, stress relief
    are reasons that he smoked, if addiction is one of
    the reasons alongside those, then the answer to the
    first question on the verdict form is yes.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Objection, Your Honor.  That
    misstates the Court's instruction.
         THE COURT:  I'll overrule the objection.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  And there's no fault on this
    question.  That's the second question on the verdict
    form.  We're not talking about whether it was Lamar
    Danielson's fault that he was addicted.  The
    question is:  Was he and did it substantially
    contribute?
         You saw this document in opening.  You saw it
    at trial.  Lamar Danielson was five years old,
    turning six in 1959.  And Philip Morris internally
    recognized, "Sure, people smoke for enjoyment,
    people smoke for stimulation and relaxation, people
    smoke for addiction."  All of that was true with
    Lamar. And the answer to the first question on the
    verdict form is "yes" as a result of that.
         And that leads to the second question:  "What
    percentage of fault for his death is attributable to
    Philip Morris and how much is attributable to Lamar
    Danielson?"
         One thing I want to stop and mention here, the
    Court is going to tell you in the instructions, you
    cannot assign fault to Lamar for anything that Micah
    Danielson may have done.  And specifically, I'm
    talking about buying cigarettes, smoking around
    Lamar when he was trying to quit, not encouraging
    him to quit or encouraging him more strongly to
    quit.
         You heard a lot of evidence on that.  It's not
    about fault, and you'll hear that it's not to affect
    your damages verdict either.  The only purpose for
    that evidence goes to how it affected Lamar
    Danielson and his smoking.  And, frankly, if he were
    not addicted, it wouldn't much matter.
         The instructions are going to tell you that
    "negligence," which I'm going to talk about, because
    that's what we're talking about when we're talking
    about percentages of fault, "negligence is the
    failure to use reasonable care." It's doing something that a reasonable person
    or company would not do under the same or similar
    circumstances or failing to do something a
    reasonable person or company would do under the
    circumstances.  Failing to use reasonable care.
         And when you talk about dividing up fault in
    the case, consider how long Philip Morris knew about
    the dangers of smoking.  We heard evidence all about
    Lamar and what he knew --
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object.
    This is the waiver in Rizzuto.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  We heard a lot of evidence about
    Lamar and what he knew or what his family members
    knew.  We also saw a lot of evidence about what
    Philip Morris knew.
         We do not accept any fault for Philip Morris's
    fraudulent concealment or the conspiracy, which
    we'll talk about in just a moment.  When it spoke,
    whether on its own or through the Tobacco Institute,
    it had a duty to tell the whole truth.  And if you
    find later on, on those questions, that they were a
    substantial contributing cause to Lamar Danielson's
    death, there will not be any allocation -- there
    will be no reduction of damages based on an allocation of fault under this question, and that
    will probably make more sense when I talk about it
    then.
         But just so that we're very clear going into
    this, we don't accept fault for Philip Morris's
    concealment or the lies or the conspiracy they
    entered into.
         We showed you all the way back in 1936, Philip
    Morris was following the literature, including this:
    "Abundant clinical evidence of an etiological role."
    Dr. Cummings told you that means a causal role of
    cigarette smoking and cancer.  That's a study from
    1929.  It's found in a document from Philip Morris
    in 1936.  This is 15 years before Lamar Danielson
    was born.
         What did Philip Morris do with this
    information?  Did it use reasonable care, which is
    the standard under negligence?  Was Philip Morris
    reading all those Reader's Digest articles that
    Mr. Geraghty showed Mike Cummings?  Lamar Danielson
    wasn't reading articles in the 1920s, 1930s, "Cancer
    By the Carton" in the 1940s.  Can you infer that
    Philip Morris knew about them, though?
         They certainly knew about this, because this
    and the other studies that came out in the early 1950s, they told us in their documents, are what
    prompted them to get together at the Plaza Hotel.
         What did Philip Morris do with this
    information?  Is there something Philip Morris could
    have done with this information that would have
    changed Lamar Danielson's life, that would have
    affected whether Lamar Danielson ever smoked
    cigarettes?
         With the knowledge that they had going back
    into the 1930s, Philip Morris still chose, when it
    redesigned Marlboro, to base it on a study from 1953
    that included 15 year olds.  And they were told, "If
    you want to increase the number of 15 year olds,
    here's the way you should go about it."
         George Weissman, whose name you heard many
    times in the trial, who was the vice president at
    Philip Morris, writes to the head of research and
    says, "You know what?  We're encouraged that we have
    our greatest strength among 15 to 24 years old --
    year olds.  And the Roper survey is good
    information.  We should proceed.  Let's go."  And
    they did.  And they redesigned Marlboro, and it came
    out the next year when Lamar Danielson was one year
    old.
         The cornerstone of Marlboro and the redesign of Marlboro included 15-year-old kids.  And you heard
    from Jerry Pate, by the time Lamar Danielson was a
    15-year-old, everyone in their group, it was the hip
    cigarette Wayfarers and Marlboros.  That was a quote
    from Mr. Pate.
         That didn't happen by accident.  And you're
    allowed to ask, you must ask, "Is this reasonable
    care?"  Did Philip Morris act as a reasonable
    company, or did they act unreasonably based on the
    information that they had before Lamar Danielson was
    even born?
         We showed you an internal --
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I object to waiver
    in Rizzuto.
         THE COURT:  Approach, please.
         (The following proceedings were held outside of
    the hearing of the jury.)
         MR. GERAGHTY:  I don't mean to interrupt
    Mr. Schultz --- -
         THE COURT:  I understand.
         MR. GERAGHTY: -- but whenever he's asking the
    jury -- he's done it twice now, even though he said
    to the contrary, but he's asking the jury to think
    about intentional conduct of Philip Morris and
    compare it to the conduct of Mr. Danielson under the comparative fault question.  If you do that, you
    waive the argument that the comparative fault
    numbers do not apply to the intentional tort claims.
         I just want to make that clear, that those
    statements are doing that, and that's the basis for
    my objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Okay.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  I realize Your Honor may not
    make that decision at this point, but I just --
         THE COURT:  I understand.  The reason I
    overruled the first objection was because it's
    really whether or not he's going to waive it.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  I understand that.
         THE COURT:  Your objection actually was an
    alert to him and he --
         (Laughter.)
         THE COURT:  -- modified his comment in the next
    sentence and dealt with that.
         So it really is a question of whether in total
    it's a waiver.  But if you wish to keep alerting him
    that he may be going in a direction, you can do
    that.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Well -- and I understand, and I
    just think there's going to be a point where the
    cumulative effect of this you can't fix it, in other words, but I understand Your Honor's point, and I --
         THE COURT:  But as to -- as to the latest
    objection, though, I -- I'm sorry, I didn't see
    the --
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Okay.  That's fine.
         THE COURT:  -- the connection.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  I understand.
         THE COURT:  And that's why I asked you to
    approach the bench.  I understood your first
    objection.  And -- and it was a statement that
    basically was comparing the fault of defendant to --
    to the concealment of claim.  And, yes, I agree
    that if he kept going down that road, he may stand
    in the position that he had waived it.
         But with respect to the second one, I didn't --
         MR. SCHULTZ:  Your Honor, for the record, I'm
    talking about their conduct; they could have taken a
    different course.  It was negligent of them not to
    do so.  I'm going to talk about the conspiracy and
    their intentional concealment under those --
         THE COURT:  Again, it's important that the
    distinction be made if you're going to continue
    to be able to --
         MR. SCHULTZ:  Yes.
         THE COURT:  -- given that pocket that has been developed.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  And I've couched every single bit
    of this in terms of negligence because that's where
    it belongs.
         THE COURT:  Thank you.
         (The following proceedings were held within the
    hearing of the jury.)
         MR. SCHULTZ:  You can pull that back up,
    please, Ryan.
         This is what Philip Morris did with the
    knowledge that Philip Morris had, and this is when
    Lamar Danielson is a newborn.  In fact, this is a
    month before -- or ten days before he was born.
         Philip Morris's fault, its negligence, its
    failure to use reasonable care to act as a
    reasonably prudent company would under the same
    circumstances extends far back before any fault
    could ever begin on the part of Lamar Danielson.
         Philip Morris, in their internal marketing
    videos, actually celebrated the success of this
    marketing effort, and they talked about Marlboro as
    the greatest success in tobacco history and one of
    the most successful marketing concepts in the world.
         And now you will hear in the courtroom that
    none of that played any role in Lamar Danielson's smoking.  Well, you're entitled to draw the opposite
    conclusion, and the evidence suggests that you
    should.
         Mr. Geraghty told you in opening that Philip
    Morris clung too long to the notion that smoking
    didn't cause lung cancer.  Philip Morris didn't
    cling to that notion at all.  The evidence shows
    that it knew smoking caused lung cancer before Lamar
    Danielson was born.
         In 1961, Helmut Wakeham, the head of research,
    a presentation to the R & D committee, says,
    "Carcinogens are found in practically every class of
    compounds in smoke.  They can't get them all out."
         And in the same document they're discussing
    controlled nicotine delivery.  This is before Lamar
    Danielson ever picked up a cigarette.  Is there
    something that a reasonable company would have done
    that might've changed the path of Lamar Danielson's
    life?
         How would a reasonable company act on the basis
    of this information?
         1964, we saw this several times in the trial as
    well, the Surgeon General links cancer to cigarette
    smoking.  This is news across the front pages of
    America.  It's not news to Philip Morris.  But it's another opportunity for Philip Morris to act as a
    reasonable company would act under the
    circumstances.
         Is there something Philip Morris could have
    done that would have changed the course of Lamar
    Danielson's life at this point before he's ever
    picked up a cigarette?
         2003, Philip Morris told us, "Most teenagers
    don't worry about long-term risks.  They can't
    imagine what it's like to be older, and they can
    become addicted quickly."  And that's all true.
         We know around 1967 Lamar Danielson is smoking
    cigarettes.  1968, you know that he's smoking
    regularly.  You heard that from Jerry Pate.
         There is a warning on the side of the packs.
    We have to believe it went on in early '66, and we
    don't have evidence of him smoking before then.
         But you saw from the Federal Trade Commission
    in their 1967 report that that warning was
    ineffective.  It could not overcome all the
    advertising that was surrounding Mr. Danielson, a
    message that they said in the FTC report, "Anyone
    who could read or speak the English language would
    have gotten."
         Mr. Geraghty told you in opening that Lamar was told constantly as a child not to smoke or drink.
    You have to judge the evidence in the case on that
    point.
         No one ever heard either of his parents speak
    to Lamar about smoking.  His father said he didn't
    talk to Lamar, even when he smelled smoke on him in
    high school.  What we do know is that at least one
    time when he was 14 years old -- so we know he's
    smoking at 14 -- he got in trouble for smoking.
         But you heard the evidence from his brother
    Ray, "Yeah, mom was very opposed to smoking.  She
    didn't like the smell.  She didn't like the
    ashtrays.  Health was never mentioned."  That was a
    direct quote from his brother Ray Danielson.
    "Health was never mentioned."
         Now, at the same time Lamar Danielson is
    beginning to smoke, Philip Morris's knowledge
    doesn't go away.  It doesn't evaporate.  It
    continues to grow.  And Philip Morris, despite this
    knowledge, in 1970, is still targeting young people.
    This is the year Lamar Danielson is 16 years old,
    going on 17 years old.  And they're talking about
    how to get that group of smokers.  Well, they have
    Lamar Danielson by this time.  And they're trying to
    get others.  Is that how a reasonable company acts; a fault-free company acts?
         You've heard that a warning went on the packs
    in 1970.  You've heard a lot about warnings in this
    case, and I'm not going to stand here and tell you
    Lamar Danielson never saw a warning on a pack of
    cigarettes in the 1970s.  I think any reasonable
    person would know that he had to have seen it at
    some point in the 1970s.
         But we know what Philip Morris thought about
    the 1970 warning.  Dr. Cummings showed you this
    formally secret business document.  "A harsher
    warning will be required on all cigarette packages
    after November 1st, 1970.  It remains to be seen
    whether this stiffer caution notice will affect
    sales.  No change was evident when the present
    notice was added to the package in 1965."  In other
    words, it didn't make any difference.  "We doubt the
    new notice will have an adverse effect."
         And if you look at the sales of Marlboro, which
    we did through that internal marketing video, it
    didn't.  Marlboro sales continued to skyrocket
    through the 1970s.
         And Dr. Cummings showed you the 1981 FTC
    report.  "Cigarette advertising does not disclose
    material health and safety information.  As a result, many smokers remain unaware of the very
    basic fact that smoking is hazardous to health and
    many more hold false beliefs about the existence,
    probability, and severity of these dangers.  In
    addition, the evidence indicates that the current
    warning is not an effective remedy for overcoming
    this problem."
         MR. GERAGHTY:  I object based on preemption.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  Overruled.  Thank you.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  We are not suggesting that Philip
    Morris should have put a different warning on the
    pack.  Philip Morris put the warning --
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object to
    that comment as well and move to strike and make a
    motion.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  Approach.
         (The following proceedings were held outside of
    the hearing of the jury.)
         THE COURT:  Objection, please?
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Number one, there's no failure
    to warn claim, and he just said he's not suggesting
    that Philip Morris should make -- should have made a
    stronger warning, but he really is implicitly
    suggesting that by this whole line of questioning.
         So Your Honor has put in the instructions that Philip Morris, after July 1, 1969, was not required
    to put on the packages any different warning labels
    than the one that was required by the federal
    labelling law.  So I think this argument is
    implicitly trying to undermine that law and the
    Court's instruction.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  I -- the -- well, let me let
    you briefly respond for the record.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  I'm trying to do exactly the
    opposite, Judge, and make it very clear the only
    relevance of this for the jury is the effect it
    would have on Lamar Danielson in terms of
    comparative fault.  In fact, I was about to mention
    you will see a stipulation they put the proper
    warnings on there.
         THE COURT:  I -- I overruled the objection.
    Deny the motion to strike.
         (The following proceedings were held within the
    hearing of the jury.)
         MR. SCHULTZ:  As I was saying, we're not
    suggesting Philip Morris should have put a different
    or stronger warning.  It put on the warning the
    federal government required.
         But this is important in terms of how you judge
    the effect that warning may have had on Lamar Danielson when you assess his comparative fault.
         This is after that 1970 warning has been on the
    packages by the time of the report for 11 years.
    And you'll recall Philip Morris had an internal
    document where they looked at the FTC report and
    said it was accurately reported and based on sound
    research techniques provided by reputable research
    technicians; in other words, it's accurate.
         The first evidence that we have of people
    encouraging Lamar Danielson to stop smoking is right
    around this time.  Becky Wiggins and Lorraine
    Sanders, his sister-in-law and mother-in-law,
    stopped in 1980, and they started talking to him
    about smoking.
         There's no dispute about that.  Lamar Danielson
    heard people in his life tell him, "You need to quit
    smoking."
         You heard evidence from Lawana Joyner that he
    tried to quit smoking in the early 1980s.  You've
    also heard a lot about this statement over and over,
    "Aw, sis, get out of here."
         That is not the only thing Lamar Danielson said
    to his sister-in-law, though, about smoking.  He
    also told her, "I'm hooked."  Lamar Danielson was
    struggling through the 1980s with this addiction, and he's not a whole lot different, as you'll hear,
    from a lot of people his age.
         He had no idea what he was up against.  This
    goes all the way before Lamar Danielson ever picked
    up a cigarette.  And Philip Morris is attempting to
    study the effect of smoke pH on nicotine delivery.
    Nicotine delivery varies.  The higher the pH, the
    higher the nicotine delivery.  And it concludes
    nicotine delivery can be controlled via filler or
    smoke pH adjustment.
         This is what's going on in Philip Morris's labs
    despite all of the knowledge that they have.  Is
    that how a reasonable company acts?  Does this make
    any difference to Lamar Danielson when you compare
    Philip Morris's fault and Lamar Danielson's fault?
         This is before he ever smoked.  You saw more
    evidence going throughout his lifetime of the
    sophistication, the depth of Philip Morris's
    knowledge about its product and its efforts to
    manipulate that product to maximize addiction.  It
    studied --
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would move to
    strike that last comment.  Part of my motion in
    limine.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.  Thank you. MR. SCHULTZ:  They studied nicotine.  They
    studied smokers.  They studied it all.  You heard
    directly from Dr. Cummings, not to reduce the
    addictiveness of their products but to maximize
    addiction.
         Dr. Dunn, who had the book that Mr. Geraghty
    showed Dr. Cummings, the one where he had the --
    the -- this is not the views of Philip Morris or the
    CTR in his chapter in that book -- he's in charge of
    psychology at Philip Morris.  They have a whole
    department devoted to studying the psychology of
    smoking, and he summarizes their mission very neatly
    in this document that you saw.
         "I would state our charter from Philip Morris
    is in this fashion:
         "Study the psychology of the smoker in search
    of information that can increase corporate profits."
         1977.  It's been 41 years since that 1936
    document we saw where they're studying the
    cancer-causing properties of their product.
         Lamar Danielson doesn't know that this is the
    fight that he's fighting.  Lamar Danielson blamed
    himself.  And Philip Morris says, "That's right.  It
    is all your fault."
         You have to decide whether that's true, whether this contributed to his smoking, whether marketing
    to his generation as children contributed to his
    smoking, whether Philip Morris could have made more
    reasonable decisions as a company.  You've seen this
    graph several times during the trial.
         Lamar Danielson grows up with smoking on the
    rise.
         And you can see over here (indicating) when we
    get into the early 1980s, there's a drop in the
    '70s.  It starts to level off.  If you draw a
    straight line from there back to the 1960s,
    consumption is just a hair below where it was back
    in the 1960s.
         Lamar Danielson's not isolated off by himself
    smoking cigarettes.  Cigarette smoking is, at the
    time he begins, over 4,000 cigarettes per capita per
    day and almost 4,000 cigarettes per year per adult
    in the 1980s.
         You heard about 60 million quits many times
    during the trial.  The most important number we
    would submit to you about that is what Dr. Burns
    told you.  That in the 1980s, as late as the 1980s,
    where you see this first uninterrupted drop that
    kind of levels off in the '90s, until you start
    seeing another drop in the '90s -- this steep decline is when Lamar Danielson is trying to quit
    smoking, right along with the rest of America.
         And Dr. Burns told you of the people of his
    generation, 80 percent of the men who had ever
    smoked were still smoking in the 1980s.
         Lots of people had quit.  Sure.  Lots of people
    had died.  Lamar Danielson was trying to quit.  And
    4 out of 5 men from what Dr. Burns told you, as his
    birth cohort -- the people born at the same time as
    him who smoked -- 4 out of 5 of them are still
    smoking in the 1980s.
         Should Lamar have tried more ways, more times
    to quit smoking?  Yes, he should have.  And we
    accept fault for that.
         We've never said otherwise.
         But Philip Morris has responsibility here too.
    Philip Morris was saturating America with ads
    depicting the glory of cigarettes all of Lamar
    Danielson's lifetime.  And they were manipulating
    their product -- you've seen evidence of that -- to
    maximize addictiveness.  They were studying smokers
    to maximize addictiveness.  They were targeting
    kids.
         And is any of that reasonable conduct, based on
    all the knowledge that they had?  All of that goes into this comparative fault analysis.  Only a
    cigarette company would hook kids to a deadly
    addictive product and then blame them for smoking.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  I would object to that last
    comment and make a motion.
         THE COURT:  You need to approach to make the
    motion?
         MR. GERAGHTY:  No, sir.  I can do it at the end
    of this.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  I will overrule the
    objection.  Thank you.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  That is not how reasonable
    companies behave, and that's the question that
    you're being asked on the allocation of fault.
         Philip Morris has fault going back 30 years
    before Lamar Danielson ever picked up a cigarette.
    They have fault throughout his lifetime.  Wherever
    his fault begins, he should have known sooner.  He
    should have known more.  He should have tried
    harder.  Whatever that fault is, Philip Morris's
    fault doesn't end when Lamar Danielson's begins.
         Philip Morris has more fault than Lamar
    Danielson in this case, and you'll hear -- we heard
    a lot in opening about control and responsibility.
    Philip Morris was in control of those cigarettes. They were in control of their product, and they have
    a responsibility as a company.
         The next issues in this case for you are there
    concealment of information regarding the
    addictiveness or health effects of smoking?  Was
    that a legal cause of Lamar Danielson's death?  Did
    it substantially contribute?
         And, likewise, was there conspiracy?  Their
    agreement to conceal with the TI, CTR, the TIRC,
    R.J. Reynolds, Brown & Williamson Tobacco Company.
    Is that a cause?
         Those are two separate questions.  There's
    Philip Morris's concealment in its own right, what
    it knew.  And there's concealment through the
    conspiracy through the TI and all of that.  You saw
    lots of documents from the TI in this case.
         The Court will tell you Philip Morris is
    responsible for every act taken by any coconspirator
    if that act was in furtherance of that conspiracy.
         Now, I mentioned this before.  We do not accept
    fault for this conduct (indicating).
         If you say yes on either of these questions --
    was it a substantial contributing cause? -- any
    allocation of fault to Lamar Danielson will not
    reduce the verdict, and I want to be clear about that in this case.  Those are separate claims.
    The -- the negligence; the nonintentional conduct
    that I've just described; and the concealment, which
    is an intentional tort.
         The question here really is whether the message
    got out.  You heard from Dr. Cummings.  Everyone in
    America heard this message.  There's no question
    Lamar Danielson heard this message of denial and
    doubt all through the course of his lifetime.
         Philip Morris spent more than $500 million of
    its own money writing checks year after year after
    year to fund the Tobacco Institute, to fund CTR.
    You can infer from that Philip Morris certainly
    thought that it was working.
         And they told you in 1964 what the message was
    and the purpose of that message.  "Give smokers a
    psychological crutch, a self-rationale for continued
    smoking."
         Philip Morris understood smokers and they
    understood addiction.  And they said, "You know
    what, Surgeon General has said that it's bad.  We
    need to give them some rationale to keep smoking
    because they're going to hear that message."
         And, of course, at some point in Lamar
    Danielson's life he heard the message.  He knew smoking was bad for him, but that's how addiction
    works.  Rationalization and denial.  And Philip
    Morris was there to provide the rationalizations and
    the denial.  They are enablers to use addiction
    terminology.
         We went back to 1953.  Lamar Danielson was a
    couple of months old when Philip Morris -- and I
    handed you this document during Dr. Cummings's
    direct examination -- when this was published in
    newspapers across America, "We, the tobacco
    industry, accept an interest in people's health as a
    basic responsibility, paramount" -- higher than --
    "every other consideration in our business.
         "We believe the products we make are not
    injurious to health."
         This is 1954 now.
         And, "We always have and always will cooperate
    closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the
    public health."
         Is that the evidence that you saw in this case,
    their responses to the Surgeon General through the
    course of Lamar Danielson's lifetime?  That's the
    promise that they made in 1954.  And if you want to
    see two weeks before, you saw the document that
    shows what they were really thinking. This was that memo that the PR agency put
    together after they interviewed the research
    directors in the wake of the mouse-painting studies
    and all of that.  And what did the research
    directors for the companies say?
         "It's fortunate for us that cigarettes are a
    habit they can't break.
         "Said another:  'Boy!  Wouldn't it be wonderful
    if our company was the first to produce a cancer
    free cigarette.  What we could do to the
    competition!'"
         No question cigarettes cause cancer.  If we
    could make one that doesn't, man, we would make a
    lot of money.
         "Said another:  'Suppose everybody smoked just
    one cigarette less a day.  That would be maybe
    40 billion a year.'  And, again, 'The stock market
    fall is terrible.'"  Because dividends were going to
    be so good this year until this news about the
    health hazards of smoking was spread across the
    country.
         That was their initial reaction, and their
    initial concern was what it was always and that was
    money and profits.  That's what drove the
    conspiracy. If we jump to 1972, Dr. Cummings showed you
    this document from two gentlemen -- two men in the
    Tobacco Institute.
         "For nearly 20 years, this industry has
    employed a single strategy to defend itself on three
    major fronts...the strategy was brilliantly
    conceived" -- they're celebrating it -- "brilliantly
    conceived and executed over the years."  And it
    helped them win important battles.  "It's only fair
    to say it was not -- nor was it intended to be -- a
    vehicle for victory.  On the contrary, it has always
    been a holding strategy."
         We know sooner or later we have to stop
    denying.  There will come a point where it's not
    plausible for us to deny the health harms of smoking
    anymore.  Well, that point came four or five years
    after Lamar Danielson died.  But, in the meantime,
    we have a holding strategy, and we can sell lots of
    cigarettes to addicted smokers.
         How do you do that?  Creating doubt about the
    health charge without denying it, advocating the
    public's right to smoke, keeping smoking normalized,
    keep those triggers out there -- that's the ultimate
    effect of normalization of smoking advertising --
    and always encouraging more research, and that's where the CTR came in.
         Leading scientists say there's still doubt.  We
    don't know.  That's what you heard from
    Dr. Cummings.
         And that was the plan, as described internally,
    by the TI itself over the past 20 years, and it
    continued until after Lamar Danielson's death.
         Around 1999 or 2000 the conspiracy came to an
    end.  TI was shut down.  The CTR was shut down.
    These kinds of messages stopped.
         "The No. 1 health problem is not cigarette
    smoking, but the extent to which public health
    officials may knowingly mislead the American
    public."
         You haven't heard anyone say something like
    that in the last 15 years.  Because the only people
    who ever said this were the cigarette industry.  And
    you know why they said it.  They've told you, a
    psychological crutch, a self-rationale for continued
    smoking.
         That jamming of the transmission, these kinds
    of messages stopped in the year 2000.  And you heard
    from three witnesses what's happened to smoking
    rates, especially youth smoking rates, in that time.
    And the Judge told you, you can draw inferences from the evidence.  You can draw an inference if they had
    done in 1953 what they had --
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I object.  There's
    no evidence of that.
         THE COURT:  (After perusing realtime screen)
    Overruled.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  If the industry had done in 1953
    when they got together at the Plaza Hotel and said
    let's not jam the health message transmission.
    Let's do really cooperate like we're going to tell
    everyone we're going to do.  If they had done then
    what they did in the year 2000, how different would
    the world have been when Lamar Danielson was 15
    years out just like we are today?  How different
    would the smoking culture have been?
         You saw all the evidence of how the smoking
    culture back in the '60s and the '50s differed from
    what we see today.  Youth attitudes about smoking.
    The permissiveness of smoking.  Social attitudes
    about smoking.  They're entirely different.  And
    much of that is attributable to the fact that these
    messages went away 15 years ago.
         They could have gone away in 1953; but the
    industry got together and decided, no, we're going
    to do the opposite.  Did that have an effect on Lamar Danielson?  Did it have an effect on whether
    Lamar Danielson ever even picked up a cigarette?
    Those are inferences you can draw from the evidence
    to conclude that this misconduct substantially
    contributed to his smoking; and we all agree his
    smoking took his life.
         Never in his life would Lamar Danielson have
    heard something like this if they had done in '53
    what they did in the year 2000 (indicating).
         The last two issues for you on the verdict form
    are the damages.  The damages for Mrs. Danielson and
    her family and for the estate of Lamar Danielson.
    And punitive damages.
         And I'm going to talk about the punitive
    damages before I talk about the damages to them,
    although... uh, they will come last on the verdict
    form.
         Punitive damages, the judge is going to tell
    you, are appropriate if we prove, by clear and
    convincing evidence, intentional misconduct on the
    part of the industry.
         And you'll get the full instruction on what all
    of that means.  It's a higher burden of proof.
    We've met that burden of proof in this case.  You
    have to hear that it came from high officials in the company.
         The vast majority of the documents that you saw
    with Dr. Cummings, vice president, president, head
    of research, the conspiracy itself was carried out
    by the presidents of the companies.  You can't keep
    a conspiracy -- a conspiracy very long if everybody
    in the world knows about it.
         You heard the TI executive committee, the TI
    communications committee -- those were all people by
    people -- or populated by people like Joe Cullman,
    who you saw on Face the Nation.  People like Jim
    Bowling, who you saw interviewed during
    Dr. Cummings's testimony.  This all happened at the
    highest levels of the company.
         And when you're answering the punitive damages
    question of does Philip Morris deserve to be
    punished for what you've seen in this trial, ask
    yourself:  Was it an accident?  If it wasn't
    intentional, what was it?  Did all of this happen
    for 45 years by accident?  Or was it conceived --
    brilliantly conceived in the words of the TI itself
    and carried out in the name of profits?
         And look around and ask yourself if you can
    think of any example in the history of corporate
    culture that is more reprehensible -- MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object to
    this argument.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  Ask yourself if you can think of
    any example in the history of corporate culture
    that's more reprehensible than what you've seen from
    the cigarette industry in this trial.  Because
    reprehensibility is the key issue on whether they
    deserve to be punished.
         The TI itself said, "Our basic position in the
    cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and
    may be subject to a finding that we are making false
    or misleading statements to promote the sale of
    cigarettes."
         That's not Matt Schultz.  It's not
    Mrs. Danielson.  That's the Tobacco Institute
    itself.  Is that reprehensible conduct?  Is that
    deserving of punishment?  Especially when you're
    dealing with a product that is deadly and addictive.
         If you check yes on punitive damages, the jury
    instructions tell you you will return tomorrow, for
    less than a day, to take additional evidence and to
    decide the amount, if any, of punitive damages that
    you would award.
         Finally, I want to talk about damages for the family.  Because that's really why we're here.
         There are two types of damages.  I talked a
    little about this in opening.  There are economic
    damages.  These are the types of damages that would
    replace the money that Lamar Danielson -- because he
    died at such a young age -- would have brought into
    his household.  These are going to be in jury
    instruction No. 5.
         So when you fill out the verdict form, when you
    fill out the damages portion, you can look to No. 5.
    These have been agreed to between the parties.
    These are the losses for the family in this regard.
         THE COURT:  You have --
         MR. SCHULTZ:  It won't be --
         THE COURT:  Mr. Schultz, you have 30 minutes of
    your time remaining.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  Thank you, sir.
         You'll have these numbers in the jury
    instruction No. 5 because they've been agreed to by
    the parties.
         Estate losses are for Lamar's estate.  Micah's
    losses, Jennifer and Sandi.  Because Billy was of a
    certain age when Mr. Danielson died, he's not
    entitled to the economic damages.  He is entitled to
    the other sort of damages, the much more serious damages that we're here about; and that is the loss
    of companionship, the mental pain and suffering, the
    mental anguish that comes from watching your father
    or your husband die from lung cancer and living the
    rest of your life without him.
         And those are by far and away the most
    substantial damages in this case.  The Court will
    tell you there's no fixed standard for these
    damages.
         And it's not easy to put a value on a human
    life.  And that is not really what you're doing.  In
    fact, it's not putting a value on his life; it's
    putting a value, as best you can, on the grief and
    the suffering and the mental anguish that the family
    has experienced as a result of his death.
         Money is not going to bring Lamar Danielson
    back.  We all know that.  But it's the only thing
    our system can do and this is the system that we
    have.
         You saw the evidence of Lamar.  Lamar was a
    special person.  He was a prankster.  He was a
    protector.  And you heard from many people that
    everybody loved him.  He's the kind of guy that
    everybody likes.  He wasn't just anybody.
         And he was a good husband and he was a good father, and you saw that in the evidence.  How many
    people sing love songs to their wife when they can't
    really sing very well in front of their children and
    their friends?  Not everybody.  They had a very
    special relationship.  They were a very fortunate
    family, and he died at a very young age.
         I told you in opening statement we were asking
    for substantial damages in this case.  We are
    recommending -- it's up to you ultimately, but we're
    recommending $6 million for Micah Danielson, and $3
    million for each of her children in noneconomic
    damages in this case.
         You can give more.  You can give less.  You're
    the jury.  You've heard the evidence.  You have to
    make that decision.  And it's not an easy one and we
    understand that.
         One way we try and value things in our culture
    and I guess everyone -- is by asking what would you
    pay for something?  And ask yourself when you're
    talking about this issue:  Would the Danielson
    family --
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object to
    this argument.
         THE COURT:  Approach, please.
         (The following proceedings were held outside of the hearing of the jury.)
         THE COURT:  Let me articulate -- let you
    articulate your objection.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Yeah, the preface to what he was
    just about to say was sometimes you ask people how
    much would they pay to have somebody back.  I don't
    think that's a proper way to evaluate the loss that
    the family has had.  So that's my objection.
         THE COURT:  Okay.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  What I was going to say is
    whether the family would give all of this up to have
    him back.
         THE COURT:  Do you have a citation of
    authority?
         MR. GERAGHTY:  I don't, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  I'm sorry, I will overrule the
    objection.
         (The following proceedings were held within the
    hearing of the jury.)
         MR. SCHULTZ:  As I was saying, when you ask
    yourself this question when you're talking about
    this issue, ask yourself:  Would the Danielson
    family give all of this up to have Lamar Danielson
    back?  To have him back for Christmas.  To have him
    back when Sandi's baby is born in January.  I think everybody in the courtroom knows the answer to that
    question.
         I'm going to show you very briefly because we
    have a verdict form in this case and the judge will
    read it to you, but I prefer that you see the
    verdict form itself.  It's a few pages long because
    we have several claims in this case.
         The ELMO, thank you, Ryan.
         The first question on the verdict form, as I've
    already told you about:  Was addiction to Marlboro
    cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of the
    death of Norman Lamar Danielson?
         The answer to that question clearly is yes,
    based on all the evidence.
         Lamar Danielson was not a social smoker.  Lamar
    Danielson didn't smoke cigarettes -- 20, 30, 40 a
    day -- because he liked the taste of Marlboro.  He
    smoked compulsively, feeling the need every day to
    smoke -- Dr. Dorce's definition -- because he was
    addicted to nicotine.
         The next question on the verdict form:  How
    much fault goes on Philip Morris?  How much on Lamar
    Danielson?
         That's for you-all to decide.  I would ask you
    to remember how long Philip Morris's fault goes back.  How deep their fault is compared to Lamar
    Danielson's fault.  His fault was human weakness.
    His fault was not overcoming an addiction.  And we
    do believe he bears some fault for that.
         Our suggestion is 75 percent to Philip Morris.
    You have to make that decision, just like the
    damages decision.
         It's not easy, but you've heard all the
    evidence in the case.  You've been very attentive.
         The third and fourth questions pertain to the
    conspiracy and the concealment.  The first question:
    Was the concealment or omission of material
    information regarding the addictiveness or the
    health effects of cigarettes or both by Philip
    Morris USA, Inc. a legal cause of the death of Lamar
    Danielson?
         If they had done in '53 what they did in 2000,
    would Lamar have ever even smoked?  How would it
    have affected his life if they told the truth all
    his life instead of doing exactly the opposite?
         The answer to that is yes.
         And the conspiracy is not just Philip Morris's
    concealment.  That was the first question.  This is
    the concealment by the Tobacco Institute, the CTR --
    all the other companies, that whole empire that Dr. Cummings showed you of people devoted to keeping
    that psychological crutch out there for people like
    Lamar Danielson to hear.
         And, absolutely, it was a substantial
    contributing cause to the fact that he smoked.
    That's why they spent over a billion dollars on it.
         The next question is the estate damages.  I've
    written that in there.  It would not be written on
    the verdict form.  Jury instruction No. 5 has those
    numbers in there.
         The next page asks you the total amount
    sustained by Micah Danielson.  That also is a number
    straight out of the jury instructions.  The parties
    agree that's the number that goes on that blank in
    the verdict form.
         Total damages sustained to her for loss,
    support and services.  Those are the economic
    damages I talked about.
         For the next -- this is our recommendation.
    And then you have to total them up on the verdict
    form.
         And I won't do the math every time.  You get
    the idea, which is really what this is about.
         Total damages for Jennifer.  Again, the loss,
    support and services, that's jury instruction No. 5. The number won't be on the verdict form.  You would
    have to write that number in.
         And then for damages for her and for each of
    the children, we're asking for $3 million.  And that
    would be true on the next page for Sandi, and it
    would be true for Billy.
         Billy doesn't have an entry on the jury form
    instruction, as I mentioned, because of the age that
    he was when his father died.
         We take this case very seriously.  I know
    you-all took this case very seriously during the
    whole trial, and we appreciate that.
         I started off by asking, you know, when you
    walked in this courtroom, did you think -- maybe you
    did -- why in the world would somebody sue a
    cigarette company because their husband or their
    father smoked all his life and died from lung
    cancer?
         We've answered that question in this trial.
    You've been very attentive and we appreciate it.
    I'll have a little bit of time after Mr. Geraghty
    that I may or may not use, depending on what we hear
    in his closing.
         I'm sure you'll give him the same attention
    that you've given me, and I greatly appreciate it. Thank you.


                    REBUTTAL ARGUMENT
         MR. SCHULTZ:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         This is rebuttal, ladies and gentlemen.  I will
    be brief.  I'm not going to cover anything that I
    covered in my final argument.
         Rebuttal is where I will rebut the things that
    Mr. Geraghty has said to you; and I will jump around
    a bit because I'm writing them down as I go.
         The first one I would like to address is this
    notion of accepting any responsibility means
    accepting full responsibility.
         Well, we do accept responsibility.  That's half
    the story.  The other half is you'll see the jury
    instruction that says exactly what we have said all
    along in this case; and that is that we accept
    responsibility that Lamar Danielson's acts in
    combination with the acts of Philip Morris are what
    caused his death.
         That's what we've said from day one in this
    case.  That's what we've said in this courtroom.
    That's what will be in the jury instructions.  And
    there's no question that we've ever said anything different.
         The -- I want to talk for a moment about these
    attacks on Mrs. Danielson and her credibility and
    her veracity.
         You were told very early on -- I think this was
    the first slide -- in evaluating believability of a
    witness you should consider whether they have a
    financial interest.  Well, the jury instructions
    tell you that.  That is something you should
    consider in a case.  Any interest a witness has in
    the outcome of the case is worthy of consideration.
         But then you were shown this:  Mrs. Danielson
    recalls only quits of seven or eight days, as if
    she's the only person who testified to that in this
    case.
         Becky Wiggins recalled a quit of one week in
    1987, one in 1988.  Roy Wiggins remembered one or
    two quits of a week's duration.  Mrs. Danielson is
    not the only person who testified to this.
         And if you look down we see, for example, Billy
    Danielson, father quit for a couple of months to a
    year.  Well, that was half of the passage.  You
    heard me read the other half of the passage with
    Dr. Dorce where he said -- when they mentioned a
    couple of months, he said that's right.  For a brief time -- he said it twice -- I remember my father
    quitting for a brief time.
         You have heard all of that evidence and you
    have to consider all the evidence, not just snippets
    of it.
         Lamar Danielson told his doctor he quit for
    four months.  He did.  We don't dispute that.  It
    was two days after he was told he had a mass in his
    lung that he believed might be cancer.
         Is it possible Lamar Danielson was trying to
    convince himself and his doctor that it wasn't
    cancer; that it's not true?  Look, I quit for a long
    time.  I don't know.  Nobody knows.  It is what he
    told his doctor, and we don't dispute that at all.
         But no witness, not one witness in this case
    recalls Lamar Danielson quitting for four months.
    And certainly no one remembers anything close to a
    year when you put Billy's testimony into context.
         Those are the facts.  They're not all lying
    under oath, ladies and gentlemen.  Those are the
    facts that you heard from all of the witnesses.
         Ray Danielson said Lamar gained 25 or 30
    pounds.  He did say that.  Mrs. Danielson told you
    she never had to buy a new suit for him.  You'll
    have all the photos in evidence throughout Lamar's lifetime.
         Sandi was born in 1986, and we have a
    photograph of him next to an ashtray in the hospital
    room when she's being born.
         You go forward in time when Sandi is a small
    baby and look at those photographs and ask yourself
    if he gained 25 or 30 pounds.  There is more
    evidence that just one-liners out of depositions in
    this case.
         One of the things that Mr. Geraghty attacked
    Mrs. Danielson about was saying --
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object to
    the word "attacked."
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         Don't use the word "attacked."
         MR. SCHULTZ:  One of the things that
    Mr. Geraghty said is worthy of consideration, I
    suppose, and whether Mrs. Danielson is being
    credible was that she only said her husband seemed
    to enjoy smoking; but she was 100 percent confident
    that he was addicted.
         But you heard when I cross-examined Dr. Dorce
    yesterday morning, is when it was.  I talked about
    Mrs. Danielson's testimony on this very point.  And
    read a quote out of her deposition that he gave the appearance of being addicted, but she couldn't say
    he was, and they asked why the appearance?  Well,
    it's something that you can't seem to control very
    well.
         I brought all of that out with Dr. Dorce.
    She's been perfectly consistent between saying he
    seemed to enjoy it.  He seemed to me to be addicted.
         She was married to Mr. Danielson for 20 years.
    If you've been married 20 years it doesn't make you
    a mind-reader.  She couldn't read Lamar Danielson's
    mind.  She told you what she thinks based on her
    experiences.
         She was perfectly consistent.  She never said
    she was 100 percent confident that he was addicted.
    She said exactly what she said about enjoyment.
         And there's no dispute in this case, ladies and
    gentlemen, that people who enjoy cigarettes don't do
    so to the exclusion of addiction.
         Mr. Geraghty on one slide mentioned that a
    question for you would be whether Mr. Danielson
    relied on anything Philip Morris said.  Well, that's
    half of what you should consider under the jury
    instruction; but the instruction the Court will give
    you says very plainly plaintiff need not prove the
    statements by the companies were related directly to Lamar Danielson if their content reached him through
    other sources.
         And you heard from Dr. Cummings that's what the
    CTR was all about.  Scientists who would get up and
    speak on behalf of the companies so the newspapers
    don't read the cigarette company says this; they
    read leading cancer researcher says no one knows yet
    about the -- the -- the hazards of smoking or what
    have you.
         That's how the conspiracy worked.  That's why
    that instruction is in there.
         On the addiction, Mr. Geraghty said we were
    working real hard to push up the numbers of Lamar's
    smoking.  Well, this is a slide we showed you with
    Dr. Cummings.  From one to two and a half packs.
         Ladies and gentlemen, that's what the evidence
    shows.  Lawana Joyner kept a spreadsheet.
    Mr. Geraghty showed you lots of testimony from her
    or talked about it in his closing.  Is she now not
    telling the truth all of a sudden when she said he
    smoked a pack or two packs or over two packs a day
    based on a spreadsheet that she kept?
         The numbers that we used both in our social
    smoker versus addictive smoker slide, and the
    numbers that Dr. Cummings used on the Heaviness of Smoking Index were based on one to one and a half
    packs a day.
         If you use two, he would have been a 6 out of
    6.  That's not what Dr. Cummings used.  He was being
    very conservative.  We're not trying to push the
    numbers up.  We're trying to bring you all the
    evidence so you can make the best decision you can
    make on the facts as presented.
         And it's not all just about the Heaviness of
    Smoking Index.  Dr. Cummings told you these are
    considerations that come from the Surgeon General of
    the United States.  He took into consideration all
    of these things and wrote a 35-page report that he
    was asked about regarding Lamar Danielson.
         It's not just the Heaviness of Smoking Index.
    That is a way to assess.  It is important.  It's
    valid.  It's predictable.  It's useful.  But you
    heard a lot more than just that in Dr. Cummings's
    testimony.
         A couple of other things.  The money that
    Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns have made over time was
    brought up.  These men have unique experience.
    They've testified for a long time.
         I told you in opening statement they are not
    friends of the tobacco industry.  They're cancer researchers.
         The tobacco industry sells a product that has
    caused more cancer than anything else in the history
    of the world.  They're not friends of the tobacco
    industry.  They have testified against them in cases
    like this.  And you've heard that over 400,000
    people a year are killed by smoking.
         Dr. Cummings has testified in 100 cases over 20
    years.
         If you look at the numbers for Dr. Dorce, 75 to
    $85,000 a year, if she testified for 30 years like
    Dr. Burns has, she would earn between 2.6 and $2.8
    million.
         It sounds like a lot when you add it all up
    over 30 years, but you have to take into
    consideration these gentlemen's qualifications,
    their unique skill, their unique experience, and why
    they're testifying in cases like this.
         On the lungs, Mr. Geraghty started out saying
    that Lamar regularly saw diseased lungs, the black
    diseased versus the healthy pink.  Then it became
    frequently.  And by the end it was every single day.
    That's a quote.  Every single day he saw this.
         Well, you've heard the evidence, ladies and
    gentlemen.  Swede Danielson, his father, said way back we did autopsies in the funeral homes, and he
    would see these figures.  Would Lamar see that?  I'm
    sure he did.  He did testify to that.
         Charlie Dillard said I saw all of the stuff
    that Mr. Geraghty crossed Dr. Cummings on about the
    biohazard bags; and he said I would imagine Lamar
    saw that as well.
         And Beverly Milsted said we didn't do autopsies
    by the time Lamar Danielson took over at the funeral
    home.  That's the evidence.  You can make of it
    whatever you can make of it.
         You heard Dr. Hurt, not on my questioning or
    Ms. Gilmer's questioning, but on Mr. Geraghty's
    questioning.  Mr. Geraghty asked him to tell a story
    about seeing a cadaver and as a medical student it
    didn't make him stop smoking; and, in fact, he used
    that as a lesson on denial and rationalization.
         Knowledge is not power.
         Even if Lamar Danielson knew in the 1970s of
    the health effects, his wife testified that knowing
    and believing are two different things.  And
    Mr. Geraghty said that sounds like something
    Dr. Cummings would say.
         It is something Dr. Cummings said.  It's
    something the Federal Trade Commission said.  If you remember the slide about the three levels of
    awareness:  It's one thing to hear something; it's
    another thing to believe it's true; and it's another
    thing altogether to believe that it's true for you.
         That comes from the Federal Trade Commission in
    a report that Philip Morris said was accurate.
    That's not just Mrs. Danielson.  It's not just
    Dr. Cummings.  But it is true.  Knowing something
    and believing something are different things.
         And when you're addicted -- how many addicted
    people in the world do you think -- do heroin
    addicts think they're shooting up vitamins?  They
    know heroin is bad for them.  It doesn't make them
    not addicted.  It's proof of their addiction.
         Mr. Geraghty mentioned that by 1969, '70 or
    '71, Mr. Danielson may be experimenting with
    cigarettes.  You heard Mr. Pate who testified he
    started out in middle school when he met Lamar, and
    Lamar was smoking.
         By high school he was smoking regularly.  He
    testified if he wasn't in the water skiing, he had a
    cigarette in his hand.  That's the testimony.
         Unless you're going to assume that Mr. Pate
    came in here and took an oath and lied under oath,
    that's the evidence in the case about his smoking. You can't spin that any other way.
         Mr. Geraghty also said that cigarette
    companies -- before I get to that, there was a
    question -- I think one of you asked a question.  It
    was a good question.  Did anyone ever diagnose
    Mr. Danielson during his lifetime with nicotine
    addiction?
         Mr. Geraghty said the answer is absolutely not.
    The real answer is, we don't know.
         Dr. Crosswright, we don't have his records --
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object.
    This is speculative.
         THE COURT:  I'll overrule the objection.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  Dr. Dorce told you we don't have
    Dr. Crosswright's records and that's why she
    couldn't be real clear about the nicotine patch
    prescription.
         But we do know -- so we don't know whether
    Dr. Crosswright did or didn't diagnose him; but we
    do know he wrote him a prescription for nicotine
    patches to help him quit smoking.
         Nicotine patches are often written to people
    who are diagnosed with addiction.  I suppose
    sometimes they're written when they're not.  That's
    something you'll have to tease out of the evidence.      But the answer not absolutely not.  The real
    answer is we can't know because we don't have all
    the records; and that's nobody's fault.  That's just
    how the case evolved.
         Mr. Geraghty said at the very beginning
    cigarette company executives made some inappropriate
    comments, and that's what we showed you.  Is that
    what you took from the day and a half of
    Dr. Cummings's testimony that that's all Philip
    Morris did was make inappropriate comments?  That's
    not the evidence in this case.
         They changed the smoking culture and the
    decisions they made impacted Lamar Danielson's life
    in a very real way.
         And I ask you one more time, consider if they
    had done in 1953 what they did in the year 2000 --
    the way cigarette companies act changes how people
    in this country view cigarettes and how --
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, there's no evidence
    to support that.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.  Thank you.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  And how kids view cigarettes.
    You've seen that in your own lives.  You can bring
    your common sense and your life experience into the
    jury room with you to make inferences about what would have happened if they had done the right
    thing.
         And you heard about damages.  The Danielsons,
    they're all different people with different lives
    with different losses.  Different ages when Lamar
    died.  Different relationships with him up to that
    point in time.
         The damages are not just one big ball of wax.
    These are individual damages for individual people
    who suffered their own losses.
         It may be a large sum of money.  It should be a
    large sum of money.  What sum of money would you
    give to a loss of a husband of 20 years, somebody
    like Lamar, for a father who died when you're nine
    years old?
         Ladies and gentlemen, the only thing Philip
    Morris has ever understood is money.
         Thank you.  We appreciate your time.  You've
    been very attentive.  Sorry if I got a little jumpy
    at the end, jumping around on this.  We appreciate
    you being here, taking the time, and we look forward
    to receiving your verdict.
         Thank you.
