         MR. GERAGHTY:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Well, good morning, ladies.
         FROM THE FLOOR:  Good morning.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  This is the last time I'm going
    to get a chance to speak to you.  I told you that, I
    guess, on Tuesday.  I was wrong Tuesday.  But this
    time we're all sure this is the last time that I'm
    going to get a chance to speak to you.
         And I've said it several times, but we
    appreciate very, very much.  I mean, it's really
    tremendous that even yesterday afternoon, after
    2 1/2 weeks, you're still asking very interesting
    and good questions of the witnesses.
         So let me just say on behalf of everybody,
    thank you very much.
         In the first phase of this trial, you
    determined that Mrs. Danielson and her family were
    entitled to compensatory damages. And you awarded an amount that you thought was
    fair.  And you fully compensated her for the harm
    that you believe that Philip Morris caused.
         In your Phase I verdict, you also decided that
    Mr. Danielson shares some responsibility for his
    actions, and you allocated 51 percent of the
    responsibility to him.
         And we assume that you did that because you
    believe that there is a shared responsibility here
    and that Mr. Danielson bears at least -- at least
    some percentage of the responsibility for what
    ultimately happened.
         And then you awarded $325,000 in damages to
    Mrs. Danielson and her family.
         So that was Phase I, and now we're in Phase II,
    and the good news, obviously, is Phase II is a lot
    faster than Phase I.  So we're at the end of the
    road here in Phase I.
         Judge Jones will instruct you -- he's already
    instructed you, but you'll get the written
    instructions when the lawyers are done talking --
    that it is not appropriate to award any additional
    money to the plaintiff in punitive damages unless
    the plaintiff persuades you that today, in 2015,
    punitive damages are necessary for punishment and to deter future similar conduct.
         And just so it is clear, ladies and gentlemen
    [sic], Judge Jones has instructed you, you'll see it
    there in the instructions, it says, quote, "You may,
    in your discretion, decline to assess punitive
    damages."
         So you can say, ladies and gentlemen [sic], no
    more money.
         No more money.
         But if you decide, however, that punitive
    damages should be awarded, I'd like to show you one
    of the instructions that you're going to get in the
    packet.
         This is on Page 5.  This was read to you.
         This was -- I'm having a little problem with
    the... there we go.
         Can everybody see that now?  All right.
         This was read to you by Judge Jones yesterday.
    It'll be in the written packet of instructions that
    you have.
         But it says, "There must be a reasonable
    relationship between any amount of punitive damages
    you award here in this phase, and the amount" -- it
    should say "of," but I think that's a typo, but "in
    the amount of compensatory damages you have awarded."  In other words, the amounts that you've
    already awarded to Mrs. Danielson and her family.
         That's one of the instructions you will receive
    from the judge.
         The question you have to decide now, today, is
    how much additional money you should award to the
    plaintiff, if any, not to compensate, but to punish
    Philip Morris for its past conduct and to deter it
    in the future.
         And in this phase you've heard new evidence.
    You now know that Philip Morris is a highly
    regulated company and that it agreed to many of the
    restrictions under which it now operates.
         You have now seen how the advertising and the
    marketing and the sale of cigarettes is dramatically
    changed and been restricted just in the last 15 to
    20 years.
         But before we talk about those changes, what
    I'd like to do first is discuss the law on punitive
    damages and how that law should be applied during
    the course of your deliberations.
         Awarding punitive damages is not something that
    is done automatically.  In fact, the law imposes
    very specific limitations on punitive damages awards
    to make sure that defendants, even unpopular ones, are treated fairly.
         And among the limitations on punitive damages,
    which you will see in the set of instructions that
    Judge Jones will give you, are three particularly
    important points that I'd like to focus you on.
         No. 1:  Philip Morris cannot be punished for
    legal behavior.
         No. 2:  Any punishment must be only for the
    concealment of information that you've found
    specifically harmed Mr. Danielson and not for any
    other wrongful conduct you've heard about during the
    course of this trial.
         And, finally, you must consider any mitigating
    or changed behavior that has taken place.
         And what I'd like to do briefly is talk about
    those three points in a little bit more detail so
    you understand what it is that I'm talking about.
         So let's talk about that first principle for
    just a minute.
         Philip Morris can't be punished just for
    selling cigarettes.
         It may seem simple and obvious to you, ladies
    and gentlemen, but -- ladies.  I'm still thinking we
    have our men from yesterday here -- but it's worth
    thinking about for just a minute.  Cigarettes are a legal product.  And they are a legal product even
    though it is widely known that they are dangerous
    and addictive, right?
         The fact is, our society, through our Congress,
    has chosen to keep cigarettes legal to manufacture,
    market, sell, and to smoke.
         We have left the decision to smoke cigarettes
    to the individual, just like we have done with
    alcohol and many other risky activities.
         We recognize that many lifestyle choices come
    with health risks, but we, as a society, have made
    the judgment to allow people the freedom to make
    those choices.
         Now, you may disagree with the balance our
    society has struck with respect to smoking
    cigarettes.  You may disagree with that.  And,
    ladies, if you hold that opinion -- which you have
    every right to do so -- you have every right to hold
    that opinion, but that opinion must not influence
    your decision about whether to award punitive
    damages in this case.
         The law does not allow you to punish Philip
    Morris for selling cigarettes, even if you believe
    it is wrong for them to do so.
         So let me move to the second point. The Court has instructed you, and I think
    Mr. Schultz just showed you that instruction, that
    you can only punish Philip Morris for the conduct
    that caused Mr. Danielson's death.  And that was the
    basis of your finding in favor of Mrs. Danielson on
    her claims for concealment and the agreement to
    conceal.
         So, specifically, that was Question Nos. 3 and
    4 on your verdict form from yesterday.  Those were
    the two -- those were the two claims we're talking
    about.
         The law does not permit you, in this case, to
    punish Philip Morris for harms suffered by anyone
    other than Mrs. Danielson.
         In other words, this phase is not about
    cigarettes, generally.  As you heard Mr. Schultz
    tell you, it is about Philip Morris's statements
    about cigarette smoking and health made in the past
    that you believe influenced Mr. Danielson in his
    decision to smoke.
         If there are other people who believe that
    they've been wronged by the actions of Philip
    Morris, they have the right to bring their own
    lawsuits and have their own juries hear their cases.
    Many already have.  And you heard me talk about that to some degree when I cross-examined Dr. Cummings
    and Dr. Hurt and Dr. Burns.
         Many people have decided not to file lawsuits.
    Many people believe that they make their own
    decision to smoke with their eyes wide open, and
    they believe that they accept the consequences of
    those decisions.
         So quite simply, we do not know the facts
    surrounding why those people decided to smoke or to
    continue smoking, and that cannot form the basis of
    any punitive damages award in this case.
         Let me put it to you this way:  When you go
    back to deliberate in just a few minutes, if someone
    in the jury room argues that Philip Morris should be
    punished in this case for the harm to anyone other
    than Mr. Danielson, you should say to that person,
    "You know, that's wrong.  That's not the
    instructions we were given by the judge.  The law
    does not permit us to do that."
         The burden of proof is on the plaintiff in this
    case, Mrs. Danielson and her attorneys, to show by
    clear and convincing evidence that the plaintiff is
    entitled to recover punitive damages, and those
    damages must be based solely on wrongful conduct
    that you found actually harmed Mr. Danielson. Now, I'm sure you saw things about the -- that
    Philip Morris did in the past that you didn't like,
    that upset you; but your obligation under the law
    that Judge Jones will give you is to identify and
    focus only on the wrongful actions that caused
    Mr. Danielson's harm.
         And why is that important?  Well, that's
    important, ladies, because only after you have
    identified the specific wrongful actions that caused
    harm to Mr. Danielson, that caused harm in this
    case, can you properly evaluate whether an award of
    additional money, above and beyond the amount you've
    already awarded in the form of punitive damages, is
    necessary today in 2015 to address those wrongful
    actions.
         And, finally, let me talk about that last
    principle and determine whether there is a
    continuing need for deterrence in light of the
    changes and the regulation in the conduct of Philip
    Morris today.  In other words, when you look at
    Philip Morris today and the evidence you heard
    yesterday, you have to ask yourself the following
    question:
         Is it necessary to punish the company today for
    things that the company did in the past so that those things won't happen again in the future?
         And that, ladies and gentlemen [sic], is really
    the heart of the matter before you this morning.
         You've heard about the conduct of Philip Morris
    in the past.  But you have now heard yesterday
    afternoon about what has been done by the Attorneys
    General of the 50 states, by the federal government,
    and by Philip Morris itself in the years since then
    to address those very issues.
         And why is that important?  That's important
    because, if the wrongful conduct that caused
    Mr. Danielson's injuries has already been corrected
    and cannot be repeated, then there is far less need
    today, in 2015, to award punitive damages to the
    plaintiff above and beyond the money that you've
    already decided to award to compensate her and her
    family.
         Now, in Phase I you heard about conduct that
    happened in the 1950s and the 1960s and the '70s and
    the '80s and the '90s.  And you obviously feel --
    you obviously feel that someone should have stepped
    in back then, in the 1950s and the 1960s, and
    stopped the conduct that you found to be wrongful.
         But, you know, with all the power that a court
    has, with all the power that a court has, the one thing it cannot do is turn back the hands of time.
         The past is the past.
         And what is important in this particular phase
    of the trial, as opposed to Phase I, is the present
    and the future.
         The present and the future.
         Plaintiff wants you to believe that, because
    the company has the same name, Philip Morris, and it
    still sells cigarettes, that nothing has changed.
         But your common sense tells you, ladies, that
    the people who wrote the documents and made the
    decisions 40 and 50 and 60 years ago are different
    from the people who were making the decisions today.
    They are generations removed from the people who
    work for the company today, like Pete Lipowicz.  So
    let's talk about the Philip Morris of today, in
    2015.  And let's start with 1998.
         You heard Dr. Lipowicz talk to you about the
    Master Settlement Agreement, or the MSA, and the
    permanent restrictions it has imposed; you heard
    what Philip Morris has done to align itself with the
    public health community on issues of smoking and
    health and, specifically, the Surgeon General; and
    you've heard about the Food and Drug
    Administration's regulation of cigarettes at Philip Morris.
         You know that the Master Settlement Agreement
    imposed a variety of advertising restrictions.  And
    as a result, there are no cigarette ads on
    billboards, in stadiums, on mass transit of any
    kind.  There is no branded merchandise, no hats,
    T-shirts with Marlboro on them.
         And in 2005 you heard that Philip Morris
    voluntarily stopped advertising in magazines
    altogether.  They just removed all of their ads.  If
    you see an ad for a cigarette in a magazine today,
    it will not be an ad for Marlboro or any other brand
    of cigarettes made by Philip Morris.
         The only place where Philip Morris has any
    advertisements for its cigarettes today is in the
    convenience store, behind the counter, where the
    cigarettes themselves are displayed.
         That's it.
         Philip Morris does not advertise on the
    Internet.  One of you asked that very good question.
    It has a private Web site for adult smokers and
    persons can only sign up to have access to that
    Web site if they are age-verified as an adult,
    21 years or older.
         To ensure that information about smoking and health is not concealed today or in the future, the
    Master Settlement Agreement requires Philip Morris
    to post publicly on a public Web site, at its own
    expense, millions of pages of documents.  They're
    all on the Internet.  They have a continuing
    obligation to post those documents on the Internet.
         In addition, Philip Morris has taken a further
    step by setting up a public Web site, which we
    showed you yesterday, in which it takes a public
    position on cigarette smoking and health.
         And here is what Philip Morris says.  It's
    probably going to be a little tough for you to
    read -- maybe it's a little bit better now.
         This is just that screen shot we showed
    yesterday.
         It's a little blurry, but I'll read it to you
    so you don't have to strain your eyes.  It says,
    "There is no safe cigarette.  Cigarettes are
    addictive and cause serious diseases in smokers.
    For those concerned about the health risks of
    smoking, the best thing to do is quit."
         "The best thing to do is quit."
         These are clear, unambiguous, and simple
    statements, ladies and gentlemen [sic].  Today and
    in the future you won't hear anything different from Philip Morris or any industry trade organization.
    The Tobacco Institute, the Council for Tobacco
    Research, they don't exist.  They were disbanded
    back in 1998.
         Philip Morris has also directed the public to
    the message of the public health community and the
    Surgeon General on issues of smoking and health for
    the last 16 years since 1999.
         Now, you heard Dr. Lipowicz respond to both my
    questions and to Mr. Schultz's questions.
         Does Dr. Lipowicz or Philip Morris agree with
    every single thing that the Surgeon General or the
    FDA has said about cigarettes?
         Well, the candid answer, no, of course not.  Of
    course not.  And you heard us have those discussions
    throughout the course of this trial.
         But the important point, ladies and gentlemen
    [sic], is, unlike in the past, unlike the evidence
    you heard during Phase I of this trial in the '50s
    and the '60s and the '70s and the '80s, Philip
    Morris no longer engages in any kind of a public
    debate or disagreement with the Surgeon General or
    any member of the public health community about
    these issues.  Philip Morris is committed to
    directing the public to what the Surgeon General says about cigarette smoking.  And they've been
    doing that for the last 16 years.
         You heard the Congress gave the Food and Drug
    Administration authority over cigarettes in Philip
    Morris in 2009 and to carry out that mandate, ladies
    and -- ladies, the FDA has created -- I'm still
    having trouble with that; I apologize.
         To carry out its mandate, the FDA has created a
    special center for tobacco products or the CTP.  But
    the center for tobacco products is funded by user
    fees imposed on cigarette companies, including
    Philip Morris, at a current rate of over half a
    billion dollars per year.  And Philip Morris and
    other companies are going to have to pay those user
    fees on into the future.
         Those are a continuing obligation every single
    year.  And the Center for Tobacco Products uses
    those resources, that money from Philip Morris and
    other companies, both to enforce the requirements of
    the law and to research issues that are important as
    part of its decision-making authority.
         What are some of the examples of what the Food
    and Drug Administration is doing today?
         You heard that the FDA has the right to show up
    at Philip Morris's facilities whenever it wants, unannounced, and to inspect the facilities, the
    documents, all of the manufacturing procedures to
    ensure that they comply with law.  And the FDA has
    done just that several times.  That's what
    Dr. Lipowicz told you.
         If it finds a reason to, if it believes that
    Philip Morris has violated any aspect of the law,
    the FDA can seize products, shut down Philip
    Morris's facilities, and impose fines for
    noncompliance.
         The FDA can establish the level of
    constituents, the amounts in tobacco smoke,
    including nicotine.  They can't reduce the amount of
    nicotine to zero, but they have the final say as to
    what level of nicotine may be in a cigarette.
         The FDA can restrict what Philip Morris says
    about its products.  The FDA now governs, regulates,
    and restricts how Philip Morris can advertise its
    cigarettes.
         Philip Morris provides the Food and Drug
    Administration with all of the ingredients used in
    its cigarettes, and the FDA has the authority to
    direct Philip Morris to take this particular
    additive out, take that particular additive out, or
    to remove any specific additive or ingredient. And to date the FDA has not told Philip Morris
    to remove any particular additive or ingredient; but
    the bottom line, ladies, is the FDA now controls
    what goes into a cigarette, what can come out of the
    cigarette, and what can be said about cigarettes.
         Now, we know, from your verdict that you heard
    things that concerned you during Phase I of this
    trial.  So let's talk about that for a moment.
         If what concerns you was cigarette advertising,
    what do we know now?  We know that the only place
    where Philip Morris advertises is in the convenience
    store itself behind the counter.
         If what concerned you was that Philip Morris
    did not share its internal documents, the companies
    now must post those documents on a public Web site.
         If the FDA wants additional information from
    Philip Morris, they are empowered to get what they
    want, and they have absolute power to impose fines
    if they don't believe Philip Morris has complied.
         And if what concerned you were the public
    statements made by Philip Morris that disputed what
    the Surgeon General said in 1964 or 1979 or 1988,
    those kinds of statements can no longer be made by
    Philip Morris.  Does not make them, and it cannot
    make them. Philip Morris's published on its Web site since
    1999 that smoking causes lung cancer and other
    diseases and smoking is addictive.
         Philip Morris is committed to ensuring that the
    public, the American public, hears a single, uniform
    message about the health risks of smoking, and that
    is the message from the Surgeon General.  That's
    what you've heard.
         If what concerned you was the use of
    ingredients or additives in cigarettes, what is
    happening now?  Philip Morris provides a complete
    list of all the ingredients in every single
    cigarette it sells to the Food and Drug
    Administration.  And the FDA has the power to say
    take this additive or that additive out, if that's
    what the FDA decides to do.
         Mr. Schultz talked to you about youth smoking,
    and it's natural to be concerned about protecting
    our kids, but what you now know is in the United
    States today adolescent smoking is at its all-time
    lowest level.
         Dr. Lipowicz told you that youth smoking rates
    in Florida are 3.8 percent, which is at an all-time
    low, and lower than it was just ten years ago and
    much lower than the national average. So where does this all leave us on the
    question, whether it's necessary to award more money
    to the plaintiff in this case to punish Philip
    Morris today?
         Well, the plaintiff told you that Mr. Danielson
    began smoking when he was 14 in about 1967 or 1968.
    You heard that during Phase I.  The world was very
    different then, and Philip Morris operated in a very
    different environment.
         But consider the world in which Philip Morris
    operates today.
         Bless you.
         FEMALE SPEAKER:  Thank you.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  A 14-year-old boy today would
    have been born in 2001, right?  He would have never
    seen a Philip Morris advertisement on television,
    never heard one on the radio, never seen one on a
    billboard or in a stadium or on a bus.
         If he walked into a retail store today, his
    access to cigarettes would be severely limited.
    You-all know that.
         To the extent he would have even seen a
    cigarette ad at all at the age of 14, it would have
    had a federally mandated warning label on it.  The
    ones you saw in evidence. He never would have heard any statement from
    the Tobacco Institute or the Council for Tobacco
    Research because they don't exist.  They were
    disbanded back in 1998.
         He never would have heard any statement about
    cigarette smoking and health made by Philip Morris
    other than cigarette smoking causes disease and
    cigarette smoking is addictive.
         From the day that 14-year-old was born,
    millions of tobacco company documents have been
    available on the Internet for anyone to read.
         And, finally, he would be growing up today at a
    time when high school smoking rates in Florida are
    at the lowest rates ever recorded by any state in
    the country.
         Notwithstanding all of this, Mr. Schultz is
    asking you to award an additional $7 1/2 million
    over and above the amount that you have already
    awarded Mrs. Danielson and her family in
    compensatory damages.
         Ladies, that number is the kind of number you
    would see in a lottery.  That's a lottery ticket for
    the plaintiff.  Not a number that has any bearing on
    reality or the evidence you've heard in this case.
         That's more than $700,000 every single year for the next ten years.
         Think about the message that $7 1/2 million in
    punitive damages sends to Philip Morris today.
         It says that, even if you enter into binding
    agreements, like the MSA, that impose restrictions
    that fundamentally change the way you do your
    business, and even if you were subject to
    significant government oversight and regulation, you
    will still be forced to pay significant punitive
    damage awards.
         Ladies, reform, regulation, and change must
    make a difference.
         Must make a difference.
         Mr. Schultz has urged you to send Philip Morris
    and other cigarette companies a message, and I
    agree.  But the message I respectfully suggest that
    you should send with your verdict is this:
         The world in which Philip Morris operates has
    changed, and it has changed dramatically in the last
    15 or 20 years.  It is a regulated company, and we
    do not need to levy further damages to make Philip
    Morris change its ways.
         You know that Philip Morris has paid
    substantial sums of money to the government, to the
    FDA, as part of these user fees.  Philip Morris has paid about half of the $2 billion in user fees that
    have been paid just since 2010.  And those
    obligations are going to continue into the future.
         Under the circumstances, we don't think you
    should award any additional money to the plaintiff
    in punitive damages in this case.  But if you
    disagree with me, and you think the plaintiff has
    satisfied their burden to prove by clear and
    convincing evidence that today, in 2015, there is a
    reason to award punitive damages above and beyond
    the amount that you've already awarded to
    Mrs. Danielson, let me suggest this:
         Remember what I told you earlier.  The Judge
    has instructed you that there must be a reasonable
    relationship between the amount that you award here
    and the amount that you already awarded in
    compensatory damages to Mrs. Danielson and her
    family.
         If you decide to award any money to the
    plaintiff in this phase of the case, we think the
    number should be $100,000.  That bears a reasonable
    relationship to the amount of compensatory damages
    you've already awarded.
         100,000 is about one-third of the amount of
    damages you've already awarded to Mrs. Danielson. It's the same amount that you awarded to each of her
    three children.
         And if you did that, the goals of compensation
    and reasonable punishment, reasonable punishment,
    would be served.
         Now, this is the last time that I'm going to
    have a chance to speak with you and I'm going to end
    simply by thanking you.  I want you to understand
    that the fact that you found on Philip Morris on
    some of the claims in this case does not in any way
    diminish how deeply I appreciate your service and
    your effort and your time.
         It truly has been an honor to present this case
    to you.  I've enjoyed it tremendously.  Hopefully,
    you haven't found it too tedious.  You've paid a lot
    of attention, you've asked a lot of very good
    questions.  I don't think anyone could ask for
    anything more than what you-all have done over the
    last two and a half weeks.
         So I simply want you to know that I deeply,
    deeply appreciate everything and thank you.
         Now, I'm going to sit down here in just a
    minute and you're going to have the opportunity --
    Mr. Schultz is going to have the opportunity to
    speak to you one more time in rebuttal; and, of course, you know that's because the plaintiff,
    Mrs. Danielson and her attorneys, bear the burden of
    proof.
         And as you listen to what Mr. Schultz says,
    just ask yourself:  What purpose would be served by
    awarding additional damages at this point in the
    form of punitive damages?  What purpose would be
    served?
         Thank you very much.
