MR. ALVAREZ: May it please this Honorable Court, Counsel, Ms. Davis.
Good morning.
THE JURORS: Good morning.
MR. ALVAREZ: I want to start by thanking you for giving me and my client two weeks of your time and your life. I know it's not easy to get away from your families and from your work and from your normal routine. And I just want to tell you we appreciate that, and she appreciates that. But the system can't work unless you're willing to make that sacrifice for the system that we have today, which is the best system in the world, where six people are going to decide this case.
And both sides are on an equal and level
playing field. And this is the only country in the world that has a system like that. And I want to thank you for being a part of it. Thank you.
I hope you learned something. I hope I did a --1 hope we did a good job, because when you walked in here, there may have been a lot of things that you thought about history were true, and later, you found out, "Well, I didn't know that."
You know, we went from -MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, I object. Golden Rule.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ALVAREZ: We brought you quality experts. We brought you professors from Stanford University, trained at Harvard. We brought you an addiction expert through video, who is from Johns Hopkins University, from the National Institutes of Health, helped write the Surgeon General Report. We brought you Dr. Villa, who is one of the only doctors in the United States who has six board certifications.
So we brought you quality, the quality experts to help explain the life, the times, the medicine, and the science.
And I hope --1 hope we were able to do that
for you and enrich you in what this case is about and help you gain some knowledge of what we're trying to do.
So what I want to do now is give you a copy, through this PowerPoint, of the seven questions. There's going to be seven questions on the verdict form. Seven questions. And I want to go through each and every one of those questions with you so that you have an understanding of what's going to be asked of you. Okay?
So let's start with the very first question, if we could.
The first question is "Was Booker Davis addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause," not the legal cause, "a legal cause of his lung cancer and death?"
And basically, this is asking you a few questions. This is asking you was he addicted. Right? And was that addiction the legal cause, and I'll explain legal cause, of his lung cancer and resulting death. Okay?
So I want to focus in on the first part of this on addiction. Let's talk about addiction.
Okay? Let's talk about what it means. Okay?
Because one of the things it doesn't mean in that question, when you go back to this question, okay, it says, "Was Booker Davis addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death?"
Notice that it's not about the fault of either party. That's not being asked there. You're going to see a separate question in the verdict form that deals with that, where you could apportion responsibility between Booker Davis and the tobacco company. You're going to have an opportunity to do that, but it's not part of the class membership.
And it's not about whether addicts can quit. Because you even heard both experts say that just because you were addicted doesn't mean you can't quit. Okay? Addicted people to anything can quit.
It doesn't mean that you weren't addicted in the beginning. Okay?
And again, it's not about whether smokers share some responsibility. I'm going to show you where you could apportion responsibility on the verdict form. That comes later.
And it's not about whether he relied on a statement from the tobacco company that concealed
material information. You're going to see another portion of that issue on a separate question on the verdict form. Okay?
So the very first question is just about was he addicted, did that addiction cause him, legally cause him to -- to -- to have a smoking-related disease, and that smoking-related disease caused his death. That's all it means. Okay right? So let's look at the evidence. Okay?
And you've got to decide this case, what, on the evidence.
So he started smoking by the age of 15. He smoked for about 40 years, 41 years. That's a long time. He smoked one to two packs a day. That's 200 to 400 doses of nicotine to the brain every day. He would smoke first--
It went off for a second.
He smoked first thing in the morning -- I'll keep talking while this is coming up. I kind of know what the evidence is.
He smoked first thing in the morning. Why is that important? Because you heard from Dr. Henningfield that that is the number one indicator of whether you're addicted, because when you're asleep, you obviously can't be smoking.
Right?
So if you wake up and the very first thing you do is have a cigarette, that is the most important factor or criteria for addiction. Why? Because your body is in withdrawal. You haven't had it for several hours, six, seven, eight hours, the time period you're asleep. If you wake up and the very first thing you do is have to have a cigarette, the very first thing, that's evidence of addiction.
He smoked with breakfast. He smoked when he came home from work. Would smoke constantly and everywhere, at home, at work, in the car. He smoked in bed.
The last thing he did was smoke.
And this is -- here is the thing. He kept a cigarette behind his ear. He wanted to make sure (snaps fingers) he had -- he didn't even want to wait to take one out of his pack of cigarettes. He wanted -- he wanted it right there in the back of his ear to go what, from here to here. That's evidence of addiction. That's evidence of addiction.
He was a chain smoker. He had a cigarette dangling from his mouth doing his normal activities.
He had -- there were cigarette stains on the windowsill in the bathroom. Does that sound like somebody who enjoys it? Does that sound like he's doing something to -- to keep his hands occupied, to be occupied?
That you would stand in the windowsill in your bathroom and smoke out the window? That's enjoyable?
He's addicted.
Actions speak louder than words. Look at what he did.
He even smoked after his diagnosis. He even tried to smoke in the hospital. He tried to quit many, many times, and it only lasted a few days.
So, you know, I'm going to talk to you about the definition of addiction. You know who decides the definition of addiction?
I'm looking at six people who are going to do that. That's you. Because you decide the definition of addiction. You decide. There is not going to -- the judge -- he read you the instructions. Did you hear any definition of addiction? No.
So whatever an expert tells you, well, this is what we rely on addiction, this is what -- that
doesn't matter. Because you decide if the person is addicted. And it's not some book in the DSM, and it's not some book from the American Psychiatric Association. It's not from any of that.
You -- and the judge told you what you use for that. What do you use? Your common sense. Use your common sense. A guy who gets up in the morning, first thing he has to do is smoke. He smokes over 40 times a day. He smokes over five -he smokes over five hours a day, of his day, of his 16-hour day awake, smoking. That's addiction. But you're not going to hear a definition of addiction because you decide that. You decide that.
And who did you hear from? We brought you Dr. Henningfield. He's a professor at Johns Hopkins medical school. He lectures students on nicotine addiction. He was a former investigator for the National Institutes of Drug Abuse on nicotine addiction. He's a former lead scientist for the FDA.
He's written over 400 peer-reviewed articles, and two-thirds of them on nicotine addiction.
That's over 300 - that's over 300 articles on nicotine addiction. One of the most widely
recognized experts in the world that you heard from.
He contributed to the '86 and '88 Surgeon General Report. He's a consultant for the CDC. He's on the committee for the World Health Organization. He's even testified before Congress on the issues of cigarette design and delivery system.
This is an expert. This is an expert.
And what does he tell you? He tells you that 400 percent or more nicotine receptors in the brains of smokers than nonsmokers. That the first time - the time to the first cigarette of the day is the most important factor. And he says a one pack or more a day is heavily addicted.
And why is that important? In fact, you heard him say, look, if you smoke one pack a day, you're not just addicted, you're heavily addicted. And this man smoked over a pack a day.
Let's hear what he had to say, because I want to play a brief portion of his testimony, very briefly for you.
Can you go back?
(Video deposition of Dr. Jack Henningfield played as follows:)
A. Addiction is a biological barrier to acting on free choice. So addiction does not - addiction to cocaine doesn't mean you can't quit cocaine, but the addiction means that there is a powerful biological driving force that makes it more difficult for the person that wants desperately to give up cocaine, to actually give up cocaine. Same applies to nicotine and heroin and alcohol for an alcohol addicted person.
Single, in my opinion - well, it's really two. It's number of cigarettes. So if somebody is smoking more than a pack of cigarettes per day, virtually every day, that is a sign that they are very likely heavily dependent.
People seem to get more nicotine out of a cigarette, as far as we know. And the waking-up cigarette, people that smoke more quickly when they get out of bed regularly are more likely to have higher cotinine levels, higher nicotine levels in their blood, stronger withdrawal, greater difficulty in quitting and so forth.
So those two items are - are probably the most powerful two items.
Addiction is the interface. It's the driver.
It's the interface between the product, the cigarette, and the disease.
(Video deposition stopped.)
MR. ALVAREZ: So a few things he said that are very important. Just because you can quit doesn't mean you weren't addicted. And the two most important things are the amount that you smoked, and this man smoked over a pack a day, almost two packs a day, sometimes two packs a day, and how quickly you start smoking when you wake up in the morning.
Every single one of these is a checkmark for Booker Davis.
So let's talk about who they brought. And they brought an expert by the name of Debra Barnett. And this is their nicotine expert. And let's talk about some testimony that she - she gave.
She only has one patient that she's treated exclusively for nicotine addiction, only one person, one patient in her career.
90 to 95 percent of her practice does not focus on addiction. She's never conducted any specific research on the area of nicotine addiction. She's never conducted any research on smoking cessation. She's never conducted any research in the area of smoking and health. She
has not conducted any studies in the area of nicotine addiction.
She's never published, meaning she's never written on nicotine addiction. She's never published, that means written, on the area of smoking and health. She's never published on smoking cessation.
She's never conducted any seminars where the main topic was nicotine addiction, and she's never been asked to speak at any conference on any topics of smoking and health or nicotine addiction, and she's never worked at a smoking-cessation clinic, yet that's the expert.
Of all the experts in the world, this is who they choose.
MR. BAYUK: Objection, Your Honor, improper argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: And she had some pretty extreme, extreme positions. Some of those positions included that a five-pack-a-day smoker was not addicted. Five packs a day. That's a hundred cigarettes a day. It takes 10 minutes to smoke a cigarette. Okay?
And here is - here is an interesting thing
that she admitted. She says she's reviewed 18 cases for the tobacco company, and of those - of those 18 cases, which were all multiple-pack-a-day smokers, none of them, in her opinion -
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, I object as facts not in evidence.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, rely upon your own independent and collective recollection as to what the testimony was.
MR. ALVAREZ: When Mr. Freidin was asking her questions, she said she's testified in - she's reviewed 18 cases, and of those 18 cases, none of the smokers were found to be addicted. Okay? And in her own opinion, it's 50 percent.
So of those 18, if it's 50 percent, then half of them, nine of them, would have had to have been addicted, but in her opinion, none. None were addicted.
She had - she had to admit that the '89 Surgeon General Report actually says that 80 to 90 percent of the smokers are addicted. She - you know, the DSM-IV, which was in use at the time that Mr. Booker was alive, she agreed that statistics there are saying 80 to 90 percent of the smokers are addicted. Yet she found zero percent of all
the cases she reviewed for the tobacco company weren't addicted.
And you've got to look at motivation and you've got to look at believability of a witness, and that's one of the instructions that the judge gave you. You know, do you believe the witness, do they have -- look at the frankness, look at the motives, look at the motives.
So they choose a person who has never been published, you know, no one recognizes her as an authority on nicotine addiction, and they -- and she's plucked out of Tampa.
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, I object. It's improper argument.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ALVAREZ: And her salary increases 30 to 40 percent. Overnight. For testifying for tobacco companies. That's something you can consider. That's something you can consider.
But look at her -- look at her -- not her education or training, but look at her experience. She's -- she doesn't have any experience in this stuff.
Let's look at how -- what we're talking about.
He smoked one to two packs a day. That is, over
the course of his lifetime, between almost 3 million and 6 million exposures to nicotine.
Between 3 to 6 million. That's between a pack and two packs a day, one pack is almost 3 million, two packs is 6 million, exposures over his lifetime of nicotine.
That's -- that's an enormous amount of nicotine that you're getting in your body.
And think about it this way. How about using some other common sense approaches, some other tools that God gave us, common sense, if it's enough to cause his lung cancer and death, but it's not enough to addict him? It's enough to kill you, give you cancer, and you die, but it's not enough to addict you? It's something you do for 40 years, five hours a day for 40 years and you are not addicted to it? Use your common sense, of course the person is addicted.
And this is the definition, "Addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of his lung cancer if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such lung cancer so that it could" be -- "reasonably be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine,
such lung cancer would not have occurred."
So what does that mean? "Legal cause if it directly produces or contributes substantially to producing cancer." "Contributes substantially."
That means did it play an important role. That's all it means, did it play an important role. Okay, but for the addiction, the lung cancer would not have occurred.
Another way to think about this is but for the addiction, if he was not -- think about it this way, if he was not addicted to nicotine, would he have smoked one to two packs a day for 41 years and developed lung cancer? Of course not. Of course not.
So this is an easy chart that explains legal cause. So this is applying the facts to the law.
Okay?
Addiction causes somebody to smoke, continued smoking; right? You continue to smoke, it causes what? It causes lung cancer and death. Directly produces or contributes substantially to producing lung cancer.
And if you noticed, I'm going to go back real quick to the -- you know what's missing out of this -- what word is missing out of here? Choice.
Being able to quit. Right? There is nothing in there about choice.
You know why it's not in there? Because it's not a requirement. That's not what this -- that's not what this is about.
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, misstatement of the
law.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, the law is what the Court will instruct you to, and you are to follow the Court's instruction as to the law.
MR. ALVAREZ: And look at the instruction.
This is the instruction. And it's not in there.
So how do we have to prove our case? I don't have to prove this case to you by a hundred percent. All I have to do is -- it's by the greater weight of the evidence. It means the more persuasive and convincing force and effects of the entire evidence in the case.
And, you know, that's why you always see the scales of justice. I only have to tilt it a little bit more on my side and I prove the case. That's all we have to do. It doesn't have to be a hundred percent, it's greater than 50 percent. Okay?
So when you're asked this question, "Was Booker Davis addicted to cigarettes containing
nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death," you know, we suggest that you answer yes. If you answer no, we go home. So the case is over, we didn't meet our burden of proof, you can send us home.
But we did more than that. We did more than that. We've proven our case well beyond the greater weight of the evidence.
Now, here is a second question. The second question I don't think there is much dispute about, but, you know, this is the second question. "Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by Reynolds a legal cause of Mr. Davis' lung cancer and death?"
And basically what this is asking you is did he smoke their -- did he smoke their cigarettes?
Did he smoke -- Winstons is a brand that's manufactured by Reynolds. Is it -- is it their brand that he smoked which caused his lung cancer? And there is no dispute about that.
All the factual evidence in this case supports the fact that he was smoking, he was a longtime Winston smoker. That's -- the evidence of that is very, very clear.
So let's talk about Dr. Villa for a second, because he's six -- he has six board
certifications. And the two most important ones are pathology and oncology. Because the pathologist is the doctor that looks at the slides and is able to tell what kind of cancer the cells are or the tissue is.
And an oncologist is the one that treats it.
Right? He's the cancer doctor. He's the treater.
So he's able to do two things. He's able to look at the pathology, understand the pathology, and then order a course of treatment for the doc- -for the patient. Okay?
And his testimony is, he confirms that the pathology was lung cancer. He says squamous cell, the type of lung cancer he had is 98 to 99 percent of the time caused by smoking. Okay? He said it's inoperable, 85 to 95 is usually a terminal condition. Once you get lung cancer, it's very, very rare that people survive it. It's a very significant and terrible disease.
And he says that the lung cancer was caused by smoking. And the lung cancer caused his death.
And when you were asked to assume the time period that he smoked the Reynolds brands of cigarettes, he said that smoking the Reynolds brands of cigarettes substantially contributed, causing his
lung cancer and death.
So we've met every element of the claim to say yes to that question as well. In fact, there is no evidence to the contrary.
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, I object as a misstatement of the evidence.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, rely upon your own independent and collective recollection as to what the testimony was.
MR. ALVAREZ: You're not going to hear any testimony -- or you heard the testimony already. There was not one witness who said he didn't smoke Wnston for a long period of time, and they make Reynolds -- Reynolds makes Winston cigarettes.
So let's look at the death certificate because -- you know, you also heard during the cross-examination of Dr. Villa they were crossing and saying, well, you don't have this medical record, and you don't have that medical record, and you don't have this CT scan, and you don't have this film, and you don't have this, this, this, this, this. Remember that whole line of saying you don't have -- but you know who had all that stuff? You know who had all that stuff? The doctors that were treating him. And the doctor who signed the
death certificate. Right? He had it all available to him. He had it all available to him. And what does he say killed him? He said he -- you know, his heart stopped, and it was caused by lung cancer.
So Dr. Villa may not have it all. He has a clinical picture. He has a pathology. We have the death certificate. But the guy who signed the death certificate who was treating him had every single thing that they talked about, and that's what they concluded. So there is no disputing that.
So when you're asked this question, "Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by Reynolds a legal cause of Mr. Davis' lung cancer and death," the answer to that is yes.
And by the way, there is seven questions.
There is a lot of yes and no questions. I suggest to you that every one of those yes and no questions is very, very important. And then if you answer no to those, you know, there are significant issues with those. I'm going to explain what it is. But we think that we've met our burden of proof on every single one of those, that it should be yes.
Okay?
All right. So now I'm going to jump from the beginning, the first question, to the end because I think this is what this case is about. And this is the last question you are going to receive.
It says, "Please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against defendant under the circumstances of this case."
Because that's what this case is about. Okay? This case is about punitive damages. And let me tell you why it's about punitive damages.
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, object. Object as improper argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: This is a question you're going to get. This is the last question. "Are punitive damages warranted against the defendants?" And one of the instructions you are going to hear is, is about gross negligence, means that the defendants' conduct was so reckless or wanting in care that it constitutes a conscious disregard or indifference to the life, safety, or rights of persons exposed to such conduct.
That is the law. If we meet that standard, you should say yes to that question.
Let's look at the evidence. What did they do that constituted a conscious disregard or indifference to the life, safety, and rights of persons exposed to such conduct, and in this case, Mr. Davis? Let's look at what they did.
This is -- from now on, guess what we're going to be talking about? Their own statements.
"Our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge, and we may be subject to a finding, that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes."
That's a confession.
MR. BAYUK: Objection, Your Honor, that's improper argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: "The individuals we met" -- this is 1958. And this went on for decades and decades and almost 50 years.
"The individuals we met believed that smoking causes lung cancer. Carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke. Obviously, the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming, the evidence challenging such
indictment is scant. Cigarettes have certain unattractive side effects, they cause lung cancer."
This is 1962 and '63. This is what they were saying internally. They weren't telling the people that. That's the concealment. That's the reckless disregard for the lives of people. When you know this, all right, and you don't -- and you don't tell people.
"Constitutes disregard or indifference to the life, safety, or rights of persons exposed to such conduct." But there's more.
"What we need to know above all things is what constitutes the hold of smoking; that is, to understand addiction. As a result of these various researches, we now possess a knowledge of the effects of nicotine far more extensive than exists in published scientific literature." This is 1962.
And the whole time, the whole time they're denying that nicotine is addictive. The whole time. The whole time.
And they have a duty to reveal, not conceal. They have a responsibility to tell the truth, not to mislead.
"Moreover, nicotine is addictive. We are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive
drug, effective in the release of stress mechanisms."
But they continued, more. "For the typical smoker, nicotine satisfaction is a dominant desire. Therefore, in designing any cigarette product, the dominant specification should be nicotine delivery. Tobacco products contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug, with a variety of physiological effects. Our industry is based upon design, manufacture, and sale of an attractive dose form of nicotine." 1972.
They have a duty not -- they have a duty to tell you the truth, not to conceal.
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, object to this. Contrary to the instructions you gave.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: They did not reveal. They concealed.
"Without the chemical compound, the market" -and this is what they cared about the whole time -you're not going to see one document where they're concerned about a single person. About a single person. This is what they're concerned about. "Without the chemical compound, the market" -- "the cigarette market would collapse. PM, Philip
Morris, would collapse and we'd all lose our jobs and our consulting fees."
And this is a Reynolds-related document. "However, we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. That is to say, if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business overnight."
That's what they cared about. That's the indifference to life that they had, the reckless disregard that they had.
"We have deliberately played down the role of nicotine." That's concealing. That's not revealing. That's concealing. "Hence the nonsmoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfaction it may offer him, and no desire to try it. Instead, we somehow must convince him with wholehearted irrational reasons that he should try smoking in the hopes that he will for himself then discover the real, quote, satisfaction obtainable."
This isn't about doing something keeping your hands occupied. This is a well-engineered, highly-sophisticated device dispensing nicotine to addict you to continue smoking. They did it on purpose with intent to harm people, including
Mr. Davis.
Let's listen to what they were saying.
(Video clip played as follows:)
MR. CULLMAN: I don't believe that most people who smoke get lung cancer. I'm convinced that eventually, they will find some element, through a filter or through leaf growing or a special type of seed growing that will eliminate the mysterious thing they're looking for.
We want to be the detective just as much as the Surgeon General or as the AMA. We'll cooperate in every way.
I don't think the industry admits there are any bad elements. If there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find them. And if they are found, they will be removed. But at this point, we do not know.
SPEAKER: We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous, we don't accept that. Because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
MR. DWYER: To this question, it must be answered insofar as the correlation between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are concerned, no one knows. It may; it may not.
MR. HORRIGAN: It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. It has not been causally established.
MR. KOPPEL: Cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
MR. HORRIGAN: Despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link establishment.
MR. KOPPEL: No causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease?
MR. HORRIGAN: No. As a matter of fact, there are studies that while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over ten years that would say again that science is still puzzled over these forces.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. ALVAREZ: Every one of those men that were working for a tobacco company knew that what they were saying was false and misleading.
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, there's no evidence to
this.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Ladies and gentlemen, rely upon your own independent and collective recollection as to what the testimony was.
MR. ALVAREZ: Not only is there evidence of that, the evidence is in their own handwriting and documents. And, in fact, if we meet our burden of proof on class membership, you have to accept the Engle findings that they did conceal and they did conspire. And they continued with these ridiculous statements.
(Video clip played as follows:)
SPEAKER: Dr. Herbert L. Ratcliffe has noted a significant increase in the frequency of lung cancer in water fowl, especially in two species of ducks at the Philadelphia Zoo, located in the typical city air pollution area.
MR. DWYER: Two Chicago doctors implicated fresh air is a health hazard, claiming it leads to insomnia and nightmares. Apricots have been questioned because of their cyanide component. Betel nut chewing was linked with intestinal cancer. Old books were cited as a source for a viral infection. Cats and dogs are on the list, as
are milk, butter, eggs, cauliflower, peanut butter, potatoes, corn, peas, brussel sprouts, and spinach, to name just a few foods whose consumption has been linked with human disorders.
Sex also is on the health hazards lineup, along with wax milk cartons and Worcestershire sauce.
DR. WAKEHAM: Anything can be considered harmful. Applesauce is harmful if you get too much of it.
MR. P. TAYLOR: I don't think many people are dying from applesauce.
DR. WAKEHAM: They're not eating that much.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. ALVAREZ: You know, they make those ridiculous statements about apple -- you know, applesauce and apricots that they kept making to the American people. And it's ridiculous. And it was purposely done with one intention and one intention only, is to keep addicted smokers smoking. And think about this. If you have an addicted smoker and they're hearing competing messages, one from healthcare providers saying, "Look, this can cause cancer, it can kill you," and they also hear, they also hear from the tobacco
companies, the makers of the product, saying, "It hasn't been proven, there's doubt, we're studying it," or "smoke a filtered cigarette, it will take out all the bad things," which one do you think the addicted smoker will choose?
And he chose what millions and millions of Americans did, was believe the tobacco companies.
And we're going to show you evidence of that.
And this was purposely done with one intention, one intention and one intention only, is to keep the conspiracy going so they could continue to sell cigarettes and they didn't care about anyone. They didn't care about a single person.
And they didn't care about this man and his five children. Didn't care about anyone.
And it showed a conscious disregard or indifference to the life, safety, or rights of persons exposed to them. That's what it's about.
This is from their own documents. "The publicity emanating from the medical profession linking cigarette smoking with cancer gave some of the smaller companies an opportunity to promote the sale of filter-tip cigarettes, making use of therapeutic claims. It is purely a merchandising and sales promotion proposition."
They knew as early as 1953 that filters didn't work, and that was -- and that was -- and that was the fraud that continued on. And that while millions of Americans said, "Well, you know what, I hear it's bad, I'm going to switch to filters, I'm going to take out all the bad things, I'm going to continue to smoke," the whole time these guys knew that was false, that was misleading, and they did it purposely. This campaign of the filters that went from almost zero percent or less than
1	percent in 1950 to almost all the cigarettes made in the world today are filtered cigarettes are just a fraud.
And this is their own documents. "The illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration. As we know, all too often, the smoker who switches to hi-if cigarettes winds up smoking more units in order to provide himself with the same delivery which he had before.
"In most cases, however, the smoker of a filter cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar than he would have gotten from a regular cigarette. He had abandoned" -- this is -"He had abandoned the regular cigarettes," meaning the non-filtered cigarettes, "however on the
grounds of reduced risk to health."
This is what they knew. They knew that people were doing that. And they didn't reveal, they concealed.
We say here, "Try our triple or quadruple or quintuple filter, capable of removing whatever constituents of smoke is currently suspect while delivering full flavor and, incidentally, a nice jolt of nicotine. And if we are the first to be able to make a sustain" -- "and sustain a claim, what price Kent?" Meaning that Kent cigarettes was taking over the market because of the Micronite filter. All right? They knew this whole thing was a scam.
Does it look like they cared about the life and safety or rights of persons exposed to that conduct? Is that what they cared about?
Look at the evidence.
And there's more. "If this committee had not been formed," and they're talking about the Tobacco Institute Research Committee, "if it hadn't been formed, the cigarette industry by now would be in a deplorable position. TIRC had been a successful defensive operation.
"We must in the near future provide some
answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and self-rationale to continue smoking," which is what I was telling you about. You give them mixed messages, tell them this hasn't been proven, smoke a filter. That's what they were doing. These are very smart men. These are scientists. These are executives with a lot of money behind them. This plan was ex -- well funded, well executed.
"Our basic position in the controversy is subject to the charge that we are making false and misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. Obviously the key word is confusion. And anything we can do to confirm such a situation could work to our advantage.
"For nearly 20 years, the industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts, litigation, politics, and public opinion. While the strategy was brilliantly conceived" -- this is them patting them on the back, hey, we were brilliant. Brilliant? Knowing that it caused cancer and concealing to people, telling people that a filter would take things out when the whole time you know they're getting more tar and nicotine? Concealing those facts from the
American people and lying to them? That was brilliantly concealed?
On the contrary, there has always been a holding strategy, consisting of creating doubt about the health charges without actually denying it.
And look at the amount of money. They had $550 million that they spent on the TIRC, CTR, and Tl. That's half a billion dollars. That buys you a lot of doubt and confusion.
This was a well-funded machine.
And what happened? Their plan was working. Consumption kept going up during his lifetime. Consumption kept going up. It didn't go down.
There were little dips when things happened. And what would they do? The machine would work harder and get the consumption back up, because that's all they cared about.
1961, "Carcinogens are found in practically every class of compound in smoke. Present technologies does not permit selective filtration of particulate in smoke." Right? That's 1961.
And what do they tell the Surgeon General two years later? "None of the chemical compounds listed therein, to our knowledge, has been found by
scientific research to be harmful to the health of a smoker in the amounts reported in smoke. It is possible, of course, to modify the chemical composition of cigarette smoke by the use of filtration." Okay? That's what they tell the Surgeon General. Right? Internally, they say something else.
Are they revealing, or concealing? Do they care about the people?
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, I would object as improper argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: "If we move towards reduction or elimination of nicotine from our products, then we shall eventually liquidate our business."
That's what they cared about, their business.
They knew that they could manufacture a cigarette with no nicotine or in such low quantities that it not be addictive. But that's not what they wanted. That's not what they wanted.
"We do not foresee" - and here's - and this is the extent that they went. They went to the extent of destroying documents and rewriting documents. And we know that because we have these evidence - the evidence of that here. "We do not
foresee any difficulty in the event a decision is reached to remove certain reports from research files."
Does that look like honest research to you, that you remove things? That's evidence of concealing, not revealing.
"As an alternative to invalidation, we can have the authors rewrite these sections of the report which appear objectionable." This is what they wrote to the lawyers for the company.
Listen, don't worry about it, we'll say what you want.
"This is to inform you that I have either returned to the library or destroyed all formal reports and the like checked out to me."
Is this evidence of revealing or concealing?
Is this evidence that they care about the lives -lives of people?
Is this evidence that they have conscious disregard or indifference for the life and safety and rights of persons exposed to them?
"The long-term scientific programs have been carefully planned, such the results obtained should not be able to harm the industry. Recommendations for a scientific program will be given later." So,
you know, they're controlling the science.
"Subjects to be avoided. Attempt to relate human disease to smoking. We have a major program in INBIFO, and since this is a locale where we might do some things which we are reluctant to do in this country, I recommend that we acquire INBIFO either in total or to the extent of controlling the interests."
You know, Philip Morris, who's a co-conspirator in this case, went to the extent of buying a research lab in Germany to do studies on cancer that they didn't want to do here so that we wouldn't get our hands on it and say, "Huh, you knew the whole time."
Is that evidence of revealing or concealing?
"The CTR began as an organization called the Tobacco Industry Research Council. It was set up as an industry shield in 1954. Bill Shinn feels that Special Projects are the best way that moneys are spent on these projects. CTR has acted as a front." A front.
And these tobacco and research letters and things that they sent out to -- to -- to doctors and scientists all over -- all over the country.
And this is a criteria. Say, listen, guys, we
should make -- these are examples. "A report in which the statistics of smoking-associated disease are questions. One in which death certificates or other classifications of such a disease are questioned."
That doesn't show -- that doesn't seem like honest research. It seems like they want to find the exception rather than the rule and manipulate the facts.
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, I object. It's improper argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: And the most important story, this -- the most important -- important type of story is one which casts doubt on the cause-and-effect theory of disease and smoking.
Let's hear what they had to say.
(Video clip played as follows:)
SPEAKER: The record shows that many of the country's most respected doctors openly challenged anti-cigarette claims.
MS. BROWDER: The case is still open. The jury has not come in.
MR. STOSSEL: It may not be harmful? You're not convinced?
MS. BROWDER: It may be or it may not be. We don't know.
MR. CAMPBELL: We don't know what causes cancer in general right now, so I think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship, but -- which has yet to be proven.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. ALVAREZ: Are they revealing or concealing? This is the information that made up life for Booker Davis and millions of other Americans. They purposely did this with one intent and one intent only, is to create doubt about the harms of smoking so that their customers would keep buying their cigarettes and they could keep making profit.
And this is -- this is from them. "The lawyers remind us, I'm told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case. We cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." Their words, not mine.
And they go before Congress in 1994, and we're going to show you that. It started in 1953,
ended -- well, it didn't end in 1994, but they had the gall, all of them, to get together and, you know, go in front of Congress and say things that never were true.
And, you know, you were shown -- you were shown, you know, in 1962, 1960, 1963 articles in the Miami Herald that warned people about the health effects of smoking. But that's a snowflake in a snowstorm.
Because when you put half a billion dollars behind a project, and millions and millions -billions of dollars in marketing a product, a few articles in a newspaper don't make a difference when the overwhelming evidence and the landslide of information is contrary, and they had time, the resources, the money, the energy, and you know what else they had? The motive to do it, the incentive to do it.
So "Please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against the Defendant under the circumstances of this case."
There is more evidence. This is the other thing they do. You know, they marketed to every segment of -- of our community, okay, you know,
whether you were Hispanic, whether you were Jewish, whether you were white, whether you were young, whether you were black. It didn't matter, they wanted everybody's money. Okay? Every money -everybody's color of money was good to them, okay?
But what they did was, we know for a fact that they didn't use the same type of advertising for African Americans that they used for whites. They focused it, they focused it, they focused it.
"The only recent" -- "Only recently has the black market been pictured as a real opportunity for the product cultivation and sales growth."
This is 1964.
The objective of Winston, this is the brand he smoked. What do you think? He woke up one-listen, do you think he just woke up one day and said I'm going to -- I'm going to smoke this brand of cigarettes? Something drove him to that.
Winston was their number one cigarette, the one they promoted the most.
"The objective of Winston advertising in the black market is to convince the maximum number of people in the group that Winston provides more taste than any other cigarette."
"RJR is showing share growth momentum among
black smokers most likely due to the company's use of marketing efforts specifically targeting towards black consumers."
So there is no issue. You know, that's why I should you these --1 showed you these documents not to get you mad, I showed you these documents to show you that this -- that Booker, Booker is exactly the guy who they were looking for.
And, you know, these are some of the ads that he would have seen.
And look what they said. This is the president of American Tobacco Company in 1984. (Portion of video deposition played as
follows:)
Q. Throughout yourtenure with American, it was not only Americans' position, but your position that cigarettes weren't injurious to health, is that accurate?
A. Through my tenure?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes, that is so.
Q. That's something American Tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. It's a statement that American Tobacco placed
great reliance on?
A. We - we issued that statement, yes.
Q. And as far as--
A. Certainly we wanted them to believe it.
Q. As far as you're concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay.
(Video deposition stopped.)
MR. ALVAREZ: Justifiably relied on that statement. This is the president of the American Tobacco Company in 1984 saying listen, if they saw an ad, if we said something, we wanted the public to believe it, and if they believed it, we wanted them to believe it. That's in their own words.
"Realistically, if our company is to survive and prosper over the long term, we must get our share of the youth market." Why is that important? Because 90 percent of all smokers start as teens, and they know that and they want to grab that market, because if they don't grab them young, they don't get them. They don't get them.
"They represent tomorrow's cigarette business. As the 14 to 24 age group matures, they will account for a key share of the total cigarette
volume." That's all they cared about, volume.
"We have deliberately played down the role of nicotine, hence the nonsmoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfaction it may offer him, and no desire to try it."
Let me go into this -- you saw a few of these, and there's a -- and you heard Dr. Proctor, there is hundreds of thousands of these, okay? When kids, in their schools, would write to them and say, hey, what is this about smoking? Is it harmful? Is it harmful?
They write back and they say, "Despite all research going" -- this is a fifth -- this is a fifth grade class. A fifth grade class. "Despite all the research going on, medical science has not found any conclusive evidence that an element in tobacco or tobacco smoke caused any human disease. The answer to the many unanswered smoking and health questions and the true cause of human disease can, we believe, be determined by scientific research. Our company intends, therefore, to continue to support such research until the truth is known."
This is what they're telling kids, when the whole time, they know the truth. And they did it
and they did it for one reason only, so they continued getting people hooked on cigarettes, kids, who will grow up to be their customers of the future. It's documented in their operational plan.
So when you're asked this question, which is the very next -- the first question, most important question, "State whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against the defendant under the circumstances of this case," that answer has to be yes. It has to be yes.
They didn't care. They didn't care about Booker Davis. They didn't care about these people. They cared about themselves.
So these are questions 3 and 4. "Did Mr. Davis reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement made by Reynolds that concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available to him concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking, and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his lung cancer?"
And the second one has to do with conspiracy, "Did Mr. Davis reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement that concealed or omitted material information a fact" -- oh, yeah, okay -- "concealed
or omitted material information, a fact not already known to him concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and that was made in furtherance of Reynolds' agreement with other tobacco companies to conceal material facts, and if so was such a reliance a legal cause of Mr. Davis' lung cancer and death."
So let's talk about this. This is the fraud and this is the conspiracy count. Let's talk about that, okay? What's the evidence of that? What's the evidence that he believed them, that he did something to change the way he acted in belief of something they said?
Let's look at the evidence. Okay? Because we know that these are some of the things that they did not reveal, that they concealed. Okay?
They formed -- they didn't tell people, they didn't go out and say, hey, we formed a conspiracy in 1953 to deny the health effects of smoking.
They didn't tell people that they hired scientists and doctors to mislead the public.
They didn't say, hey, these stories that you see aren't true, we are really writing them or we're paying the American Medical Association $10 million so that they don't, you know, so that they
don't approve of the Surgeon General's warnings.
They're not going around -- they're not paying -- they're not telling people, hey, these doctors that you hear are denying the health effects, because they are on our payroll. They're not telling people that.
You know, they don't tell people that they studied nicotine and that they know it was a highly-addictive drug. They said the opposite.
They didn't tell people that they're studying teenagers and that they know that 90 percent of all kids start smoking as teens.
They didn't -- you know, they didn't tell people that they knew that 50 percent of all smokers would die from a smoking-related disease. That's something they knew and they concealed.
They knew that it was -- that smoking was killing hundreds of millions -- hundreds of thousands of Americans every year, and they concealed that fact. In fact, they denied that fact. They said that not a single person, not a single person has died.
They didn't tell people that they manipulated levels of nicotine to keep them smoking. They didn't tell the people that they knew there were 70
cancer-causing agents in cigarettes. They didn't tell people that there were carcinogens like polonium 210, arsenic, cyanide.
They didn't tell people that the filters were no safer than non-filters. In fact, they said the opposite. Okay?
They talked about low tar being safer. They purposely misled the public about filters and low tar. That's not -- they didn't come forward with what they knew. They sold -- they sold propaganda and lies to get people to smoke.
MR. BAYUK: Objection, improper argument, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: That's the concealment. And what evidence do we have that he did it? What evidence do we have that he did it? Look at the testimony of Mr. Naylor. "When I showed him the articles, he told me that there was also articles that had -- that -- the same people or those same newspapers had written articles earlier about not knowing enough about cigarettes being dangerous -not having enough proof to validate people's claims about cigarettes causing cancer."
Okay?
"And what did you respond to that? Did you show - talk to him more about the articles?
"Well, I kind of just talked to him, like, you know, how does he know it - it's not true or is he not concerned about it, and things like that.
"Okay. And did he - did he respond back, or did he let the subject drop at that point?"
And this is what he said. "Well, he kind of just - he showed me the back of the cigarettes that had the filter on it, or something like that, and told me that the filter was kind of just not allowing - the filter was to keep the carbon and all of that stuff that people were saying was getting in your lungs, it was keeping it out."
That's why he smoked filtered cigarettes, because he believed it was safer. Who did that? Who promulgated that? Who sold that? They did. They got exactly what they wanted.
"Did Booker Davis ever tell you that he knew that cigarettes were harmful to him?
"He never really admitted that they were harmful to him. He just - he just said that he knew that they had articles, but that the cigarettes that had a filter on it, and so that he was keeping it from" - "it was keeping it from
harming him, I guess as much as anybody else or whatever, I don't know."
Question: "And what did he say to you when he was showing you and demonstrating or pointing to that portion of the cigarette? What did he say to you?
"That was the portion that keeps the - keeps whatever it is that - carbon, things like that, that he said is causing cancer, it keeps from entering the lungs and the body."
There you go, there is the evidence. That he changed the way he behaved based on what they said, how they marketed cigarettes. That was their plan, that's what they did, that's what they accomplished. They got what they wanted. They got what they wanted in this case.
MR. BAYUK: Objection, improper argument, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: And these are articles in his newspaper where he could have seen this information. They showed you articles in the Miami Herald that doubted it, here is an artic- - that said smoking was harmful, here are articles in this very same Miami Herald and Miami News, when he was
alive, that said exactly what he told his son.
Here they are. And they are in evidence, look at them.
"Scientists find no proof smoking causes cancer." "Cigarette Death Rates Slight" - "Linked Slightly, Meds Say." "Smoking Cancer Link Disputed." "Cancer and Cigarette Data Challenged." "More Cigarettes Being Smoked As Fears Wane." "Cigarettes [sic] of Lung Invokes Many Factors, Doctors Say. Report on Cancer Needs More Study."
That's the information he was - when you have an addicted smoker and he's reading competing messages, which one is he going to listen to? The one that they know will get a response.
And this is - and this was 2014, a representative from Reynolds, admitting that they wanted people to believe them.
(Portion of video deposition played as
follows:)
Q. And then they also wanted to reassure the public that there was no proof of the link between smoking and lung cancer; correct?
A. They - they did want that message to get out, yes, that's correct.
Q. And they wanted people to believe that; right?
A. Well, it was the facts at the time, and as far as they saw it, so, yeah, they certainly wanted that message out there.
Q. And why would they want the message out there to reassure the public that there was no proof?
A. Because they didn't believe that the - that the science supported a direct link between smoking and disease. And especially in the 1950s, there was a lot of question about whether or not that link could be established.
So they certainly wanted - they didn't want people to draw that conclusion before - before it could be looked at more thoroughly.
Q. Exactly. They didn't want the public to conclude that and they didn't want the public to believe that; right?
A. Again, they - you know, the thought at the time was that that certainly was not the case. So, yeah, they wouldn't have - they wouldn't have want that.
(Video deposition stopped.)
MR. ALVAREZ: They didn't want that, they didn't want - that's them. That's them a couple years ago. They didn't want the public believing that smoking was harmful. And that's their own
representative saying it under oath.
And they got what they wanted in this case.
They got what they wanted. They were successful. And now we're here for justice, because they got what they want, and somebody got hurt. And the law says that's wrong.
(Videotaped deposition resumed.)
Q. One source of expectations concerning product which a consumer has are the advertisements of that product. Is that accurate?
A. I would agree with that.
Q. Would you expect a consumer to rely upon your advertisements?
A. Yes. Our advertising is truthful, and we would anticipate that they would rely on it if they chose.
Q. That's your promise as to what the consumer can expect from your product, isn't it?
A. Yes, it is.
(Videotaped deposition stopped.)
MR. ALVAREZ: You know, that's them saying I want the consumers to rely on us. And when they rely on you and they smoke and they believe you and they get hurt, the law says that you are responsible for that.
And, you know, they spent $250 billion advertising. That's a lot of money. That's a lot of money. $250 billion.
And they went before Congress in 1994, and these are the presidents and the CEO, and they knew what they were saying was not true.
(Video clip played as follows:)
SPEAKER: Do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth?
Please consider yourself to be under oath.
MR. WYDEN: Let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive.
Let me ask you first, and I'd like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. I heard virtually all of you touch on it.
And just yes or no, do you believe nicotine, is not addictive?
MR. CAMPBELL: I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
MR. WYDEN: Mr. Johnston?
MR. JAMES JOHNSTON: Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. There is no
intoxication.
MR. WYDEN: We'll take that as a no.
And again, time is short. If you could just --1 think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. We just would like to have this for the record.
MR. TADDEO: I don't believe that nicotine or our products are addictive.
MR. TISCH: I believe nicotine is not addictive.
MR. HORRIGAN: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
MR. SANDEFUR: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
MR. DONALD JOHNSTON: And I, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. ALVAREZ: 1994, when Mr. Davis was diagnosed, they're still denying it. Still denying it.
So when you are asked this question, questions
3	and 4, the answer is yes. Is yes.
And then this is the next question. "Please state the percentage of any fault that you charge to Booker Davis and the percentage of
responsibilities that you charge to the Defendant, if any, for the legally causing Booker Davis' lung cancer and death, because Booker Davis admits that he bears some measure of responsibility, you must assign some percentage of fault, up to a hundred percent, to Booker Davis."
So here is the -- remember I told you there would be a place on the verdict form for you to assess responsibility? Okay? This is it.
So let's look at -- let's analyze this. Let's analyze this. Okay?
If two people go into a relationship, right, and they're both coming into it honestly and both people know the same information, I guess you could say -- and it doesn't work out, I guess it's 50/50.
Right?
But when one person conceals and doesn't reveal.
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor.
I'm sorry, Mr. Alvarez.
I	object, as a misstatement of the law, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: And one side.
THE COURT: And, ladies and gentlemen, the law
is what I tell you the law is. You must follow the law as I instruct you.
MR. ALVAREZ: And one side conceals and doesn't reveal what they know, then it can't be 50/50. It can't be 50/50. Okay? It can't be 50/50.
So for the fraud, we -- we're not accepting any responsibility for the fraud and for the concealment. We're accepting responsibility for what you read in the jury instructions, it's for his frequency and durations of quit attempts, that he should have tried harder, he could have tried harder, and if-- he should have tried harder.
But how could he be responsible when someone's lying to him? Someone's misleading him?
That's not equal. That's not 50/50.
And "Negligence is the failure to use reasonable care, which is the care that a reasonably careful corporation would use under like circumstances. Negligence is doing something that a reasonably careful corporation would not do under like circumstances, or failing to do something that a reasonable corporation" -- "careful corporation would do under like circumstances." That's what it is. Okay?
When you're comparing fault, compare appropriately. And they share most of the fault, the large majority -- I'm going to suggest to you what it is, and you don't have to accept it, it's up to you to decide. But I -- this is what we would suggest.
We would suggest that Booker Davis should be
2	percent and they should be 98 percent, because what they knew and what they did and what they concealed from a guy who never graduated from elementary school, who knew more. Who had more resources. Who got the message out.
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, it's a misstatement of the law.
THE COURT: Overruled on that basis.
MR. ALVAREZ: Who knew more. Would a reasonable corporation act this way. He was a target. He was a fish in the pond. They threw a net and they caught him and now they're responsible for him because they got what they wanted.
All right. So I'm winding down. I've spoken to you for a little bit, 62 minutes. I'm getting ready to sit down.
THE COURT: An hour an seven minutes.
MR. ALVAREZ: Well, okay. Somebody is keeping
time.
The next question is question number 6, and it really talks about the amount of damages sustained by the five children. Okay?
So they -- you know, they weren't the Brady bunch, but they were the Davis bunch. Right? And you heard a lot of evidence attempting to impugn, you know, Mr. Davis. But one thing you didn't hear, one thing you didn't hear is the disputed, and you saw it, the kind of relationship he had with these kids. His children. Right? Because they loved him, and he loved them. And when you look at them, you know, they ranged from ages of what, three to 12, three to 12.
That's when you need your parents the most. I mean, you always need your parents. I mean, you could -- you could be 30 years old, 40, you still need your parents.
But when you're three years old, five, or seven, ten, 12 years old and your -- and your father is, at the age of 57, is taken away from you, you don't have him anymore, then that's a void that can't be replaced.
And I guess -- you know, they're not -- like I said, you know, they're not -- they're not the
Brady bunch, but they're the Davis bunch, and the love that they had for their children, for their father, was just as much as any child has for a parent. And they grew up to be wonderful adults.
And they have a void in their life that they suffered from. And it's up to you to decide what that void is, what that loss is -- what the loss is valued at. Right?
I mean, for a three-year old, five-year-old, seven-year-old, ten-year-old loses -- to lose their dad, who came home every day and played with them. And what is the value of that?
And -- and I'm going to suggest a figure -- by the way, I'm going to suggest a figure. I'm going to suggest -- I'm going to suggest a figure to you, and you can accept it or reject it. It's up to you. You may think, "Hey, Mr. Alvarez, it's too high." Or you could say, "You know what, it's too low. It's too low. You should --1 think it's more." It's up to you to collectively decide what it is. Okay?
So what we would suggest would be, for each one of the kids, $7.5 million. And you say, "Well, that's a lot of money. It's like -- you know, it's over 30 million dollars."
Well, you know what? You know, this isn't Costco. Okay? And just because you buy in bulk, you don't get a discount. Okay? They don't get a discount because they -- because there's five of them. Right?
Each one of these kids suffer individually.
Each one of them has a claim individually for the loss of their parents. And there's five of them, five of them.
What they did, what the defendant did caused the death of their father. And there's five of them.
And we suggest that this is a reasonable and fair amount, that if you think it's too high, we accept your verdict. If you think it's too low, we accept your verdict.
So based on everything that I've said, I want to, number one, thank you for your time, for your devotion to this case. I'll have one more time to speak to you. And I want to thank you very much on behalf of my clients and the Davis children. Thank you very much.



MR. ALVAREZ: May it please the Court.
Can you take -MR. BAYUK: Yes, sir.
MR. ALVAREZ: Well, there's a lot of things I want to say, a lot of things I want to respond to.
MR. BAYUK: I'm sorry.
MR. ALVAREZ: So I'm just --1 wrote notes, and I'm going to try to do my best, you know, in the limited time that I have to try to address some of the points that were made. Okay?
The question was why did we spend so much time trying to re-prove the findings. Remember, that was a point? Well, you've got to know what they did. You've got to understand what they did to people, what they did to this family and how they did it. That's why we spent three days with Dr. Proctor showing you, showing you what they knew, what they concealed from the people and how they did it. That's why we spent three days with Dr. Proctor.
Because Booker Davis didn't crawl out under a rock. He was part of this world. You were asked
the number of witnesses who told you that Mr. Davis said that he regretted smoking, that he blamed tobacco companies, and that he wanted to bring a lawsuit was zero.
Remember that slide that they brought up?
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, I object to the use of my demonstratives.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: Okay. Remember that slide? They said zero. Let's put that in perspective.
Okay? He died in 1997 believing that the filters were safer. He died in 1997 believing them, believing them that there was a controversy about smoking and health. And when did they first admit it? They first admitted it in 2000, three years after he died. How could he know if they didn't admit it until he's dead?
And this lawsuit wasn't filed until mid 2000s, late 2000s.
Let's talk about the addiction. They said the reason he smoked is because he enjoyed it, he loved it. Well, think about that. Would he spend five hours a day -- addicted smokers don't spend time smoking because they like it. He wouldn't spend time, ten minutes out of his day in the morning or
maybe longer, at a windowsill in a bathroom blowing air, blowing smoke out of a window because that's something he enjoyed. That's ridiculous.
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, I object.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ALVAREZ: Can you put up the admission?
This is what we admitted, and this is part of the instruction. This is exactly what we admitted.
I want you to see word for word what we admitted. And that's in your instructions under comparative fault. "Plaintiff admits that Mr. Davis bears some measure of fault, but less than a hundred percent of the applicable fault for causing his lung cancer and death."
"Plaintiff admits that Mr. Davis' measure of fault," listen to this, "is related solely to his acts or omissions related to the frequency and durations of his efforts to quit smoking in combination with the acts and omissions of the defendant."
So when you see those -- when he put up there and it says, "She admits it, she admits that he died" -- well, read the whole thing. It's not what -- what he said. Read the whole thing.
We talked about Dr. Villa. They cherry-picked
Dr. Villa's testimony. What he said is overwhelmingly smoking caused his cancer. He used words like absolutely, overwhelmingly. He said the type of cancer that this man had, squamous cell, he said 98 to 99 percent of the time it's caused by smoking. And the other 2 percent only happens in nonsmokers. 2 percent.
And this -- and this man wasn't a nonsmoker.
This man was a smoker. So how could -- how can the argument be made logically that he had a squamous cell -- squamous cell carcinoma of the lung and it wasn't caused by smoking, when 98 percent of the time it is?
They put something up called the "death certificate is insufficient" -
Can you put up Instruction Number 10?
-- "under the law and accordingly the plaintiff expert to prove that Mr. Davis caused" -"Mr. Davis' cause of death." [Sic]
Let's look at the actual instruction that you read. It's Number 10. It says, "A death certificate is prima facie proof of the fact, place, date, and time of the death as well as the identity of the decedent. It does not constitute prima facie proof of the cause of the death, nor
does it create conclusive proof of any fact related to the death. As it relates to the cause of death," it simply states what? "The ultimate opinion of the attesting physician," meaning the man -- the doctor who signed the death certificate, who had access to all the medical records -MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, there's no evidence what that man has as to -THE COURT: Overruled.
Ladies and gentlemen, rely upon your own independent and collective recollection as to what the testimony was.
MR. ALVAREZ: The doctor who had access to everything when he signed it. You were shown a slide that said plaintiff swore under oath in 2009 that addiction is a medical diagnosis that she is not qualified to give. What they didn't show you, what they didn't show you was the question and the answer.
Can you put up the question?
It says -- look at the first thing. "Do you contend decedent was addicted to cigarettes that contain nicotine? Do you contend he was addicted? "Yes, I do."
They left that out.
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, I read that --1 said that to the jury.
THE COURT: Okay, that's not an objection.
MR. BAYUK: It's a misstatement. The objection is it's a misstatement.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: They talked about the DSM-5, they said it was the gold standard, but yet this doctor admits, admits that the term "addiction" is not even used in the DSM. It's taken out of the DSM.
And they said -- they put up a slide that showed Dr. Henningfield and Dr. Barnett, and they compared them. There is no comparison to a man who has made his life work, his professional career, studying addiction and a doctor who only has one patient she's ever treated for nicotine addiction.
Only one patient exclusively for nicotine addiction, who's not written a single word in a peer-reviewed article on nicotine addictions. This is their expert and they want to compare the two?
There is no comparison.
They showed you this slide that says Mr. Davis made his own decision. He was smart, strong-willed, decisive, and macho, not easily
manipulated. Right, he was all those things. He was all those things.
And he believed them, because they had a well-orchestrated, well-funded, well-executed plan to get people just like him, and millions like him.
Millions like -- he wasn't the only one -- they make it seem like he is the only guy in the world that did this, when there was millions.
And it said he believed in and taught his children about personal responsibility.
He did. But you know who is not? R.J.
Reynolds.
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, object, I have to make a motion.
MR. ALVAREZ: And he did what he wanted to do. It should have said -- they're missing a word here.
This is the word they're missing. He says, "He did what he wanted to do." It should be, "He did what they wanted him to do."
That's what it should say because that's the truth and that's what happened.
They put this one up. And these are the quotes. "He didn't let anyone push him, walk over him. He didn't let anyone tell him what to do. He didn't let others dictate his action. He did what
he wanted to do. Smoking was his business. He was going to make his decision, his own decisions about smoking."
Yeah, he did that. And you know what he based it on? He based it on false and misleading information about the harms and addictive nature of smoking that were provided by R.J. Reynolds and the other tobacco companies.
So the answer to that is -- you know, yes, he was going to make his own decisions about smoking, but he didn't do it in a vacuum. He did it based on the lies and the false and misleading information.
Can you put up the verdict form, question number 3?
This is question number 3. Because I want you to be clear about what it's asking you. It said,
"Did Mr. Davis reasonably rely to his detriment on any statements that made -- made by Reynolds that", what, "concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available to him concerning the health effects or addictive nature?"
Statements that concealed information, concealed or omitted information. This isn't so much about what they said. It's about what they
didn't say. It's about what they concealed.
Because they never told anybody until three years after this man died that filters were no safer, that they truly believed that smoking was harmful and it did cause cancer.
And that every time there was a press release and every time there was an article that came out of the Miami Herald and Miami Times that disputed it, they should have come out and said that that's true, we're telling the truth about this. That's what they concealed. That's what they concealed.
They put up this one, "Known and available before Mr. Davis was born." For at least a hundred years it has been known that smoking was dangerous, it shortens one's life, all those things. Right?
Well, let me ask you, these are smart guys.
Right? These are smart executives, right, with PhD's and all these degrees? Right?
If they know this for a hundred years, why are they spending half a billion dollars on a campaign of doubt and confusion? Why are you spending $250 billion advertising the cigarette? If everybody knows for a hundred years, save your money. Why are they spending it?
If that statement is true, why did they go on
for 50 years spending half a billion, over $500 million on a campaign of doubt and confusion if everybody knew?
Now they showed you this one, "Cancer By the Carton" for the proposition that it was well known. Today, today, they're embracing this as public awareness, but at the time, when this thing happened in real time, what were they doing? They disputed every single argument with PR machines and millions and millions of dollars behind it.
Every single time something hit the paper, on the newsprint on the media, on TV, on the radio they were on it. But today, today, it's everybody knew. But at the time when Mr. Booker was smoking, they disputed it.
They put this one up.
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, I need to make a motion.
MR. ALVAREZ: And when I say they disputed,
I'm talking about the evidence in this case from Dr. Figlar, an executive of the company, who testified in this case by video deposition, who said that, who said that they believed it and they wanted the public to believe it. And that's what I'm referring to.
They put this up. "Mr. Davis began smoking when Americans were quitting by the millions."
Yeah, that's why they needed a conspiracy, people were quitting. And for every million that quit, a million started, and 500,000 were dying every year. That's what was left off this.
And they showed you a PSA. But what were they doing in real time when the PSAs, the public service announcements, were trying to warn people, what were they doing? Attacking them.
He said that they never said that filters -filtered cigarettes were marketed as safer.
Remember he said that?
Put up the document, put up PT2073 and PT -well, let's put up 2073.
This is an internal document, Lorillard Company.
"As all of us are aware," let's read that again. "As all of us are aware, Kent was marketed as a safer cigarette for the smoker who was concerned about smoking and health."
And that happened over and over again with all filtered cigarettes.
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, that's a misstatement of the evidence.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, rely upon your own independent and collective recollection as to what the testimony was.
MR. ALVAREZ: What do you think the word filter means? Why would -- why would they start marketing filters after the mouse painting study?
For what purpose? To create a belief and an atmosphere that it's safer.
So they put up this. "Plaintiff claims for $37.5 million in damages" -- and by the way it's not 37. It is each one of these kids has an individual claim. Each one of them has an individual claim.
"Is inconsistent with the evidence." It says,
"He voluntarily left the family."
Well, he went to the hospital. He went to the hospital. I guess that's voluntarily. Okay.
"He declined visitation rights in 1997."
That's never -- that's not true. That's not true.
You heard from the children. They said he declined visitation rights in 1996. That's not true. You know that he saw the children all the time, and especially on weekends.
He said he didn't pay court-ordered child support. Well, I guess 1997, when that happened,
he's dying and he can't work, I guess he can't pay child support.
And it says, "Intended to permanently leave Patty [sic] and go to his family and reunite with" -- he never did that, that's not true.
But let's look at this. Let's look at what happened. Because these two restraining orders that they're wrapping their arms around, when did they happen? Look at the date. They're in evidence. When did they happen? After he was diagnosed with lung cancer.
And so maybe Booker wasn't a guy with a lot of--1 mean, he was good with his hands, he was good with certain tools. Right? But not everybody has the tools to handle emotionally and psychologically when you are being told that you are going to die and you are going to leave all these children, and one of them is three years old.
And, you know, sometimes, you know, people react a certain way and want to run and get angry and get upset. And - but before that, before he was diagnosed with lung cancer, there is not one shred of evidence that there was ever a problem in their relationship, with Patsy, at all. Not one.
Didn't happen till he got lung cancer, which was
caused by smoking cigarettes, which was caused by them.
I have a lot of time left, but I think you know the case. The children are willing to accept your verdict. And whatever your verdict is, they will accept. And all they wanted was an opportunity -MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, I'm sorry, this is improper argument.
THE COURT: Wrap it up, please.
MR. ALVAREZ: The system can only work with people like you. We want justice. That's all we're asking. Thank you.