         MR. WICHMANN:  May it please the Court.
         Happy St. Patrick's day to everybody.
         I'm sorry to say that my wife and twin
    daughters would be very upset if they saw me
    wearing a blue tie today, so my colleagues made
    sure that I rectified that.
         I wanted to take a moment to thank you on
    behalf of George's family, Marion's family --
    they're all here in the courtroom today -- we want
    to thank you for your patience.  I know that
    you-all have listened very carefully and taken
    very extensive notes, so I am going to try to hit
    the highlights of the case of what you have heard.
    And I hope I cover everything.  If I don't, I'm
    pretty confident that my colleague, Mr. Millard,
    who is going to come up as soon as I sit down, or
    he may just pull me away if I get carried away, 3253 I'm sure he will cover whatever I don't cover.
         Folks, in the beginning, in jury selection,
    the cigarette company lawyer, Mr. Walker, made a
    very remarkable statement.  And I don't mean this
    personally by any means, because they're very
    skilled lawyers, and this is not in any way
    intended towards him.  But this case is not about
    the lawyers.  This case is about R.J. Reynolds and
    the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.  But the
    cigarette company lawyer made a remarkable
    statement to you, as if it were casual and
    offhand.  He said, Well, you-all are not going to
    be surprised to hear that Reynolds makes a product
    that makes people sick.
         Well, folks, you have now heard,
    two-and-a-half weeks, the truth.  The truth is the
    product that they made, that Marion smoked, caused
    an epidemic of disease, lung cancer and death in
    this country.  Twenty million Americans.  You
    heard that from Dr. Richard Hurt.  And that number
    came from the U.S. Surgeon General.
         Now, the first issue for you to decide -- and
    the judge told you about it; it's going to be on
    the verdict form -- is whether or not Marion was
    addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and 3254 whether that addiction was a legal cause of her
    death.
         Now, the cigarette lawyers told you, well,
    quitting smoking really wasn't on the priority
    list for Mrs. Dion, for Marion.
         You heard evidence that she smoked for 45
    years, a pack and a half to two packs a day, in
    the morning, at night, when she was sick, first
    thing in the morning.
         They told you, well, quitting wasn't on her
    priority list, because she was raising her family.
    She was packing a lunch for George; she was doing
    all these other tasks.
         Well, frankly, we all have grandmothers and
    mothers, and many of us have daughters.  That
    statement is demeaning.  And you have heard
    evidence, her son Bob got on the witness stand and
    cried.  He told you she tried to quit so hard that
    she cried in front of me and told me how hard it
    was.
         They said, Well, she didn't try this, she
    didn't try that.
         You-all have heard from the best,
    most-qualified witnesses in this country that she
    tried to quit numerous times cold turkey, and it 3255 wasn't until she got a patch when she was finally
    able to quit.
         Now, the Reynolds lawyer also said in opening
    statement, Well, she wasn't a tortured smoker.
         A tortured smoker.  That should give us an
    idea about the product that Reynolds fine tuned
    and manufactured and sold to people in this
    country, that had additives and the ingredients so
    they could inhale the smoke and get addicted.
    They played with the nicotine levels so people
    would stay addicted.  They added pH, they played
    with the nicotine pH so the smokers would get a
    kick, get a high.  You heard Dr. Hurt about that.
    None of this was known to Marion Dion during her
    lifetime.
         So she essentially was their best customer.
    They sold their product to her for over 40 years,
    and she smoked a pack and a half to two packs a
    day.  Now, they're coming into court telling you,
    Well, she should have quit.  Quitting wasn't on
    her priority list.
         Well, let's talk about their priority list.
    When during the course of the conspiracy between
    1953 and 2000 did Reynolds ever stand up and say,
    Folks, you-all have got to quit, because this 3256 product we're selling you and you're smoking is
    highly addictive and it's going to kill you.
    Never.  There is not one shred of evidence that
    they did that during the course of the conspiracy.
         Robert, would you put up the Surgeon General
    4200, 67, please.
         MR. PHILIPSON:  Sure.
         MR. WICHMANN:  You're going to get this piece
    of evidence back in the jury room, and you're
    going to get a chance to look at it.  This is --
         No, the top, please.
         This is a pamphlet from the U.S.
    Surgeon General's office of this country.  You can
    see at the top, Addiction.  Nicotine is powerfully
    addictive.
         Now, could you show us that?  Yes.  Please
    highlight that.
         You will see the woman right there.  They
    crushed Marion.
         What does the Surgeon General say?  Addiction
    to nicotine changes the chemical balance in your
    brain.  Nicotine is a highly addictive drug.
    Addiction keeps people smoking even when they want
    to quit.  Breaking addiction is harder for some
    people than others.  Many people need more than 3257 one try to quit.
         It goes on to say, Scientists now know more
    about why the brain craves nicotine.  Like heroin
    or cocaine, nicotine changes the way your brain
    works and causes you to crave more and more
    nicotine.  These powerful cravings make it hard
    for you to think about anything else.  Smoking can
    cause both physical and mental addiction.
         And they knew this, the cigarette companies
    knew this from 1953 on.  They didn't tell the
    American people, until years after Marion died,
    that smoking caused lung cancer.
         Now, did what they did make a difference?
         Could you put up the consumption chart,
    please?
         You have seen this before.  Dr. Hurt,
    Dr. Cummings talked about it.  On the left-hand
    side there is the yellow consumption chart.  Right
    there.  That's the profit chart.  That shows how
    many cigarettes the companies were selling over
    time, 1940, 1950, more, more, more, all the way up
    until 1980.  And there shows the female lung
    cancer rate that reflects the war on women.  Right
    there, you can see it rising.
         So all the time that they were making money 3258 selling cigarettes, and women were smoking their
    product and dying -- you see the chart going right
    up there, straight up -- where was Reynolds'
    priority list?  Where was Reynolds'  list to call
    women and say, Not a pack and a half, two packs a
    day.  You've got to stop.  You've got to stop,
    mom.  You've got to stop, grandma.  You've got to
    stop, because you'll end up with lung cancer and
    die.
         No, the highest executives of the cigarette
    company -- companies, including Reynolds, educated
    men, powerful men, wealthy men, it wasn't on their
    priority list.  But, you know, here today, all of
    the sudden, they want to blame Marion for being
    their absolute best, ideal customer.
         The scare that came in 1953, cigarettes might
    cause cancer.  What did they do?  They started
    marketing filters.  What did Marion do?  She
    started smoking filters.  Why?  Because they
    marketed filters as being safer.  Kept on smoking.
    She kept on smoking.
         By the way, they don't today, and they never
    ever had a medical doctor on staff to try to help
    their customers, who are addicted, quit smoking.
         Now, folks, another thing I want to mention 3259 to you.  The judge in his opening statement told
    you about the Engle class action case, and that
    part of our burden of proof was to prove that
    Marion was a member of the Engle class.
         Now, you might wonder, since she passed in
    1994, why are we here in court so many years
    later?  You heard from Dr. Cummings, who testified
    in the Engle trial, that that trial wrapped up in
    1999 and 2000.  It wasn't until then that
    everybody knew about the conspiracy and the fraud
    that the companies brought on Americans.  That
    class action case was not resolved until after
    that.  And the Florida Supreme Court laid down the
    rule, and the rule was, people like Marion, people
    like George who believed that their loved ones had
    been affected by this epidemic of disease, could
    only file their case in 2007.  George followed the
    rules.
         MR. WALKER:  Objection, Your Honor.  Facts
    not in evidence.
         THE COURT:  I will overrule the objection for
    now, because I think they need to understand the
    context better.  Then you probably need to move
    on, Mr. Wichmann.
         MR. WICHMANN:  That's why it took so long to 3260 bring the case to you here in court.  And that's
    why it's unfair for the cigarette lawyer to
    cross-examine George and ask him questions like,
    Well, didn't your wife, Marion, did she want to
    sue us back then in 1994?  Nobody knew.  Nobody
    knew.  This information was concealed.  And they
    conspired to conceal it from smokers like Marion
    back in 1994.  Nobody had any idea of all those
    secret documents that you all saw in this case.
         Dr. Cummings who we brought down, and we're
    going to talk about him more -- from Roswell Park
    Cancer Center in Buffalo, the oldest cancer center
    in this country, the New York attorney general
    turned over previously secret Reynolds industry
    documents to him to look at.  He founded the ten
    thousand -- the New York Smokers Quitline to help
    people.  He came down and told you, I've dedicated
    my life to this.
         Dr. Hurt, Richard Hurt, from the Mayo Clinic,
    and we're going to talk a little bit more about
    him.  He participated in the Minnesota trial.  He
    got access to all these previously secret
    documents, but not until 1999 and not until 2000.
    Marion had been dead for years.
         That's the conspiracy and that's 3261 concealment.
         The question for you-all is going to be --
    and we're going to go through the verdict form --
    is whether what Reynolds and the other cigarette
    companies did, conspiring and concealing that they
    were putting additives in cigarettes, that
    cigarettes -- that they were controlling the
    nicotine level, that their product was highly
    addictive and they knew back in 1953 that
    cigarette smoking caused disease -- didn't tell
    anybody about it -- is whether that conspiracy and
    that concealment would have made a difference to
    Marion Dion.  And I'm here to tell you that the
    evidence in this case is it would most certainly
    have made a difference to this woman and to that
    family.
         And Dr. Hurt told you why.  He said, We tell
    all the addicted smokers that we treat in the Mayo
    Clinic, this is what nicotine is about, this is
    what nicotine does to your brain, this is what you
    have to know in order to successfully quit.  And
    that is why you have to quit, because, as the
    Court instructed you, smoking cigarettes causes
    lung cancer.
         None of that was ever told to Marion Dion. 3262 But what they did over the 50 years is they
    spent $250 billion -- that evidence came from
    Dr. Cummings and Dr. Hurt, and Reynolds hasn't
    brought a single witness in to dispute it, because
    they knew it's true -- $250 billion in
    advertising, in marketing, all to put forth this
    campaign of doubt, this campaign of deceit.  What
    they concealed from the American people, all those
    men, those well-educated men, those wealthy men
    with their chemists and their toxicologists, but
    no medical doctors, no medical doctors to help
    their addicted smokers, all those wealthy men
    decided we're going to make all this money and
    we're going to keep all this from the American
    people.  Two hundred fifty billion dollars.
         So they are going to get up and tell you, no,
    no, she didn't rely on a single statement.  Right?
         Well, you-all have the instructions, and you
    can read the instructions over on that.  What the
    evidence shows is that the umbrella, the wallpaper
    in this country from the 1950s on was smoke,
    smoke, smoke, smoke.  It's okay.  Just in case you
    have any concerns, buy a filter.  In case you want
    to quit, let's do low tar.
         You have heard the evidence, and that from 3263 Dr. Cummings and Dr. Hurt is the uncontradicted
    evidence in this case.
         Now, could you go to slide 1, please?
         The first question on the verdict form --
         And the verdict form, by the way, is a road
    map for you-all, a road map for accountability.
    You're going to get it, and it's going to have
    spaces for you to check.  And I will show it to
    you in a minute.
         And the first question is going to be, Was
    she addicted and did her addiction to smoking
    cause her lung cancer?
         But what the first question is not about,
    it's not about.  It's not about who is at fault.
    It's not about whether addicted smokers can quit.
    And the cigarette company lawyer spent hours
    talking to you -- everybody can quit, everybody
    can quit, everybody can quit, 60 million people
    can quit.
         And then Dr. Hurt said, Yeah, well, that's
    not exactly right, because 20 million of them
    quit; they are dead.  They don't want to talk
    about that.  They're dead from smoking.
         This is not about whether smokers share some
    responsibility.  And I'm going to get to that, 3264 because Marion does, and I will explain to you
    why.  And it's not reliance on a statement from
    the tobacco industry.  Okay?
         Now, let me talk to you for a minute --
    you-all have a package of the jury instructions.
    I'm not going to bother you by putting one up,
    because the judge has read it to you.  You have
    it.  But jury instruction 6, 6, read it over.
         In order to be a legal cause of injury or
    damage, addiction to cigarettes containing
    nicotine need not be the only cause.
         So you-all can think back there, well, maybe
    there is some choice in this; maybe there is some
    personal responsibility in this.
         And by the way, you-all have notepads.  Write
    down the number of times Mr. Walker says "choice"
    in his closing argument.  You will fill your
    notebook up.
         You can have some of that under the Florida
    law, right here.  An addiction to cigarettes
    containing nicotine may be a legal cause of loss,
    although it operates in combination with some
    other act.  That's what we lawyers call a
    concurrent cause, side by side.  You can have some
    choice, you can have some personal responsibility. 3265 But the reason we're here, ladies and
    gentlemen, is because Marion was addicted.  Not
    one single witness got on the witness stand and
    said to you, She liked the taste of cigarettes,
    she enjoyed cigarettes, she told me she loved it.
    Not one person told you that.
         This is a woman who tried, tried, and tried
    to quit.  And it wasn't until the nicotine patches
    came on the market in this country in 1992 that
    she ran down to her doctor and got her
    prescription and had to use that prescription for
    14 months before she could break the cycle of
    addiction, only a year later to die of lung
    cancer.
         Now, let's talk about the evidence and the
    witnesses that you have seen and heard from.
         Number 5, please.
         We brought to you Dr. Richard Hurt.  There is
    his picture.  The former director of the
    In-Patient Nicotine Cessation Clinic at the Mayo
    Clinic.  Only the second one in the country.  He
    started it up.  They want to tell you that
    nicotine is, well, a little bit addictive.  I
    don't think so.  He told you there are people so
    badly addicted they have to admit themselves into 3266 the hospital, and even then he has less than a 50
    percent success rate of those that are heavily
    addicted.
         He's written over 300 peer-reviewed articles
    on smoking and health, treated thousands of
    patients, lectured around the world.  He's an
    expert on nicotine addiction.  He's testified in
    front of the U.S. Congress.  Board certified in
    internal medicine and addiction medicine.  And he
    told you folks, based on the tests they use, that
    Marion Dion was heavily addicted.
         We also brought in Dr. Kathleen Brady.  Let
    me talk for a minute about Dr. Brady.
         And by the way, Dr. Hurt told you, I have
    dedicated my career to helping people who were
    addicted.
         This lady is the foremost addiction brain
    scientist in this country.  She has a medical
    degree.  She's a neuropsychiatrist.  She also has
    a Ph.D. in pharmacology.  She's NIDA, the National
    Institute of Drug Abuse.  A leading researcher on
    nicotine addiction.  She herself told you about
    the studies she's done where she puts smokers in
    MRIs and just shows them pictures of cigarettes
    and how parts of their brain light up.  She told 3267 you that it's her life's work to help women in
    addiction.  Over 300 peer-reviewed articles on
    addiction.
         And we're going to talk about the witness,
    this major cigarette company, major Fortune 500
    company brought into this courtroom.  We will talk
    about that particular person.
         But before we do, Dr. Brady told you modern
    brain science tells us that if an adolescent --
    and the evidence in this case was Marion started
    smoking as a young teenager -- if an adolescent
    starts to smoke at a young age, nicotine, the
    chemical, the drug nicotine, affects the frontal
    part of the brain.  Yes, it affects judgment, Dr.
    Hurt said.  Dr. Brady said it also affects that
    part of brain that controls impulse.  We all know
    teenagers and impulse.  They can hardly say no to
    anything.  That's what she said.
         And in a sense, we know that from our life
    experience, and science now tells us there is a
    reason for it.  It's that part of the adolescent's
    brain is not fully developed.  So what modern
    science tells us, and not the science from the
    cigarette company expert we'll get to in a second,
    but the science from the United States 3268 Surgeon General, the science from the National
    Institute of Drug Abuse, the science from the
    leading doctors that you have seen in this case,
    tell us, youth smoking affects the brain so that
    it makes it harder for folks to quit and makes it
    more difficult for them to make the conscious
    decision to put that cigarette down.
         And that, ladies and gentlemen, is one of the
    reasons why we're going to ask you to punish
    Reynolds at the end of this case for marketing and
    targeting American youth.  And we're going to get
    to that in a second.
         Now, she also used the DSM-IV criteria, and
    she rated, under the DSM-IV criteria, Marion Dion
    as being addicted.  But she also told you that
    since she couldn't do an in-person interview, she
    also looked at the Fagerstrom test, another test
    for nicotine dependence, and that Marion Dion
    scored as addicted.
         And she also looked at Mr. Walker during
    cross-examination and said, You're not -- you're
    not seriously contesting that she wasn't addicted.
    It's like, why else would this woman smoke as much
    as she did for over such a long period of time?
         They would like you to believe the woman was 3269 suicidal.  Well, that would include 20 million
    American smokers who also died from smoking.
    That's a lot of people that just didn't get it, if
    you follow their logic.  Or that is a lot of
    people who were addicted to the nicotine in
    cigarettes.  They bought into the campaign of
    doubt that the companies funded for $250 billion.
    They smoked lights, they smoked filters, and they
    are no longer with us today.
         Now, if you put up slide 10, please.
         We talked about a definition of addiction.
    Dr. Hurt and Dr. Brady both told you it's a
    chronic relapsing brain disease characterized by
    compulsive drug seeking, and despite -- and used
    despite harmful consequences.
         We're going to talk about the Reynolds
    expert -- quote, expert, in a moment.
         But in a nutshell, Marion was addicted.  She
    began smoking in the early teens.  She smoked a
    pack and a half to two packs a day for 45 years.
    That's 400 to 800 hits of nicotine to the brain
    each day.
         Next slide, please.
         Smoked first thing in the morning.  She
    smoked to avoid withdrawal.  Multiple quit 3270 attempts, even though the Reynolds folks tell you
    it wasn't high on her priority list.  You heard
    from the family.  You heard from George.  Smoked
    while she was sick.  She switched to lights.
         You know, and I would like to talk with you
    briefly.  You have in your package of instructions
    an instruction -- and it's No. 3.  It talks about
    witnesses and it talks about so-called expert
    witnesses.  It tells you you may accept opinion
    testimony, reject it, give it the weight you think
    it deserves based on the qualifications of the --
    of the so-called person, his or her demeanor, so
    on and so forth.
         There is also another and previously secret
    internal Reynolds document I would like to talk to
    you a little bit.  That's No. 13, please.
         And Dr. Cummings, Dr. Hurt talked about this.
    This was dated 1982.  It's two lawyers talking
    about a conversation that they had with
    Mr. DiMarco, who was one of the executives at
    R.J. Reynolds.  Back in 1982, their previously
    secret documents said that the director said,
    quote, Our medical/scientific witnesses will say
    whatever we want them to say, clearly implying, if
    not stating, that they lacked credibility and 3271 integrity.
         And you will find that number -- I can give
    you the number of it -- you will find it in the
    stack of previously secret documents back there.
    It's PT 01913.
         Without further ado, would you put up No. 14,
    please?
         This Fortune 500 company brought to you one
    witness.  And that witness was a Dr. Abramson who
    had the time to drive all the way over from Miami.
    But he told you, I have this thin, three-page CV,
    plus I'm too busy as a clinician working with
    patients.  But he admitted to me he doesn't have a
    single patient today who has come to him currently
    for help to stop smoking.  Not one.  Zero.  He
    also told us he never published a single article
    in a -- in a paper about nicotine addiction, done
    no studies on nicotine addiction, and
    interestingly enough -- and again, this is no
    reflection on opposing counsel, because they are
    very skilled.  This case did not involve
    Mr. Walker, but it did involve R.J. Reynolds.  He
    was hired by R.J. Reynolds in a case called
    Calloway.  And the Reynolds lawyers give him a
    script with the questions and the answers. 3272 Getting on the witness stand, here is what we are
    going to ask you and here is how you have to
    answer.  And he admitted it right here in front of
    you.
         And to make matters worse, well, he took the
    CVN feed of his testimony, sat down with the
    Reynolds lawyer to watch himself testify.
         He faulted Marion.  He said, Oh, Marion, she
    didn't try hard.  She should have gone to a
    smoking cessation clinic.  Remember that?
         I said, how many of them have you been to?
         He said, Man, not one.
         Last but not least, the $50,000 man.  That's
    what he charged in the case that he tried, that he
    participated in over there for Reynolds in Miami.
    He admitted that.
         So we submit that this man is not believable.
         The Court is going to also give you -- well,
    you have your package of instructions.  And in
    there is an instruction on what the burden of
    proof is for us.  And it is the greater weight of
    the evidence.  And if you just think of that scale
    on Lady Justice's -- in Lady Justice's hand that
    Mr. Millard talked about in jury selection.  All
    we have to do is tilt it a little bit and we win. 3273 Like a basketball game 51 to 50, we win.
         You-all have seen who we brought down to
    testify that Marion Dion was addicted versus who
    Reynolds has brought.  And I submit to you that
    there is no question.
         Now, the Court is also going to talk to
    you -- or, I'm sorry, the Court has given you the
    instructions -- you will have a verdict form --
    that Marion's addiction has to have caused her
    lung cancer and death.  Mr. Millard is going to
    talk a little bit about that.
         But I wanted to put up slide 17, please.
         I want to talk to you a little bit about the
    product that Marion smoked for all those many
    years, that Winston cigarette that had,
    unbeknownst to Marion -- we know today -- had
    bronchodilator, chemicals to expand the lungs,
    making it easier for tobacco to get in, ventilated
    filters.  Dr. Hurt told you about that.  He showed
    you the difference between the filters and the two
    brands of cigarettes and how, by compensation,
    which is unconscious, she is smoking, sucking in
    harder to get the nicotine to her brain, and
    that's taking more of the dangerous chemicals into
    her lungs.  They add levulinic acid, they add 3274 sugars, they add ammonia to increase the kick.
    You recall that.  We'll talk a little bit about
    it.
         Marlboro, their competitor's cigarette, was
    taking off.  Reynolds was obsessed with figuring
    out why, how they could get the sales of Winston
    up.  They figured out that a Marlboro had high pH
    levels and it gave the smoker an additional kick
    to his brain.  So they manipulated the pH levels.
         But unfortunately, what they have known since
    1953 is that the smoke has nitrosamines.  And
    Dr. Hurt explained that to you.  He said it's not
    that nicotine that kills you, it's all the tobacco
    smoke with all the cancer-causing nitrosamines.
    And, frankly, they have known that -- it's
    uncontested -- they have known that since 1953,
    and they kept selling their product, and they
    never told anybody.  And now they want to come in
    and say, Oh, well, Marion, it wasn't on her
    priority list to quit.
         All right.  Flavorings.  There is a big long
    list.  Dr. Hurt talked about it.  All this goes
    into their product.  Why?  To make it easier for
    Marion to quit?  I don't think so.  To make it as
    hard for her to quit as they could so they could 3275 sell more cigarettes to her.  And they sell more
    cigarettes, they make more money.  But now they
    come back later, 2015, you know, we manufactured
    this terrific cigarette, this terrific nicotine
    delivery device so that people would get addicted,
    but it's her fault because she didn't quit when
    she had a chance way back when.
         I don't think so, folks.
         The next slide.  Let's go to slide 20,
    please.
         The doctors talked to you all about
    nitrosamines -- all about the carcinogens in
    tobacco smoke, many of which were isolated by the
    industry in the early '50s and the 1960s, but they
    never gave it to the Surgeon General; they never
    participated in that.
         Speaking about the Surgeon General, would you
    go to 21, please?
         All our experts got up and told you the
    Surgeon General in 1988 got it right.  Cigarettes
    are addicting.  Nicotine is the drug that causes
    addiction.  The pharmacologic and behavorial
    processes that determine addiction are similar to
    those that determine -- drugs such as heroin and
    cocaine. 3276 And I don't mean this personally on this
    witness Abramson, but what I thought was most
    interesting is when we played the clip of the
    Surgeon General, C. Everett Koop, appointed by
    Ronald Reagan, he said cigarettes are highly
    addictive; they're just like, to some people,
    cocaine and heroin.
         I stopped it.  I said, Do you agree?
         He said, No, I don't agree with that.
         We went down.  The Surgeon General said this,
    young smokers get addicted.  It's hard for them to
    quit.
         I said, Doctor, do you agree?
         No, I don't agree with that.
         These are outliers.  He's an outlier.  This
    is not established science.  This is not what this
    country's No. 1 doctor, the Surgeon General,
    that's not what modern branch science tells us.
         And by the way, I thought it was interesting.
    They brought him up and he said, Oh, yeah, I
    looked at a brain too back when I was at the
    Montreal Institute.  Well, it turns out he was an
    undergraduate, and they looked at a cat brain.
         I mean, come on.  This is nothing like the
    Dr. Brady who gets millions of dollars from 3277 National Institute of Drug Abuse to study brains
    to help women to quit.
         Now, he was also asked about slide 22, which
    is the 2010 Surgeon General's report.  It says,
    Nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that
    people smoke.
         He said, No, I don't agree with that.
         Folks, in an interest -- in the interest of
    time -- and I have only about another five or ten
    minutes -- I'm going to sort of run through this.
         But if you go to 23, please.
         It's -- there are a stack of documents back
    there that we discussed with Dr. Cummings and
    Dr. Hurt.  Reynolds knew nicotine was the
    fundamental drug that would run their business.
    There are documents back there we showed to you.
    In the business of selling nicotine.  Industry is
    based on the sale of nicotine.
         They are going to come up and they are going
    to tell you, Mr. Walker is going to tell you --
         Twenty-four, please.
         -- it's all a free choice matter.  Despite
    what the Surgeon General says, despite what
    Dr. Brady says, despite what Dr. Hurt says, it's
    all free choice. 3278 Well, there is a document, and it's PT 2184.
    And we talked about this document.  Back in 1980,
    two tobacco executives were quoting a Shook Hardy
    lawyer, and that Shook Hardy -- and they knew back
    then, they were writing down, cigarette smoking is
    more addictive than using heroin.  They wrote
    this.  That's in their previously secret internal
    document.  I just gave you the number.
         They also told us, Shook Hardy -- those were
    the lawyers -- remind us that the entire matter of
    addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting
    attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case.
         Well, that's me, folks.  That's Mr. Millard.
    That's Mr. Payne.  That's us.  Back in 1980, they
    were prescient, I think is the word, they knew
    they would end up in a courtroom like this one
    day.  And what did they write?  We can't defend
    continued smoking as free choice if the person was
    addicted.
         Well, the cigarette company lawyer got up and
    tried to cross-examine Dr. Hurt, and said,
    Shook Hardy doesn't represent us, right?
         Dr. Hurt said, Wait a minute.  Wait a minute.
    They're the architects of the whole conspiracy.
    They were the lawyers for Philip Morris, and they 3279 were also the lawyers for these straw companies,
    these public relations companies that the industry
    set up -- the tobacco industry, the TIRC, the
    Council for Tobacco Research.  Shook Hardy was
    right in the middle of it all.
         Then to put icing on the cake, I showed
    Dr. Hurt a document.  And there it was.  It was a
    list of all the -- of all the cigarette company
    executives.  Brown & Williamson -- that's
    Reynolds -- American Tobacco -- that's Reynolds --
    R.J. Reynolds, Philip Morris.  Shook Hardy was
    right in there.  The lawyers were running the
    show.  Not medical doctors telling these companies
    let's go public with this, let's talk to the --
    let's help these 20 million folks that are getting
    sick and going to die.  No.  They turned it all
    over to their lawyers.
         They also -- if you could go to 25, please --
    we also gave you evidence, FTC reports, Surgeon
    General's reports, internal documents, all saying,
    no, no, it's not free choice.  It's addiction.
         Addiction compromises choice, which is what
    Dr. Brady talked about.  And we know that now from
    science.  This is not -- this is no longer a big
    mystery to us.  The internal documents of 3280 industry -- 26, please -- tell us that they knew
    it was all nicotine addiction, and that is PT1820,
    if you-all want to look at it back in the jury
    room.
         I also told you about how they manipulated
    nicotine and smoke pH -- that's 27, please -- to
    addict smokers.  And that's PT4791 and 1552.
         Again, No. 28, please.
         They talked -- and it's PT3291.  The more
    free nicotine, the higher the profits.
         Now, folks, the judge -- the judge gave you
    the instructions, and let me ask you to write down
    instruction No. 8.  That's the instruction that
    has to do with the Engle findings.  That's the
    instruction that tells you if Marion Dion is found
    to be a class member -- and we're going to ask you
    to check yes on the box on that one -- these are
    the findings that apply.  They are accepted to you
    as being true for the purposes of this case.
         Smoking causes lung cancer.  Nicotine is
    addictive.  Reynolds was negligent.  The
    cigarettes she smoked were defective.
         If she's a class member, that's a finding as
    a matter of law.
         That Reynolds concealed or omitted material 3281 information not otherwise known or available,
    knowing the material was false.  Failed to
    disclose a material fact concerning the health
    effects and addictive nature of smoking.
         Now, I expect the Reynolds lawyer will get up
    and say, Well, what statement did she exactly rely
    on?  Well, the whole point is there is not one,
    because how can she rely on something that they
    hid from her?  That's the point.  They hid it from
    her.
         Now, they agreed with the other manufacturers
    to conceal or omit this information.  And this is
    what's important.  It's the last paragraph that I
    have on my -- on my instruction here.
         Regarding the health effects of smoking with
    the intention that smokers and members of the
    public would rely on those statements to their
    detriment.
         That's the whole doubt and confusion campaign
    that they fueled with their $250 billion.  That
    was all the executives saying, Oh, no, there's
    nothing wrong with it, there's nothing wrong with
    it, there's nothing wrong with it.
         And you will see a little bit more about that
    in a second. 3282 Now, after you -- after you check the first
    box yes, that she was addicted, then the next
    question has to do with comparative fault.
         Now, George is 80.  Okay.  George lost his
    wife of 42 years, his childhood sweetheart, who
    sat through this proceeding for two-and-a-half
    weeks, and he heard all about their conspiracy,
    their concealment, their additives in their
    cigarettes, their pH manipulation, engineering
    these cigarettes to addict Marion.  So when he got
    up on the witness stand and testified, it's no
    surprise he was a little bit upset.  And he told
    you there is absolutely no fault on the part of
    Marion.
         Well, as his lawyer, I speak for him, just
    like Mr. Walker speaks for Reynolds.  And I'm
    telling you no.  I'm telling you yes, that you may
    find some fault on Marion.  And there is a part on
    the verdict form where you can put percentages of
    fault, a percentage of fault on Reynolds and a
    percentage of fault on Marion.  And if you think
    she didn't try hard enough to quit, like they're
    telling you all about, that doesn't mean she
    wasn't addicted, but that may mean that you're
    going to put some fault on Marion.  Whatever you 3283 put, we'll live with it.
         But here is my point.  She can't be found at
    fault for information that they didn't give to
    her.  She can't be found at fault for their
    intentional acts of conspiring in 1953, their
    intentional acts of keeping this information from
    the American public.  That is separate.  And that
    we do not accept fault on her part for that.
         You will see the verdict form.  There is a
    separate section between her apportionment of
    fault and these other questions.
         Now, there is going to be a question:  Did
    Reynolds' concealment or omission of the addictive
    nature of smoking, was it a legal cause of Marion
    Dion's death?
         The answer to that is yes.  And the answer to
    that is yes, is because she didn't know what they
    were putting in their cigarettes.  She didn't know
    they engineered these cigarettes to addict her.
    She didn't know any of that.  She didn't know
    about the pH manipulation.  She didn't know about
    their campaign to target children.  She didn't
    know any of that.  Had she known, sure, her
    chances of quitting, if Reynolds had disclosed in
    1953 and 1954, 1955, 1960, would have been much 3284 better.  If Reynolds had said -- would give
    doctors this information so they could go out and
    help people who were addicted, she would probably
    be here today.
         So the answer to questions 3 and 4 on the
    verdict form should be yes.
         And by the way, when you get to this issue of
    fault, previously I was talking about, please
    remember that Marion started maybe 17, 18 years
    before, before there were any warnings on
    cigarette packs, before the Surgeon General ever
    issued his first report that the cigarette
    companies attacked.  Remember Dr. Brady and
    Dr. Hurt.  They talked about how when people start
    smoking as adolescents, how much harder it is for
    them to quit.  She was addicted by then.
         Now, we already talked about Reynolds being
    co-conspirators.  We talked about the meeting in
    the Plaza Hotel in New York when, in 1953, when
    all the executives got together.  We talked about
    The Frank Statement.  Dr. Cummings talked about
    it.  It was in that 1953 publication in the New
    York Times where they promised that there was
    nothing wrong with their products, when they knew
    otherwise.  And they all signed off on it.  I'm 3285 not going to go through that.  I expect -- because
    I think you-all will see it in the instruction,
    that this information is what conspiracy is all
    about.
         What I would like to do is, if you could go
    to 35, please.
         I would like you to look at this.  This is in
    evidence.
         And by the way, when you go back and
    deliberate, if there are any video clips you want
    to see, you can come back and they will be played
    for you in the courtroom.
         But I want you to take a look at this,
    please.
         (Whereupon, a video clip was played in open
    court as follows:)
         A SPEAKER:  If we do find any that we
    consider harmful -- and so far we have not -- we
    will remove these from smoke and still retain the
    pleasure of your favorite cigarette.
         A SPEAKER:  Well, obviously, a filter takes
    out certain tar and nicotine.  I don't think the
    industry admits there are any bad elements.  If
    there are bad elements, through our laboratories,
    through the Surgeon General, through the AMA, 3286 through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find
    them.
         (Video clip concluded.)
         MR. WICHMANN:  Stop right there.  You heard
    Reynolds got up in opening statement and said, We
    never said anything about filters.  There is --
    you can't -- they said we wouldn't be able to
    point you to a single ad that said filters were
    good.  Well, you just heard this man on national
    TV saying, Well, there is nothing wrong with
    cigarettes, but we have a filter on there.  It
    will take out anything bad if there is.
         Please play the rest.
         (The video clip continued as follows:)
         MR. CULLMAN:  We do talk to the question of
    whether or not cigarettes are hazardous.  We do
    not believe that cigarettes are hazardous.  We
    don't accept that, because when, as, and if any
    ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as
    being injurious to human health, we are confident
    that we can eliminate that ingredient.
         A SPEAKER:  Do you believe that cigarettes
    are safe?  Have they been proved to be safe,
    Mr. Cullman?
         MR. CULLMAN:  I believe they have not been 3287 proved to be unsafe.  I did read that report, and
    I concluded from that report that it's true that
    babies born from women who smoke are smaller, but
    they're just as healthy as the babies born from
    women who do not smoke.
         (The video clip concluded.)
         MR. WICHMANN:  Come on.  Come on.
         THE COURT:  Excuse me, Mr. Wichmann, you
    asked me to tell me when you used 45 minutes.
         MR. WICHMANN:  Thank you, Your Honor.  I will
    wrap it up.
         THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
         MR. WICHMANN:  Women -- babies born to women
    are just as healthy?  That was not a casual
    statement.  That statement was made on national TV
    by an executive of the industry who knew -- who
    knew -- how dangerous cigarettes were.  And the
    reason he said that, folks, is because if he could
    reassure Americans that the most vulnerable, the
    unborn baby, wouldn't be affected by the mother
    smoking, he knew addicted smokers like Marion
    would go on believing their lie, that there was
    nothing wrong with smoking cigarettes.
         This is how cruel and callous and
    reprehensible that their conduct was over 3288 course of the conspiracy.
         Now, you will see a lot of ads, filter ads.
    Reynolds' lawyer is going to get up and tell you,
    not a single one promises anything.  They're all
    women.  They're all smiling women saying, Low tar,
    good taste, low tar.  It's a subliminal message
    that they knew otherwise.
         And Dr. Cummings and Hurt explained all of
    that to you about low tar, the compensation, how
    they hoodwinked the government with the machines
    and how the government pointed out -- and you will
    see Surgeon General reports that the industry knew
    a lot more about their product.  They didn't give
    all information to the Surgeon General, so people
    made mistakes and recommended filters and
    recommended low tar.  It's all part of the fraud.
         Now, I want to quickly go through Reynolds'
    documents.
         Fifty, please.
         There are a whole bunch of documents that
    have to do with youth smoking, marketing --
    marketing to minors, starting with the letters
    back in the '20s, the numbers are here, 4014,
    4013.
         Could you highlight the -- the Lucky ad, 3289 please, Robert?
         You will see in the lower right-hand corner,
    Reynolds makes Luckies.  Mr. Walker will stand up
    and say, Well, she didn't smoke them.  But you
    will see that back there, and that is an ad, Prom
    Days.  It's a girl with a cigarette in her hand.
         You will see documents, 4791, that talk about
    inducing presmokers and nonsmokers to become
    habituated smokers.
         Can we go to No. 51, please?
         They talk about the future, low age end of
    the cigarette business.  They use the term young
    adult smoker, young adult smoking market.  That's
    PT1950.  They're talking about the Camel filter,
    that they want to penetrate the 14-to-24 age
    group, which represents tomorrow's cigarette
    business.
         Fourteen-year-olds, that's what they're
    targeting.  And that's PT1836.  And you're right.
    She smoked Camels when she was just a little
    child.  But this goes to the issue of
    reprehensibility.
         On the verdict form there will be a question:
    Do you find that there should be an award of
    punitive damages to punish R.J. Reynolds.  Yes, 3290 and this is why, for what they did.  Not only the
    war that they had on women, letting the lung
    cancer rate go up while the men sat back there and
    took their checks to the bank, but also that they
    were targeting the youth of America.  That's
    un-American.
         Now, look at PT1641.  It's a Reynolds
    document, 1960, the 14-to-24 age group represents
    tomorrow's cigarette business.  Now, Mr. Walker
    made a big deal about a document.
         Fifty-three, please.
         He says, Well, this document says we're not
    going after kids, but Dr. Cummings pointed out
    you've got to go to the appendix.  And if you go
    to the appendix, they're talking about kids;
    they're talking about replacement smokers.  And
    that is 1973.  That is PT1973.
         Okay.  Now, here is one.
         Number 54, please.
         A previously confidential document,
    R.J. Reynolds, PT4791.  We have deliberately
    played down the role of nicotine.  The nonsmoker
    has little or no knowledge.  And this talks about,
    We must convince him with irrational reasons he
    should try smoking. 3291 We go to 55, please.  This is the document.
    3400, replacement smokers.  Younger adult smokers,
    if you go to the appendix, PT3400.  They're
    talking about to start by age, replacement
    smokers, 12, 13, 14, 15-year-olds.  Younger adult
    smokers are the only source of replacement
    smokers.  This is the way these people were
    thinking.
         Now, just a couple more slides and we'll be
    done.
         Folks, they are going to get up and talk
    about choice, I told you.
         Slide 57, please.
         This is an important one.  It is the PT3829.
    It's the 1989 Surgeon General's report.  And the
    reason it's important is it's 1990, four years
    before Marion died.  It's a look back.  And it
    talks about the prevalence among -- of smoking
    among women has declined much more slowly than
    among men.  This is 1990.  If the current trend
    continues, smoking rates will be about equal among
    men and women in the mid 1990s, after which women
    may smoke at a higher rate than men.  The key to
    addressing this problem is the prevention of
    smoking among female adolescents. 3292 But it also talks about choice:  These two
    factors refute the argument that smoking is a
    matter of free choice.  Why?  Most smokers start
    smoking as teenagers and then become addicted.  By
    the time smokers become adults, when they would be
    expected to have greater appreciation of the
    health effects, many have difficulty quitting.
         Now, I just want to close this part of the
    presentation with Slide 58, please.  There is
    really no doubt.  The Surgeon General, report
    after report after report, Dr. Brady, Dr. Hurt,
    Dr. Cummings.
         Nicotine addiction is the fundamental --
    fundamental reason that individuals persist in
    using tobacco products.
         So on the verdict form, folks, we want you,
    we ask you to check "yes" for all these questions
    on addiction.  Mr. Millard is going to talk about
    the disease causation.  He's going to talk about
    some of the other issues, because we want you to
    check "yes" did she rely, "yes" was she affected
    by the conspiracy, and "yes" should Reynolds be
    punished for the conduct that you have heard about
    here for the last two-and-a-half weeks.
         And thank you all very much for your time. 3293 And, hopefully, I will have a few -- I saved a few
    minutes at the very end for rebuttal.  But please
    pay as much attention to Mr. Millard as you did to
    me.
         Thank you very much.


         MR. MILLARD:  Thank you, Your Honor.  May it
    please the Court.  Good morning, everybody.
         I'm glad we get to talk again.  It's been a
    while since voir dire.  I want to cover some of
    the areas that Mr. Wichmann did not cover and go
    into the medical issues that I dealt with the
    doctor on the stand.  And we will talk a little
    bit about that, and then we'll talk about the
    damages and how we put all that together, so it's
    kind of a road map of where we are going.
         I've got to tell you, over the weekend I was
    trying to put all this together.  And I'm looking
    at Dr. Kane and reading the transcripts and I'm
    looking at all the evidence and I'm wondering,
    What am I missing?  What am I missing?  We brought
    in Dr. Kane, the treating doctor.  And he looked
    at all the records.  He had hands on with Marion.
    He treated and cared for her.  He talked about
    what was going on with her.  He rendered all his
    opinions.  And I'll go through them in a little
    more detail.
         And then I looked at what the defense did.
    There was no doctor, there's no evidence, there's
    nothing but shooting a couple holes -- trying to 3299 shoot a couple holes into the theory of what
    Dr. Kane said and to the testimony that he gave.
         I looked at the scale and I go, What am I
    missing here?  And almost to the point of I
    thought, Why are we here on this issue?  Should
    this have not been conceded?  I don't know.  You
    guys will decide that.  And let's talk about it a
    little bit more.
         What it reminded me of, though, as we heard
    throughout this trial from Mr. Wichmann and a lot
    of the experts, Dr. Hurt and Dr. Cummings about
    the campaign of doubt, it's happening here on the
    medical issue.  It's -- the only thing they
    brought was doubt.
         MR. WALKER:  Your Honor, improper argument.
         THE COURT:  The objection is overruled for
    now.
         MR. MILLARD:  I'll move on.  We all
    understand.  You have seen all the evidence.
    You've seen what's going on.
         THE COURT:  Just a second please.
    Apparently, we have a question from one of the
    jurors.  I didn't make it clear that that process
    is over.  And I didn't make it clear.
         I'm sorry.  Well, I've got to tell you a very 3300 quick story, because I was just talking to one of
    my colleagues, and they were talking about the
    question thing, which has all worked very well.
    And Judge Roberts was telling me the last trial
    she had one of the jurors, after the case was --
    the whole case was completely over had, a series
    of questions that they wanted to ask the
    witnesses.  Anyway, so that was my fear.
         This -- so you will know, the jury asked, May
    we write on jury instruction packets?  And, yes,
    you certainly may.  Those are yours to use however
    you think fit.  And I thank you for asking me.
    But those are yours.  So if you would write on
    them and that would be a big help, you are welcome
    to do that.
         Okay.  I'm sorry, Mr. Millard.
         MR. MILLARD:  Not a problem.  I'm glad we
    cleared that up.  Those are yours, and you can do
    whatever you want with them.  You're not going to
    take them when it's over, but while you're here
    you can use them as you please.
         We have the burden in this case.  We've
    talked about -- we've talked about the scales.  I
    just want to show the jury instruction that you
    have there that talks about what we're responsible 3301 to do, and we'll talk about why I think we've done
    this.
         To show if she's a class member, is going to
    be the first question on the verdict form.  And
    this is the instruction within the big package.
    It tells you how to go about that job.
         The point is you have to decide whether
    addiction to smoking cigarettes containing
    nicotine is a legal cause.  It doesn't have to be
    the only legal cause, but it has to be a legal
    cause.  And the way you determine that is if her
    smoking cigarettes directly and in a natural and
    continuous sequence produces or contributes
    substantially -- it doesn't have to be the only
    thing; it's a substantial contribution to
    producing her lung cancer and her death.
         The second section goes on to tell you that
    it does not need to be the only cause.  Even
    though it operates in combination with the act of
    another or some other causes, if the addiction to
    nicotine contributes substantially to producing
    such loss, injury, or damage, we have met our
    burden of proof.
         Let's talk about that a little bit.
         We talked about the scales on voir dire. 3302 Bill mentioned -- Mr. Wichmann mentioned it a
    little bit.  I don't have all the technological
    savvy these guys have, so I was trying to figure
    out how to do my own scale of justice.  And this
    is the best I came up with.  I put together the
    evidence I was able to see in the transcript from
    the trial.  And here is the summary as I see it.
    On one side, our side, George Dion's side, it's
    the plaintiff's burden to show we tipped the scale
    every so slightly.  It's overwhelming to me.  We
    have got the oncologists.  We have got all of
    those doctors who treated, hands on.  You will see
    it in the medical records; you will have those in
    the jury room.
         Dr. Kane.  Dr. Kane came here and talked to
    you.  He's an oncologist.  He rendered the
    opinions that she had squamous cell carcinoma of
    the lung.  That was the primary location.  It
    spread down into her leg.  They tested that.  The
    pathologist will tell you that they found that.
    Dr. Reid looked at that.  We're going to talk
    about these in a little detail in a moment.
    Dr. Goldman was the oncologist before Dr. Kane.
    His records are there.  He talked about his
    diagnosis. 3303 Dr. Golder was a treater.  Dr. Orman, the
    partner of Dr. Kane.  We've got the pathologist,
    Reid, O'Hara, McCormick, they all participated in
    this care and treatment.  The records are there.
         The radiologist found the lung -- the mass in
    her lung, the only mass other than in her leg and
    small metastases in her rib and the other section
    of her hip that showed you.  You will see the
    records.  They're in the medical records, MD001,
    MD002, MD003, and MD004.  We will have the Venice
    records, the Sarasota records, have the death
    certificate.  And the other is all the
    photographs.
         And before I forget on the photographs, the
    family, those are precious, precious items that
    are original in the folders, so please take care
    of them if you look at them.
         On that side we have all this evidence.
    These are actual people, hands-on treaters.  And
    the other side, again, we have a series of doubt.
    We have mere possibilities that were suggested.
    No witness, no doctor, no evidence of anything but
    smoking caused her lung cancer and her death.
         Let's look at it in a little more detail.
         Who is Dr. Kane?  Dr. Kane came here to talk 3304 to us.  He managed the course of her care and her
    treatment from the moment he got his hands on her
    in May of 1994.  Originally, she was with
    Dr. Goldman.  The family had a relationship
    because of George's mother, who had the colon
    cancer.  And Dr. Kane had treated her.  And they
    were very happy with Dr. Kane.  They wanted to go
    back to him.  He did.  He took good care of her.
    He talked about the care; he talked about the
    treatment.
         He told us Marion had primary squamous cell
    carcinoma of the lung which was caused by her
    40-plus years of smoking and that this cancer
    caused her death.  That's his opinion.  That's the
    question.  That's your first question.  Was she
    addicted?  Did the addiction to her smoking
    cigarettes cause the lung cancer and death?  And I
    think it's pretty clear, but let's go through it
    just to make sure you're seeing what I saw.
         Dr. Kane, where was he trained?  He went to
    Penn State University for his medical school.  He
    went to the National Institute of Cancer and
    trained there.  And he talked to us about that,
    and he talked about all of the different things
    that he's done.  He told us lung cancer is his 3305 business.  This is what he does.  He knows this
    stuff very, very well.  He has devoted his life to
    it.
         He's researched and he is published.  We
    heard about that, peer-reviewed articles.  He's
    researched lung cancer treatment.  Some of the
    medications he's researched are still in operation
    today, still used to help patients.  He taught
    medical students about lung cancer.  He's board
    certified in oncology and hematology and hospice.
    He's a member of the American Cancer of Oncology,
    American Society of Clinical Oncology.  He's also
    a member of the Sarasota Medical Society.  As we
    know, he now works at the FDA and helps in their
    oncology and hematology division.  He worked
    locally here, and that's why he was able to meet
    and had the pleasure of meeting Marion Dion.  He
    treated, he cared for her.  He helped the family
    through that process.  We'll talk a little bit
    about that.
         He had privileges at the hospitals, both
    Sarasota and Venice.  He's on staff at Venice
    Hospital.  He was the chief of medical staff at
    one point in time.  In Sarasota, he told us that a
    major part of his practice was dealing with lung 3306 cancer patients.  And most of those were smokers.
    In fact, he talked about that smoking is the
    primary cause.  And we have heavy histories of
    smoking, 40-plus years, a pack or more a day.
    Then, of course, when we look at cancer and a big
    tumor in the lung, we think about that.
         The doctors -- the other thing he said, at
    the National Institute, he treated patients there
    as well.  He wasn't just studying.  After he
    studied and was trained, he went on to help and
    treat patients there.  He told us that he examined
    them.  He diagnosed them.  He diagnosed lung
    cancer, and squamous cell carcinomas, and he would
    render conclusions and opinions as to whether or
    not their smoking was a cause of their lung
    cancer.  Part of his job, he was trained to do
    that; he did it there; and he's done it here.
    That's what he does.  That's his job.  He told us
    Marion Dion's lung cancer was caused by her
    smoking.
         Now, we all know in medicine there's no 100
    percent certainties in anything.  And he talked to
    you about how, when they went to the hospital, she
    went to the hospital the first time, we had Dr.
    Lonstein.  And Dr. Lonstein put together a series 3307 of tests, studies.  Let's find out what's going
    on.  He found the tumor in her leg, the
    destructive lesion in her leg was literally
    crumbling away at her bone.  He tried to deal with
    that.  He did rodding.  And as we know, the
    rodding they put in there had failed because the
    cancer continued to grow.  The cancer continued to
    destroy the bone and that couldn't hold it in
    place.  So he had to pull the bone out and put in
    a prosthesis instead of the bone and try to cure
    that problem.
         They took pathology.  We talked about
    pathology.  Dr. Kane told you that the proper
    place to do pathology is the place that would give
    you the most information and the place that
    provides the least risk to the patient.  When
    cancer metastasizes, it spreads.  What's happening
    is that the parent cells that were in their lung
    had children, had break-offs.  They transferred,
    he said, through the blood system.  And they went
    down and found a new home, and they found it in
    her leg primarily.  And there were a couple other
    spots in her rib and the other side of her hip
    bone.
         When you test those, those cells tell us 3308 what's in her lung.  It's the same.  They have the
    same cells.  Dr. Kane explained that to you.
         He also told us that when we look at
    pathology, the pathologists look at the specimen.
    They get tissues.  Some are good, some are bad.
    It's kind of a hit or miss.  And he did say unless
    you have the entire lung handed to you, then it's
    pretty obvious what you have got going on.  But
    it's hit or miss as to quality of the cells you
    are going to receive are.
         We saw that Dr. Reid, the first set of cells
    we had from Dr. O'Hara were not very good.  He
    talked about them being necrotic.  Remember that
    term necrotic, which means dead cells, that a lot
    of the cells were poor.  It wasn't a good sample.
    However, he had enough to tell us that the cells
    he found were malignant, malignant meaning cancer.
    We've got cancer cells here.  He could not further
    classify that.  And that was through a needle
    biopsy.  Once her leg was opened up for the
    surgery, they took other samples.  And, of course,
    that was the proper time to do it rather than
    trying to invade her chest and invade her lung and
    cause other kinds of risks and complications, they
    used the obvious location to do that. 3309 What they did is they had her leg open for
    the surgery, they went in and grabbed more tissue.
    Dr. Reid received that tissue.  And you will
    remember what Dr. Reid's report said:  Squamous
    cell carcinoma.
         And what pathologists do is they use words to
    describe it, because they are not the clinicians
    who perform a final diagnosis.  And we heard about
    that from Dr. Kane as well.  And what the
    pathologists do is they will say "consistent
    with," "the most likely tissue."  Said cancer from
    this tissue is squamous cell.
         And that's what Dr. Reid did.  You will see
    the records.  You will have them in evidence.
         From that the records went to Dr. Goldman.
    You remember Dr. Goldman.  He was the pathologist
    in the hospital and before Dr. Kane and the one
    whom the family said, after he had treated them
    for a while, would like to go to Dr. Kane.  I was
    going to show you his record.  And you have seen
    this several times during this trial.
         First of all, you see at the bottom, that's
    him.  And if we could just look what he did.
         You remember, he had a first report.  In the
    first report he says, you know, we don't have 3310 pathology yet, but from the size of the tumor and
    what we know now, it looks like it's going to be
    squamous cell carcinoma.
         After that he received the pathology from Dr.
    Reid, and he wrote an addendum, he added to his
    original report, and here is what he says.  I know
    it's a poor quality copy, but at the very top it's
    "pathology demonstrates."  It's not "most likely,"
    not "consistent," not "maybe," not "possibly."  He
    says, We now know that it demonstrates poorly
    differentiated squamous cell carcinoma that's
    metastatic to the hip area.  It spread.
         He gives his assessment, is what he does with
    that.  And he says the same thing.  It's poorly
    differentiated squamous cell carcinoma, right
    upper lobe, metastatic to the bone, and in left
    hip and right pelvis.
         At this point, you see at the bottom too,
    just to note, this is when he recommended -- the
    family had asked to go to Dr. Kane.  He sent all
    the records to Dr. Kane.  We know Dr. Kane got
    them and he reviewed all the records.
         Dr. Lonstein, at the very beginning of the
    treatment when she came in -- remember, George
    said that she first got treated and they thought 3311 it was some kind of hip strain or groin sprain and
    the pain didn't go away; she continued to suffer
    and hurt.  So he went and found an orthopaedist,
    and he came to Sarasota, and that was to Dr.
    Lonstein.  He was in the hospital.  And we saw a
    bunch of his records during the trial.
         And what Dr. Lonstein did, he puts -- set
    forth a plan of medical investigation, he looked
    at everything.  They did a bone scan, a skeletal
    scan.  They focused on the pelvis.  They looked at
    her chest.  They looked at her leg.  They checked
    her blood.  They looked at every possible area in
    her body to try to determine where this -- where
    this cancer is coming from and what type of cancer
    it is.  They looked at all the evidence.
         And Dr. Kane talked about the medical
    investigation is very important, because there's
    lots of possibilities in medicine.  So they look
    at all those, and they make them all important at
    the beginning, and then as they are going, they
    only make the ones most important that are showing
    some sign that it's going to lead to a conclusion.
    So they narrow the field as they go.
         The doctors did that before Dr. Kane.
    Dr. Goldman had the diagnosis.  The pathology came 3312 back.  Dr. Kane received the patient.  He received
    the records, and he agreed that after this
    comprehensive medical investigation, the day,
    cancer was primary to the lung.  It was the mass
    she had in her lung.  There were no other masses
    found in her body.  That it had metastasized and
    gone to her leg.  And that was what was causing
    her pain.
         And you heard George talk about how difficult
    this was.  It wasn't just something that, you
    know, they found a tumor and she had a little
    problem and it was no big deal.  She was in severe
    pain.
         THE COURT:  Excuse me, Mr. Millard.  You
    asked me to tell you when you had used 15 minutes.
         MR. MILLARD:  And we're there.
         THE COURT:  And you have.
         MR. MILLARD:  Thank you so much.
         THE COURT:  All right.
         MR. MILLARD:  Time flies when you are
    standing up here trying to go through a lot of
    things that I think are important.
         What I know is that you-all have seen and
    heard the evidence and the key evidence in this
    case.  Dr. Kane.  What did Dr. Kane base his 3313 opinions on?  He had all the medical records.  He
    had all the doctors at Sarasota Hospital.  He had
    the physicians at Venice Hospital.  He went
    through all the records.  He said he does not just
    accept what's in those records when a patient
    comes to him.  It's his responsibility, were the
    words he used, to look at the patient, talk to the
    patient, evaluate the records, see what the other
    doctors were looking at, and make his own
    determination.  Were they correct?  Have I got the
    right diagnosis?  And then how to treat it.  He
    was the treater for the chemotherapy.  And
    Dr. Golder you saw did the radiation therapy to
    her leg.
         What did Dr. Kane tell us at the end of his
    testimony?  He rendered some opinions for us.  And
    these are the summaries of what he concluded.
         First he told us, Marion Dion's primary
    squamous cell carcinoma of the lung was caused by
    her 40-plus years of smoking more than a pack a
    day.
         Number 2.  That her repeated exposure to the
    carcinogens in the cigarettes she smoked for
    40-plus years was the cause of her lung cancer.
    Again, this is precisely what he did at 3314 National Cancer Institute, was trained to do, and
    he did.
         He also told us it was normal in his Sarasota
    practice, because patients typically want to know
    what's causing this.  Remember, he said someone
    would say, Why me?  Why is this happening to me?
    He further told us, there's no other cause which,
    more likely than not, could have been the cause of
    her lung cancer other than smoking.
         He told us in the fourth one, D:  Marion
    Dion's repeated exposures to the carcinogens in
    cigarettes from her more than 40-year history of
    smoking caused her lung cancer and caused her
    death.
         Marion Dion's smoking cigarettes caused her
    death.  We suggest you check "yes" to that box.
         There's only one other note.  When I was
    looking at the evidence brought, they didn't bring
    it with regard to Dr. Kane, but when Dr. Abramson
    was up there, Mr. Wichmann had asked him about Dr.
    Kane's opinions and asked him, Are you a medical
    doctor?  Have you reviewed his opinions?
         He said, Yeah, I've reviewed his deposition.
    And he had written out, and remember in his list
    of what he thought about the opinions?  And when 3315 asked about Dr. Kane's opinion, in his own notes,
    that Marion Dion's cancer was related to a smoker,
    even though he was disagreeing with everything the
    Surgeon General said, he did not disagree with
    Dr. Kane.  He agreed.
         Defense evidence.
         All right.  Now, for me, this is the hard
    part.  We've got to talk about George, we've got
    to talk about his damages, we got to talk about
    why we're here.
         Under the law, he's entitled to certain
    damages.  And those damages are his loss of his
    companionship of his wife of 42 years, Marion
    Dion; the protection she afforded him -- I'll talk
    about that a little bit -- and for the pain and
    suffering that he's gone through from watching her
    suffer while she was ill from her passing and from
    that point forward.
         We all saw him on the stand.  You can
    evaluate that yourself.  Was that real?  Was that
    serious?  Was that long-lasting?  Was that
    profound?  Here's a man who, 20 years later, is
    still grieving.  It hasn't ended.  He loved her
    dearly.  And we heard him talk about that.  They
    literally grew up together.  They met very, very 3316 young.  They fell in love at a young age.  In
    fact, they married at the end of their high school
    and they began to have a family.  Most people
    would have bet against that lasting at that age,
    taking on that kind of commitment.  But together,
    they came together as a whole.  They helped each
    other.  They supported each other.  They became a
    unified whole and raised five beautiful children.
    We saw two of them.  Great children; loved their
    parents; still sad about their mom; love their
    dad.  They got, I think, 11 grandchildren and 10
    great grandchildren.  I may have the numbers mixed
    up, but the family continued to grow.
         The problem is, and George told you up here,
    that he talked about his baby, Kimberly.  Marion
    wasn't there when she got married.  Breaks his
    heart to this day.  Every time when one of his
    children has a special event, Marion is not there
    with them.  It breaks his heart.  It's tough for
    him.  It's tough for the family.
         She was his whole.  She was the glue.  He
    said the glue.  He not only -- she not only held
    the family together, she held him together.
    Robert got up here and she said she did everything
    for him.  When she passed, he literally fell 3317 apart.  He didn't know what to do with himself.
    He was alone.  He was saddened.  He stayed in his
    house alone.  He was isolated.  The family tried
    and neighbors would try.  You heard Kim talk about
    they would come and bring him food and try to help
    him get out of the sadness that was going on.  In
    George's own words from the stand, he said you
    know, this is a love story that just went very,
    very badly.
         Kim talked about that he still, after many,
    many years of marriage, 40-plus years of marriage,
    would come and they would hold hands.  They loved
    each other for many years.  He would come home
    from work and want to kiss and hug her still.  He
    loved this woman.  She was his everything.  He
    would bring her flowers unannounced.  Why?  He
    loved her, he came home and he --
         And the love has not passed.  This is not a
    situation where they decided to part ways.  She
    was literally ripped out of his life in a crazy
    and surprising state.  They had no warning that
    this was coming.  And he talked about it was like
    they dropped a bomb on them when the doctors came
    and told them this was lung cancer.
         And thank God for Dr. Kane.  Dr. Kane had 3318 been through this before.  Not an easy job, but a
    sweet man, a compassionate man.  He told both of
    them, listen, you are coming to an end here, and
    if there's anything you want to do that's
    important to you, you better do it now, because
    time is short.
         What did she want to do?  She wanted to make
    sure that every one of her children had the time
    to have closure with her and to say goodbye.  And
    George made sure that happened.  And they got with
    each of the children one at a time.  She spent
    that valuable, valuable time, as sad as it was,
    that she was able to say goodbye to each of her
    children.
         You heard about what they liked to do in the
    house.  You learned about what they used to do in
    the community.  Marion was fun.  She was fun
    loving, she danced, she played.  Robert said it
    was just like that in the house too.  People
    kidding, smarting off, having fun with each other.
    George lost that.  When she passed, that passed.
         We saw the pictures.  I have them.  I'm not
    going to go through them all again.  You remember
    the clown outfits and the bike and the dancing and
    the choreography.  She was -- made him whole.  She 3319 made him whole and was ripped away.  And it's a
    sad story.  It's a love store that went very, very
    badly.
         Now, we heard a little mention that he has
    found a lady friend.  That he now has a lady
    friend, Rose Marie.  It came up a couple times.
    You will see the instruction that was already read
    to you -- it's in your packet -- that the fact
    that he has a relationship -- he hasn't remarried,
    but he has a relationship, that that may not be
    considered in mitigation of any damages, elements
    of damages incurred by George.
         Why is that?  Because the loss happened on
    October 8, 1994.  And that's what we're
    considering.  What happened to him?  That's when
    she was taken away.  There's no replacement for
    that.  We saw how he feels today.  And thank God,
    he found someone to spend some time with now that
    he's got a new friend.  But she's still a powerful
    loss and has never been replaced.
         Pain and suffering.  There's the
    companionship element.  We compensate for that.
    The pain and suffering, they are different things.
    And, you know, what she was in his daily life and
    who she was to him and the years they had 3320 together, the bond they had, her making him
    whole -- that's an element; we contemplate that.
         It's a hard job.  You know, I feel for you
    having to figure out how you value that.  You
    know, the problem is, and I'll tell you right now,
    if we could turn the clock back, George would not
    want one dime from anybody.  Turn it back, give
    her back, give him back his Marion.  He'd love to
    have that.  Can't do it.  The legal system only
    says what you can do is seek money damages.  So
    that's what we have to do.  He wants this company
    to be responsible for what they did.
         You know, he got a little angry up here, and
    Mr. Wichmann talked about that a little bit.
    That's the first time he's heard all this evidence
    of what they did to his Marion.  Shocking.  I
    don't know if you were shocked.  Shocking to me,
    shocking to George hearing what happened.  The
    campaign of doubt, what they misled, the
    information they held back.
         Mr. Wichmann talked a little bit about how
    Marion was the perfect customer.  No kidding.
    Started young, just like they wanted here to do.
    Smoked Camels, their product; Winston, their
    product; Winston lights, their product.  And how 3321 was she rewarded for being such a loyal customer?
    They gave her lung cancer and it killed her.  I'd
    be angry.  George is angry, rightfully so.
         How do we talk about these damages?
         We have 20 years going backwards that he's
    already suffered with his loss.  You have seen
    mortality tables.  You can use them or not use
    them, as you wish, as to how long it's expected he
    might live, she might live.  The truth is you've
    seen him.  He is healthy.  He's full of life.
    He's not going anywhere, thank goodness.  You
    know, he's got at least 10 more years, in our
    opinion, to go.  So we've got 30 years total to
    contemplate.  How do you do that?
         Real quickly, I want to run through a couple
    ways that helped me figure that out, is I try to
    look at things back in time, try to figure out
    what was happening 20 years ago.  So let's run
    through a couple of those.
         If you go 20 years ago, 1994, what were the
    things in the news back then?  Remember Nancy
    Kerrigan, the olympic skater, was attacked by a
    Tonya Harding?  A long, long time ago.  That's a
    faint memory.
         O.J. Simpson got arrested.  What did he do? 3322 He killed his wife and Ronald Goldman back then.
         A couple years later in 1996, that was the
    O.J. trial two years later.
         JonBent Ramsey.  Remember the story about
    her?  Long time ago.
         The Value Jet crashed in the Florida
    Everglades.  Anybody remember that?  Tragedy,
    tragedy, long time ago.
         Presidential election.  It was Bill Clinton
    and Al Gore against Bob Dole and Jack Kemp.
    Anybody remember Ross Perot when he was out there
    campaigning?  It seems like forever.
         Seventeen years ago, '97, Princess Diana was
    killed in a crash.  That seems like forever.
         He's been living through all these different
    times.
         If we just went back seven years ago, housing
    bubble burst.  Virginia Tech shooting.  We all
    remember that.  It seems like a long time ago.
         Nancy Pelosi was elected as the first female
    speaker of the U.S. Congress.  A pretty big event.
    It seems like a long time ago.  A long, long time.
         Just for or five years ago, 2010, we've got
    the WikiLeaks.  Remember that news?  Gulf of
    Mexico oil spill. 3323 How do you value these losses?  I don't know.
    I don't know.  It's tough.
         Here is the way we look at it, is we look
    about the period of time and we think that, you
    know, it's hard -- a minute, a day, a year.  How
    do you put a number on that?  What we think is
    appropriate, and whether it's 2 million or 10
    million, these are numbers you are going to have
    to come up with, you're going to have to figure it
    out, you're going to have to look at the whole
    picture and decide what to do.
         We would suggest that 10 million is the
    proper number.  And we ask that you do not award
    any more than that.  It's important to us and to
    George that it not be any more than that.  What it
    comes out to is about $333,333 a year.
         Is that enough?  Is that too much?  I don't
    know, but it seems appropriate to us.  And that's
    how we would look at it.
         It's your decision.  We trust you and we
    appreciate you.  We have appreciated you-all since
    the beginning of all this.  In voir dire you-all
    were attentive.  Through this trial you've been
    attentive.  We've seen you taking notes.  We've
    seen you paying attention.  We trust you will do 3324 the right thing.  The award must be just and it
    must be fair, looking at all the evidence.
         Last point.  We don't want any sympathy.
    This is not about sympathy.  This is about the
    facts of this case.  Every time we have a new
    child that graduates or is born or has a special
    event, George thinks about Marion.  His family,
    his friends give him plenty of sympathy, so we're
    not here for sympathy.  We are here to be just.
    Thank you so much for your time.
