         MR. WALKER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.  It's
    nice to be able to chat with you again.  Sure
    enough, once again, I'm talking to you like right 3332 before lunch or right after lunch.  So I'm going
    to do my best to try to at least keep your
    attention, keep it interesting.  You've all heard
    a ton of information, and I guess -- I guess it's
    been almost two weeks since you-all took your oath
    as jurors in this case, and there is a lot of
    information that you will have to sift through
    when you're back deliberating about this case.
         But before I do anything else, I want to do
    what I have done -- tried to do every other time
    when I have spoken to you, which is thank you on
    behalf of Mr. Williams and Mr. Fuhrman and my
    client and myself.
         I think when Mr. Wichmann earlier kept
    talking about the cigarette lawyer did this, the
    cigarette lawyer did that, I was sitting there
    going, Who is he -- who is he talking about?  Then
    I realized he's talking about me.
         So I'm John Walker, is my name, and I
    represent Reynolds.  And you know that by now.
         And we have all been watching you.  We don't
    get to talk to you that much during the trial, but
    we're all kind of looking and trying to pay
    attention and to see, you know, what are you-all
    really listening to.  And you've all been very 3333 difficult for us to read, except for the following
    thing.  We can all tell that you have been paying
    very close attention to everything that's been
    presented, frankly, by both sides.  You've kept
    good humor.  You've been patient with us, with the
    Court, with the staff, and we all -- I think I can
    speak for all of us, we all appreciate it.
         What I wanted to do is just to say at the
    outset something that I said in the opening when
    we first talked.  And that's that a lot of the
    information that you heard in this case isn't
    ultimately going to be terribly helpful to the job
    that you have.  And I think that proved to be
    true.
         Even as recently as this morning when
    Mr. Wichmann was giving the first part of their
    closing argument, he spent time still talking
    about things that doesn't really help you figure
    out what the facts are that relate to Mrs. Dion.
    He showed you this consumption chart that had the,
    you know, overall cigarette consumption kind of
    bouncing up and down over the years.  He started
    talking about whether 20 million other people
    passed away from cigarette smoking.
         But this case isn't about all of those 3334 people.  And it's really just about Mrs. Dion.
    And that's important, because no matter how loudly
    or how emphatically or how high pitched
    Mr. Wichmann argues his case, the facts that
    relate to Mrs. Dion don't change.
         In fact, someone said -- and I can't remember
    who -- said that facts can be very stubborn
    things.  No matter how we try to spin them or
    change them or wish that they were something other
    than they are, the facts that relate to Mrs. Dion
    are very stubborn things.
         What are the two most important facts that
    you have heard over and over and over again in
    this case about this one smoker, Mrs. Dion?  You
    heard over and over again that Mrs. Dion knew the
    risks and had the ability to quit smoking the
    entire time that she smoked.  And you heard over
    and over again that Mrs. Dion was not misled by
    anything that Reynolds or any tobacco company or
    tobacco representative said or did.
         Now, Mr. Wichmann said, Oh, when the
    cigarette lawyer -- me -- stands up, he's going to
    tell you all about choice, and if you kept count
    of every time he said choice, you would fill up
    your notebooks.  Then he said that I was going to 3335 make that argument in spite of what the experts
    told you.
         Well, he's only half right, because choice is
    an incredible issue in this case.  But I won't be
    talking to you about choice in spite of what the
    experts said.  I will be talking to you about
    choice because of what the experts said.
         In Mr. Wichmann's opening, he said that the
    evidence was going to be that Mrs. Dion simply
    could not quit smoking; there are smokers out
    there who cannot quit smoking.
         And then when I stood up, I said, What the
    lawyers say is not evidence.  Every expert who
    testifies will tell you that all smokers, even
    addicted smokers, even heavily addicted smokers,
    can quit.  And that's exactly what happened.
         We made it a point with every single expert
    witness who was talking about this topic, whether
    it was Dr. Cummings, Dr. Hurt, Dr. Brady and then
    our witness, Dr. Abramson, we asked every single
    one of them, and every single one of them
    confirmed all smokers can quit smoking, and
    Mrs. Dion had the ability to quit.  We know that,
    because she did quit.
         Think about the second issue, when I said 3336 Mrs. Dion was not misled by anything the tobacco
    companies said or did.  And I told you at the
    outset you were going to have to really pay
    attention to whether the accusations that they
    were making have anything to do with Mrs. Dion.
         You've heard from the judge, there is this
    class of Engle smokers.  You know from when
    Dr. Cummings and Dr. Hurt were here that they
    testify in lots of other cases.  There are lots of
    other smokers out there who are bringing tobacco
    companies into court and making these same
    accusations.
         The question for this case is, did they prove
    to you that the companies or their representatives
    did or said something that mattered to Mrs. Dion?
    And I'm bringing it up now to give you the
    following example.
         Mr. Wichmann made a big deal.  He showed you
    a video of, I think it was Joseph Cullman on "Face
    The Nation" and where he made this remark about
    whether the babies born of smoking women are just
    as healthy as other kinds of babies.  And he
    hushed his voice and he tried to make it seem to
    you that this thing that Joseph Cullman said on
    "Face The Nation" was somehow so important in this 3337 case.
         What he left out was that when Joseph Cullman
    made that statement on "Face the Nation," it was
    1971.  Even if Mrs. Dion saw that statement, she
    had already been finished having all of her kids.
    She had her youngest child in 1968, long before
    Joseph Cullman said what he said on TV.
         And if any of you thought for one second that
    Mrs. Dion might have been misled by what Joseph
    Cullman said in 1971, remember that 15 years
    before he made that statement, all the way back in
    1956, Mr. Dion was telling Mrs. Dion that
    cigarette smoking is bad for the health of your
    un- -- of our unborn child, and you shouldn't
    smoke.
         And what did she do?  She stopped smoking,
    even though it was for a short period of time.
    She did the same thing in 1958 and 1959 and then
    again in 1968.
         Mrs. Dion didn't believe any tobacco company
    person who said something about cigarette smoking
    not affecting the health of unborn children.
    That's just another one of these accusations like
    many that you have heard in this case that simply
    doesn't relate to Mrs. Dion. 3338 Now, you already know by now that you're
    getting close to the job that you have to have at
    the end of this case.  And it all comes down to
    filling out that form that we call a verdict form.
    And what I'm going to try to do to provide some
    organization to what I have to say, and hopefully
    to be more helpful to you, is to actually go
    question by question down the verdict form that
    you're going to have to answer and to tell you
    what at least we believe the evidence showed about
    how you should answer those questions.
         But what I want to do first is to just point
    out to you -- you will see this every time I pull
    up a question -- that every single question on
    that verdict form is about Mrs. Dion.  No other
    smoker is at issue in this lawsuit.  And you will
    see that in the verdict form that you have to fill
    out at the end of this case.
         The findings that Mr. Wichmann talked to you
    about are not about Mrs. Dion.  They don't answer
    any question that you have to decide about
    Mrs. Dion.
         So let's take a look at the first question
    that you will get on the verdict form.
         Was Mrs. Dion addicted to cigarettes 3339 containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction
    a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?
         Now, that's the first question on the verdict
    form.  It's on the very first page.  It looks like
    one question, but there are actually a number of
    different issues that you will have to figure out
    in order to answer this question.  Mr. Wichmann
    and Mr. Millard actually talked about several of
    them.  I'm going to try to help you see how these
    underlying issues relate to this question.
         Can we have the next slide, please?
         First, to answer this question, you have to
    decide, Did the plaintiff prove that Marion Dion
    was addicted?
         Next, Did the plaintiff prove -- because it's
    their burden of proof -- that Mrs. Dion died from
    lung cancer caused by smoking?
         And lastly, Did plaintiff prove that
    addiction was a legal cause of her cancer and her
    death?
         Now, the interesting thing about this is that
    if you answer any of those no, A, B, or C, then
    the answer to question 1 is no.  And while your
    verdict has to be unanimous for question No. 1,
    you don't all have to agree on the same reason for 3340 it.  So if some of you think the plaintiff didn't
    prove lung cancer caused by smoking and others
    think that the plaintiff didn't prove that
    addiction was a legal cause of her cancer and
    death, you can all agree to check no to question
    1.  And that's really important.
         I'm actually going to talk to you about all
    three of those, A, B, and C, because a no answer
    to any of them means a no answer to question 1.
    But those issues are not all created equally.
    Actually, the most important issue of those three
    is the last one, No. C.  So I'm going to spend a
    little bit of time talking about whether they
    proved she was addicted, whether they proved lung
    cancer caused by smoking, but I'm going to spend
    more of my time talking about the last issue.
         So let me start with the question of, Did
    they prove that Mrs. Dion was addicted?
         Well, first they brought this Dr. Hurt that
    Mr. Wichmann was talking about.  At $5,600 a day,
    he's the guy who came in and admitted that while
    only 50 percent of cigarette smokers, daily
    smokers are addicted, he nevertheless always
    testifies 100 percent of the time that the smokers
    in these cases are addicted.  And he does that 3341 because he uses what I will refer to as a rigged
    test.  The Heaviness of Smoking --
         Can you go back, please, just for one second?
    Back.
         The Heaviness of Smoking Index is the one
    that he uses every time he testifies that a
    cigarette smoker is addicted.
         Why do I say it's rigged?
         Can we go to the next one, please?
         Because this is the test that no matter how
    you apply the test, no matter how many cigarettes
    you've smoked, no matter any of the other
    information that might be available about the
    smoker, any time you apply this test, the answer
    is always dependent.  What does that mean?  It
    means that by choosing this test, you've chosen
    the result.  This test will not ever lead to a
    conclusion of not addicted.  And yet, this is the
    test that Dr. Hurt uses.
         And so I said to him, Well, Dr. Hurt, you
    have been doing this for a long time.  You must
    know that there are other tests out there, other
    criteria that people can use to assess addiction.
    I said, What about the DSM?
         He said the DSM is unusable in a case like 3342 this.
         But then immediately after that, right after
    Dr. Hurt left the stand, then they called
    Dr. Brady.  And Dr. Brady starts talking about the
    DSM that Dr. Hurt just said was unusable.
         So then on cross, I asked Dr. Brady, I said,
    Dr. Brady, you spent your time talking about the
    DSM.  How would you respond to someone who said
    that the DSM is unusable?
         She said in a way that probably only
    Dr. Brady can, she looked at me, she kind of
    smiled, and she said, Well, I would want to sit
    that person down and talk to them about that.
         And maybe she will get a chance to do that
    with Dr. Hurt.  I don't know.
         MR. WICHMANN:  Objection, Your Honor.  The
    commentary is inappropriate.
         THE COURT:  Objection is overruled to the
    last question, but --
         MR. WALKER:  Dr. Brady used the DSM, which is
    the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual.  But for
    some reason that she never explained, she used the
    outdated version of it.  The DSM goes back
    decades.  There have been different variations of
    it -- DSM-I, II, III, IV and then IV-TR.  And you 3343 heard from Dr. Abramson that the DSM-IV that
    Dr. Brady used was adopted about 20 years ago and
    was replaced two years ago by the DSM-5.
         I don't know why Dr. Brady used the outdated
    DSM-IV.  That was never explained.  But the only
    witness who actually used the current criteria was
    Dr. Abramson.  He's the witness that we brought
    in.
         Dr. Abramson told you all about his
    qualifications, which I'm going to get to the
    criticisms of Dr. Abramson in a moment.  But Dr.
    Abramson was the only witness who actually used
    the most current criteria that was -- that
    reflects the input and the best medical judgment
    of the NIDA -- that's the National Institute on
    Drug Abuse; NIMH, which is the National Institute
    of Mental Health; and WHO is the World Health
    Organization, and others.
         Only Dr. Abramson used the current best
    criteria for assessing addiction that's not a
    rigged test.  And he testified and explained that
    under that criteria, Mrs. Dion was not addicted.
         And Mr. Wichmann, when he had the chance to
    stand up and cross-examine Dr. Abramson about that
    criteria, he didn't ask him a single question 3344 about it.
         Now, do you recall his closing earlier this
    morning?  Mr. Wichmann said, in talking about Dr.
    Abramson, he said, Well, there is this document in
    evidence from 1982 from -- I guess, that's 32
    years ago that says something, where somebody in a
    company said, you know, you can get witnesses to
    say whatever you want them to say.
         That document has nothing to do with Dr.
    Abramson.  That document was written 20 years
    before Dr. Abramson touched the first case that he
    looked at in a cigarette smoking and health case.
    And it has nothing to do with it.
         Then Mr. Wichmann said, Well, Dr. Abramson,
    you know, he makes $50,000.  He's made $50,000.
         Well, it's a surprising criticism of Dr.
    Abramson, given that their star witness in this
    case, their very first lead-off witness in this
    case was Dr. Cummings.  You may remember in
    openings, I previewed what you were going to hear
    from Dr. Cummings.  I said, When I sit down,
    Dr. Cummings is going to take the stand, and he is
    going to be the highest-paid, most biased witness
    you will hear of the entire case.  And darn it, if
    when Dr. Cummings took the stand, he didn't admit 3345 that he's made a million testifying in cases like
    these for plaintiff's lawyers like Mr. Wichmann
    and his group.
         How can you criticize Dr. Abramson for
    getting paid for all the work that he's done in
    this case when Dr. Cummings has made a million
    testifying in these cases?
         And Dr. Cummings told you he's biased.  He
    said that he's been described as a mercenary in
    what he sees as a war against tobacco.  A
    mercenary, ladies and gentlemen, is a soldier for
    hire.  And that's exactly how Dr. Cummings sees
    himself.
         You looked at Dr. Abramson.  You had the
    chance to evaluate his demeanor, the way he
    answered my questions.  Did he change his demeanor
    when he was answering questions from plaintiff's
    counsel or was he the same?  Did he explain his
    answers?  Did he answer the questions that were
    put to him?
         Sometimes, with Dr. Cummings, I felt like I
    would say, Dr. Cummings, what's your first name,
    and the answer would be, Well, there was a 50-year
    conspiracy by the tobacco companies, and if you
    don't take that into account, then my first name 3346 is K. Michael.  Right?
         Dr. Abramson answered the questions that were
    put to him.  There were times when he wanted to
    explain too.  He waited until it was my turn to
    stand up again and say, Dr. Abramson, please tell
    the jury what you didn't have the chance to say
    during cross.
         That's the difference between a witness you
    can believe and a mercenary that you have every
    reason to suspect that he can't be believed.
         So I have talked about all of the witnesses
    that you heard on this issue of addiction.  What
    didn't they show you?  They didn't show you a
    single medical record that said that Mrs. Dion was
    addicted, because there aren't any.  They brought
    Mrs. Dion's treating physician, Dr. Kane --
         Not ready for that yet.
         We brought Mrs. Dion's treating physician,
    Dr. Kane, but he didn't say that Mrs. Dion was
    addicted.  And it's not in any of his medical
    records from that time period either.
         It was the plaintiff's burden to prove that
    Mrs. Dion was addicted to cigarette smoking, and
    they didn't meet that burden.  But honestly, I'm
    not going to spend another minute talking about 3347 this question of whether she was addicted, because
    that's not even the key issue here.
         The next issue that I listed was medical
    causation.  This is in the A and the B and the C
    for the first one.
         By the way, if you decide that they didn't
    meet their burden of proof of proving addiction,
    you should check no to that first question on the
    verdict form.
         But let me talk about the second one, about
    medical causation.  This is the question of
    whether the plaintiffs proved that Mrs. Dion died
    of lung cancer caused by smoking.  And Mr. -- I
    guess it was Mr. Millard -- he said when he stood
    up -- and I wrote it down -- he said he looked at
    everything and he couldn't figure out what was
    missing.  What's missing here?
         Well, that's exactly what I want to talk to
    you about.  What's missing.
         Can we have the next one?
         What would you expect to find in an
    open-and-shut case where there's proof of lung
    cancer caused by smoking?  You might expect to see
    medical records that say that the person had lung
    cancer caused by smoking.  Not here. 3348 Or you could have -- you could prove lung
    cancer caused by smoking by an autopsy.  An
    autopsy can show what was the cause of death.  It
    could have answered a lot of questions in this
    case about whether or not Mrs. Dion actually had
    lung cancer caused by smoking.  But no autopsy was
    done here.  They don't have that proof either.
         You could look at a death certificate.  You
    could see if the death certificate provides proof
    that the person had lung cancer caused by smoking.
    They showed you the death certificate.  It doesn't
    say anything about her having cancer caused by
    smoking.
         You could have a lung biopsy.  Mr. Millard
    said something about they compared biopsy tissue
    from -- that came from her hip to tissue in her
    lung.  That's not right.  There was no tissue
    taken from her lung because there was no lung
    biopsy.  No one ever looked at the tumor that was
    in Mrs. Dion's lung to determine whether it
    started there, the way a primary lung cancer
    would, or whether it metastasized to the lung.
    And remember, Dr. Kane admitted that the lung is
    the most common place that cancers in other places
    in the body metastasize to, because all of 3349 blood goes through the lungs.  There is no proof
    of lung cancer caused by smoking by biopsy from
    the lung because there just isn't one.
         You could have pathology slides, where you
    could bring in a pathologist, they could show you
    the slides, they could try to explain to you how
    the slides show proof of lung cancer caused by
    smoking.  They didn't have that either.  That's
    missing.
         Radiology films, X-rays, CAT scans, MRIs.
    You could try to use that.  You could bring in a
    radiologist who could try to show that that
    provided proof of lung cancer by smoking.  That
    was also missing.  They didn't have any of that.
         Can we have the next slide, please?
         Then even if you don't have any of those
    things, there are other types of signs of primary
    lung cancer caused by smoking that you might see
    where that's the disease.  You would have evidence
    of coughing.  But there was no evidence of
    coughing here.  She didn't have a cough.
         You could have coughing up blood.  I think
    that's called hemoptysis.  We didn't have that
    here.
         You can have a shortness of breath from lung 3350 cancer.  No evidence of that here either.  All of
    that missing.
         Enlarged lymph nodes you commonly see in
    primary lung cancer caused by smoking.  That we
    didn't have here either.
         A centrally located mass.  These are all
    things that Dr. Kane talk about.  You would expect
    to see that in primary lung cancer caused by
    smoking.  It's missing from here.
         Clearly differentiated cells.  Mr. Millard
    showed you the medical record that said poorly
    differentiated cells, and Dr. Kane explained that
    that means that when you're looking at the cells
    that came from her hip under the microscope, it's
    hard to tell exactly what they are.
         They say she had squamous cell lung cancer.
    But the fact that they weren't clearly
    differentiated calls that into question.  We don't
    have that here either.
         Now, what does that mean?
         Is there another one?  Do we have the next
    slide after that?  Oh, it's the same slide.
         So when Mr. Millard says what's missing, it's
    everything that we just talked about.
         And let me be clear.  I'm not criticizing any 3351 of Mrs. Dion's treating physicians.  Mr. Millard
    said that there were good reasons that her doctors
    had for not doing a lung biopsy.
         That's because doing a lung biopsy was not
    the right thing for Mrs. Dion's treatment.  Her
    doctors all those years ago were not trying to
    build a case for money damages in a court of law.
    So, yes, biopsying the hip and not the lung may
    well have been better for Mrs. Dion's treatment,
    but it's not better for a plaintiff who is trying
    to prove that Mrs. Dion had lung cancer caused by
    smoking and is asking for money damages because of
    it.
         Plaintiffs have the burden of proving that
    Mrs. Dion had primary lung cancer caused by
    smoking.  They didn't meet it.  Their own Dr. Kane
    that they brought admitted there were problems,
    all of these problems.  And we didn't need to
    bring another witness to tell you the exact same
    things that Dr. Kane admitted to.
         Because we don't believe they have proven
    this, that is the second reason you should check
    no to the first question on the verdict form.  But
    I'm not going to spend another minute talking
    about that either, because that also isn't the key 3352 issue on the first question.
         Because even if some of you think that
    Mrs. Dion might have been addicted, even if some
    of you think, at the end of the day, that
    Mrs. Dion might have died of lung cancer caused by
    smoking, they still have to prove more for you to
    check yes on that first question.  They have to
    prove not just that she was addicted but that
    addiction was a legal cause of her cancer and
    death.  And that term, "legal cause," is a special
    term with a special meaning in a court of law.
    It's so special, in fact, that you have a whole
    instruction dedicated to that, that you got from
    the judge that he read.  And it's also in your
    materials.
         Can we pull that up, please?
         Now, that's a lot of words about this
    question that you have to answer about whether
    addiction to smoking cigarettes was a legal cause
    of injury to Mrs. Dion.  But I want to suggest to
    you to read the whole thing.  But I want to
    suggest to you that the most important parts of
    that instruction are the words "contributes
    substantially."  The addiction, if she had one,
    has to contribute substantially to producing 3353 injury so that it can reasonably be said that but
    for the addiction, she would not have been
    injured.
         That's the test that you're going to get from
    the judge.
         There is even a second paragraph down there
    that, I think, either Mr. Wichmann or Mr. Millard
    talked about.  But it resolves to the same thing.
    At the bottom there, it still has to contribute
    substantially to producing the injury.
         Why am I saying that that's so important?
    Well, Dr. Brady came and talked to you about
    nicotine addiction.  And I'm actually going to
    point to you something that she said, because she
    was right about this.  Dr. Brady said that
    nicotine alone does not cause cancer.  What puts a
    person at an increased risk for cancer is
    continued smoking.  You can expose yourself to
    nicotine here and there and never get -- be at an
    increased risk for cancer.  It's only the
    continued smoking over a certain number of years
    that we'll talk about that puts smokers at an
    increased risk of cancer.
         And that's really, really important.  Because
    as I told you in opening, the plaintiff spent most 3354 of their time trying to persuade you that
    Mrs. Dion was addicted.  She's addicted, she's
    addicted, she's addicted.  They brought two
    experts, Dr. Hurt and Dr. Brady, to tell you the
    same thing.  She's addicted.  That's what they
    say.  They spent comparatively little time trying
    to explain to you how the mere fact that she was
    addicted meant that that's why she continued to
    smoke.  That's the key issue in this jury
    instruction and in the first question on the
    verdict form.
         Can I have the next slide, please?
         I put this together to try to show you why
    this is so, so important.  And if you look on the
    left, I have nicotine, and you could even call
    that nicotine addiction.  And then on the right
    there is cancer.  But the truth of the matter --
    and that Dr. Abramson explained this -- cigarette
    smoking does not automatically lead to cancer.
    It's continued smoking that does that.  And
    whether or not a person continues to smoke long
    enough to be at an increased risk for cancer
    depends on the woman in this case, the woman in
    the middle of the nicotine and the cancer.
         Did Mrs. Dion have the ability to quit 3355 smoking?  If she was addicted and so addicted that
    somehow it made it impossible for her to quit
    smoking so that she kept smoking decade after
    decade, long enough to be at an increased risk for
    cancer, that's one thing.  If she didn't, if she
    had the ability to quit smoking the entire time,
    knew the risk and made choices for herself about
    whether to try to quit smoking, that's a different
    thing.  And that's the issue that you have to
    decide for question No. 1.
         Here is what we know about cigarette smoking
    and quitting, generally.  We know from Dr. Brady
    and others, no one becomes a cigarette smoker
    because of addiction.  We know because I asked it,
    and I think one of you asked the question as well
    of some of the witnesses, nicotine does not
    intoxicate smokers; it does not prevent smokers
    from understanding the risks of cigarette smoking.
         Dr. Abramson told you that and Dr. Brady told
    you that.  In fact, most of what I'm going to
    describe for you in this part of our discussion is
    going to come from both Dr. Brady and Dr.
    Abramson, because on these issues, they really
    agree on almost everything.
         Nicotine does not impair smokers' judgment 3356 and their ability to have executive higher level
    brain functioning, decision making, the ability to
    understand that cigarette smoking has risks and to
    make choices for themselves about whether they
    want to try to discontinue that behavior or not.
         Mr. Wichmann wants very much for you to think
    that cigarette smoking is the -- is just like
    using cocaine or heroin or these other things.
    That's why they showed you that video from
    Dr. Koop and why they keep talking about it.
         But when Dr. Abramson came here, he showed
    you the real facts about the differences and the
    similarities between nicotine and these other
    drugs.  He showed you and he even talked about the
    underlying basis for this, because I think one of
    you asked a good question about, Where did this
    information come from?  And he talked about that.
         And he showed you the research that indicates
    that, sure, all of these things can cause the
    release of dopamine in the brain, but that doesn't
    mean that they are the same.  Nicotine is similar
    to the release of dopamine from caffeine.  That's
    not anywhere near being in the same category as
    drugs like cocaine or methamphetamines.  Those
    drugs release way more dopamine in the brain, 3357 which means they have a much stronger reinforcing
    ability to keep people using that behavior.  It's
    not the same as nicotine.
         Nicotine doesn't prevent smokers from
    choosing to try to quit.  Every single witness
    that took the stand told you that.  Dr. Cummings,
    Dr. Hurt, Dr. Brady, and Dr. Abramson all said
    that.
         And the reality, when it comes to the choices
    smokers make about whether to try to stop smoking
    or not is the same reality we talked about in jury
    selection.  In this world, both now and back when
    Mrs. Dion was a smoker, there are people out there
    who know the risk of cigarette smoking and aren't
    interested in quitting.
         Most of you probably know people who are
    exactly like that.  And Mrs. Dion was exactly like
    that.  Dr. Abramson and the other witnesses even
    told you that not all smokers even claim to want
    to quit smoking.  Some of them won't even say they
    want to quit smoking.  And then there are other
    smokers who say they want to quit smoking but
    don't actually try.  And Dr. Abramson showed you
    their research on that.
         He showed you that even when it comes to 3358 science of cigarette smoking and nicotine and even
    addiction, the principle that many of us know that
    actions speak louder than words still holds true.
    Lots of people say they want to quit smoking.
    Only a very small number are actually ready to
    take action on that.  And that's going to be very
    important when you look at Mrs. Dion's smoking
    decisions over the years, but, again -- can I have
    the next slide, please?
         All the experts agreed that once a smoker
    makes the decision to try to quit smoking, all
    smokers can succeed.
         Now, I'm not going to tell you today.  I
    didn't tell you in opening.  I didn't tell you at
    any point in this case that nicotine and addiction
    bear no role in smoking.  They do have a role.
    Clearly, they can have a role in cigarette smoking
    for some people.  But the role that it has isn't
    about understanding the risks or making the
    decision to try to quit smoking or even being able
    to succeed at quitting smoking.
         The difference in addiction means that once
    you've made the decision to try to quit smoking,
    for some people it can be harder to succeed.  You
    can still succeed, but it can be harder for some 3359 people.  And that's why all of the witnesses said
    all smokers can quit.  Some may have to try
    different methods; some may have to be more
    persistent than others.  But quitting smoking
    requires a persistent, committed effort to quit
    smoking.
         Can I have the next slide, please?
         This is what I was just talking about.  It
    doesn't prevent you from quitting.  Everyone,
    including addicted smokers, can quit but only
    after you have made the choice to quit smoking.
         The next one, please.
         We know that because the witnesses talked
    about it, that there are over 60 million Americans
    alive today in this country who understood the
    risks, made the choice for themselves to try to
    quit smoking.  Many of them may have been
    addicted.  Many of them may have had to make more
    than one effort, a sustained effort, but they all
    succeeded.  And these are people with the same
    brain changes, the same dopamine release, the
    same -- frankly, even the same exposure to
    advertising that the plaintiff was talking about
    in their whole case.
         These aren't people who were living in a cave 3360 somewhere who had brains that are different from
    Mrs. Dion's brain.  This is evidence that everyone
    can quit smoking, including Mrs. Dion, who did
    quit smoking.
         So the question then, getting back to the
    question about Mrs. Dion, the question becomes,
    Why didn't she quit smoking when it mattered most?
    And I said this in opening, and some of you may
    have been thinking, Well, what does that mean?
    What is -- what is Mr. Walker saying "it mattered
    most"?  Well, now I can talk to you about that.
    The evidence has come in, and I explain.
         Can we have the next dem please?
         And a lot of this actually comes from the
    testimony from Dr. Kane.  This is basically the
    time period that includes the time period that
    Mrs. Dion smoked cigarettes.
         And Mr. Kane explained that cigarette smoking
    doesn't increase your risk for cancer overnight.
    If you just smoke one pack of cigarettes or one
    cigarette or three packages of cigarettes, you're
    not going to be at an increased risk for cancer.
    That's not enough smoking to get to that level.
         And while Dr. Kane wasn't sure exactly how
    many years you would need, he testified, in 3361 answering questions that Mr. Williams asked him,
    that five years of smoking is not enough.  He
    needs more than five years of cigarette smoking to
    be at an increased risk of cigarette smoking -- of
    cancer.  I'm sorry.
         And he also said that once you quit smoking,
    that your risk for cancer starts to go back down.
    And it will -- after a certain amount of time,
    about ten years or so, the increased risk that you
    have from being a cigarette smoker actually goes
    back to the level of a person who has never
    smoked.  That's why the packages say,
    Surgeon General Warns:  Quitting smoking now
    greatly reduces the risk to your health, and why
    you saw some of those public service announcements
    like the one from the Larry Hagman that talks
    about reducing the risk by quitting.
         So what does that mean?  When we look at
    Mrs. Dion's life, we know that her early cigarette
    smoking, however much it was -- you heard some
    people say -- I think one person said maybe she
    started at 13 and another person said maybe she
    started at 15.  Regardless of when she started,
    she didn't smoke cigarettes as a minor for more
    than five years.  It was five years tops. 3362 What that means, if you look at this, is that
    she was not at an increased risk for cancer during
    any of that period while she was a minor.  That's
    why we have drawn an arrow on the left that stops
    at 1950.  She was 18 in 1950.  If she started at
    13, five years out, she's 18, and it's 1950.  If
    she started at age 15, it took five years at least
    for her to be at an increased risk for cigarette
    smoking, and that would take you actually to 1952.
         On the right side, we have 1994.  That's when
    she was diagnosed with cancer.  And if we apply
    what Dr. Kane said and we look ten years before
    that, it takes us back to 1984.  That means that
    if she had quit smoking by 1984, she probably
    would not have gotten lung cancer in 1994 the way
    she did.
         What does that leave us?  That leaves us with
    a zone here where the decisions that she made
    between 1950 and 1984 was the most important
    period in her life when this comes to being at an
    increased risk for cancer.  Every time she made
    the decision to smoke another cigarette, there was
    a potential for an increased risk of cancer, and
    every cigarette that she had chosen not to smoke
    during that period would have decreased her risk 3363 of getting cancer.
         Now, that's why throughout this case you-all
    kept hearing me ask people questions about the
    1950s, the 1960s, the 1970s, and the 1980s,
    because this time period between the 1950s and the
    1980s is the time period where Mrs. Dion's
    decisions had the greatest impact on whether she
    was going to be at an increased risk for cancer or
    not.  The question then becomes, What was going on
    in that critical time period for her?
         Can we have the next?
         What is it that actually explains her
    continued smoking during that time period?  The
    plaintiffs say she was addicted and she couldn't
    stop smoking.  You're going to have to decide:
    Was she addicted and so controlled by addiction
    that she couldn't stop smoking for all those
    years; or was the evidence that Mrs. Dion knew the
    risks during that time period and simply was not
    ready to stop smoking during that time period?
         Let's take a look.  I will talk now, as you
    know, about the '50, '60s, '70s, '80s, and
    Mr. Wichmann said nobody knew.  Nobody knew
    anything during this time period.  I wrote it
    down.  He said nobody knew. 3364 Well, the evidence that you heard was the
    exact opposite of that.  The evidence was that the
    media has been discussing the dangers of cigarette
    smoking for over 100 years.
         And even if we look at the time periods that
    were relevant to Mrs. Dion, this period starting
    in the 1950s is actually the time period when the
    press and the media was more active than any other
    time in the history of this country, publicizing,
    warning people about the health risks of cigarette
    smoking, because that's when a lot of the studies
    were coming out, in the 1950s.
         So you heard in the evidence some of these
    quotes.
         Can I have the next one?
         People were finding out about all of this
    information, not on the Internet or on somebody
    else's smart phone or Google, but through
    excellent coverage of the press, radio, and on TV.
         Can I have the next one, please?
         This is Dr. Heller from the National Cancer
    Institute who early in this time period of the
    '50s, '60s, '70s and '80s is talking about the
    coverage of the health risks of cigarette smoking
    on newspapers, on the radio, on TV and other 3365 media.  He said relative to that point in time
    that that was an exceedingly valuable way of
    informing the public.
         And I think we showed you the quote that by
    1968, I think it is -- do we have the next one?
         The information was so pervasive that the --
    that Daniel Horn from the Government Agency
    Clearinghouse On Smoking and Health, said you
    could stand on the rooftop and shout smoking is
    dangerous at the top of your lungs, and you
    wouldn't be telling anyone anything they didn't
    already know.
         Now, when we talk about what was on TV and in
    the newspapers and in the press, I told you in
    opening that there would be no better example of
    that than the Dion household.  You heard the
    evidence that in the Dion household they had
    newspapers delivered, they were watching the news
    every night after dinner, they had magazines
    there.
         And I mentioned to you in opening that we
    were going to see, you were going to see exactly
    what the information was that was being piped into
    the Dion's living room.
         And here is what you saw.  It was coming in 3366 on television.  This one is in evidence.
         (Whereupon, a video clip was played in open
    court as follows:)
         A SPEAKER:  This is a CBS News Extra on
    smoking and health, the findings of the
    Surgeon General's committee.
         A SPEAKER:  Almost from the moment that
    cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked.
    But the attacks took a new turn ten years ago.
         MR. WALKER:  Stop that.
         (Video was stopped.)
         MR. WALKER:  We showed you how it was on the
    TV, it was on -- it was the newspaper, the Boston
    area newspaper and other places that they lived
    that were delivered right to their front door.
    These are just the ones that we showed you.
         You-all probably figured out when I was
    cross-examining Dr. Cummings that I could have
    gone for hours and hours with examples of the news
    that the Dions subscribed to talking about the
    health risk of cigarette smoking.
         You also saw in -- you also heard the
    evidence that the Dion family, in their home, they
    had a magazine rack.  And I don't know if it
    looked exactly like this magazine rack, but we 3367 know that it had in it these types of magazines.
    Magazines like Life Magazine, Time Magazine,
    Reader's Digest.  Those are some of the magazines
    that we know that they received.
         And we showed you what was in those magazines
    that were being delivered to the Dions' home
    during this time period discussing the health
    risks of cigarette smoking.  And it wasn't just
    news magazines like Newsweek or Time.
         This is also information that was in Better
    Homes and Gardens.  Redbook.  Remember, we even
    showed you the 1958 magazine that the Dions
    subscribed to that talked about the risks of
    cigarette smoking to the health of unborn babies,
    long before anyone said anything about it on TV.
         And then we showed you public service
    announcements, like this one that were also on TV.
    And we talked to you -- we got Dr. Cummings to
    admit that during these time periods, 90 percent
    of Americans had heard or read that cigarette
    smoking was linked to the risk of lung cancer.
         And then there was a bit of a hubbub about an
    awareness poll versus a belief poll, so we showed
    the belief polls.  What did the polling data
    actually say about what Americans believed?  We 3368 showed you this data that was on the screen, but
    here I have got it on the chart.  From 1969 to
    1990.  And you remember the numbers.  '69, 71
    percent, 81 percent, 87 percent, 94 percent,
    rising each year, but always, always the average
    American was more likely to believe that cigarette
    smoking was one of the causes of lung cancer than
    not.
         How does that apply to Mrs. Dion?  It means
    that while Mr. Wichmann was saying that nobody
    knew, you're not here to figure out what everybody
    knew or whoever nobody is that they're talking
    about.  The only smoker at issue in this case was
    Marion Dion.  And she was getting this information
    about the health risks of smoking from all
    angles -- on TV, in newspapers, in magazines, and
    from her own family.
         You heard the evidence from all the
    witnesses.  We had one day where we heard from
    Kimberly and Robert and Mr. Dion.  They all said
    that from -- going all the way back to the '50s
    with Mr. Dion, you heard evidence about their
    daughter Cindy who was talking with Mrs. Dion
    about the health risks in the '60s, into the '70s
    and '80s with Robert and Kimberly, they were all 3369 talking to her about the health risks of cigarette
    smoking and telling her that she needed to quit
    smoking.  And she never said back to any of them,
    I don't know what you're talking about.  You're
    wrong.  I saw a tobacco spokesperson on TV who
    told me that this is safe.  She didn't say any of
    those things.
         Mrs. Dion knew the health risks of cigarette
    smoking the entire time that she smoked as an
    adult.  So when we look at this time period -- and
    again, I'm focusing on 1950 to 1984 for the
    reasons we discussed -- the evidence in this case
    is overwhelming that Mrs. Dion knew the risks of
    cigarette smoking.
         Now, the question is, the next question
    becomes, she knew the risks.  What was she doing
    about it?  Was she doing anything about it?
         Can we have the next slide, please?
         That's important, because every single one of
    the experts said that to succeed at quitting
    smoking, you first have to try.  Knowing the risk
    will not stop you from smoking if you're not
    actively trying to quit.
         And so if we take a look back at the
    timeline, we can see, What was she doing for most 3370 of this time period in the 1950s through the
    1980s?  The evidence was clear.
         Now, I put "did not try to quit" in red with
    the arrows showing the sides.  And if you look
    closely, you will see there are two breaks in the
    '50s and one break in that arrow in the '60s.
    Those are the three times that you heard evidence
    about Mrs. Dion actually putting down the
    cigarettes.  Two pregnancies in the 1950s.  That's
    the one where she is pregnant.  Mr. Dion said, You
    should stop smoking.  She puts down the cigarettes
    for a short period of time, starts smoking again
    and makes no further effort to quit during that
    pregnancy or that year.
         And then you have the same thing in the '60s.
         All of the rest of that time period, there's
    no evidence from anyone that Mrs. Dion was
    actually trying to stop smoking.  Not smoke a
    different product, not, you know, just talking
    about quitting, actually stopping smoking.
         And that's important, because when we
    remember what we were talking about words versus
    actions, actions speak louder than words, you
    heard a lot of evidence in this case about what
    Mrs. Dion was saying, and you heard evidence about 3371 what she was actually doing.
         So if we're looking at this period from the
    '50s through the '80s -- can I have the next
    slide, please -- what did I mean?  What did
    Mr. Dion say?  Mrs. Dion said I want to stop, I'm
    trying to stop.  But what did he say she was
    actually doing about it?  He couldn't detect any
    regular pattern of trying to quit.  As far as he
    knows, she did not put the cigarettes down other
    than those three times that we talked about.
         Mr. Fuhrman had the same exchange with
    Mr. Dion.  He said that Mrs. Dion said, I want to
    quit, I'm trying all the time.  That's what she
    said.
         But what was she actually doing?  She never
    stopped smoking.  Sometimes when she said she was
    quitting smoking, she was actually still smoking.
         And then you heard from Kimberly as well.
    Kimberly talked about what Mrs. Dion said to
    people.  I want to quit.  But Ms. Widgeon also
    said, as far as she could tell, Mrs. Dion never
    stopped smoking before 1993.
         Actions speak louder than words in terms of
    what Mrs. Dion really wanted to do, because the
    truth is we asked every single witness in this 3372 case who knew Mrs. Dion, every single one of them,
    and even the ones that didn't come in to testify,
    some of the other kids, we asked every witness who
    knew her whether -- what they could tell us about
    what Mrs. Dion was doing to quit smoking.  And
    they all said, I don't remember.  I don't remember
    her putting them down.  I don't remember how many
    times she may have tried to quit.  All I remember
    is her talking about it.  And no one could
    actually remember her doing anything about it.
         And that's important, because as Dr. Abramson
    and others said, there has to be a persistent,
    motivated attempt to quit in order to be
    successful.
         And Dr. Brady said something that I thought
    was very insightful about this too.  We were -- we
    were having an exchange.  We were talking about
    motivation.  And she said that whether you're
    talking about cigarette smokers or any kind of
    lifestyle change, whether it's exercise, cigarette
    smoking, anything, that for a lot of people that
    have other things going on in their life,
    motivation can wax and wane.  It can be that one
    day you're announcing to people that you're going
    to take -- you know, you're going to turn over a 3373 new leaf and you're going to stop smoking, you're
    going to get on the treadmill, whatever it is, and
    then it can wane to where you become busy with
    something else and you're just not as motivated to
    do that one thing that you know you should be
    doing, and you're not really trying seriously as
    you were or might have been before.
         If Mrs. Dion was trying to quit all those
    years, even if she was, the evidence is she wasn't
    doing anything that was significant enough or
    memorable enough for anyone to be able to tell you
    about it today.
         And we know from other evidence in the case
    all of the things that she wasn't doing.
         Can we have that one, please?
         The evidence was about these were all the
    things that Mrs. Dion wasn't doing.  She didn't go
    to a health care professional.  She does not try
    hypnosis.
         She didn't go to a smoking cessation clinic.
         She didn't participate in SmokEnders.  That
    was one of the stop-smoking campaigns that was in
    the newspapers.
         She didn't participate in the Great American
    Smokeout.  You heard about that from the public 3374 service announcement with one of the public
    service -- Ed Asner.  Thank you.  I forgot his
    name.
         She didn't make a New Year's resolution to
    quit.
         She didn't ask her friend or family to help,
    even when her family was quitting.  Even when
    Robert had that compelling story that he told you,
    he even got emotional about it.  He said he ran
    into -- he was trying to catch his son and he was
    out of breath, and he knew he needed to stop
    smoking, and he put them down and he succeeded.
    She knew that he stopped, but she never asked him
    how he stopped.  She never asked him for help
    stopping.  They only talked about switching to a
    different brand.
         She never set a quit date.
         And these last three are really important for
    the reasons that Dr. Brady and Dr. Abramson talked
    about.
         She never threw out her cigarettes or her
    ashtrays or her matches or her lighters.  That's
    important, because those witnesses, the experts
    told you, that when you leave your ashtrays and
    you've got cigarettes all over the house and 3375 lighters and matches, those are visual cues that
    lead you to start smoking.  If you're trying to
    quit smoking, you can't have these reminders all
    through your house that are prompting to continue
    smoking.
         Now, why am I saying all this?  Am I
    criticizing Mrs. Dion?  I'm not criticizing her.
    I don't stand here to tell you that, you know, she
    did something wrong by not taking these actions;
    that she did something wrong by continuing to
    smoke instead of making more or different or
    motivated, committed efforts to quit smoking.
    Mrs. Dion had a lot going on during those years in
    the '50s, '60s, '70s, and '80s.  And Mr. Wichmann
    implied that I was saying something offensive by
    pointing out in Mr. Dion's cross that she had a
    lot going on.  I don't think it's offensive at
    all.
         The fact is, Mrs. Dion was the backbone of
    that family during those years.  From the moment
    she woke up in the morning to the moment she went
    to bed at night, she was busy raising five kids
    and helping her husband.  That's what she was
    focused on during this entire time period when she
    wasn't doing those things.  And it's easy to see 3376 why stopping smoking may not have been a priority
    for her at that time.
         Whatever you think the reason is that she
    wasn't doing more to stop smoking, it wasn't
    Reynolds.  It wasn't the nicotine in cigarettes.
    Dr. Brady and Dr. Abramson both agreed with me
    that nicotine doesn't prevent you from doing any
    of these things.  Addiction doesn't prevent you
    from trying any of these methods to quit smoking.
         If we go back to the timeline, we know that
    in the 1990s -- which is why I have a different
    color --
         Or actually, do we have -- can we add the --
         So we talked about the '50s, '60s, '70s and
    '80s when Mrs. Dion wasn't seriously trying to
    quit.  I want to move now to the 1990s.  As you
    have heard me say during this case, things were
    different for Mrs. Dion in the 1990s.
         Their last daughter, Kimberly, moved out in
    '89 or '90.  They are living in Florida.  They're
    in a retirement community.  Mr. Dion said that
    Mrs. Dion had time to be active with things like
    dancing, things that were personally important to
    her.  She wasn't sick.  She didn't have a heart
    attack or some traumatic experience that Dr. Hurt 3377 talked about to force her to stop smoking.  But
    something was different, because she told Mr. Dion
    for the first time she just didn't want to smoke
    anymore, and she was ready to quit smoking.  And
    for the first time in the 1990s, she actually did
    some things that she never tried before, like
    nicotine replacement therapy.
         Mr. Wichmann wants you to think that the
    nicotine patch is what made all the difference to
    Mrs. Dion; that she -- that was something that was
    never available to her before.  But the witnesses
    told you that the same type of technique for
    quitting smoking -- that's the nicotine patch --
    is the same theory behind the nicotine gum.  They
    are both nicotine replacement therapy products.
    The idea being you get the nicotine from the gum
    or the patch and you put down the cigarettes and
    you eventually stop smoking, and then you stop the
    gum or the patch.
         The nicotine gum was available to Mrs. Dion
    as early as 1984, but she didn't try it back then.
    It was only in the '90s when something was
    different for her that she tried these approaches
    that she hadn't tried before.
         Now, she didn't use -- you heard a lot of 3378 back-and-forth about this.  She didn't use the
    patch to put down the cigarettes at first.
         She actually used the patch for over a year
    while still smoking, even though that isn't the
    way that doctors told people to use the patch back
    then.  And you can decide whatever you want to
    decide about whether that means she was motivated
    to stop smoking when she first started the patch.
    But what we know is, later, she stopped smoking.
    And Dr. Abramson testified and explained to you
    that the patch -- it's not even clear that the
    patch is what made the difference for her, because
    if it was, she would have quit earlier.  And if
    getting nicotine from a patch is what made the
    difference for people, then the success rate on
    the patch would be higher than 35 percent.
         Cigarette smoking is not just about getting
    nicotine, and the patch is not what made her quit.
    She quit because she was at a different place in
    her life, when she was ready to do something, that
    she hadn't done before.
         And Dr. Brady said sometimes things just have
    to line up right for you.  Sometimes the stars
    have to align.  You have to be at a place in your
    life where you're ready to do something that you 3379 haven't done before that.
         And then we asked her, I asked Dr. Brady.
    And she gave the most important testimony about
    this.  Because remember, I said the witnesses they
    called at first spent most of their time talking
    about whether she was addicted, but not as much
    time talking about whether addiction got in the
    way of her quitting, prevented her from having the
    ability to quit.
         This is what Dr. Brady said about that.
    Dr. Brady said, when I asked her -- it was near
    the end of examination -- I said to her, Do you
    agree that Mrs. Dion had the ability to quit
    smoking in the '90s?
         She said, Yes, of course she did.  The best
    evidence of that is that she did quit.
         THE COURT:  Excuse me, Mr. Walker, you asked
    me to tell you when you have used 60 minutes, and
    you have.
         MR. WALKER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  All right.
         MR. WALKER:  Then I said, what about in the
    1980s when she wasn't trying seriously to quit,
    when she wasn't doing all the things on that list?
    Did she have the ability to quit smoking back 3380 then?
         She said yes.
         Did Mrs. Dion have the ability to quit
    smoking in the '70s?
         Dr. Brady said yes.
         Did she have the ability to quit smoking in
    the '60s and even as far as back as the 1950s?
    And Dr. Brady, their witness that they said --
    they talked all about her qualifications, she
    freely admitted that Mrs. Dion had the ability to
    quit smoking all the way back to the 1950s.  And
    Dr. Abramson told you the exact same thing.
         Smoking -- Mrs. Dion was smoking not because
    addiction prevented her from stopping.  She was
    smoking cigarettes because she knew the risk and
    simply wasn't ready to stop smoking.  If she had
    tried to quit more than three times in that time
    period, all of the witnesses said she would have
    succeeded.
         And if you look -- one second.  That means
    that when we look at the answer to the first
    question on the verdict form, for all of the
    reasons that we just went over, the answer should
    be no.  The plaintiff did not prove for all or any
    of those three reasons that I have discussed, that 3381 Mrs. Dion was addicted to cigarettes and had an
    addiction that was so substantial that it was a
    legal cause of her lung cancer and death.
         Now, that's the first question on the verdict
    form.  And you're going to see from the
    instructions that if you check no to that
    question, your job is actually finished.  You
    wouldn't have to answer any of the other
    questions.
         But there is another question on the first
    page that it's my job to talk to you about.
         Can we see that, please?
         And that's this one.  Please state the
    percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of
    Marion Dion's death that you charge to Reynolds or
    Marion Dion.
         And that boils down to the following
    question:  Who is responsible for the choices that
    mattered to Mrs. Dion?  Not somebody else, the
    choices that mattered to Mrs. Dion, who was
    responsible for those?
         You heard a lot of evidence about choices --
         Not right now.
         You heard a lot of evidence about choices
    that other people made that did not matter to 3382 Mrs. Dion.  What am I talking about?  You heard
    about all these cigarette designs.  Mr. Wichmann
    even showed you this graphic that talked about how
    the cigarette was designed, whether it has
    filters, something about pH levels, additives.
    Dr. Cummings did talk about that.  But the minute
    he left, remember he left and Dr. Kane came in the
    middle?
         Mr. Williams asked him.  He said, The jury
    has heard about all these different things.  What
    about this as a medical doctor?  Are filtered or
    unfiltered cigarettes all dangerous or is one any
    safer than the other.
         He said, no, they're all dangerous.
         Does it matter where you put the vent holes
    or whether it's light or whether it has additives
    or not?
         He said no, those things don't matter.
         Do you tell your patients to smoke a
    cigarette designed one way or the other?  Do you
    tell them to smoke this brand or that brand?
         Those things don't matter.  Those design
    differences don't have anything to do with
    Mrs. Dion, because all cigarettes can put you at
    an increased risk for cancer, and all cigarettes 3383 can be addictive, regardless of those design
    choices that Mr. Wichmann talked about.
         And I will just mention this.  He mentioned
    pH levels a bunch of times, and he said, Well, the
    company -- I think he said that Reynolds was
    worried about Marlboro cigarettes.  Marlboro
    cigarettes had a higher pH, and according to
    Mr. Wichmann, someone at Reynolds was worried that
    more people were going to buy Marlboro than
    Winston.
         Well, Mrs. Dion's son Robert smoked Marlboro,
    and sometimes Mrs. Dion bummed Marlboro cigarettes
    off of Robert, and yet, pH differences aside,
    Mrs. Dion never became a Marlboro smoker.
         If that theory that pH levels dictates what
    brands people smoked were true, she would have
    switched to Marlboro cigarettes, and she never
    did.
         Those choices about design have nothing to do
    with Mrs. Dion.
         What are the choices that actually could have
    made a difference to Mrs. Dion?  We put them on
    this chart.
         The choice that she made to smoke as an
    adult.  Remember, if she had quit smoking all 3384 way over to 1950, right before we get into this
    critical period, she would not have been -- she
    would not have smoked enough cigarettes to be at
    an increased risk for cancer.  Dr. Kane told you
    that.
         The choices she made not to try to quit.
         The choices she made about how to quit
    smoking, not availing herself of all of the tools
    that were available to her.
         And the choice that she made about when to
    really get serious about cigarette smoking.
         Those choices could only have been made by
    Mrs. Dion and not by anyone else.  And she is 100
    percent responsible for those choices, the ones
    that mattered to her.
         Can I have the next slide, please?
         This is what the evidence was about choice
    and responsibility.  Smokers have the ability to
    decide whether they are going to quit or not.
    It's important for people to decide that they
    really want to quit, to make up their minds that
    they really want to quit, and to actually make an
    effort to quit.
         Dr. Cummings.  The individual smoker is fully
    responsible for making the choice to quit. 3385 Fully responsible means 100 percent.
         What about this?
         The next one, please.
         Remember this?  There was all this discussion
    about the Surgeon General and Surgeon General Koop
    in particular.  This bears upon the question of
    responsibility.
         The cigarette is not going to light itself
    and jump into your mouth, nor are you going to go
    into a brain-induced hypnotic trance and light the
    cigarette.  No matter how much you have smoked or
    how much you like to smoke, the choice to light up
    is always yours.
         Surgeon General Koop didn't say the choice to
    light up is 50 percent yours or 10 percent yours
    or 70 percent yours.  The choice to smoke or to
    try to quit belongs 100 percent to the smoker.
         Can we have the next one?
         Mr. Wichmann showed you some language out of
    the 2010 Surgeon General's report.  But we had to
    show you the part at the back where it boils it
    all down.
         What does all this information mean to you?
    Now is the time to quit smoking.  No one can make
    you quit and no one can do it for you.  Even if 3386 you have smoked for many years, you can quit.
         "No one can do it for you" means that
    Mrs. Dion was 100 percent responsible for the
    choices she made to either try to quit smoking or
    not to seriously try to quit smoking.
         Now, it's not surprising that Mr. Dion would
    be unwilling to accept that Mrs. Dion has any
    responsibility for her smoking.  It's easy to
    understand that he would want to remember her as
    someone who was blameless in terms of her
    experience.  He said that she bears no
    responsibility.  But it's really going to be up to
    you to decide whether someone other than Mrs. Dion
    bears responsibility for the choices that mattered
    to her.
         But when you do that, I will ask you to think
    about -- think about this.  Mrs. Dion smoked
    cigarettes as an adult for about 42 years, from
    1950, when she turned 18, all the way up to 1992,
    '93.  That's about 42, 43 years.  That comes out
    to about 2,184 weeks.  The evidence in this case
    is that she put down her cigarettes for about a
    week, twice in the 1950s and once in the 1960s.
         What does that actually mean about how often
    she was trying to quit? 3387 Can we have the next one, please?
         That means that 99.86 percent of the time,
    Mrs. Dion was not trying to stop smoking.  Even
    during the years and decades while millions of
    other Americans around her were quitting smoking,
    including people in her own family life, her son
    Robert, 99.86 percent of the time she was not
    trying to quit smoking.  Who could be responsible
    for that but Mrs. Dion?
         Mrs. Dion never blamed anyone else for the
    decisions that she made, and neither should you.
    Those were her choices to make, not anyone else's.
    And even Dr. Brady agreed with me that people who
    know the risks should be entitled to make the
    decision to smoke cigarettes in spite of those
    risks.  And Dr. Brady testified that Mrs. Dion was
    more than equipped to make those decisions,
    because she didn't have any cognitive impairment.
    She was a smart lady who knew what she was doing.
         Now, Mr. Wichmann kept saying to you -- and
    he said it in the context of this question --
    don't -- don't hold Mrs. Dion responsible for her
    smoking, or don't give her much responsibility for
    her smoking, because she started as a young
    person. 3388 Well, think about this.  First of all,
    Mrs. Dion was not a teenage girl her entire life.
    This idea that she spent the rest of her life
    living with a decision that she made as a teenager
    is just not true.  We all know and can think of
    examples of people who started smoking cigarettes
    while they were teenagers and then made an adult
    choice to stop smoking cigarettes when they
    reached adulthood.
         And in this case, it's especially important
    because of Dr. Kane's testimony.
         Can we pull up the timeline again?
         Remember, Mrs. Dion at most smoked for five
    years underage, at most.  And Dr. Kane told you
    that five years smoking does not put you at an
    increased risk of lung cancer.  But that's the
    most anyone can say she smoked as a minor.  That
    means that Mrs. Dion's underaged smoking was not
    enough to put her at an increased risk of lung
    cancer.  If you think that she got lung cancer,
    Dr. Kane's testimony tells you she didn't get it
    from smoking as a teen.  It's the decisions that
    she made as an adult to go on smoking that put her
    at an increased risk of cancer.
         Then when Dr. Brady was on the stand, I said 3389 to Dr. Brady, Well, let's try to figure out --
    you've gone through this criteria, and you said
    that she's addicted.  And I started asking her
    when she was addicted, when did she meet these
    criteria within a 12-month period.
         She said, well, sometime in the '70s or the
    '80s, all the way on the back end.
         I said, Well, let's go back to when she
    turned 18 in 1950.  Let's apply this criteria that
    you just applied to determine whether she was
    addicted, and let's try to figure out, using your
    criteria, Dr. Brady, let's try to figure out if
    there is any evidence that Mrs. Dion was addicted
    at the time -- as of the time of her 18th
    birthday.
         And she said, We can't do that.  We don't
    have evidence for that.
         I started going through the factors, and she
    said, No, I won't do it.  I refuse.  There is just
    no evidence to do that analysis.
         And I said, Well, does that mean that you
    agree with me that there is no evidence that you
    can use to diagnose her as being addicted as of
    her 18th birthday?
         She agreed with me. 3390 That means between Dr. Kane's testimony and
    Dr. Brady's testimony, that means that the choices
    that mattered to Mrs. Dion were the choices, not
    that she made as a minor, but the choices that she
    made as an adult who knew the risks.
         However long she may have smoked as a minor,
    those choices did not doom her to a lifetime of
    smoking.  Those choices that she made as a minor
    did not make it inevitable that she would get
    cancer.  She could have made a different choice as
    an adult every time she picked up a cigarette as
    an adult.
         As I mentioned, there are many people who
    start smoking as teenagers and then make a
    different choice to stop smoking when they are
    adults.  It's just -- in Mrs. Dion's case, she
    wasn't ready to make that decision until the
    1990s.
         All right.  So we believe the answer to the
    question 2 should be 100 percent for Mrs. Dion,
    and that forces you to put zero percent for the
    Reynolds.
         Now, I want to take a look at the next two
    questions.  These are the questions on the verdict
    form that relate to their fraud claim.  And I'm 3391 going to move through this a little bit more
    quickly, because I think this is an issue that
    ought to be easier for you to resolve.
         I have already showed you the evidence that
    Mrs. Dion knew the risks.  The key issue for every
    allegation that they have made, because these are
    all about Mrs. Dion, is who said it and did
    Mrs. Dion rely on it?
         As you saw, there were many statements being
    made in the public about cigarette smoking.  Some
    of those statements were made by the government
    officials like the Surgeon General, the Public
    Health Services, the National Cancer Institute,
    people like Cuyler Hammond of the American Cancer
    Society.  And then there were statements being
    made by cigarette company people like some of the
    ones that they showed you on the video.  And they
    said different things.
         For example, plaintiffs argue that Mrs. Dion
    said she smoked filtered and light cigarettes
    because they supposedly were better for her.  And
    maybe she did think that.  But the question is,
    where did she get this idea?
         First of all, we don't even know how long she
    smoked them.  Mr. Dion said that he and Robert 3392 agree.  Mr. Dion said she only smoked it briefly
    in the '90s, and her son Robert said she switched
    back and forth from lights to regular cigarettes
    all through the '80s.  But what we know is
    whatever it is that she thought about them being
    better, she didn't get that from any tobacco ad.
         Can we pull up those next dems?
         Remember, I went through this with
    Dr. Cummings, and I X'd out the ones that didn't
    have anything to do with Mrs. Dion.  And then we
    zoomed in on the ones that were for Winston, the
    product she smoked.  And none of them said
    anything about cigarettes being safe or healthy or
    better for you.
         And then plaintiffs -- I showed you this in
    opening, and I said, Maybe the plaintiffs will put
    this in and let you see the actual Winston ads.
    These are all Winston ads from their exhibit list.
    There is a whole book full of them.  And you
    can -- you can go through them any time you want.
    You will see all through them, they're all about
    taste and flavor.  They didn't put it in, so we
    put it in.  And when you're back in the room, if
    you want, you can look through, you can pick any
    page at random of all of their Winston and Winston 3393 Lights ads, and you won't see a single one in
    there that says that it was better or safer to
    smoke filters or light cigarettes.
         That's why, when I started the jingle at the
    beginning, "Winston tastes good," a lot of you
    could remember "like a cigarette should," because
    that was always the message, about taste, not
    about being better for you.
         But there are statements by other people,
    people who we were not responsible for, who for
    their own reasons in the public health community
    said you should quit smoking, but if you don't
    quit, you should think about using a filtered
    cigarette that was lower in tar and nicotine.
         And we showed you some examples of this.
    This one from 1957.  That's Dr. Wynder talking
    about filters and the potential reduction in
    cancer risk.
         The next one, please.
         This one from the American Cancer Society
    encouraging people to smoke lower tar, lower
    nicotine, light cigarettes.
         The next one, please.
         This one is from the United States Department
    of Health, not Reynolds, not any conspirator to 3394 Reynolds, giving this advice.
         And can we have the next one, please?
         The same thing.  Dr. Hammond.
         Then we showed you what she might have seen
    on TV.  You saw what the Winston ads were saying,
    and then you saw what the public health community
    was saying about whether these were better.  And
    you can decide for yourselves which one was more
    likely to suggest to her that filters or light
    cigarettes were safer.
         I won't show you those now, but you probably
    remember them.
         And then we showed you --
         Can I have 52, please?
         We showed you some of the studies that were
    actually coming out on actual smokers that the
    public health community was relying on; not
    something a tobacco company said or did, but
    actual studies that, even if somebody today thinks
    were wrong, led the public health community to
    make that recommendation.
         And then the next question then is, did
    Mrs. Dion rely on something that the companies
    said?  There is no evidence that she did, only
    evidence that she was aware of the risk the whole 3395 time.
         They showed you quotes and statements where
    they say that the companies were telling the
    people that it wasn't proven, that more research
    was needed, but no one who actually knew her said
    that she repeated any of those things.
         And then when Dr. Cummings was here, we
    looked at the actual data on whether people were
    listening to what tobacco companies were saying
    about whether cigarette smoking was injurious to
    health.  And here is what you saw.
         Only three percent of people in 1959 said
    they would be most apt to believe one of these
    organizations if they said lung cancer wasn't
    linked to cigarette smoking.
         And then can we have the next one, please?
         We did that for a number of different years.
    '68, five percent.  The next one.  And we went
    through that for a number of different years.
         The five percent who listed the tobacco
    companies.  But when it says tobacco companies,
    it's talking about those same people that
    Mr. Wichmann was talking about.  And most
    Americans, overwhelmingly so, were not believing
    these tobacco company sources as reliable sources 3396 of information on these issues.
         My point, I want to be clear, I'm not saying
    that Mrs. Dion never saw any of the statements
    that they showed you.  I'm saying that it's
    incredibly, incredibly unlikely that she relied on
    any of them, because she knew the risks, and
    almost no one was relying on those statements.
         And Mrs. Dion never even said that they
    wanted to file a lawsuit like this one.  This is
    Mr. Dion's lawsuit.
         We've already talked about advertisements.  I
    want to talk now about their allegations about
    youth marketing.  This was a big, big argument
    that they made.
         THE COURT:  Mr. Walker, you asked me to tell
    you when you've got ten minutes left.
         MR. WALKER:  Thank you, Judge.
         THE COURT:  You're welcome.
         MR. WALKER:  The key years with respect to
    these allegations were 1932 to 1950.  Those are
    the years when Mrs. Dion was a minor.  And that's
    why I kept talking about those years when we were
    on this subject with the witnesses.
         I have got in my hand every document that
    they say shows youth marketing.  The first two are 3397 a couple of -- or maybe this is -- yeah.  The
    first few of these are these documents from the
    late 1920s.  That's before Mrs. Dion was born.
         When I showed you the questions about fraud
    and conspiracy, they all relate to Mrs. Dion.
    There cannot reasonably be an argument that these
    documents from before, I guess, five years before
    Mrs. Dion was even born were a legal cause of some
    injury to her.  They weren't.
         Then the other documents that they have are
    basically just surveys.  This is one that they
    showed a survey from 1959.  Some more survey data
    from other years when Mrs. Dion was already an
    adult.  Here is another one here.  None of these
    documents are even asking about advertising
    themes, and none of them say, great, let's use
    this information and go target kids.  Not a single
    one said that.
         The other documents that they show are like
    proposals.  Like this one from Dr. Teague that's
    in here.  Some thoughts about new brands of
    cigarettes for the youth marketing.  These are all
    things saying, Strategies and opportunities for
    the future.  Forward proposals.  They didn't show
    you any documents that said that the company 3398 actually took Dr. Teague up on his ideas.
         Imagine, all of you have probably worked
    somewhere where there was some person in your
    office or in your -- on your team or in your place
    of employment that if you -- that you would think
    that, my God, I would never want that person to be
    the representative of this company.  That's what
    Dr. Teague was.
         These ideas that people talked about for new
    brands, proposals for the future, they didn't have
    anything to do with Mrs. Dion.
         And they were all, by the way, from time
    periods when she was in her 20s, 30s, or 40s.
         And then I said to Dr. Cummings, You say
    you've reviewed 2,000 documents on youth
    marketing.  Where is the one that shows the
    companies were marketing to Mrs. Dion when she was
    a minor?
         He didn't produce a single one.
         Instead, I had to show him the documents --
    please -- that showed what the company's position
    actually was.
         We should not in any way influence nonsmokers
    to start smoking.
         Next one. 3399 These terms where we talk about youth, we're
    referring to young adult smokers.
         Next one, please.
         It is not our business to motivate people to
    start smoking, particularly minors.
         And finally, RJR's consistent policy is that
    smoking is a matter of free, informed, adult
    choice which the company does not seek to
    influence.
         And that second to last document, that's the
    one that Dr. Cummings covered up the part that
    says, We don't market to minors, and I had to come
    back and show you that one.
         The answer to these fraud-related
    questions -- next one, please -- should be no.
         And not surprisingly, the answer to the next
    question about damages.  Well, you already know
    what I'm going to say.  I told you from the jury
    selection into the opening, we don't think this is
    a case where any damages should be awarded.  There
    are many other cases out there where some of the
    facts they're talking about might fit some other
    smokers.  It's just not Mrs. Dion.
         Can I have the next one, please?
         The last question that I have to talk to you 3400 about, although I don't think you should reach it,
    relates to the punitive damages.  And you see
    "clear and convincing" is highlighted there.
    You're going to get a definition of that.
         The next one, please.
         Clear and convincing evidence requires
    something more compelling and persuasive than the
    other evidence in the case.  You have to have a
    firm belief or conviction without hesitation about
    the matter at issue.
         The next one, please.
         This is what you need to know about punitive
    damages.  They can be awarded only for conduct
    that was a legal cause of her illness, and
    punitive damages are paid only to Mr. Dion.  They
    are in addition to damages that fully compensate
    Mr. Dion.  Basically, punitive damages means more
    money.
         And most of the conduct that you heard about
    in this case, not only did it not cause an injury
    to Mrs. Dion, it's not even reprehensible,
    punishable conduct.
         Can we have the next one, please?
         It's not punishable conduct for the head of
    the company to tell the head of the research and 3401 design to cooperate with the government trying to
    find a safer cigarette.
         Next one, please.
         It's not reprehensible conduct to actually
    work with the government for ten years in the
    National Cancer Institute Tobacco Working Group to
    try to develop a less hazardous cigarette.  And
    it's certainly not -- the evidence was that
    tobacco companies were thanked for their
    participation in that.
         The next one, please.
         It's not punishable conduct to develop new
    ways of identifying what's in cigarette smoke and
    to publish on it; to send research to the
    Surgeon General that's cited in the '64
    Surgeon General's report.
         The next one, please.
         Remember the "Green Monster"?  Reynolds
    shouldn't be punished for that.  It was funded by
    money from Reynolds and the other companies.  It
    was relied on by the Surgeon General for the 6,000
    articles it referenced on smoking and health,
    articles including that smoking causes cancer,
    COPD, and could be addictive.
         And it's not punishable conduct to make 3402 filtered and light cigarettes that the public
    health community was asking for, that they
    believed would save lives.
         This quote is from Dr. Russell.  He was not
    part of anyone's conspiracy.  And he said, At the
    time, it is unlikely that any single measure has
    saved more lives or done more to reduce
    smoking-related diseases than the switch to
    filter-tipped cigarettes.
         At the end of the day -- I'm sorry.
         So the answer to this question about punitive
    damages should be no.
         Can I have the next slide, please?  I want to
    finish where I started.  The stubborn facts in
    this case are that Mrs. Dion knew the risks, had
    the ability to quit the entire time, but chose to
    smoke until she chose to quit, and she was never
    misled by anything Reynolds or any alleged
    co-conspirator of Reynolds said or did.  And that
    adds up to a defense verdict.
         You know, Mrs. Dion passed away in 1994.
    This is not her lawsuit.  It's 2015.  This is
    Mr. Dion's lawsuit.  He's the one asking for money
    damages for the choice that Mrs. Dion made to
    smoke a legal product. 3403 And you have heard a little bit about
    Mr. Dion's life now, about his activities and his
    travel.  And I agree with Mr. Millard that
    Mr. Dion is fortunate not to have to do those
    things alone.
         The judge will instruct you that you can't
    decide this case based on sympathy.  If the
    evidence and the law supports a defense verdict in
    this case, as I have already said it does, it's
    your duty and obligation to come back with a
    defense verdict.  You may even have to remind each
    other of that at some point in your deliberations.
         I have tried to fairly summarize the evidence
    that you have heard in this case.  And when I sit
    down, plaintiff's counsel will have another chance
    to tell you why everything I said is wrong and you
    should rule in their favor.  And they get to go
    last, because they have the burden of proof.
         I won't get a chance to address anything new
    he might say, because I will be finished.  But you
    know me, you know our team, you know our case by
    now.  Whatever he says to you after I sit down, I
    just ask that you think about how we would have
    responded to those arguments.
         I want to thank you again for your patience 3404 and good humor.  I have explained this case the
    best way that I know how, and I have explained in
    the best way that I know how why that evidence
    justifies a defense verdict.
         We're in your hands.  I ask only that you
    apply your common sense, focus on the evidence and
    the law, and return a verdict for the defendant.
         Thank you, Your Honor.


         MR. WICHMANN:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Mr. Walker told you it's all about choice.
    You chose to smoke.  Addiction had nothing to do
    with it.
         Would you please play 4725A, please?
         (Whereupon, a video clip was played in open
    court as follows:)
         A SPEAKER:  Surgeon General C. Everett Koop
    has issued two major reports on smoking, one on 3407 dangers of secondhand smoke, the other on nicotine
    addiction.
         The tobacco industry disputes both reports as
    more political than scientific.
         A SPEAKER:  We have been told so frequently
    by the cigarette industry that smoking is a matter
    of free choice, you start when you want and you
    quit when you want, but anybody who has ever
    smoked knows that is not true.
         A SPEAKER:  What does the record, the
    long-time record say is the most dangerous age to
    get hooked on tobacco?
         A SPEAKER:  Indications are very clear that
    the people who are most heavily addicted to
    nicotine and have the greatest trouble quitting
    are those who began smoking when they were 14 to
    16.
         I think the studies all over the world, in
    every country and every culture, the younger you
    start, the greater the addiction and the more
    difficult it is to quit.
         A SPEAKER:  Now, you said that you considered
    tobacco as addictive as cocaine or heroin.  Isn't
    that an overstatement?
         A SPEAKER:  No.  I think the evidence is very 3408 clear, if you understand what we're talking about.
    Addiction is a specific physiological problem.
    And the manner in which you become addicted to
    nicotine is exactly the same manner in which you
    become addicted to cocaine or heroin.  And even
    after you have quit and you think you're clean,
    there is a tremendous tendency to relapse.
         A SPEAKER:  There is no such thing as a safe
    cigarette.  There is no such as quality death.
         (Video clip was concluded.)
         MR. WICHMANN:  Mr. Walker told you she just
    didn't have the priority to quit.  Her son got up
    and cried, her older, eldest son who would know
    the most about her smoking, got up and cried and
    said she was trying to quit all the time.
         As Dr. Brady said, the problem was the tools
    available to her, like the nicotine patch, the
    most successful of the cessation aids, was not
    available until 1992.  And as soon as it became
    available to her, she went down to her doctor,
    Dr. Villotti, and got a prescription.
         He showed a chart saying she never went to
    any health professional for help quitting smoking.
    That's just not what the testimony was.
         He also said that everybody knew, because he 3409 played a clip from Harry Reasoner, the famous
    television CBS reporter.
         Would you please put up 606, please?
         Well, here is Dr. -- Harry Reasoner's
    obituary.  In pure intellect, Harry was smartest
    of all TV correspondents -- that's the person that
    Mr. Walker just showed you -- announcing to the
    world, according to Mr. Walker, that smoking was
    bad for you.  He smoked three packs of cigarettes
    a day.  Four years ago, he had his cancerous left
    lung removed and continued to smoke heavily.  I
    can stop drinking if I have to, he said, but I
    can't stop smoking.
         That speaks, ladies and gentlemen, to the
    power of addiction.
         Dr. Hurt came and told you about the
    Heaviness of Smoking Index test that Mr. Walker
    said is a rigged test.  And he said it's because
    no matter who you put up, they are going to score
    as addicted on the test.  Dr. Hurt looked at him
    and said, I'm sorry, no, because we don't apply
    that test to nonsmokers.
         He's a clinician.  You have to use your
    clinical judgment.  That's what doctors do.  He
    said, no, this is the test. 3410 And Dr. Brady got up and used the DSM-IV.
    And their expert, Dr. Abramson, got up and said,
    No, it's the 5.
         Then on cross-examination, I asked him.
         I said, You are a member of this society that
    gets this monthly newsletter?
         He said, yes.
         I said, Well, didn't you get the monthly
    newsletter that said that the DSM-IV that
    Dr. Brady used has been validated for use in
    diagnosing nicotine addiction, but the DSM-5 has
    not yet -- has not yet been proven reliable for or
    valid.
         Now, could put up slide 39, please?
         Mr. Walker talked about the polls.  He said,
    Well, I brought you polls.  All these polls, they
    all say the same thing.  Everybody knew.
         Well, the Gallup poll.  You will find in
    evidence, it is PT3876.  You'll see the newspaper
    ad.  And it's from that very company that he used
    that had the polls.  They are accusing big tobacco
    of misusing poll results in court.  Gallup
    maintains, far from proving there was a link
    between smoking and lung cancer that was commonly
    known, its 1954 poll actually showed a high degree 3411 of doubt and confusion about the dangers of
    smoking.  The 90 percent figure, Gallup says,
    reflected knowledge of the controversy, not a
    widely held belief that smoking causes lung
    cancer.
         Meanwhile, it says, responding to another
    question, only 5 percent at the time said that
    they thought there was a link.  Five percent.
         So they're misusing the poll here in court
    right in front of you.  If you don't believe me,
    please take a look at the exhibit.  You can see up
    in the left-hand corner, it has PT3876.
         Do I have time for one more, Judge?
         THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
         MR. WICHMANN:  Thank you.  Would you put up
    40, please?
         Now, this is PTSG1990.  Ladies and gentlemen,
    this is the report from the 1990 Surgeon General
    that is in evidence.  This is a looking back
    report in 1990 when Marion was still alive.
         And the Surgeon General says, reading from
    the top, Important gaps in public knowledge still
    exist.  Some smokers may have failed to quit
    because of a lack of appreciation of the health
    hazards of smoking and the benefits of quitting. 3412 In 1987, smoking -- in a 1987 national health
    interview, respondents were asked whether smoking
    increases the risk of various diseases, including
    lung cancer, and whether smoking cessation reduces
    the risks.  Thirty to 40 percent of smokers either
    did not believe that smoking increases these risks
    or did not believe that cessation reduces these
    risks.
         These proportions correspond to 15 to 20
    million smokers in the U.S.  Clearly our efforts
    to educate the public on the health hazards of
    smoking are not yet complete.
         And I might add that the $250 billion
    campaign that the industry waged for 50 years to
    confuse and to cast doubt on whether or not there
    was a link between addiction, smoking, and disease
    was, in fact, successful.
         I spoke a little bit quick, Judge.  If I have
    two minutes, I have one more video clip to play.
         THE COURT:  All right, sir.
         MR. WICHMANN:  Okay.  Would you play No. 44?
    Exhibit 44 from our slide show.
         (Whereupon, a video clip was played in open
    court as follows:)
         A SPEAKER:  Take the controversy about 3413 cigarettes.  In the 91st Congress, a House
    committee heard testimony from leading experts on
    smoking and health.  The record shows that many of
    the country's most respected doctors openly
    challenged anti-cigarette claims.
         A SPEAKER:  And I have to disagree with you
    in that we don't know what causes the elements
    that have been attributed to cigarette smoking.
         A SPEAKER:  I don't know.  Frankly, I think
    that smoking may be hazardous; it may not be.
         A SPEAKER:  Smoking maybe hazardous; it may
    not be.  No one, including TV7, knows for certain.
         A SPEAKER:  I am saying that the science to
    date and over $100 million of our industry
    indicates that there is no causal --
         A SPEAKER:  Cigarette smoking does not cause
    cancer?  Yes or no.
         A SPEAKER:  It is not known whether
    cigarettes cause cancer.
         A SPEAKER:  All right.
         A SPEAKER:  It has not been causally
    established.
         A SPEAKER:  Cigarette smoking.  No causal
    relationship between cigarette smoking and
    emphysema? 3414 A SPEAKER:  Despite all of the research to
    date, there has not been a causal link
    established.
         A SPEAKER:  And I think it's worth pointing
    out that all links that have been established
    between smoking and certain diseases are based on
    statistics.  What that means is that the causative
    relationship has not yet been established.
         A SPEAKER:  The case is still open.  The jury
    has not come in.
         A SPEAKER:  It may not be harmful?  You're
    not convinced?
         A SPEAKER:  It may be or it may not be.  We
    don't know.
         A SPEAKER:  Do cigarettes cause cancer?
         A SPEAKER:  I don't know if they do or not.
         A SPEAKER:  I'm not in a position to give you
    a does or does-not answer.
         (Video clip concluded.)
         MR. WICHMANN:  There you have it.  Today she
    is supposed to have known in the '70s, '80s and
    '90s what Reynolds' spokespersons for the entire
    industry spent $250 billion telling the American
    public and American smokers that they didn't know
    yet.  Thank you, folks. 3415 THE COURT:  All right.  Members of the jury,
    we're going to go over the last instruction and
    then a few other things.
         So if you look on page 24, which is jury
    instruction No. 20, is where I'm going to pick up.
         Members of the jury, you have now heard all
    the evidence, my instructions on the law that you
    must apply in reaching your verdict, and the
    closing arguments of the attorneys.  You will
    shortly retire to the jury room to decide this
    case.  Before you do so, I have a few last
    instructions for you.
         During deliberations, jurors must communicate
    about the case only with one another and only when
    all jurors are present in the jury room.
         You will have in the jury room all the
    evidence that was received during the trial.
         In reaching your decision, do not do any
    research on your own or as a group.  Do not use
    dictionaries, the Internet or other reference
    materials.  Do not investigate the case or conduct
    any experiments.  Do not visit or view the scene
    of any event involved in this case or look at maps
    or pictures on the Internet.
         This last one -- this next sentence is 3416 probably not going to happen.  If you happen to
    pass by the scene, do not stop or investigate.
         All jurors must see and hear the same
    evidence at the same time.  And do not read,
    listen to or watch any news accounts of the trial.
         You are not to communicate with any person
    outside the jury about this case.  Until you have
    reached a verdict, you must not talk about this
    case in person or through the telephone, writing
    or electronic communications such as blog,
    Twitter, e-mail, text message or any other means.
    Do not contact anyone to assist you, such as a
    family accountant, doctor or lawyer.
         These communications rules apply until I
    discharge you at the end of the case.
         If you become aware of any violations of
    these instructions or any other instruction I have
    given, you must tell me by giving a note to the
    bailiff.
         Any notes that you have taken during the
    trial may be taken to the jury room for use during
    your discussion.  Your notes are simply an aid to
    your own memory, and neither your notes nor any of
    those of any other juror are binding or
    conclusive. 3417 Your notes are not a substitute for your own
    memory or that of other jurors.  Instead, your
    verdict must result from the collective memory and
    judgment of all jurors based on the evidence and
    the testimony presented during the trial.
         At the conclusion of the trial, the bailiff
    will collect all of your notes and immediately
    destroy them.  No one will ever read your notes.
         In reaching your verdict, do not let bias,
    sympathy, prejudice, public opinion or any other
    sentiment for or against any party to influence
    your decision.  Your verdict must be based on the
    evidence that has been received and the law on
    which I have instructed you.
         Reaching a verdict is exclusively your job.
    I cannot participate in that decision in any way,
    and you should not guess what I think your verdict
    should be from something I may have said or done.
    You should not think that I prefer one verdict
    over another.  Therefore, in reaching your
    verdict, you should not consider anything I have
    said or done except for any specific instructions
    to you.
         Pay careful attention to all the instructions
    I gave you, for that is the law that you must 3418 follow.
         You have a copy of my instructions with you,
    and you already have those, so you can take those
    with you and use those during deliberations.  All
    the instructions are important and you must
    consider all of them together.  There are no other
    laws that apply to this case.  And even if you do
    not agree with these laws, you must use them in
    reaching your decision in this case.
         When you go to the jury room, the first thing
    you should do is choose a presiding juror to act
    as foreperson during your deliberations.  The
    foreperson should see to it that your discussions
    are orderly and that everyone has a fair chance to
    be heard.
         It's your duty to talk with one another in
    the jury room and to consider the views of all the
    jurors.  Each of you must decide the case for
    yourself, but only after you have considered the
    evidence with other members of the jury.
         Feel free to change your mind if you are
    convinced that your position should be different.
    You should all try to agree but do not give up
    your honest belief just because the others think
    differently.  Keep an open mind so that you and 3419 your fellow jurors can easily share ideas about
    the case.
         I will give you a verdict form.  And that is
    not in your materials, but I'm going to go over it
    with you, and you will have this with questions
    that you must answer.  I have already instructed
    on the law that you are to use in answering these
    questions.  You must follow my instructions and
    the form carefully.  You just consider each
    question separately and please answer the
    questions in the order that they appear.
         After you answer the questions, the form will
    tell you what to do next.  And I'll go over that
    form with you right now.
         It has the name of the case.  It says,
    Verdict Form.  It starts off, We the jury find as
    follows.
         And then Question 1:  Was Marion Dion
    addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and,
    if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her
    lung cancer and death?  A place to check "yes," a
    place to check "no."
         And there is an instructional note that tells
    you:  If your answer to Question 1 was "no,"
    please proceed no further except to sign and date 3420 this verdict form and return it to the courtroom.
    If your answer to Question 1 was "yes," please
    proceed to question 2.
         Question 2 says:  Please state the percentage
    of any fault that was a legal cause of Marion
    Dion's death that you charge to R.J. Reynolds
    Tobacco Company.  There is a line.  Marion Dion,
    there is a line and a parenthetical note that they
    have to add up to 100 percent.
         Then there is another instructional paragraph
    that says:  In determining the amount of damages
    in Question 5, meaning Question 5 of the verdict
    form, do not make any reduction because of the
    fault of Marion Dion.  The Court will enter a
    judgment based on your verdict and, in entering
    judgment, will make any reduction required by law.
         Then on the second page is question -- or is
    Question 3:  Was the concealment or omission by
    Defendant R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company of
    material information concerning the health effects
    and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes a
    legal cause of Marion Dion's death?  A place to
    check "yes," a place to check "no."
         Question 4 asks:  Was the conspiracy between
    R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and other cigarette 3421 manufacturers to conceal or omit information about
    either the health effects of smoking or the
    addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both
    with the intention that smokers and members of the
    public would rely upon them, is that a legal cause
    of Marion Dion's lung cancer and death?  And
    there's a place to check "yes" and a place to
    check "no."
         Question 5 asks:  What is the total amount of
    damages sustained by George Dion for loss of his
    wife, Marion Dion's companionship and protection
    and his mental pain and suffering as a result of
    Marion Dion's lung cancer and death in the past?
    And there is a line.  And then in the future, and
    there is another line.
         And then Question 6:  Please state whether
    you find by clear and convincing evidence that
    punitive damages are warranted against Defendant
    R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company under the
    circumstances of this case.  A place to check
    "yes" and a place to check "no."
         And then it says:  So say we all on this
    blank day of blank, and there is a signature line
    for the foreperson.
         So your verdict must be unanimous.  That 3422 means it has to be agreed to by each of you.  And
    when you have agreed to a verdict and finished
    filling out the form, the foreperson needs to date
    it and sign it and notify the bailiff by knocking
    on the door.  When you have reached a verdict, I
    am going to strongly ask you that each of you take
    one last look at the verdict form to make sure
    that you agree, so that you all agree to the same
    verdict.
         If you need to communicate with me for any
    reason, you need to write a note, give it to the
    bailiff.  If there is some sort of split, don't
    tell me about the split, but I need to know why
    you want to talk.
         If you have any questions that come up during
    your deliberations, those need to be in writing.
    Use the process that we used during the case as
    far as asking questions, and we'll need to give
    that to the bailiff.  And just like the questions
    that were submitted to the witnesses, any question
    from you has to be reviewed by me, by the lawyers,
    the court reporter has to be here, clerk has to be
    here.  So if you have a question, if you can
    continue to deliberate until you receive an
    answer, I would encourage you to do that. 3423 Now, all of the videos that are in evidence,
    if you want to see any of them, let us know and we
    will bring you back in the courtroom and show the
    video if you want to see it, because there is not
    any practical means, as you can imagine from the
    last two weeks that you have been back in that
    jury room, that we -- that we could do that back
    here.  But if you want to see those that are in
    evidence, just let us know and we will bring you
    in here and then we'll show them to you as long
    as -- as long as you want to.
         I think that's all I have at this point.  And
    so Ms. Firebaugh and Mr. Ruffino -- is it
    Ruffino or --
[#DELETED MISTRIAL PROCEEDINGS#]