MR. McCARTER: Thank you, your Honor.
Good morning.
JURORS: Good morning.
MR. McCARTER: It seems like every time I talk to you, it's right around lunchtime, doesn't it?
First, I want to start with a big thank you for being here the last -- how long has it been? A week and a half or two weeks or so.
And if you remember, I talked to you in jury selection, I said if Plaintiffs witnesses tell you everything we need to put into our case, we might not need to call our own witness.
I hope you don't hold it against us that we think we were able to get out of the Plaintiff's witnesses all of the facts you need to return a defense verdict.
So I thank you for your attention on my behalf and Ms. Arnold over here. We have people in the office who are helping us with this case, and I thank you on their behalf as well, and I thank them for the work that they have done.
Now, I wanted to start off this afternoon -- this morning, excuse me, by talking about sort of the big picture about what the evidence shows, okay?
Let me start with that, and I will try to talk about the questions on the verdict form and see if I can help you answer those questions.
You may remember some of these points from my opening statement. This is what the evidence showed in this case. This is the big picture.
The evidence showed that Mr. Dombey was aware of the dangers of smoking. And in some ways, Mr. Kaiser has already made my argument for me on this, because what you have seen in the trial is that Mr. Dombey was an intelligent man. He was college-educated. He was a businessman at an executive level of a major, modern company. He worked in marketing and advertising in his career. He read the newspaper, watched TV, kept up with current events.
You heard the first days of this trial from Dr. Proctor, and you heard from every one of his family members, that Mr. Dombey was the type of person who would have seen and read about the risks of smoking. He couldn't have missed it, given the widespread publicity about
the risks of smoking received in the media.
I'm not going to show you slides of Ulysses Grant or the mouse skin painting or anything else. You've seen that. You know it.
But it was in the media. Mr. Dombey would have been aware of the Surgeon General's Report in 1964. Mrs. Dombey, when she was 19, she saw the coverage, and she remembered it almost 50 years later. Mr. Dombey's sisters saw the coverage as well.
There were warnings on the packs starting in 1966. For the next 30 years, right on the pack of cigarettes Mr. Dombey was smoking, he would have seen information about the risks of smoking.
And, of course, you have heard about Mr. Dombey's father passing away of lung cancer that the family attributed to smoking.
Mrs. Dombey's father passing away from cancer that the family attributed to smoking.
Mrs. Dombey's mother getting emphysema in 1985 and quitting smoking. And you have heard all of the family member warnings Mr. Dombey received from Mrs. Dombey and his children over the decades.
There's also no real dispute in this case that Mr. Dombey enjoyed smoking. I say "real dispute," because I'm going to talk about one thing in a minute that you heard this morning.
But it's true that Mrs. Dombey and Alyse, when they testified at trial, they tried to distance themselves from what they said in their deposition. But you saw that in their deposition, when they were under oath to tell the truth, they both admitted that Mr. Dombey enjoyed smoking.
We know that Mr. Dombey enjoyed smoking because he was somebody who liked the flavor and the taste of a cigarette, and the flavor and taste of his cigar. He liked strong flavor and strong taste. He smoked unfiltered cigarettes from time to time. And he was not interested in anything that was low in tar because it didn't give him the flavor he wanted.
Now, you heard some -- something this morning about, well, how -- was he enjoying smoking when he had cancer? Was he enjoying smoking in December of 1995, when he had cancer?
What is that about?
You know from Mrs. Dombey -- one of you asked the question. When he came home from the hospital in 1995, did he quit smoking? Yes.
Yes, was her answer.
She didn't tell you about that on her direct examination. She didn't tell you about it on cross. But you asked.
What you're going to see in a medical record in a few minutes is that he actually quit smoking before he went to the hospital and got diagnosed with cancer.
So he wasn't even smoking when he had cancer. So this business about him not enjoying it when he had cancer, he wasn't even smoking.
We also know that Mr. Dombey could have quit smoking if he had wanted to. Now, you saw there's no evidence that Mr. Dombey ever once tried to quit smoking the first 25 years he was smoking, so from the mid 1940s up until 1969 or '70.
And you heard from his sister, his sister said, yeah, I knew him the whole time. I don't know that he ever tried to quit.
His daughters were alive and part of that period. They didn't know that he ever tried to quit then.
You heard from Dr. Goldman, who had read Mr. Dombey's first wife's testimony that she didn't say that he tried to quit smoking during that period of time.
Mrs. Dombey described to you three quit attempts, none of which was a serious quit attempt. One was where Mr. Dombey made a big production about throwing the cigarettes away, but he kept his lighters and ashtrays.
That's the one where Mrs. Dombey laughed at her deposition because it told her that he was just telling her that he was going to quit smoking, but he wasn't really planning to do it.
The other two quit attempts lasted a day or two. He didn't feel good, he didn't feel well, so he stopped smoking, and as soon as he felt better after a day or two, he went right back to smoking.
The evidence is Mr. Dombey was not interested in quitting smoking until around the late '80s/early '90s for the first time. And
when he was interested in quitting, guess what?
He was able to quit.
He quit in 1987 for two to three months.
He quit in 1990 for five months. And he quit in December 1995, when he wasn't feeling good, and that was before he was diagnosed with cancer.
If Mr. Dombey could quit in 1987, and he could quit in 1990, and he could quit in 1995, he could have quit years earlier, if he had wanted to. And the only one keeping Mr. Dombey from quitting earlier was Mr. Dombey. Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds had nothing to do with it.
Mr. Dombey was the one going to the store and buying the cigarettes. Mr. Dombey was the one taking the cigarette out of the package and putting it up to his mouth and lighting the cigarette and smoking it.
Mr. Dombey couldn't make him stop smoking, his daughters couldn't stop smoking, Philip Morris couldn't make him stop smoking, RJ Reynolds couldn't make him stop smoking.
Mr. Dombey could make himself stop smoking because he did when he wanted to.
Fourth, Mr. Dombey was not influenced by anything Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds said.
That's really what this case is about.
Was Mr. Dombey affected by something that these companies said about the health risks of smoking or addiction?
You will remember, because it probably got repetitive, we asked every one of their witnesses who knew Mr. Dombey: Did he ever tell you that he heard a statement by the tobacco companies? Did he ever tell you that relied or was affected by a statement by the tobacco companies?
No. No. No. No. No. Across the board. Every one of their witnesses.
Of course, it is their burden to prove to you that these companies did something or said something that affected Mr. Dombey, and their own witnesses came in and admitted, we don't
have the evidence.
And finally, Mr. Dombey is responsible for the choices he made in his life. I said this in opening, but it bears repeating because it is important.
I am not in any way intending to criticize
Mr. Dombey. He did not file this lawsuit. He had the right to choose to live the life he wanted, just like we all do. He chose to smoke cigarettes and cigars. Some of us choose to drink alcohol, eat foods we shouldn't eat, and none of us probably get to exercise as much as we should. We all get the right to make those choices. And that's fine. It's fine that we can choose the way we want to live our lives.
But with the right to choose comes what? The obligation to be responsible for the consequences of your action.
And what the evidence shows is that Mr. Dombey is the one who is responsible for the choices he made.
Now, that's sort of the case at a 30,000-foot level. Let me now see if I can help you answer the questions on the verdict form.
You have seen this, but this is the first question on the verdict form, and that's whether Mr. Dombey was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was his addiction a legal cause of bladder cancer?
It's one question, but there's a lot of
stuff packed into this. So let me try to break it down a little bit and talk about all of the elements of this that the Plaintiff has to prove for you to answer yes.
And you know where I'm going to wind up, is that the answer to this question is no. If you answer this question no, you check the box, you sign the form, and you go home. The case is done just on this first question.
So what does Plaintiff have to prove here? One, they have to prove that Mr. Dombey was addicted. That's one.
Two, they have to prove that his addiction was a legal cause of bladder cancer. That's two.
Three, because they have to prove that it is an addiction to cigarettes that caused the cancer, they, of course, have to prove that cigarette smoking, and not cigars or something else, caused Mr. Dombey's cancer.
And finally, they have to prove that he had bladder cancer. Bladder cancer refers to cancer that started in the bladder. If the cancer started in the ureter and moved to the bladder, even though there's a tumor in the
bladder, that's ureter cancer. So they have to prove that the cancer started in the bladder.
And it is their burden of proving each of these things. They have to prove all of that.
If they fail on any one, then it is a no. Of course, if they fail on all four, it is a no.
And they did fail on all four. These are four different reasons why to check that question no.
The first is that Plaintiff did not prove that Mr. Dombey's cancer was caused by cigarette smoking. That is sort of just the basic. You don't even get out of the box with that. They have to prove that the cancer was caused by cigarette smoking.
And let me show you this. This was a -yeah, this is it. This is a demonstrative exhibit that I used with Dr. Soloway at the end of his cross-examination.
And Dr. Soloway is the only one who came in here. He came in here on video. He's the guy who changed his testimony after meeting with the lawyers, okay?
He came in here and said -- he's the only guy that said smoking was the cause, but even
Dr. Soloway admitted there are a lot of other risk factors, a lot of other causes of bladder cancer besides cigarette smoking, and that Mr. Dombey had several of them.
Mr. Dombey was in the age that put him at risk, at a high risk for bladder cancer. He's a male. He smoked cigarettes. He smoked cigars. And Dr. Soloway didn't agree so much on kidney or ureter stones, but we're going to talk about what the evidence was of that, the link between kidney and ureter stones and ureter cancer.
And of course, we don't know what, if any, occupational or environmental exposures Mr. Dombey had.
So these are all of the risk factors he said. They want to prove it is cigarette smoking when he had all of these risk factors.
Let me talk about them. I'm going to talk about the two you heard about a lot. First cigars, and then I'm going to talk about kidney and ureter stones.
Let me start with cigars, because you certainly have heard a lot about cigars in this trial.
Now, I tried to preview it for you in opening because the case is supposed to be about cigarette smoking and you're going to hear a lot about cigars, and I tell you, you certainly saw this a lot: This is the six cigars per day.
Do you remember this business about was that his signature on the bottom or did he write his name on the bottom? Do you remember all of those?
Well, the key information is that that's his handwriting. Is he the one who he said he smoked six cigars a day. That's the question.
You may remember I asked Mrs. Dombey about it. I think it's one of the first questions I asked when I cross-examined her. This is the second page of the document, but I put up the first page. And she didn't know it was the cigar document. I showed the handwriting at the top of the first and said: Is that your husband's handwriting? Yes.
I showed the bottom of the first page: Is that your husband's handwriting? Yes.
Then I skipped this part about cigars and showed the bottom of this page. Is that your
husband's handwriting? Yes.
So before she saw it was cigars on there, before she knew what document it was, his
handwriting was all before the cigars and it was after the cigars as well.
Then I showed her the 20-plus cigarettes.
Is that his handwriting? Yes.
Then I mentioned the six. She said:
Well, anybody could have written the six.
Is that credible, that Mr. Dombey wrote all of the information on here but somebody else wrote the six?
Now, they've tried everything they can to distance themselves from this record, because they know if Mr. Dombey was a cigar smoker, how can anyone conclude that it was the cigarette smoking that caused his cancer?
We heard a new one this morning. I think this was the first time we heard it. If Mr.
Dombey was smoking two to three packs a day, and six cigars a day, there wouldn't be enough time in the day to do that.
I think you know the flaw in that, is that Mr. Dombey wasn't smoking two to three packs of cigarettes a day. He said 20-plus. 20 is a
pack. So he's smoking just more than a pack.
He wasn't smoking two to three packs.
Every time you heard somebody say that, they get confronted with what Mr. Dombey said long before a lawsuit was filed, that, yes, what he told his doctors was one pack or a pack and a half a day.
And so this is information coming from Mr. Dombey in 1971, before anybody ever dreamed of filing a lawsuit. This is the only evidence we have from his mouth or from his pen about how many cigars he smoked.
Now, this business about was it -- did he smoke six cigars a day his whole life? I told you in opening, we're not claiming he was smoking six cigars a day his whole life, because it doesn't matter. He may have been smoking six cigars a day in 1971, and maybe for some period before and maybe some period after, but the important point is that he was smoking cigars throughout his life, she smoked them on a regular basis, and that cigar smoking is a risk factor for the type of cancer the Plaintiff claims he has.
And so if we try to figure out, where does
everybody agree, everybody agrees he smoked cigars. Everybody agrees he smoked cigars throughout his life. That's what his daughter Bonnie said. She was the one who was read to you.
And Plaintiffs own expert, Dr. Soloway, agreed that cigar smoking can cause cancer, including bladder cancer.
That's all undisputed. It comes from their own witnesses.
And so what is -- you saw this during Dr. Soloway's testimony, but this is what the National Cancer Institute says about cigars:
That some premium cigars contain the tobacco equivalent of an entire pack of cigarettes.
And you heard from Dr. Soloway: Yeah, if Mr. Dombey was smoking six cigars a day, that's like smoking six packs of cigarettes a day. If he's smoking one to two cigars a day, that's like smoking one to two packs of cigarettes a day. That's the equivalent or even more than he was smoking cigarettes.
Now, the National Cancer Institute also says that cigar smoking has higher concentrations of toxins than cigarette smoke.
You heard about nitrosamines when Dr. Proctor was here. That's what they're talking about, too.
Of course, cigar smoking causes lung, upper airway, digestive track and bladder cancer. That's not from me; that's from the National Cancer Institute.
Now, another issue that kept popping up, and you heard about it already, Mr. Dombey wasn't inhaling his cigars. He wasn't inhaling his cigars. They asked the family members that.
I ask you, would they really know whether he was inhaling? And it was so long ago, why would they bother to remember it? Whether he was inhaling or not, it doesn't really matter.
Let me back up. You heard Dr. Soloway, the way those carcinogens get into the bladder and the ureter is they go in the bloodstream and the kidneys filter the carcinogens and chemicals out of the blood into the urine, then the chemicals go into the ureter and bladder.
So when Dr. Goldman was here, you know, he studied cigars. And he said people don't have to inhale the smoke to get the chemicals into
the bloodstream because cigar smoke gets absorbed in your mouth, into your bloodstream. And where does it go? It goes in the same place as the cigarette smoke goes. It goes in your ureter and bladder, through the kidneys. That's what their own expert, Dr. Goldman, said.
But on this issue of inhalation, whether Mr. Dombey inhaled the cigar smoke, you heard from Dr. Goldman that most cigarette smokers who later smoke cigars inhale, and that he believes, based upon his research, that Mr. Dombey probably inhaled the smoke. That's their own expert.
And he also said: But you can't really trust family member accounts because often, when people smoke cigars, they tell people, I don't inhale. They say, I don't inhale. They don't want their relatives on their back: Hey, the cigar smoking is going to cause lung cancer. You have got to quit.
So this case is about bladder cancer, not lung cancer. And we know from their expert that the carcinogens from the cigar smoke make it to the urinary tract.
Now, again, the Plaintiffs claim here, what they have to prove is that Mr. Dombey's cancer was caused by cigarette smoking. But even their own expert, Dr. Soloway, could not rule out cigars as the cause.
This is what Dr. Soloway said. This is, again, after he's changed his testimony, after he had those meetings with the Plaintiff's lawyers and paying them $750 an hour. This is his testimony.
Do you believe that Mr. Dombey's cigar smoking was a sufficient cause of his cancer and death? That is, that the cigars by themselves could have caused his cancer and death?
"ANSWER: They could have. They could have.
They want you to believe it's the cigarettes, but their own expert admits it could have been the cigars. And they have the burden of proof, we don't.
Now, cigar smoking is just one of the risk factors I want to talk about. The next one is kidney and ureter stones, because you have seen evidence on that, and you have heard about
Mr. Dombey's extensive and very serious history and ureter stones.
And it turns out from the research you saw during the cross-examination of Dr. Soloway that kidney and ureter stones are actually a larger risk factor for cancer in the urinary tract than is cigarette smoking.
I will show you that in a minute, what we showed during Dr. Soloway's cross-examination. It has to do with the relative risks of kidney stones and ureter stones versus smoking.
And I'm also going to talk about Mr. Dombey's long history with kidney and ureter stones.
Let me jump right into the science on this. This is what you saw. You saw this exact part when we were cross-examining Dr. Soloway.
This is from the Journal of the National Cancer Institute. Dr. Soloway said this is the most reputable journal on cancer in the United States. It's very prestigious. The articles published in here are reviewed by experts in the field. Dr. Soloway reviews articles. And if they make it through that process, they get
published.
Let me stop here because you heard something: Well, this was a population of people in Sweden.
This isn't the Swedish Journal of the National Cancer Institute that it's published in. This is the United States Journal of the National Cancer Institute. That is what this is published in.
And you see here at the top, there is a reference at the top, if you can see it, SIR.
That's this relative risk thing.
And what this is saying, and you heard this from Dr. Soloway, is that people who have had a history of stones in the kidney or ureter, which is Mr. Dombey, have a 5.3 greater chance -- 5.3 times greater chance of later getting renal, pelvis, ureter cancer than somebody without that history. That is the National Cancer Institute's publication saying that.
They also say that the majority of these tumors were of the transitional cell type.
That's the same kind of cancer Mr. Dombey had.
And that kidney or ureter stones were
located on the same side of the body as the tumors. In other words, if you get the stones on your left side, that's where the cancer is going to show up later on. That's linked to having a prior history of stones.
Now, so what about Mr. Dombey? How does he compare to his research?
Oh, I said the relative risk is higher for kidney and ureter stones. It's 5.3. For smoking, it's between 2 and 4.
So this is a bigger risk factor for Mr. Dombey than smoking is.
Well, we know from Mr. Dombey's medical records he had two kidney or ureter stones in 1968. That's the blurry handwriting on there.
1968,	two stones.
We also know that Mr. Dombey had a very serious case of kidney and ureter stones in 1975 and 1976.
This is his absence record from Kodak.
And on November 26th, 1975, he started missing work for calc., that is stone, kidney, ureter.
He missed 41 days of work because he had surgery.
This is the episode where Mrs. Dombey said
he was in so much pain at home that they had to call 911 and take him to the emergency room. That's how bad it was.
And they took him to the hospital, and they tried to treat it with medication, but it didn't work. So they had to take him and operate on him. He was in the hospital for nine days. It was a very invasive process, very serious issue.
The important point, besides the fact that he had the stones, is where they were. This is a little blurry, but beneath the date it says, left -- left renal calculi.
So he had the stones in the same place where he later got cancer, in the left side of his body, the left ureter.
Then, of course, in 1995, when he goes in and ultimately is diagnosed with cancer, he again has kidney stones, and it is again on the left side, the same side the cancer was.
So were the ureter and kidney stones the cause of his cancer in his urinary tract?
There is no way to know.
That is the point of all of this. He had so many risk factors, there's no way to say it
was cigarette smoking, cigar smoking or the stones.
But they have to prove it was the cigarette smoking, and they haven't even come close to doing that. The most likely explanation is this long history he had of kidney and ureter stones, because look at how his history compares to the research we saw earlier.
He had that long history of stones. He had the same type of cancer that is linked to the stones in the research, transitional cell cancer. His cancer was on the same side of his urinary tract where he had his stones, on the left side, just like the research indicates that was published in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute.
So if you are looking at what is most likely, this is most likely. It is the highest risk factor. But the point is, I'm not trying to prove to you this was the cause, because I don't have the burden of proof.
My point is, the Plaintiff can't possibly prove to you it was cigarette smoking, when he had all of these other risk factors, and they
haven't met their burden of proof.
So that is -- this is what, really, the definition is here, as to how you figure out whether cigarettes was a legal cause. And this refers to the addiction to cigarettes. If you look at the bottom, that is the important point.
I'm going to substitute cigarettes for addiction, because they have to go beyond proving it was the cigarettes; they have to prove it was the addiction. But they don't even get out of the gate if they don't prove it was the cigarettes.
So but for his cigarette smoking, bladder cancer would not have occurred. What does that mean? It means that Mr. Dombey, if he had not smoked cigarettes, he would not have gotten bladder cancer.
That is what they have to prove to you.
They have to prove -- they have to have somebody come in and say, an expert, if he didn't smoke, he never would have gotten bladder cancer. That's what they have to prove.
Who said that? Nobody.
In fact, I asked Dr. Soloway whether he could say it. I don't need him to say it. We don't need him to say it; the Plaintiffs need him to say it. I asked him. I asked him four different times. These are the last two.
I asked him if he could offer the opinion but for cigarette smoking, Mr. Dombey would not have gotten bladder cancer.
He had not answered the question straight the first two times. He said: I prefer leaving it exactly what I said.
And I asked him: You're the able to answer any question directly?
I answered the best I can.
The Plaintiffs needed him to answer that question directly to prove their case. And his failure to do so, in fact, his refusal to answer my question, tells you all you need to know about whether they have proved that cigarette smoking was the cause, and they didn't. Their expert wasn't even willing to offer the opinion.
So when you get to this question 1 on the verdict form, the answer is no. You check no, you sign it, and we are done.
Now, unfortunately, I told you four reasons, not just one, so I have to keep going, because I don't know which one or ones you are going to find persuasive. You only need to find one persuasive.
The second is Mr. Dombey could have quit smoking, if he had wanted to.
I talked about this earlier. But Mr. Dombey was always capable of quitting smoking. But he didn't want to quit. He didn't want to quit. He wasn't interested in quitting until the late '80s/early '90s. It was his choice to smoke, and he had the right to do that. But it is also his obligation to be responsible for his choices.
Now, Plaintiff had the burden of coming in and proving to you that Mr. Dombey was addicted, that he was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes.
What was their evidence of it? Well, the only testimony that you heard on that was from Dr. Goldman. I'm betting you remember Dr. Goldman. He was paid $600 an hour. He has no expertise in addiction. He's a pulmonologist. He's never researched
addiction. He's never published on addiction.
He's not Board certified in addiction.
You remember his simple definition for addiction, that almost everyone who smokes half a pack a day for a year is addicted. It's as simple as that. You smoke half a pack a year, you're addicted. That's why he said Mr. Dombey is addicted. It's that simple in his mind.
Now, Dr. Goldman has testified and been a paid expert in 35, I think it was, tobacco cases where he comes in and testifies. And in every case in which he testifies, he always says 100 percent of the time that the smoker is addicted.
The fact is, Dr. Goldman did not need to know anything about Mr. Dombey to come here and testify that he was addicted. That was going to happen anyway.
The Judge is not going to give you an instruction on the definition of addiction.
The Plaintiff is going to have to prove that to you. They are going to have to prove to you what addiction means and whether Mr. Dombey meets that standard. And the only evidence they brought to you is this simple definition
from Dr. Goldman, who is not an expert, and he says everyone is addicted.
It will be up to you to evaluate the credibility of Dr. Goldman's testimony. You have the right to just completely reject it if you don't believe it. If you don't accept it, you reject it, you check that box no, they haven't proven he's addicted.
Now, just keep this in mind, too, because you have paid experts who say the same thing at every trial. Even Dr. Goldman admitted that not a single one of Mr. Dombey's treating physicians ever wrote in a medical record that said he was addicted.
There is no evidence that Mr. Dombey's own treating doctors, who were not hired for this lawsuit, ever diagnosed him as being addicted.
Now, whether he's addicted or not, the more important point is that he could have quit smoking. And you know from the evidence that 50 million Americans, these are people that are alive today, have quit smoking. 30 million Americans quit smoking during this time period Mr. Dombey is smoking, 1964 to 1979. That is a 15-year period in which 2 million Americans
quit smoking every year.
They all were smoking the same type of commercial cigarettes Mr. Dombey was smoking. There was nothing preventing Mr. Dombey from being one of them except Mr. Dombey himself.
I've been saying Mr. Dombey could have quit smoking, and the evidence shows that, but Plaintiff agrees, this is one of the stipulations we read this morning, this is something Plaintiff agrees to: That Mr. Dombey's acts or omissions related to the frequency and duration of his efforts to quit smoking were a partial proximate cause of this injuries.
What that means, the reason why his failure to try harder to quit was a cause of his injuries, because it means that he could have quit smoking.
If Mr. Dombey couldn't have quite -- if he could not have quit no matter how hard he tried, then the failure to quit would not be a cause of his injury.
It's only a cause of his injury if he could have tried harder and could have succeeded.
So when Plaintiff admits to this, it's an admission that Mr. Dombey not only could have tried harder, but that if he tried harder, he would have quit.
Now, I talked earlier about the quit attempts that Mrs. Dombey described in her testimony, and the one that she left out, because you asked her, about when Mr. Dombey quit smoking in December 1995.
Keep in mind that Mr. Dombey's daughters did not remember any of those quit attempts that Mrs. Dombey described. In fact, they don't remember him ever trying to quit smoking while they lived at home.
Alyse, the youngest, left in 1988 to go to college. So they don't remember any quit attempts up until 1988. Naomi did remember that he quit smoking for two or three months in 1987, after she was out of the house. So there is that. Of course, he quit for five months in 1990, and quit in 1995.
This right here -- excuse me a minute here. This right here is the medical record showing that he quit smoking for five months in 1990. And this is another one of these medical
records that they are trying as hard as they can to run away from.
Why? Because they know that if he quit smoking for five months in 1990, it destroys their addiction case. If he could quit then, after smoking for what? 35 or 40 years, he could have quit any time before then.
So they bring in Dr. Goldman, who calls Mr. Dombey a liar, because they don't want you to believe this record.
Now, this could have been the same quit attempt and successful quit attempt that Naomi described in 1987. Remember, she said she remembers talking to her dad, that he was so proud of himself for quitting smoking for months. Maybe she was just off by three years, or maybe they were two separate quit attempts.
The point is, he quit for five months.
Remember, the only indication we have of him starting smoking again is from a 1995 medical record. So he could have quit for longer, but there are no medical records for in between. So it's not like you have a series of medical records saying he's a nonsmoker for five years. We just don't know.
So they want you to believe that Mr. Dombey was lying to his doctors when he provided this information. And there's no reason why Mr. Dombey would have been lying to his doctors. He had no idea there would be a lawsuit filed years later, right? He's just telling his doctors what the information is they need to treat him.
He told his doctors -- we have medical records from 1955 to 1995, where he tells his doctors he's smoking cigarettes and cigars.
Why, on this one occasion, would he decided to lie to his doctors?
He has a very specific date when he quit,
July 1st, 1990. Why would he make up a date when he quit smoking?
Mr. Dombey is also checking himself in here for inpatient care. And remember,
Mrs. Dombey said, he might have there been for maybe a couple of weeks. She couldn't exactly know. But he knew he was going to be there for a matter of days, at least. And would he really think he could fool his doctors by telling them he was a non-smoker, when he's in the hospital, stuck there for a few days,
presumably having to go outside to smoke? It's absurd.
If Mr. Dombey really, really believed that the dangers of smoking had been not proven, why would he have had a reason to lie to his doctors about his smoking in the first place?
I'm going to talk more about that "not proving" claim probably after lunch. But if he really thought the risks were not proven, why lie to your doctors about it? It doesn't make any sense.
The reason why Plaintiffs want to get away from this record is because it shows that Mr. Dombey was capable of quitting when he wanted to.
Dr. Goldman admitted this on cross-examination. After two or three days, much less five months, two to three days, all the nicotine would have been out of his system. After two to three weeks, all the withdrawal effects would have been gone.
Here, we're five months out. All of that stuff is a distant memory, yet at some point,
Mr. Dombey chooses to go back to smoking.
And when he does, his eyes are wide open.
He knows the risks. And now he knows what it takes to quit. He still decides he wants to smoke because he wants to smoke.
So this record really tells you all you need to know about the case. Mr. Dombey had full information, he could quit smoking, and with full information, after quitting, he went back to smoking because that's what he wanted to do. That's why they want you to think Mr. Dombey was lying.
Now, you learned during your questioning of Mrs. Dombey that there was this fourth quit attempt that she knew about, but she didn't tell you about on direct or cross-examination.
And that's this quit attempt when he did quit smoking in 1995. One of you asked the question: Did he quit smoking after he was diagnosed and left the hospital on December 24th, 1995?
The answer is yes. So he obviously was not smoking when he had cancer.
And there's a reason again they didn't tell you about this quit attempt when Mrs. Dombey testified when they asked her questions or I did, and you had to figure it
out for yourselves, and that's because
Mr. Dombey was capable of quitting smoking when
he wanted to.
In fact, this is a history from before his cancer diagnosis, earlier in December.
December 14th, 1995: Further history is that of heavy smoking until five days prior to the visit, when he stopped.
Now, obviously, Mr. Dombey was not feeling well at this point in time, and maybe that's why he stopped smoking. But the point is, he could stop and he did stop.
So why is it that they are trying to persuade you that he could not stop smoking when he could?
Well, it's because, if I could go to my next point here, if Mr. Dombey could stop smoking, was able to stop smoking, and could have stopped earlier any time he wanted, then Mr. Dombey's choice to smoke, not his addiction, but his choice to smoke and not to quit, that was the legal cause of his cancer.
Now, remember, question 1 asks you, they have to prove not only addiction, but that the addiction was so strong, so strong, that it had
to be the legal cause of Mr. Dombey's cancer.
That's how strong the addiction has to be.
So strong that it took away his free will to quit smoking. So strong that when he became addicted, if he was addicted, his fate was sealed, there's nothing he could do about it, he no longer had the choice to quit, if that's what he wanted to do.
From the evidence, it's obvious,
Mr. Dombey's fate was not sealed. He was not hopefully addicted. He could quit and did quit when he wanted to.
And what they know is that Mr. Dombey, if he could quit in 1987 for two to three months, if he could quit in 1990 for five months, if he could quit in December of 1995, he could have quit smoking in the early 1950s, when all the information was out there about smoking and lung cancer.
But he didn't want to quit. And if Mr. Dombey could have -- if he quit smoking in 1987, 1990, and 1995, he could have quit smoking in 1964, when the Surgeon General's Report came out.
If he could quit smoking in 1987, 1990 and
1995, he could have quit in 1966, when the warnings went on the packs.
If he could quit in 1987, 1990 and 1995, he could have quit in 1969, when his father was diagnosed with lung cancer that the family blamed on smoking.
You remember Mr. Dombey's sister quit smoking after their father was diagnosed with lung cancer. It wasn't easy, she said, but she did it. She was smoking for 20 years and was up to two packs a day. Her father dies of lung cancer. It was a powerful message. She quit.
Mr. Dombey's father also had quit smoking, remember, but he didn't quit in enough time to avoid getting lung cancer.
If Mr. Dombey quit smoking in 1987, 1990 and 1995, he could have quit any time in the 1970s or 1980s, when his wife and his daughters were saying, "Dad, smoking is bad for you. You might get cancer from it. You should quit smoking."
He could have done it then, too, if he wanted to. But he didn't want to quit until the late '80s or early 1990s, when he did quit.
The only person who could make Mr. Dombey
quit smoking was Mr. Dombey. That is the only person who could have made him quit smoking. That's why it's Mr. Dombey's choice to smoke. That was the legal cause of his cancer, even if you find he was addicted.
He had the choice and the ability to quit, and his addiction was not the legal cause. His own decisions and choices were the legal cause.
Now, the last of -- we are still on question 1. I promise you, the other questions aren't going to take as long. I'd be up here all day.
The fourth reason why question 1 should be a no is Plaintiff did not prove that Mr. Dombey's cancer started in his bladder.
And because that is directly related to question 2 on the verdict form, I'm going to put the two together and discuss them in that context.
After I have a sip of water.
This question two asks whether -- whoops.
This is how I think you ought to fill out the question on here. It should be a no. As I said earlier, if you check no, you sign the form and we are done.
You can do it for any one of the reasons I discussed. You don't have to believe them all.
If there is one thing Plaintiff didn't prove, that is enough.
So the second question is: Was bladder cancer a legal cause of Daniel Dombey's death?
And all their proof on this one is all on Dr. Soloway. If you don't believe Dr. Soloway, you are not persuaded by his changed testimony, then the answer to this question is no.
I'm going to go through and talk to you about why you should answer this one no as well.
There's really two reasons. One is they did not prove that the cancer started in Mr. Dombey's bladder.
You remember there were tumors in the ureter and tumors in the bladder. There was a statement this morning that the tumor in the ureter was really in the bladder. Nobody said that. Dr. Soloway admitted there were two separate tumors, one in the ureter and one in the bladder.
Okay. So there's two tumors. Everybody until this morning agreed on that: One in the
ureter and one in the bladder.
What they have to prove is that the cancer started in the bladder and not in the ureter, because if it started in the ureter and then spread to the bladder, that is ureter cancer, it's not bladder cancer.
They also have to prove that the bladder cancer was the cause of his death. And what that means, they have to prove the bladder tumor escaped from the bladder -- we're going to talk about that -- got into Mr. Dombey's system, and spread up to his lymph nodes in his chest and kidneys, which are what killed him. That's what they have to prove to you.
So I'm going to go back to what I did in opening and show you this. Do the little anatomy, if we can.
I know you know this by now, but I have to do this just to make sure we're all on the same page.
You have the kidneys up here. Right here is the renal pelvis that collects the urine from the kidneys. It goes down the two ureters, these long yellow tubes, and that's the bladder.
You remember, this is that thick muscle wall of the bladder. That's what controls the bladder. It holds it if you have to go. Let it out if you have to let it out, okay?
And so that's the anatomy. Here's what we know. This is what's undisputed. Undisputed, Mr. Dombey died of cancer. Take that off the table. No dispute about it.
Undisputed that what caused Mr. Dombey's death was the spreading of the cancer to the kidneys and up here to the lymph nodes around the aorta. That's what caused his death.
It is also undisputed that the cancer in the lymph nodes did not start there. It spread from somewhere else.
Also undisputed is that it spread from somewhere in the urinary tract.
You know what the dispute is: Well, where did it come from?
What they have to prove to you is that it spread from his bladder, it got through this thick muscle wall and spread across his body.
And you know, the other candidate is the tumor in the ureter, because that tumor could have gotten out of the ureter and spread from
there and caused his death. So that's really the issue.
And this all rests on Dr. Soloway from the Plaintiff's perspective, because his testimony is the only evidence that they have on this issue.
You saw this during opening as well. You remember I said you would see three types of evidence on this issue? You would see the medical records that were written by Mr. Dombey's treating physicians. These are folks that weren't getting paid $750 an hour. They were just getting paid their normal rate, not to testify, but to try to help the man; try to find out where the cancer was, whether it had spread, and where it came from.
And you have Dr. Soloway's testimony. His first version of his testimony under oath is in his deposition in April. And then you have when Dr. Soloway, after he met twice with the Plaintiff's attorneys, you have his changed testimony that he gave for trial.
So let me start with what his doctors said back here. Again, there's no thought of a lawsuit back then. So there's no incentive for
anyone to change their testimony based on what might be good for a lawsuit.
You know, Mr. Dombey's doctors, they did all sorts of procedures on him, where they put a scope and camera into the bladder, looked around and took samples.
They did an operation, where they looked inside his body to see where the tumors were. They did visual of that.
They did a lot of things, and they sent samples from the tumors to a pathologist, to look at them under the slide. And he was looking to see where did the cancer start and has it spread.
And you have seen the medical records on this. The pathologist looked at those slides and he said the tumors -- he's looking at the slides in the lymph nodes, and he's trying to figure out, where did they come from? He said they are consistent with, but not exclusively diagnostic, of uroepithelial origin.
Uroepithelial is one of those synonyms for urinary tract.
So he's saying that tumors in the lymph nodes is what ultimately killed Mr. Dombey.
They were consistent with coming from somewhere
in the urinary tract, but he couldn't say
where.
In fact, he wrote that at the bottom here.
He says that the characteristics of the tumors are insufficient to make a definitive conclusion about the site of primary origin.
So, again, he's saying he thinks they started in the urinary tract, but he can't say where.
Critically, he doesn't say what Plaintiff is claiming in this case. He doesn't say that the cancer started in Mr. Dombey's bladder. He doesn't say what they would need him to say.
So that's where it is with Mr. Dombey's treating physicians. I asked Dr. Soloway about this on the videotape. You remember Dr.
Soloway admitted that there's no statement in the medical records from Mr. Dombey's doctors that the cancer originated in the bladder as opposed to the ureter.
I asked him that, because you could see it in the medical records, but it always helps when you have their own expert admitting it.
He says there is no statement, that's correct.
So right here, before there's a lawsuit, there is no evidence that the cancer started and spread from his bladder.
Now, then there's a lawsuit, and they hire Dr. Soloway. And he's -- he's deposed on April 2nd of this year. He's under oath. You know all of that.
And what does he say? He says the same thing the doctor said: I think it started somewhere in the urinary tract, but I can't say where.
He can't say what the Plaintiff is claiming either, that it started specifically in the bladder, which is what they have to prove.
And so, he changed his testimony, so we read him his deposition testimony. And you heard this probably six different times, but he said -- he agreed that the cancer was found in the lymph nodes, that it originated somewhere in the urinary system, but exactly where, you cannot say.
"ANSWER: That's what I said.
"Was that your deposition testimony?
"Yes. You read this correctly."
He's admitting in his deposition, under oath, before those two meetings with Plaintiff's lawyers, he could not say what they needed him to say.
And you know what happens next? He meets with the lawyers once, he meets with them again, and they start talking about this, the issue of where the cancer started.
And lo and behold, after these meetings, he comes to this videotaped trial testimony and says exactly what they would need him to say.
He says: Well, I've done some thinking.
It's true, I don't have any new evidence. It's true, I don't have any new medical records.
It's true, I didn't pick up the telephone and call Mr. Dombey's treating doctors to see if, together, we could figure out where the cancer started. I didn't do any of that. All I did was meet with the Plaintiff's lawyers, and I did some thinking, and lo and behold, now I think it's most likely that the cancer started in the bladder.
That's what he said to you, and they were paying $750 an hour for his original testimony, and his changed testimony.
That is their evidence. That is their evidence on this question of whether Mr. Dombey's cancer, whether his bladder cancer was a cause of his death.
If you think that's a little too suspicious, that it's not credible, you disregard it entirely. Check that box no, if you get to it.
But if you want to entertain Dr. Soloway's changed testimony and his theory, let's talk about it, because what you know from the evidence is Dr. Soloway's changed testimony is just completely wrong.
It's wrong because Dr. Soloway's theory is that the cancer, the tumor in the bladder -remember, he says he thinks it broke through that muscle wall of the bladder. That's his whole theory. That's the foundation for it.
If that's gone, his testimony is garbage. He says that tumor broke through the muscle wall.
Well, Mr. Dombey's doctors did a biopsy of the tumor. They don't just take pieces of the tumor, they take pieces of the tissue surrounding the tumor, because they want to know, has this tumor broken through the muscle
wall of the bladder, as it happens? They want to know for the same reason that Dr. Soloway wants to know. They want to know, how much do we have to worry about this bladder tumor? Has it spread? Has it gotten through that thick muscle wall?
And the answer is no. They did the biopsy. They saw that the tumor went into the superficial lamina propria. That's the first layer.
Then they said, did it go into the muscle wall? Did it get through the muscle wall and spread through the body? There is no invasion into the muscularis mucosa or deep muscle.
That's the beginning of the end of Dr.
Soloway's changed theory. His theory depends on that tumor getting through that muscle wall.
Mr. Dombey's own doctors, not being paid for their testimony, said it didn't happen. It did not happen.
In case there's any doubt about whether he changed his testimony, this is what he said.
"Are you changing that testimony today?"
"I'm slightly altering the testimony, that's correct."
That may be the understatement of the case. He went from saying he couldn't tell where it started to saying exactly what they needed him to say. That's a huge change in his testimony.
Now, how does the evidence stack up? I submit to you already the answer ought to be no to that question 2 based on everything I've already said.
But where does the evidence stack up on whether the cancer started in or spread from the bladder versus the ureter?
Well, there was a tumor in the bladder, and we talked about Dr. Soloway's changed testimony, which is completely contradicted by the medical records.
And Mr. Kaiser this morning mentioned something about the death certificate.
It hadn't played a big role in the case.
You may have seen it during Dr. Soloway's testimony.
This is what the Judge told you about the death certificate: A death certificate is not prima facie proof of the cause of death, nor does it create any conclusive proof of any fact
related to the cause of death.
You may remember Dr. Soloway told you that the death certificate in this case was filled out by a Dr. Kline who had no role in the treatment of Mr. Dombey or his care.
And so maybe that's the reason why you haven't seen the death certificate. But, in any event, it doesn't prove anything.
So there's the proof that it came from the bladder. The only proof is there was a tumor in the bladder. Maybe if that's the only tumor, maybe that's enough. But it wasn't the only tumor, because there was a tumor in the ureter.
So without me saying any more right now, it's completely even-steven as to where the source of the cancer was, because all we have right now is the tumor in the ureter and a tumor in the bladder. And when it's even-steven -- I couldn't think of a better expression -- but when it's completely even, we win, because they have the burden of proof.
That alone is the reason to check it no.
But in case you want some confidence that it didn't come from the bladder, here are all
the reasons why it probably came from the ureter. Again, I don't have to prove this to you. They have to prove to you that it came from the bladder.
In addition to the tumor in the ureter, there was no muscle invasion in the bladder.
And so the cancer had to come from somewhere. If it didn't come from the bladder, that points to the ureter.
Ureter cancer spreads more easily. Dr. Soloway testified on this. He said the ureter has a thinner lining, and so a tumor in the ureter much more easily spreads throughout the body than a tumor in the bladder, because the bladder has that thick muscle wall.
We know that the ureter tumor spread into the bladder, and maybe this is what Mr. Kaiser was talking about, because Dr. Soloway was talking about the tumor in the ureter peeking into the bladder.
So already we have the tumor and the ureter moving into a different part of the body, which points to it as the source of the cancer and also the source of the spreading.
Finally, if we go back to the kidney and
ureter stones, the specific type of cancer that they are a large risk factor for is ureter cancer. Ureter cancer
So given Mr. Dombey's history, it's much more likely he had ureter cancer, given his history of kidney stones. And you have the same -- again, you have the same exact cell type that's linked to the kidney stones and ureter stones. And the cancer shows up later in life on the exact -- in the exact spot, in the left ureter, where he had the stones.
So it all fits here that it's not bladder cancer. But it's their burden to prove it, and they haven't even come close.
Even Dr. Soloway, even Dr. Soloway, after he changed his testimony, was cross-examined, and then they're asking him questions on redirect. I want to look at the one on the bottom. I'm going to get there. That's the important part here.
Dr. Soloway admitted, after changing his testimony: Could the cancer have come from a cancer only in this tube, meaning the ureter?
Is it possible?
Yes, the ureter is a possibility. Then he
makes statements about the ureter might be where it spread from.
The key is the bottom part. This wasn't me asking him questions. This was Plaintiff in redirect: "And I still can't prove it."
They have to prove it. They have to prove it came from the bladder. In their own expert's words: "I still can't prove it."
What was Dr. Soloway telling you, if he couldn't prove it?
He also admitted this: That he was just guessing. He said it -- he admitted it's an educated guess because he just doesn't have the information he would need.
Now, maybe if he was the treating physician and had looked in Mr. Dombey's abdomen and looked at the pathology, maybe he could have told you what it was. But he didn't have that information, and he admits he's guessing.
And you heard from the Judge that you can't decide the claims in favor of Plaintiff based on guesses. Guesses aren't enough.
Isn't that only fair, that if you're coming in and asking for, what was it, 6 or 12,
some other number, million dollars, that you have to do more than hire somebody that comes in and guesses?
A guess is not enough, and the Judge has told you that.
So the only answer to question 2 is no.
They have not even come close to proving that bladder cancer was the cause of his death.
I don't know how much further you want me to go, your Honor.
THE COURT: Is this a good place?
MR. McCARTER: It is a good place.
THE COURT: Wes, is the lunch here?
THE BAILIFF: Yes, sir.
THE COURT: Let's do that. Let's pause here, folks. We are going to take our lunch break. If you all want to go out a little while, you can, but I'm going to bring your lunch back there. I need to make sure that you -- I know you're all anxious. Give me one more second.
You can't discuss this case during the lunch hour. There will be a temptation to do that.
You saw the guy, A-Rod, got thrown at by
the Boston Red Sox yesterday? Well, you can talk that for about a minute. Whether that was intentional or not, and the other 29 minutes talk about something else.
Don't discuss the case during the lunch hour. We will bring your lunch back. We will be in recess until 1:00.
I have to meet the lawyers for lunch. I have about an hour left before we get to the case. Don't discuss it. Have a good lunch, everyone.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
MR. McCARTER: I'm now on -- I talked
about questions 1 and 2. I'm now on question 3 on the verdict form, and my promise is it will be faster.
You saw these questions earlier, and this is where you get separate questions for Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds.
And I'm going to talk to you about Philip Morris specifically. I can make the same argument I'm going to make for Mr. Walker and his client, but Mr. Walker is going to do that.
So this question 3 is: Is smoking cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris USA a legal cause of Daniel Dombey's death?
And like the other questions, you can think of this in terms of: Has Plaintiff proven that cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris USA was a legal cause of Daniel Dombey's death? Because they have the burden of proof on all of these questions.
Now, on this particular question, when you see Philip Morris USA, you know that the only Philip Morris brand that Mr. Dombey smoked was Marlboro.
So it's easier to think about it, I submit, it's certainly easier to talk about it
if I talked about Marlboro rather than cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris USA.
So that's what I'm going to do.
You will see there are two reasons why the answers to this question should be no. That's because Marlboros were not a legal cause of Mr. Dombey's cancer, and Mr. Dombey would have gotten cancer regardless of whether he ever smoked Marlboro.
I'm going to talk about these in more detail, but before I get into that, let me step back a little bit because I think it is helpful to orient on when it was and how old Mr. Dombey was and what information was out there when he started smoking Marlboro in 1969.
And so by the time Mr. Dombey starts smoking Marlboro in 1969, he's in his late 30s, or 40s. Depending on when he started. If it's
1969,	it's late 30s. If it's later, he's in his 40s.
By the time, there were warnings on every pack of cigarettes. You know that from the evidence in this case.
By 1969, Mr. Dombey had been smoking for
25	years. And according to Plaintiff,
according to Plaintiffs expert, Dr. Goldman, if he was addicted, he was already addicted long before then. In fact, they say he was addicted to cigarettes when he was smoking cigarettes in Argentina.
That brings me to a very important instruction: The Plaintiff is not claiming that Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds has any responsibility for Daniel Dombey smoking that occurred before he moved to the United States.
And if they are right, if Dr. Goldman's right that he got addicted before he moved to the United States, that means they are not claiming that we or RJ Reynolds had anything to do with his getting addicted, because we had nothing to do with his smoking in Argentina.
In addition, as I mentioned, every pack of Marlboro cigarettes he smoked carried one of these warnings. They were in the US and in Puerto Rico.
And the Judge has instructed that after July 1st, 1969 -- remember, this is right around when they say he started smoking Marlboro -- the Defendants had no obligation to place any additional warnings on the cigarette
packages.
So that instruction also applies to all Marlboro cigarettes he smoked.
Now, back to this sort of contextual slide, because the issue here is in the title, and that is whether Marlboros -- whether they proved that Marlboro cigarettes were a legal cause of his cancer. And to answer this question, of course, you have to know what "legal cause" means. And you get an instruction on this.
And this is a long instruction, but the bottom is the important part. And it is like the one we saw earlier. What they have to prove is that but for smoking Marlboro,
Mr. Dombey's death would not have occurred.
Put differently, that Mr. Dombey would not have gotten cancer if only he had not smoked Marlboro cigarettes. That's what they have to prove.
You didn't hear any witness come in and tell you if only he had not smoked Marlboro cigarettes, he would not have gotten cancer.
That was their burden to produce that evidence for you, and they didn't do it.
If you want to see what they really had to prove, you have to use your imagination a little bit, because you have to imagine a world in which Mr. Dombey doesn't smoke Marlboro, but everything in his life is otherwise as it would have been.
It's sort of like the movie Back to the Future, where you go back in time, in a time machine, and if you change something in the past, then maybe the future will change.
But what you're going to see here is if you change something in the past, and he doesn't smoke Marlboro, nothing in the future changes. He still winds up getting cancer.
So let's do a little journey back in time.
Let's go back to 1945 or so when he started smoking in Argentina.
We know that in the world in which he doesn't smoke Marlboro, he still starts smoking in 1945, because Philip Morris and Marlboro had nothing to do with that.
We know he still smokes for the next 25 years, just like he did in reality, because Philip Morris and Marlboro had nothing to do with that.
And he still smokes all of those cigars he smoked in his life, because Philip Morris and Marlboro had nothing to do with that.
And he still has the same risk factors for cancer, the kidney and ureter stones, because Philip Morris had nothing to do with that either.
So we get up to 1969, when he starts smoking Marlboro, and the question is: Well, if he hadn't smoked Marlboro, what would he have done?
And would he have done something different that would have put him on a different path where he doesn't get cancer?
Really, the only possibility is that -the only alternative that would have reduced his risk for cancer would have been if he quit smoking cigarettes in 1969 instead of smoking Marlboro, and quit smoking cigars, too.
So is there any evidence that if he hadn't smoked Marlboro, Mr. Dombey would have quit smoking in 1969?
And the answer is no. Because that's right around the time that he makes the production out of throwing away the cigarettes,
holds on to ashtrays and lighters, and
Mrs. Dombey says he wasn't really planning to
quit.
We know in 1969, around the time that he smoked Marlboro, that he wasn't going to quit smoking because he didn't want to quit smoking. His sister made a different choice. She quit smoking then. But he continued forward.
And he wasn't interested in quitting smoking until the late 1980s or early 1990s, when he did quit for several months at a time.
So in this scenario, if you go back and see whether anything in his life would have changed that would have made a difference, the answer is no, because he didn't want to quit at the time, he would have smoked anything else if he hadn't smoked Marlboro, or he would have smoked more cigars. Either way, he winds up in the same place. He still winds up getting cancer.
So Plaintiff has not proven to you what they needed to prove, that is, that he somehow would not have gotten cancer if he had not smoked Marlboro.
That's what they failed to prove. That's
what they had to prove.
So on this issue, question 3, the answer is no. This is another one, if you answer both questions no, it's a verdict for the defense.
You sign the bottom of the form, and we're all done.
Now, question 4, the next question on the verdict form -- these are -- I called these the reliance questions in my opening statement. They're pretty wordy. They're both very similar, so I'm going to read the first one because it's a similar concept in both of them.
Question 4 is: Did Daniel Dombey reasonably rely to his detriment on a statement made by Philip Morris and/or Reynolds after May 5th, 1982, which concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature, and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his death?
And this, also, there's a very important limitation here. Not only do they have to prove that they heard a statement from the tobacco companies, because you can't rely on something unless you heard it, they have to
prove that he relied on it, and they also have to prove, very importantly, that it is after May 5th, 1982. After May 5th, 1982.
And, again, these questions, if you make it this far on the verdict form, these questions should be no as well, because Mr. Dombey was aware of the dangers of smoking and addiction. We talked about that. You've heard about it endlessly. Every day of this trial you heard about the information he had and the type of person he was.
Mr. Dombey never relied on anything a tobacco company said or didn't say.
Again, we asked every one of their witnesses: Did Mr. Dombey ever say he heard something from the tobacco companies or relied on it? And the answer every time was no.
They had to bring you somebody who came in and answered those questions yes to meet their burden of proof, and nobody did that.
Mr. Dombey wasn't waiting to hear anything from Philip Morris or Reynolds. He had the information he needed to make the decisions he made in his life.
So what about this? What about the
cigarette advertising? Did the cigarette advertising influence Mr. Dombey to smoke?
Well, it didn't -- the cigarette advertising by these companies didn't influence him to start smoking because he started smoking in Argentina, which had nothing to do with these companies.
So he smoked for reasons that had nothing to do with Philip Morris and nothing to do with RJ Reynolds.
Also, Mr. Dombey worked as an executive in a major American company in the field of marketing and advertising. He knew how marketing and advertising worked. He was no stranger to it.
Do you remember Ms. Arnold asked Alyse: Well, was your father influenced by cigarette advertising? And her answer was: No, he wasn't influenced by cigarette advertising. He was intelligent.
That's what she said.
When we asked Mrs. Dombey about the advertising, she said she and Mr. Dombey joked about the cigarette ads, they joked about the Marlboro Man, and he never wanted to be like
the Marlboro Man. He didn't want to be a cowboy or move out west.
When I asked her about it in cross-examination, she started laughing, the idea was so preposterous.
The advertising had no effect on Mr. Dombey either.
What is the evidence, then, of reliance after 1982? That's where it has to be.
Now, they spent a lot of time talking and showing you a video of the CEO testimony before Congress in 1984.
I asked Mrs. Dombey about that. I said:
Did you see that testimony? Did your husband see that testimony?
She said: We never watched it. We never talked about it. And he certainly didn't rely on that testimony at all.
So that's not it.
This morning, you heard reference to filtered cigarettes and low-tar cigarettes, like that was the information he was relying upon.
When it comes to filtered cigarettes, you might remember, Mr. Sloman was asking
Mrs. Dombey about it: Did you ever talk to your husband about filtered cigarettes? She said no.
So there's no evidence that he was smoking filtered cigarettes because he was fooled or deceived in some way.
In fact, you remember when Mr. Dombey (sic) got a little worked up in his redirect examination of Mrs. Dombey and asked her again: Did he talk to you about filtered cigarettes?
And she said: The only thing he mentioned to me was that he liked the flavor of filtered and unfiltered cigarettes.
That's the only thing. Nothing about believing or smoking the cigarettes because he thought they were safe, which Plaintiff is claiming. There's nothing like that. There's no evidence in the record of it.
And they say maybe the reliance after 1982 was on low-tar or light cigarettes.
What did Mrs. Dombey say about low-tar and light cigarettes? She said he tried them maybe once. Maybe once. And she couldn't remember when it was. So it certainly wasn't -- they didn't prove it was after '82. He tried it
maybe once.
And why didn't he stick with the light cigarettes? Because they didn't give him the flavor he wanted.
So if they're right, and Mr. Dombey believed the low-tar cigarettes were safer, and there is no evidence that he did, but if he
did,	he was choosing between a cigarette he believed was safer, was healthier, and one that he liked the flavor more of.
And what did Mr. Dombey do? He chose flavor over health.
If that was the choice he was making, he chose flavor over health. That was his decision. He wasn't willing to smoke a low-tar cigarette. He tried them maybe once
So there is no evidence that Mr. Dombey relied on anything the tobacco companies ever said, that he heard it. There is just completely no evidence on that
Now, this issue is wrapped up on -- I talked about this earlier. I'm going to skip this because you've heard enough about Mr. Dombey and the information he got on the health risks of smoking.
But what they're harping on here is this idea that Mr. Dombey, despite being so well educated, so well-read, a smart, sophisticated businessman, that somehow he believed that the dangers of smoking had not been proven.
That's what you heard from Mrs. Dombey. You heard that from Plaintiff's counsel.
Ask yourselves this: If he really thought that it had not been proven that smoking is dangerous, why was he supposedly trying to quit smoking all the time, if he didn't think it was dangerous?
Why did he go in for those chest x-rays that you heard about? And not just that he went in for chest x-rays, but that after he got an x-ray that showed that his lungs were clear, that he picked up the phone and told his daughters: You don't have anything to worry about. My chest is clear.
Why is he doing that, if it's not proven?
Why is he sitting in the non-smoking section of restaurants to avoid other people's secondhand smoke if he thinks it's not proven?
Now, they said, this morning, he was sitting there because he was irritated by the
smoke.
You know what? I asked Mrs. Dombey. I said, he was sitting and avoiding the secondhand smoke because he was concerned about the effect it would have on his health.
He knew it was proven, he knew that smoking caused cancer, and he believed that secondhand smoke was dangerous to his health.
Why was he telling his daughter in the 1970s, when he realized she was smoking, that she shouldn't smoke if he thought it was not proven?
Why, when his daughters got on him about smoking in the 1970s and 1980s, saying, Dad, this stuff is bad for you, it can kill you, its dangerous, you should quit, if he thought it hadn't been proven, why did he say to them: I know, I know, and wave them off.
Why did he talk to his daughter Naomi about his own father's death from smoking, and the fact that he had quit smoking earlier, and say, you never know when it, meaning smoking, you know when it can get you?
Why would he say that to his daughter if he thought it was not proven?
You know from the evidence that Mr. Dombey did know that smoking was dangerous to his health. He knew it. He couldn't have missed the information. And he believed it from his actions and his statements that you've heard about in this case.
So on this issue of whether Mr. Dombey relied on a statement from the tobacco companies, on both of these questions, the answers are no across the board.
Now, if you make it to the next question, this is the question regarding the percentage of fault. And I didn't hear Plaintiffs talk about what percentage of fault they thought Mr. Dombey should bear. Maybe you will hear that after I sit down and can't respond.
But they have admitted that he bears some fault.
Now, I submit to you, Mr. Dombey is the one in charge of his decisions. He's the one who made the choices he made. The only person who could have stopped Mr. Dombey from smoking was Mr. Dombey.
For that reason, he bears 100 percent at fault, if you get this far on the verdict form.
The next question relates to this issue of damages. I don't have a complicated formula. But Plaintiffs are not seeking any damages in this case for medical expenses, they're not seeking any damages for funeral expenses, they're not seeking any money for any money they spent on Mr. Dombey when he got cancer. They're not seeking any money for any of those things.
The only thing they're asking you to award money for is pain and suffering damages. And I would submit to you on this record, on this record in this case, this is not a case that warrants any amount of damages at all.
The last question here, ladies and gentlemen, relates to punitive damages. This is where the Plaintiffs want you to come back for a second part of the trial and hear more testimony and more evidence, so they can ask you to award even more money than they have already asked you to award. That's what this is about.
And Plaintiff has to meet a higher burden of proof on this issue. It is clear and convincing evidence. It is a very high burden
of proof.
And I would submit to you that there's no evidence of anything that Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds or any other tobacco did that had any impact on Mr. Dombey. And there's certainly not any clear and convincing evidence of it.
So the answers to these questions, if you make it this far on the verdict form, also it should be no.
Now, if there are three things I could ask you to remember as you go into the jury room, it would be these: That Mr. Dombey never blamed the tobacco companies for his smoking or his cancer.
Mr. Dombey never said he felt he was treated unfairly or fooled or deceived or defrauded by the tobacco companies. He never said that to anybody.
And Mr. Dombey never asked anyone to file a lawsuit against Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds.
You know, you heard a lot about the things Mr. Dombey did to prepare Mrs. Dombey for life after he passed away. You heard how he did his taxes early. You heard him about leaving notes around the house that she was finding for
months and years afterwards, giving her instructions on how to put herself in a good position after he passed away.
But there was one note you didn't hear about. You didn't hear about Mr. Dombey ever leaving a note or a message or instructions that you should go out and file this lawsuit against these companies. He never said that, despite making all the preparations he made for his wife.
Mr. Walker follows me, and then Plaintiff gets the last word because they have the burden of proof. They get to go last. And they get to say things in their rebuttal that I don't get a chance to respond to.
You've seen it takes hearing from us to get the complete story and the full picture in this case. And so I have to ask you to act as me when you hear Plaintiff's counsel and the rebuttal closing, because I don't get to respond.
So what I would ask you to do is to ask yourselves, when you hear something, well, what would Mr. McCarter say -MR. KAISER: Objection as to what he would
respond to.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. McCARTER: Throughout this trial, you've seen that there's a second side to the story. And Plaintiff gets to go last. We don't get to respond. The Plaintiffs do get to go last, but they don't get the last word in this case. You get the last word. You get the last word on the issues that are presented to
you.
And we've asked a lot of you in this case. We've asked a lot of you to be here, pay attention, get here and to sit here, and it takes a lot of energy to listen to us speak like this, I know that, and to pay attention to us.
But there's one more thing I would like to ask you to do when you go in that jury room. One more thing I would ask you to do, and that is, return a verdict in favor of my client,
Philip Morris, and in favor of Mr. Walker's client, RJ Reynolds.
Thank you for your time and attention.



MR. WALKER: Thank you, Judge.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. Counsel, your Honor.
Mr. McCarter has given you so many good reasons to come back with a defense verdict in this case. I'm going to do my best not to cover any of that same ground over again. I think you all know what our positions are on many of these issues.
What I do want to do is just show you, again, the first -- these are the questions on the first page of the verdict form. And I want to point out two things about that.
First, with these questions, as with every other question on the verdict form, the issue you have to decide is about Daniel Dombey and not any other smoker.
And the answer to the questions on the first page should be no for both, for all of the reasons that you have heard about.
Mr. McCarter's checkmarks were red, mine are blue. Maybe it's because of the tie.
Maybe because it turns red, I don't know.
What I want to do, instead of going over that same ground again, is to make a few
additional points that are particularly important to my client, Reynolds.
And I told you at the very beginning of this trial that you wouldn't hear as much from me as you would from others; that I would be sitting over there quietly for most of the trial, and that is what I did. That is certainly what Dave did. And that when I stood up to talk, I would have less to say than some of the other lawyers did.
And I told you why that would be the case: That this case is about Daniel Dombey, but in the story of Daniel Dombey's cigarette smoking, Reynolds just didn't play a big significant role.
This is what we know about Mr. Dombey's cigarette smoking. You've heard a little bit of it. I just want to give it to you from Reynolds' perspective.
He starts smoking in Argentina. No one knows exactly why he smoked. No one is real sure what he smoked. Ms. Pearl came to the witness stand. She did her best to remember what he might have been smoking all of those years. She said it could have been
Chesterfield, which, of course, Reynolds didn't make. Philip Morris didn't make.
But more importantly, there is no evidence that any of the cigarettes he smoked in Argentina were made by either of these Defendants.
Perhaps the most important thing you need to know about Argentina is the instruction that you'll get from the Judge, that there is simply no claim in this case that either of the Defendants are responsible for his smoking in Argentina.
So I'm going to take his Argentina smoking off the table.
What do we know about the 1950s and early 1960s?
Well, we know that no one saw Mr. Dombey smoking Winston cigarettes at any time in the 1950s or the early 1960s.
And we know that he wasn't smoking Camel cigarettes in that time period either, because Ms. Pearl told us that during that time period, Mr. Dombey was smoking filtered cigarettes.
She didn't know which filtered cigarettes, it could have been any that were on the market,
but we know in this case that Mr. Dombey preferred unfiltered Camels.
So we know he wasn't smoking Camel cigarettes in the 1950s and 1960s.
Sometime in the late 1960s, it is hard to say exactly when, we have the first eyewitness account of Mr. Dombey smoking a cigarette that was made by my client, Camel cigarettes. His daughter Naomi took the stand and talked about that.
She was born in 1960. She said she wasn't exactly sure how far back her memories go. It could being 6 years old, it could be 7 years old, it could be 8 years. That would be 1966, 1967 or 1968.
We know that she kind of remembered seeing what Camel cigarettes looked like as of 1968.
So there is some evidence in this case that Mr. Dombey was smoking Camel cigarettes at least sometime around 1967 or 1968.
Where there isn't evidence, and what you heard Mr. Kaiser try to get you to guess about, is how long before 1967 or 1968 Mr. Dombey might have been smoking Camel cigarettes.
Because Ms. Ratner certainly didn't say
that she saw him smoking in the '50s; she didn't say that Mr. Dombey said he was smoking Camel cigarettes in the 1950s; she didn't say that anyone knew how much he was smoking of Camel cigarettes in the 1950s at all.
These cases are about proof, they are about evidence, not about speculation about what he might have been smoking in the 1950s.
By 1969, Mr. Dombey comes on the scene, and by this time, Mr. Dombey's really not smoking Reynolds products at that point.
She told you -- this is the evidence that you heard about how people described Mr. Dombey's smoking of Reynolds products in this period and for the next 26 years of their marriage: Whether it's Winston or Camel, they were not Mr. Dombey's primary brand. He smoked them very occasionally.
And about Camel specifically: They were all his last choice, and they were seldom in the house.
What is important is also what is not on this slide. No witness in this trial told you that Mr. Dombey's smoking of cigarettes made by my client was substantial. No one said that.
This is actually the best evidence they have about Mr. Dombey's smoking Reynolds cigarettes.
No one could say exactly how much of it he smoked, and certainly no one said that he smoked enough of my client's products for it to have made a difference.
Now, let me say that again.
No witness in this trial said that Mr. Dombey smoked enough of my client's cigarettes for it to have a made a difference to him.
You heard Mr. McCarter talk about the causation expert that the Plaintiffs brought,
Dr. Soloway.
And they felt he was important enough to take his deposition before trial, to video it.
You saw it. We spent I don't know how many hours watching their causation expert Dr. Soloway.
And I want to show you, this is the guy who made the educated guess about where the cancer started, and said: I still can't prove it.
You need to know the sum total of what Dr.
Soloway said about whether my client's cigarettes were a cause of Mr. Dombey's cancer and death.
This is it. He didn't say a single thing about it.
He didn't mention Reynolds. He didn't mention Winston. He didn't mention Camel. He didn't even say if you smoked X number of cigarettes, it is a substantial contribution to the cancer. He didn't address it at all.
This is the Plaintiffs witness who was supposedly here to help them meet their burden of proof as to both Defendants, including Reynolds. He didn't do it.
Now, why is this important? Why did I point out to you that no one said substantially?
Can I have the next slide, please?
Because this is the instruction you are going to get about legal cause. "Legal cause" is the phrase you're going to see on the verdict form. It is going to be defined for you by Judge Tuter.
You will see -- he's already actually read it to you, but you will see that a critical
part of the definition about legal cause is whether or not a Defendant's cigarettes contributed substantially to producing his death, so that it can reasonably be said that but for smoking that Defendant's cigarettes, that Defendant's cigarettes, the death would not have occurred.
There is another paragraph below it. You will probably hear about that from Mr. Kaiser after I sit down. You're going to see that same language.
For them to prevail, they have to have brought you evidence that the Reynolds cigarette smoking, the very occasional, not-his-primary-brand Reynolds cigarette smoking somehow contributed substantially to his illness, and they can't do that for all of the reasons, in addition, that Mr. McCarter explained to you.
Now, can I have the next slide, please?
This is where it comes up. This is the third, 3-A and 3-B questions on the verdict form. Mr. McCarter showed you those. I've taken the liberty of checking the first box for Philip Morris because it was checked earlier.
But you're also going to check no to 3-B, because that phrase, "legal cause," in that question, as to Mr. Dombey and as to Reynolds, simply was not satisfied in this case.
Now, the same is going to be true if we go to the next question. And I'm not going to go over these in detail, but for the same reason, if you reach the sixth question on the verdict form about assigning fault, there's that term again, "legal cause" of Daniel Dombey's death, there's no evidence that Reynolds' cigarettes were a substantial contributing cause of his death.
You've already heard all of the reasons why you should put 100 percent next to Daniel Dombey, but that is another reason why you put zero next to Reynolds.
As Mr. McCarter already mentioned, this is simply not a case in which damages should be awarded.
Now, I want to talk now about the Plaintiff's fraud case, because you may have -it may not have been as apparent while this case was going on, but one of the reasons that Mrs. Dombey is going to tell you or her lawyer
is going to tell you that they think they're entitled to money is based on this idea that Mr. Dombey didn't know something that would have made a difference to him.
That's why they were showing you advertisements. That's why they were showing you statements of different tobacco executives. And I want to talk first just for a minute about ads, specifically about Winston and Camel.
The Camel ads that you were shown were all from the 1930s and 1940s, before Mr. Dombey moved to the United States.
That is off the table. I've already mentioned that.
They also showed you Winston ads, and the Winston ads that they showed didn't say anything like Mr. Kaiser said they would tell you. They didn't say cigarette smoking was safe or healthy.
I want to show you a couple of ads that you saw in this case that supposedly said that cigarette smoking was safe.
What does the one on the left say about Winston?
There's a picture of the pack. There's people smiling on the bottom. It says,
"Winston tastes good like a cigarette should."
What about the one on the right? "Winston Super King." Well, there's no evidence that he ever smoked Super Kings. That ad is about how long the cigarettes are. "It's not how long you make it. It's how you make it long."
It's not about safety. It's not about health. It's just an ad for a cigarette put out by the company that's selling that cigarette.
Well, then the question is: Well, what was the testimony about whether Mr. Dombey relied on something that Reynolds put out?
Can I have the next slide, please?
This is what the testimony was to a witness down the line.
Mr. Dombey never said he relied on Reynolds. He never mentioned anything, any statement from RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company. He dismissed RJR's ads as a joke.
He laughed about the "Winston tastes good like a cigarette should." He wasn't taking it seriously.
Why would he be taking it seriously? He was never really a smoker of Reynolds products.
He chose cigarettes based on taste.
That's going to be really important in this case, because the allegation is that he picked cigarettes based on whether they were healthy, but the evidence was that's not why he chose his cigarettes at all. He choose cigarettes based on what he liked about the taste of the cigarettes.
That, ladies and gentlemen, is simply not proof that Mr. Dombey ever relied on anything that he heard or didn't hear from Reynolds.
Now, one of the first things that I told you in this case is that you were going to have to keep your eye on the ball, that you are here to decide the facts that matter to Mr. Dombey, but that wouldn't be all that you would hear.
I told you from the very beginning that a lot of what you were going to hear wouldn't really be about Mr. Dombey at all. A lot of it would be kind of a generic attack on all cigarettes and all cigarette companies.
Frankly, let's face it. Some of what you saw that wasn't about Mr. Dombey was there to
try to make you angry, to try to make you upset with the things that they say that the companies have done over the years.
Mr. Kaiser, in his closing, has suggested that I should answer his long list of questions. None of them were about Mr. Dombey. Maybe there was one at the end there that happened to have Mr. Dombey's name in it.
And I would be -- if I had another two hours, I could go through all of the reasons why those generic accusations against the companies are wrong. But I'm not going to do that because that would not be a good use of your time, because the questions Mr. Kaiser put on that board are not the questions that are going to be asked of you to answer on this case.
I'm going to focus my time on the questions that you actually are going to be asked to answer in this case, and I think that's what you should focus on as well.
Back to the question about what does their evidence have to do with Mr. Dombey? Ask yourselves, why were they showing you all of these things? I'm just going to run through
them real quick. I could make a longer list.
Why are they showing you the Frank Statement? That's the one where they made this big deal about the companies getting together in the early 1950s and they put out this ad.
That was the ad that ran on one day, of one month, in one year, and never ran again.
What does that have to do with Mr. Dombey?
Why have -- why did they show you the Flintstones sponsorship in 1960, 10 years of Winston, 10 years before Mr. Dombey started smoking Winston?
Remember Dr. Proctor said: Well, you know, maybe some kids saw it, maybe.
Are they really trying to suggest to you that at 30 years old, Mr. Dombey was watching the Flintstones and started smoking Winstons 10 years later because of that?
What does that have to do with Mr. Dombey?
Why were they showing you internal documents from people who had barely been with the company that they were -- that the documents related to?
They showed you a document from a man named Claude Teague in 1953. And you didn't
find out until cross-examination that
Dr. Teague, when he wrote that document, had
only been with the company for three years.
Then they showed you another document from a guy named Mr. Steel in 1978. The document they showed you was from August of 1978. They said he was speaking for the industry.
Then you find out on cross, Ms. Steel had only been with the company, Brown & Williamson, for three months.
That's like taking a statement that someone, you know, going down to the McDonald's, asking somebody that has been working there for three months what they think about the products McDonald's sells and saying that those statements represent the entire food and beverage industry.
It doesn't make sense, and it has nothing to do with Mr. Dombey.
Why were they talking about lights and filters? As I was sitting there, I looked to see, was there any ad in this record in evidence about light smoking for Winston? It wouldn't be Camel. For Winston?
You know what I found? This is it. This
is the only ad that's in evidence about light cigarettes. It's for Winston. It's from 1974.
It's before that 1982 cut-off.
It does not say -- remember, they said, oh, he saw the ads that said light cigarettes are safe.
It doesn't say that at all. It says, "New Winston Lights," a picture of the box. "We put good taste in a whole new light." That's 1974.
Instead of saying it's safe, it's got a warning on it, just like the warnings you've been hearing about all through trial.
That warning says, "Warning: The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health."
This is their fraud case? This has something to do with Mr. Dombey? It doesn't.
The same thing about filters. Why are they talking about filters when all the witnesses said he picked his cigarettes based on taste?
Why they spend so much with that True Magazine? That's the one that Mrs. Dombey told you had she never even heard of until this litigation. No evidence Mr. Dombey ever read
it.
Why did they show a 60-second snippet from the Waxman hearings from 1994? Is there really a suggestion that Mr. Dombey was injured because of what he heard in 1994, if he even heard it?
And why do they keep saying that all the representatives said the same thing, when you saw the clip of what the Reynolds representative said.
Whatever you think about what Reynolds' statement was at that time, he acknowledged that it can be very hard to quit cigarette smoking. He just said that he didn't believe that cigarettes are the same as heroin or cocaine.
Why did they show you that Hyman video? That was just last Friday. This is a video of a retired chief executive officer of the company that made Pall Mall.
Mr. Dombey never smoked Pall Mall.
Why were you watching Mr. Hyman on video, going through all of those Pall Mall ads? It has nothing to do with Mr. Dombey.
Now, at least as important as why this
stuff has nothing to do with Mr. Dombey is what we know about what Mr. Dombey actually knew.
May I have the next slide, please?
These are the facts that Mr. Kaiser conceded in opening statement. They were proved during the trial, and then he conceded them again in closing.
Mr. Dombey knew about the '64 Surgeon General's Report. He had 30 years of package warnings. He knew about his father's cancer being caused by smoking as early as 1969.
They say he was trying to quit. You saw the medical records about his smoking cough in the '70s and '80s.
Mr. Dombey's father had cancer that they believed was caused by cigarette smoking. Her mother, in 1958, was diagnosed with emphysema associated with cigarette smoking.
Then he saw all of the TV, newspapers, he was an avid reader, all of those things, his wife, the Plaintiff in this case, and his daughters warned him over and over and over again.
There should be no question that Mr. Dombey knew the risks. Why are you having
to hear a claim that Mr. Dombey should have been told something else that would have made a difference to him when they admit he knew all of this? And that's not even everything.
Now, in opening, Mr. Kaiser said, and he said it again today, that, yeah, Mr. Dombey knew all of this, but he also got some information from the companies.
And he, I wrote it down, he chose to believe what the cigarette industry was telling him. That was the theory.
And he said that again today. He said that, yeah, he knew all of this stuff, but he was also getting the message from the tobacco industry. And that's why they were showing you all of these slips from tobacco executives and other company representatives.
It's easy for people to think today that everything there is that's important to know, we know today, and the people that came before us didn't know any of it.
The suggestion is that we are so smart today and the people in the past were so naive, that anyone coming up in the '50s or '60s was somehow vulnerable, because they trusted and
believed everything an executive might say on TV.
Well, here is the problem: When Dr. Proctor was in that witness box, I asked him about that very thing. I said:
Dr. Proctor, you talked about polls. You've seen the polling data about whether people were looking to tobacco executives for this information.
He said: Yes, I have.
I said: Dr. Proctor, isn't it true that in the 1950s -- can I have the next slide, please -- isn't it true that in the 1950s, only 3 percent of the American public would believe it if the Tobacco Industry Research Committee said there was no connection between smoking and lung cancer?
3 percent.
And then I said: Well, what about the 1960s, Dr. Proctor? You've seen the polls -can I have the next one, please -- the polls in the 1960s that talk about whether the people were looking to the tobacco companies for this information.
He agreed with me. Only 5 percent of the
American public thought that tobacco companies were a reliable source of information on smoking and health.
5 percent.
We went forward to 1970. For the 1970s, the same kind of a question. What did Dr. Proctor admit? 3 percent.
Now, in this case, you all are going to have to decide what's more likely. Is it likely that Mr. Dombey, who knew everything that they've admitted that he knew, was in the 3 percent who was looking to tobacco companies for this information?
Or is it more likely that he is in the 97 percent that wasn't?
What does all of this evidence that they brought you and that we have showed you through cross tell you about whether Mr. Dombey, an Ivy League-educated executive, was tricked or fooled? That's what this is about.
And since this case is only about him, the better question is: What does it tell you about whether they've proved it?
When it comes to Reynolds, when it comes to both Defendants, it tells you that they just
don't have the evidence.
Can I have the next one, please?
That's why, one of the reasons why Mr. McCarter suggested you should check no to questions 4 and 5, and that's why I'm going to ask you to do the same thing.
Remember, what Mr. Kaiser told you about, he wanted to suggest that Mr. Dombey may have heard statements, may have seen them.
The question on the verdict form isn't whether he heard it, whether he saw it; it's whether he relied on it to his detriment. Did he rely on something that the company said to his detriment? The answer for both companies should be no.
Now, the next topic I want to cover with you relates to punitive damages.
And I want to give you a little bit of background information about what punitive damages are and the instructions that you're going to get on them.
Can I have the next slide, please?
First, you need to know that punitive damages can be only be awarded for conduct that legally caused Mr. Dombey's death. There's
that "legal cause" term again.
That it has to be based on clear and convincing evidence, which is the highest standard of proof in the civil -- in civil law.
You will see in the instructions that the evidence has to be lacking in confusion, and you have to be able to reach the conclusion that the Plaintiffs are asking you to reach without hesitation.
Punitive damages are only paid to the Plaintiff, and they are in addition to, on top of, beyond, full compensation.
A request for punitive damages is not about compensation. Punitive damages is the legal term that basically means "more money."
That's the request that even if you fully compensate for what has happened, I want more. I want more money.
That is what punitive damages are.
But punitive damages are only available to punish for what happened to Mr. Dombey. But none of the allegations that you have seen are really about Mr. Dombey, and I'm not going to go over that again. But I do want to show you some of the evidence that you heard about what
the companies did that should not be punished.
May I have the next one, please?
It is not punishable conduct to fund research by a Nobel-prize-winning scientist.
It is not punishable conduct to publish on smoke composition, including carcinogens.
Mr. Kaiser said we kept these carcinogens a secret. That's not true. Reynolds published on what was in smoke, invented new ways to find out what was in smoke, and published on it and gave speeches about it.
It's not punishable conduct to publish the Green Monster. That was the one where I was saying, oh, we don't have the Green Monster.
And then you all saw it. I heard this thug behind me of the Green Monster hitting the desk.
Then we had his exchange on redirect, where Mr. Sloman said: What about that green monster? Mr. Walker said there are 6,000 articles in there. How many of those articles were relevant to smoking and health? Because they're saying it's all distraction research.
How many articles in that Green Monster were relevant to smoking and health?
Dr. Proctor said: Many thousands. Many thousands of them were relevant to smoking and health.
That was not distraction research.
It's not punishable conduct to be thanked by the Surgeon General in report after report.
It's not punishable conduct to work, as a company, with the government as part of the Tobacco Working Group for 10 years, in a joint effort to try to create safer cigarettes.
I showed you, through the cross of Dr. Proctor, the document that came from Reynolds' CEO at the time, telling the director of research and design, you need to go work with the government. Work with them to try to develop a safer cigarette.
And it's not punishable conduct to work and spend literally a billion dollars trying to develop and developing heat-not-burn technology to try to make safer cigarettes.
That's not conduct that should be punished.
But even beyond all of that, a company shouldn't be punished for their opinions. A company shouldn't be punished for a remark that
someone makes in -- some employee makes in a document that is singled out by a Plaintiff's lawyer.
A company shouldn't be punished for not publicizing risks that were already publicized.
Mr. Kaiser wanted you to think about documents from 1968 and 1969, supposedly about how the companies were trying to create doubt.
What did you hear about what was being said by the public health community in 1968?
Daniel Horn, director of the National Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health, a government employee, he said you could stand on a rooftop and shout "smoking is dangerous" at the top of your lungs, and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know.
And a company shouldn't be punished for conduct that had no effect on the smoker whose wife wants more money.
For all of those reasons, I ask you to reject every request for damages from the Plaintiffs, including question 8. I ask you to check no for both companies.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, soon you are
going to begin your deliberations, and I'm actually wrapping up. I would ask you to focus on the key facts that are important to Mr. Dombey here.
The fact that Mr. Dombey chose to continue smoking year after year was his right here in America.
The fact for years he didn't even pretend to try to quit. You don't even hear about a first attempt until 25 years in.
The fact that every decision he made about smoking he made knowing the risks.
The fact that twice in his cigarette smoking history, he went back to smoking long after all the nicotine was gone from his system.
The fact that no one knows where the cancer that ultimately took his life began.
And the fact that he wasn't fooled by the companies.
And there is just one last thought I want to leave you with, because on Friday in this case, you all, as jurors, saw something that you may never, ever see again, even if you serve on 100 more juries.
You saw Mrs. Dombey take the stand, testify that Mr. Dombey enjoyed smoking, smoked because of taste, and wanted to smoke, and then after that, after Mr. McCarter asked her some questions, after I asked her some questions, you saw her own lawyers go after her about those admissions.
They yelled at her. They badgered her about her testimony that Mr. Dombey enjoyed smoking and liked the taste of cigarettes, and they tried to get her to change her testimony.
What does that tell you about how important that admission is in this case?
The fact that Mrs. Dombey, the woman who was asking you for money, admitted that Mr. Dombey enjoyed cigarettes, smoked because of the taste, tells you an awful lot. Because if Mr. Dombey enjoyed smoking and smoked for taste, he wasn't smoking because of the nicotine in cigarettes.
That means a no to question 1 on the verdict form.
If Mr. Dombey enjoyed cigarette smoking and liked the taste of cigarettes, it means he wasn't smoking because he was tricked into
doing it by some ad that he saw. That means a no to question No. 4.
If Mr. Dombey was smoking because he enjoyed cigarettes, because he liked the taste of cigarette smoking and wanted to smoke, it means that he wasn't smoking because of something some tobacco executive said. That means a no to question No. 5 on the verdict form.
And if Mr. Dombey enjoyed smoking and liked the taste of cigarettes, it means that he was smoking as a matter of personal choice. And with personal choice comes personal responsibility. And that means assigning 100 percent on question 6.
Now, the last thing I need to do, just as Mr. McCarter did, ask you to come back with a -- to return a defense verdict. I guess I didn't need the slide to say that. To return with a defense verdict.
The last thing I will say before I sit down is that we all, and I think I can speak for everyone here, we all have appreciated your patience, your good humor in this trial, and Mr. McCarter has, and I know I have explained
this case in the best way that we know how. We are in your hands now.
We are counting on you to follow the law, make sense of the evidence, and apply your common sense, which is what we all told you from the very beginning.
Thank you very much for your time and attention.
