MR. BOYCE: Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the Court.
Ladies and gentlemen. It's nice to see all of you again and have one more opportunity to talk with you before you retire to begin your deliberations and to reach a verdict in this case.
I want to take a moment at this time to thank each and every one of you for your service. Everybody has worked hard over the past couple of weeks -Mr. Acosta, the defendants, the Court -- everyone has worked hard in presenting this case to you.
But you've worked hard as well. But there is a difference. For the rest of us, this is our job.
We're here because this is what we do for a living. But not you. You are here out of a sense of civic obligation. You were here whether it was raining, whether you have a cold, whether there was a guy outside with a bull horn yelling. You guys were here every day. And an appreciation of your service, your attention and your impartiality is something that everybody in this room shares.
So thank you very much.
Now, as with opening statements, you will get
to hear from each defendant. I'm going to go first this time. I think Mr. Geraghty is going to go to go next, and then Ms. Luther. And I understand that Mr. Geraghty will speak to you about most of the important issues in this case, the issues that apply to all the defendants. And so I'm going to do my best not to repeat what you are going to hear from Mr. Geraghty, what I think he's going to say, and what I think Ms. Luther will have to say as well. Instead, I have to limit myself to a brief introduction and to a few issues involving Reynolds.
Now, there is one issue that I think you will hear from everyone in this case on, and that issue is reliability -- reliability and credibility.
What did the reliable, credible evidence in this case show? I think it showed three things. It showed that Mrs. Douglas was in control of her smoking, and nicotine did not cause her to smoke.
For Reynolds, it showed clearly that Mrs. Douglas did not smoke enough Reynolds brands to cause either COPD or lung cancer or her death in 2008. And it showed that Mrs. Douglas knew the risks of smoking and chose to smoke. Because that's what the evidence established in this case,
the defendants in general and Reynolds specifically are entitled to a verdict in their favor.
Now, I chose this issue of reliability for a variety of reasons. But the first one is Mr. Douglas himself. When Mr. Douglas took the stand, he was willing to go so far to help his case that he called Mrs. Douglas a woman child. I actually went back and checked the transcript so that I made sure I heard him correctly. But you will see Mr. Geraghty asked:
She was independent, right?
No, sir.
You don't think she was independent?
No. I was married to a woman child. She was the most beautiful little girl. I thought I had two daughters sometimes.
That's how far Mr. Douglas was willing to go to win this case. You know what the worst part about that is? It's not true. Mrs. Douglas had serious problems with her kneecaps when she was in high school. She missed about a year of high school, but she went back and finished high school. She went to fashion college. You heard how after fashion college she became the director
of a modeling agency at a very young age. Later in life Mr. Douglas trusted Mrs. Douglas with the accounting for Municipal Tax Liens. He trusted her with the payroll and books and the accounting for one of his own businesses. But in here, when he wants to try to help his case, she's a little girl, she's a woman child. That's how far he would go.
The second reason I wanted to talk about reliability and credibility is brand history. And we heard just a little bit about this from Mr. Acosta during his closing argument.
The reliable evidence shows that Mrs. Douglas began smoking sometime in fashion college in 1966. Mr. Douglas admitted that he didn't pay much attention to her smoking, but he thinks eventually she reached a point where she was smoked about a pack a day.
But the credible evidence, the reliable evidence in this case shows that she started smoking sometime in 1966. And Mr. Acosta wants you to believe that she started in 1961. But let's just review the evidence here.
First, you heard from Charlotte Parker,
Mrs. Douglas's close friend in high school:
Was she a smoker?
No. I don't remember her smoking then.
There is also a series of medical records -I'm a little quick on the draw here. There we go.
There is a series of medical records from the 1960s. Mrs. Douglas had an episode of pancreatitis and then developed a pretty serious cold, acute respiratory distress. And you can see -- these are all from 1966 -- she is treated for acute respiratory disease. They check her chest. Some wheezes in both lung fields, more so on the left. No definite rales are heard. The impression is that she has an upper respiratory infection. Final diagnosis, acute respiratory disease. Those come from earlier in 1966. But the two chest X-rays on the bottom, that her lungs were in such a bad state that they ordered a chest X-ray. And it happened in September of 1966. And that record is right here.
Now these are all available for you in the boxes. I think the easiest way probably for you to look at them is probably by date. And you can see the date here is September of 1966.
But she was given a chest X-ray in September.
There is no indication that she was smoking. This is a 20-year-old woman with acute respiratory disease, given a chest X-ray. There is no indication that she is smoking.
This is two years after that Surgeon General's report came out that you heard about.
The doctors were aware of this at this time. If she was smoking, it would have been noted in these record.
Now, Mr. Acosta showed you one medical record during his closing argument. And that medical record was from 2001. And he told you about the scales here, the preponderance of the evidence.
This is what the evidence showed with respect to when Mrs. Douglas began smoking.
On plaintiff's side is one medical record from 2001 that says Mrs. Douglas smoked one pack a day for 40 years. 2001 is 40 years after the fact. It's 35 years after the records we just looked at from 1966. One medical record against the testimony of Charlotte Parker. One medical record against a series of medical records here that showed the exact opposite.
No. 2 and No. 3 are the ones we just looked at in detail, the records actually from 1966, from
that time period that show she was not smoking.
But there is also conflicting medical records from later. A record from 2003 and 1998 that indicated she started smoking in 1968. There is one from 2006 that indicated she started smoking in 1969. One from 1995 and one from 2007 that indicated she started smoking sometime in the seventies.
But that's what the evidence was with respect to when Mrs. Douglas began smoking. The credible evidence, the reliable evidence is that she began smoking when she was an adult somewhere around 20 years old when she's in fashion college.
So the second reason -- the third reason that I wanted to focus on reliability is Dr. Goldman.
You remember Dr. Goldman. He was the guy that came in here and told you that the National Cancer Institute was not authoritative on the issue of smoking and health. Never mind that he works at a hospital that advertises the fact that they've been designated a cancer center by the NCI. Never mind that his hospital's own website sends patients to the NCI for information.
In here, in court, when he's trying to help plaintiffs, all of a sudden it's not
authoritative. He said the National Cancer Institute was not authoritative. That's how far he was ready to go to help plaintiffs in this case.
You may also recall when he said nicotine causes cancer, and Mr. Geraghty, I think, was a bit surprised. We hadn't heard that claim.
He said, What do you base that on? Where did you get a claim that nicotine causes cancer?
He says, Well, there is new studies out there.
He couldn't name one. He just said it.
It's funny, because an hour later Dr.
Benowitz took the stand and said, You know what? Nicotine by itself, it's fine. But Dr. Goldman didn't care. He was ready to push the envelope, stretch legitimate facts to help plaintiff win.
And he did it when he said the NCI wasn't authoritative, and he did it again when he said that nicotine is a carcinogen.
Now, when we started talking about my main points, that three years of smoking in the late 1960s is not enough to cause COPD or lung cancer 24 and 36 years later, let alone enough to cause her death in 2008. So that's the question you are
going to have to ask: Three years of smoking in the late 1960s stayed with her so it could substantially contribute to causing her death in 2008?
He knew he had no evidence for that. He just said it. So I pressed him, I showed him -- we talked about this timeline before. You can see the gap. It's undisputed that Mrs. Douglas quit smoking Reynolds brands in 1970. But you can see the gap. Dr. Goldman just asserted this stays with you. Every cigarette counts, is what he said. But he didn't have support for that.
There is no evidence in this case. There is no study that supports Dr. Goldman's claims. He is just trying to help plaintiffs.
So I pressed him and I showed him the National Cancer Institute Monograph 8. Do you remember what he said first? I don't know who did this study. That was his first attempt.
So I showed him the first page. It was a study run by the American Cancer Society.
Remember what he said next? I don't know how many people were in it. Maybe it's a small study.
That's what he said.
There were over a million men and women in
this study. They studied 1,078,894, men and women for a total of 11 million person years of observation. But before he saw this, before I put this on the screen, Dr. Goldman thought he could get away with saying it's a small study; I don't know who did it.
That's not credible. That's not believable.
To come in here under oath and pretend that a study of a million people by the American Cancer Society is some small study and he doesn't know who runs it? That's not believable. And that lack of credibility undercuts everything that plaintiff and Dr. Goldman had to say in this case.
So what happened next? It was around this time I think that Dr. Goldman started accusing me of suggesting that smoking for a few years was good for you. I don't have any idea where he got that from. Did you ever hear that from anyone else besides Dr. Goldman? Did you ever hear me say that smoking was a good idea? No. It didn't come from me. It didn't come from Reynolds.
Again, he just said it. This is him trying to help plaintiffs. He just made that up.
So we went and I said, look, let's just go through Monograph 8. And I showed him at first an
increased risk for lung cancer is first evidenced in the mid-to-late-40-year-old age group, and an increased rate ratio for death for COPD is not evident until the late 50-year-old age group.
He didn't have any ability to dispute that.
That's the undisputed evidence in this case.
And we went through a few more charts. These were the ones that were hard to see when Dr. Goldman was on the stand, so I blew them up in the hopes that they would be a little easier to see. But you can see that this is the rate ratios for white female smokers by level of cigarette consumption. And Mrs. Douglas probably smoked about a pack a day. But even if she smoked between 21 and 39 cigarettes a day, you can see that there is simply no risk for lung cancer before age 40. Before age 40. She quit smoking Reynolds brands in 1970, when she was 24 years old. No risk before 40, according to the National Cancer Institute.
For COPD, it was a little bit later. It was age 45 where the risk first shows up. No risk for the 40-to-44 age group regardless of how much you smoke. No risk for the 35-to-39-year-old age group regardless of how much you smoke.
Now, Dr. Goldman tried to dispute the NCI.
He tried to dispute the American Cancer Society. He accused me of suggesting that smoking for a short amount of time was good for you. He tried just about anything he could think of.
So we went to this chart. Now, this chart was prepared by Dr. Burns, who is the guy who actually wrote Chapter 3 of the National Cancer Institute.
Believe me when I tell you that the National Cancer Institute did not write this report to help Reynolds in this case. Dr. Burns did not make this chart so that I could use it to cross-examine Dr. Goldman.
But you can see down here, it's a little hard to see, that the risk for lung cancer plotted against duration of smoking shows up for the first time after 10 to 14 pack years. That's 10 to 14 pack years. She smoked Reynolds brands for three years, three years in the sixties, 40 years before she is diagnosed with lung cancer and 40 years before she passes away in 2008.
Now, this is where I thought Dr. Goldman might actually come out of that chair at me. This is where he really said, Hey, how can you say
smoking is good you for you?
I didn't suggest that smoking up to that was a good idea or good for you. That's Dr. Goldman. That's Dr. Goldman pushing and stretching and frantically trying to save plaintiff's case against Reynolds.
Now, this last bar here, the first bar for 10 to 14 pack years where the risk is under 2, that's where I drew my chart. And my colleagues have had fun mocking my artistic skills. But I like my chart. I saved it. And I brought it so that we could just look at it one more time.
You can see all I was trying to show is that when they run these studies, they define a baseline risk as 1.0. It's a normal risk that all of us are just born with. We come into the world with a baseline risk for all these diseases. This is the area that has nothing to do with smoking.
And this is what they call the excess or the attributable risk which you can attribute to smoking or whatever they are studying. It's just a principle of epidemiology.
But Dr. Goldman wouldn't agree with this chart. Dr. Goldman could not agree that 1.0 is bigger than 0.6.
When you look at it sideways -- and this is probably what I should have done -- you can see 1.0, the area that has nothing to do with smoking, is bigger than 0.6. Dr. Goldman couldn't admit that 1.0 is bigger than 0.6. That's how far he was willing to go.
What did he try next? He tried running away from Dr. Cummings. Dr. Cummings had published a study where he said, look, if you smoke when you are young for a couple years, you are not expected to have any permanent health effects when you get older.
Now remember, Mrs. Douglas quit smoking Reynolds brands in 1970 when she was 24 years old.
And here it is. He couldn't agree. So I had to show him the article. In addition to difficulties measuring cessation before age 25, cessation before age 25 does not need to be tracked because smokers who quit before then are not expected to have any permanent health effects as ex-smokers. That's Dr. Cummings.
And finally, I think Dr. Goldman's last attempt is when he just said, Well, you are just wrong. There's new studies out there at that show that the National Cancer Institute is wrong.
I said, Well, what are these new studies?
How do you base that claim in here under oath in front of this jury?
Could he name a single study? Of course not.
I asked him several times: Where are the new studies? Name one. Name one author, name one study that shows that any of that evidence is wrong. And he couldn't do it.
There is not a single study that supports plaintiff's claim that every cigarette you smoke stays with you forever such that it can be a substantial contributing cause to serious diseases 40 years after you stop smoking those brands. There is no answer for that. It's just Dr. Goldman, and it's just not believable.
Now, during my opening statement I told you that there would not be any evidence connecting Reynolds or any of the other defendants' conduct to any decision Mrs. Douglas made to smoke or to continue to smoke. And I think that's what the evidence showed in this case. This case is not about whether the cigarette companies acted in ways they should not have. That's already been decided. This case is whether that conduct affected Mrs. Douglas in such a way that
Mr. Douglas is entitled to money. And they never proved that connection.
There are two Reynolds documents in this whole case. One is the one in 1972 where it says many if not most of the people who want to quit are able to do so. Two Reynolds documents that you saw with Dr. Benowitz. But those documents were written in 1972 and 1982. How can a document written two years after she stopped smoking Reynolds brands affect her in any way? The other one is 12 years after she has done smoking Reynolds brands. She had moved on. She is smoking other cigarettes.
Documents written after the fact, regardless of what you think of them, could never have affected Mrs. Douglas. There is no connection here. There is no proof that Mrs. Douglas ever made a decision to smoke or continue smoking because of anything Reynolds did not say about the health risks of smoking.
At the end of his testimony -- I know it was kind of quick and hard to hear, so I'll just repeat it -- but Dr. Benowitz admitted that he has worked with Reynolds scientists. He has served on scientific panels with Reynolds scientists. And
Reynolds scientists, according to Dr. Benowitz, have published research results that are not helpful to the company; they publish stuff that is harmful to the company. And when they do it, it comes out of panels where they sit with Dr. Benowitz. That's what the evidence was this in case, not that there was something unsaid that affected Mrs. Douglas. It's that Reynolds scientists worked with Dr. Benowitz.
Because there is no evidence of reliance in this case, whether for Reynolds or any other defendant, plaintiff cannot prevail under the claim for fraudulent concealment. They haven't met their burden of proof. They never proved the negligence. They never proved their connection.
Now, this is the last time I get speak with you. And before I sit down, I just want to take a minute to go over what I think you will have to answer in this case. Mr. Geraghty will walk you through the verdict form, as Mr. Acosta did on his direct, and so I won't do that again here.
But we talked about this a bit in opening statement. But what plaintiffs basically have to show is that but for Mrs. Douglas's smoking of Reynolds brands, she would not have gotten lung
cancer or COPD.
I know that's a mouthful. It's hard to follow. And so as we talked about in openings, what they have to show is that if you take Reynolds brands out of the picture, that she wouldn't have gotten sick, she wouldn't have died.
If you take three years out and you think she would have gotten lung cancer or COPD anyway, then plaintiffs cannot prevail against Reynolds.
Now, Mr. Acosta said, What if there were 10 defendants and three years apiece?
That's just a hypothetical. This is Florida law. This is the law you have to apply in this case. If you conclude that if she had started smoking in 1970 without any Reynolds smoking at all, if you conclude that she still would have developed COPD and still would have developed lung cancer, then you must return a verdict in Reynolds favor. It's that simple.
I was trying to think of an analogy sitting over there, because I couldn't quite follow the one about aspirin. So this is what I came up.
Let's say the Rays beat the Yankees 10 to 1. And Carl Crawford drives in five runs and Evan Longoria drives in four runs and B.J. Upton drives
in one run. You take B.J. Upton out of that game, the Rays still win. B.J. Upton doesn't play. If Mrs. Douglas never smoked Reynolds brands, the Rays would still win that game. But here, if you think that she started smoking in 1970, she still would have had COPD and lung cancer, then you must return a verdict in Reynolds' favor.
Now, because this is the last time I get to speak to you, I just want to summarize this evidence one more time. I thought that the scales of the preponderance of the evidence standard that Mr. Acosta mentioned is an apt one. And so we have this chart.
And this is the evidence in this case specific to Reynolds. On plaintiff's side you have Dr. Goldman's claim that every cigarette stays with a person forever. That's it. He didn't have any studies. He didn't have any articles. There is nothing else to support that.
It's Dr. Goldman's claim that every cigarette stays with a person forever.
And on Reynolds side you have the conclusion of the NCI that the increased risk first shows up in the 40-year-old age group for lung cancer, in the 50-year-old-age group for COPD; that a white
female has no increased risk for lung cancer before 10 pack years, no increased risk for COPD before 10 pack years. Dr. Burns concluded that a person has no increase risk before 10 pack years himself. And finally, Dr. Cummings concluded that cessation before age 25 does not even need to be tracked, because smokers who quit before then are not expected to have any permanent health effects.
It's undisputed she smoked Reynolds brands in 1970 when she was 24 years old.
Ladies and gentlemen, that's the evidence against my client, Reynolds, in this case. That's the only evidence there is. That scale is clearly not in plaintiff's favor. Plaintiff has not and cannot meet their burden of proof. The evidence showed that there is no way a few years of Reynolds smoking in the late sixties is enough to stick around with Mrs. Douglas for 40 years so that it can be considered a substantial contributing cause of her COPD in 1994, her lung cancer in 2006, and her death in 2008. And because that's what the evidence was in this case,
I would respectfully request that when you retire to deliberate, you return a verdict in favor of R.
J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
Thank you again for your time and your attention. And I hope -- I hope you have enjoyed your experience as jurors in this case. Thank you very much.



MR. GERAGHTY: Sorry. It takes all this technical time to get set up.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. My name is Bill Geraghty, and you know that I represent Philip Morris USA in this case.
And everybody has thanked you for your time and service. I want to thank you, too, on behalf of my client on behalf of Larry Mann and myself. You have certainly be extremely attentive over the course of the last week. And I know Judge Pendino, all the lawyers, all the parties really appreciate that very much.
And, you know, it's interesting, we predicted last week that it would take two weeks for the case. And here we are. You've got a couple days to spare. And I think it's very rare that lawyers underestimate the amount of time they are going to take to present the evidence and to argue the points of law to you. So I guess that's a somewhat unintended benefit. But I'm glad that we were to able finish more quickly than we promised and get you back to your families and your lives.
I told you last week, it was only -sometimes it seems like it was a long time ago, but it was just last Wednesday. I told you last Wednesday that there were going to be issues you would have to decide, but there were other issues
that were not going to be in dispute in this case.
And I just want to remind you of the issues about which there is no dispute.
There is no dispute that cigarette smoking can cause lung cancer and COPD. No dispute about that.
There is no dispute that nicotine is addictive and can be addictive to some people. No debate about that in this case.
There is also no dispute that that nicotine is it a naturally occurring part of the tobacco plant. You heard the evidence. Tobacco has been grown in this country for hundreds of years, and that tobacco has always had nicotine in it.
Fourth. In this case, there has been no dispute that cigarette smoking played a role in causing Mrs. Douglas's COPD and lung cancer. No debate about that.
And, fifth, there has been no debate that we all feel sympathy for the loss of a spouse, for Mr. Douglas's loss of his wife. It's only natural to feel that way. But as Judge Pendino instructed you, that sympathy can play no part in your decision-making process. Your decision has to be based upon the evidence you hear from the witness
stand and the instructions given to you by Judge Pendino.
And then sixth, I want to mention just very briefly these findings. There has been no dispute about those findings. But the key thing -- and Judge Pendino told you this -- you all decide, you all decide by your verdict whether those findings apply in this case. And I think when you see the very first question on the verdict form, it has absolutely nothing to do with those findings.
So what is this case about then? This case,
I told you a week ago, was about one smoker,
Mrs. Charles Douglas, and about her husband, James Douglas. That's what this case is about. It's about her decision to start smoking, her choice to continue smoking -- you heard that she quit -- her decisions to quit, her choice to resume smoking and ultimately to quit in 2004.
That's what this case is about. And that's what you have heard in terms of the evidence over the course of the last several days.
And this case is also about money. You know that Mr. Douglas is asking you to award him money for his wife's decision to smoke cigarettes.
Now, I want to start by showing you the
specific issue you are going to be asked to decide. And I block it out. I'm going to have to back up here.
You will receive a verdict form from Judge Pendino. And the very first question says, Was Charlotte Douglas a member of the Engle class?
If you answer yes, you are deciding that Mr. Douglas should be awarded money damages for his wife's decision to smoke cigarettes. If you answer no, the case is over. Your verdict is for the defendants.
We're going to walk through at evidence.
But, ladies and gentlemen, I submit to you, when we review the evidence, when we walk through all the evidence, this is the only question you need to decide, the only question you need to decide.
So what does this mean, was Charlotte Douglas an member of the Engle class? That really doesn't tell you much in terms of how you answer the question. But the Court gave you legal instructions, so let's kind of walk through those so you understand what the issue is.
Judge Pendino told you that class members are cigarette smokers who, on or before November 21, 1996, suffered from a disease or medical
condition -- and I highlighted the key language -legally caused by an addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine.
That's the key language.
You know, I'm going to move this back here so I don't keep walking in front of the screen. I'll put it right there. That will be easier.
That's the key language. You've heard Mr. Acosta, you have heard the other attorneys refer to this concept -- legal cause. There is the terminology right there.
But what does legal cause mean in the context of this case? You also received an instruction to that effect as well from Dr. Pendino. An addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of a disease or medical condition.
And we're talking about the COPD in this case, the chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
If it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such disease or medical condition so that it can reasonably be said that -- and I missed the "but" part -- but for but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, such
disease or medical condition would not have been suffered.
That's the test in this case. And the plaintiff bears the burden of proof to prove this to you.
And, Mr. Acosta, I think -- I'm not sure he intended to do this, but there is really two parts to this.
The plaintiff must prove to you that Charlotte Douglas was addicted to cigarettes, to the nicotine in cigarettes, and he then must prove that the addiction was a substantial contributing cause, a but-for cause. And what does that mean? That means but for the addiction, the disease would not have occurred. That's their burden to prove in this case.
Mr. Acosta will probably -- and he focused on this next instruction called concurring cause.
And what was interesting is he read everything except down to the second, the next to last and the last line. And what I want you to understand about this concurring cause part of the instruction is even under this instruction, the addiction to cigarettes must contribute substantially to producing the disease or medical
condition. Under both instructions, it must be a substantial contributing cause. How substantial? So substantial that without it the disease would not have occurred.
And, ladies and gentlemen, we are going to walk through the evidence. But, in this case, the plaintiff has failed to sustain his burden of proof to prove that to you.
Mr. Acosta tried to explain that to you. The burden is called the greater weight of the evidence. The greater weight of the evidence.
And the plaintiff must convince you -- and the terms are by more persuasive, more convincing evidence than all the evidence you've heard the defendants present to you during the course of this trial.
And our evidence has come through our cross-examination of the plaintiff’s witnesses and through Dr. Kaplan and the other depositions we read to you. We presented a substantial amount of evidence.
And Mr. Acosta has got to have evidence that rises to the level that is more persuasive and more convincing to you than the evidence that has been presented by the defendants in this case.
And I would submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that the plaintiff has failed to do that in the case. He’s failed to do that because of what I told it he very beginning: The three simply truths. I told you we would prove these things to you last Wednesday, and we have proven these things to you. We have proven these things to you over the course of the last several days.
Charlotte Douglas made an informed choice to smoke. That’s the evidence you’ve heard during the course of this case. Charlotte Douglas enjoyed smoking cigarettes. Mr. Acosta acknowledged that just a few moments ago in the first part of his closing argument. We know she enjoyed smoking cigarettes for lots of reasons that had nothing to do with addiction. You heard witnesses testify, you heard Dr. Kaplan, you heard Dr. Benowitz talk about all of these things, all the reasons why Charlotte Douglas enjoyed smoking cigarettes.
And most importantly, Charlotte Douglas was in control. She always had the ability to quit smoking when she chose to do so, when she was properly motivated to do so. That’s the evidence you’ve heard loud and clear since last Wednesday.
How has been demonstrated to you?
How has it been demonstrated to you through the evidence that Charlotte Douglas was in control? Several reasons.
The first -- and you heard Mr. Acosta mention it -- the plaintiff in the very beginning of this case admitted that Charlotte Douglas herself was at fault for her own diseases and her own death.
They admitted that from the day this lawsuit was filed. The day this lawsuit was filed. We’re not blaming Mrs. Douglas. Mr. Douglas and Mr. Acosta at the very beginning said she is at fault. She is a legal cause of her own disease. Her own decision to smoke, her own failure to quit at points sooner in time, her own failure not to quit for good until 2004, according to the plaintiff in this case, was a legal cause of her disease. And we just talked about it a moment ago.
Legal cause means a substantial cause. How substantial? So substantial that but for -- it’s the same language -- but for Mrs. Douglas’s own decisions to smoke, but for her own failure to quit sooner, the diseases and the death would not have occurred. And when the plaintiff comes in and admits that Mrs. Douglas herself is a legal
cause, that’s the end of the case, ladies and gentlemen.
The evidence you have heard is that
Mrs. Douglas, her own decisions, that they were
the sole legal cause, the only legal cause in this case, the only substantial contributing cause.
That’s the evidence you have heard.
How else have we proven it to you? Well, you have heard Mr. Douglas gave a deposition under oath in this case on September 23rd, 2008. You now know what a deposition is. It’s testimony you swear to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. You just do it in a lawyer’s office without a judge present.
And on September 23rd, 2008, after filing this lawsuit, after accusing the defendants of killing his wife, Mr. Douglas was asked, Do you believe that your wife was addicted to cigarettes?
His answer was, No.
That was his honest answer in his heart of hearts.
Now, Mr. Douglas has sat through the entire trial, just like you have. He heard Mr. Acosta and I stand up and explain what the issues were in the case. Now, after learning that addiction and
whether addiction was the legal cause of his wife's illness and death, after learning that those are the key issues in the case, what did Mr. Douglas do? He got on that witness stand, stood up there, and changed his -- changed his testimony right before your eyes.
You don't believe your wife was addicted to cigarettes, do you?
I absolutely do. I absolutely know that she was.
That was Mr. Douglas on Friday, March the 5th.
And what's the other way that we have demonstrated, the defendants have demonstrated, that Charlotte Douglas was in control, that she was always able to quit when she was motivated to do so? The simple fact that she has quit, not once but many times over the years. In 1970 according to Mr. Douglas, cold turkey. In the late seventies or early eighties for several weeks when she went to the Schick Center. In 1993 or 1994, she quit for two or three months with her husband. In 1999, again, she quit for 30 days.
In 2000, she quit for 16 months, according to Dr. Sumner. And, finally, in November of 2004,
she quits for good. That's how you know Charlotte Douglas was in control.
Now, even though the trial took shorter than we originally predicted, you did hear a lot of evidence. And I want to walk you through that evidence. And I've got the same timelines that I showed you just less than a week ago, except what I have done. And I'll show you here, the black -Can you all see that in the back there?
The black is what I showed you on Wednesday. And to the extent that things that I couldn't promise you you were going to hear, because I didn't know how the evidence would come in, to the extent those things have occurred, I've added those things in blue -- additional things that have been proved in the evidence.
And so, ladies and gentlemen, so you know, the plaintiff has failed to sustain his burden of proof in this case. I want to walk you through all this evidence again to the story of Charlotte and James Douglas. The whole story.
You heard Dr. Kaplan tell you, to really know whether someone is addicted or not, you need to know how they lived their lives. You need to know what motivated them, why they did the things that
they do. And we are going to walk you through that.
And, again, I want to remind you of one of the thing I said. Anything I say about Mr. and Mrs. Douglas is not intended to be a criticism of
them because of the things they did or did not do.
We all have the right to make decisions in our lives. The same is true with Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas. But you need to understand how they lived their life.
I'm not going to spend a whole lot of time on this early part, because, frankly, Mrs. Luther and Mr. Boyce talked a lot about it. But you know Charlotte Douglas was born Charlotte Marr in Rome, Georgia. You know she grew up being told by her parents don't smoke, it's bad for you. You heard that evidence in the case.
You've heard, and frankly the plaintiffs own expert talked about it, Dr. Benowitz, said that in 1964, when Charlotte Douglas was 18 years old, the Surgeon General of the United States issued the very first report on smoking and health. The very first report. Charlotte Douglas was 18 years old when that came out.
You know that in 1966 -- Ms. Luther talked
about it -- the very first warning went on cigarette packs. Caution: Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health.
And I don't want to go into all the specifics, but ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Boyce showed you the slide. Ms. Luther talked about it. The evidence is that Charlotte Douglas started to smoke after she graduated from high school when she attended the Bauder Fashion College. That's the evidence you've heard.
All Mr. Acosta has shown you is a medical record from 40 years later when she guesstimated how long she had been smoking. That's all the evidence. And I had the same testimony from Charlotte Parker -- but you have already heard this -- she didn't smoke in high school.
These are the same medical records from 1966 Mr. Boyce showed you. I don't want to spend much time on that, you know. She didn't say a word about cigarette smoking. The doctors did not comment one bit.
The point is here is another record in 1995 where she said she had been smoking for 25 years. The point of all this is Charlotte Douglas was an informed cigarette smoker. Even Mrs. Douglas
acknowledged that by the early seventies -- and then I showed him his deposition testimony where he said the early sixties -- he and his wife understood that cigarette smoking was dangerous to their health. He told you that. He further told you that in about 1970, they first tried to quit smoking out of a concern for their health. So there is no debate about that. Charlotte Douglas was an informed smoker.
So what happens? You know that at the time Charlotte Marr meets James Cooper -- his name was Cooper, not Douglas, at that point in time -- they get married and they move to California. They know that smoking is dangerous. Mr. Douglas told you -- and I'm just kind of moving a little bit forward here for a moment. They both quit cold turkey in 1970. Mr. Douglas quit for six years.
We don't know exactly how long Mrs. Douglas quit for. But she quit in 1970.
You know that when James and Charlotte Douglas moved to California, Mr. Douglas goes to pursue business interests. Mrs. Douglas becomes the director of a modeling and fashion school at the age of 22 or 23 years old, in 1969 or 1970.
You know they were both interested in modeling and
acting. Charlotte Douglas encourages her husband to be in cigarette ads, and he's in these cigarette ads. He poses as the Marlboro Man in an ad for Marlboro cigarettes. He also poses in an ad for Raleigh cigarettes made by the R. J.
Reynolds Tobacco Company.
Now he did not tell us that in his deposition. We had to learn that after the fact.
But the significant point is James and Charlotte Douglas were proud that he had been the Marlboro Man, so proud that they took a picture of that ad of James Douglas as the Marlboro Man and put it on the wall of their home in their children's playroom. They told all their friends. James Douglas is the Marlboro Man. That's the evidence you heard in the case.
Now, I need to talk a little bit about an issue of credibility. And it first came up with this Marlboro Man ad.
The instruction you received from Judge Pendino is that you, the jury, decide which witnesses you are going to believe, which testimony you are going to believe. And in determining the believability of the witnesses, you can consider a variety of different things.
And these are part of the instructions you just received from Judge Pendino.
The demeanor the witness while testifying, the frankness or lack of frankness of the witness, any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case, and the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness considered in light of all the evidence in the case and in light of your own experience and common sense.
And, yes, ladies and gentlemen, we want you to use your common sense when you evaluate the testimony of the witnesses.
You may recall that in his deposition,
Mr. Douglas initially said he had not been in any cigarette ads.
And we said, Wait a minute. Weren't you the Marlboro Man?
He said, Oh, yeah. I was the Marlboro Man.
We asked him, Do you have any of those cigarette ads?
He said, No, I didn't have any of those ads.
You will remember I had the deposition. I don't have it here, but we had the deposition of Mr. Douglas. And I had to ask Mr. Douglas several things about what he said in his deposition,
because what you saw in this courtroom was that on several occasions Mr. Douglas told you things that were diametrically opposite of what he said in his deposition under oath.
We asked him at the very beginning of that deposition, Is there any reason that you know, of either physically or mentally, why you could not give truthful and accurate testimony today?
He said, No.
You also heard that six weeks after that deposition on September the 23rd, he filled out what is called an errata sheet in which he had an opportunity to read the entire deposition, make whatever changes he thought needed to be made if he gave an incorrect answer. And then he signed that document under oath. And he made no changes to the deposition. None.
But when he came into this courtroom, and after several times of having to show him that deposition and show him testimony that was different from what he said, on the witness stand,
I asked him, Are you telling us that we shouldn't rely on any of the answers that you gave in that deposition on September 23rd, 2008?
And his answer was, I don't know. I don't
know.
You know that our system, we have rules in our system. There is logic to our system. When Mr. Acosta and I and the other lawyers stood up at the very beginning of the case and we give you our opening statement, we do that because we tell you what we think the evidence will show, because we get to ask witnesses questions in a deposition.
We rely upon that. But in this courtroom, no one was able to rely upon anything that Mr. Douglas had said in his deposition under oath. And you need to just know that as you evaluate the testimony in this case.
We’re going to get to it later, but you know that Mr. Douglas kept those ads all these years. And we’re going to get to it chronologically. We get into the seventies. You remember that Mr. Douglas asks Mrs. Douglas to stop working outside the home to help him with his businesses. They run this ranch in Georgia, Wildwood Acres. Mrs. Douglas has her three children in 1974, ’75, and ’77. And the testimony you heard is as that decade wore on, Mr. Douglas did well financially. He acknowledged that. He did well financially. And by the early 1980s, he changes his name from
James Cooper to James Douglas, and they hire house keepers, Oldrich and Ivana Unger.
The evidence you’ve also heard is that Mrs. Douglas was interested, concerned about her appearance. It was important to her, because she was a model, that she was slim, that she was attractive. Mr. Douglas also told you that his wife’s beauty, her attractiveness, her build was important to him as well. And you heard the testimony of Mr. Oldrich Unger. It was read to you yesterday. Mr. Douglas expressed that to her.
He expressed to his wife concerns that she not eat too much because of what it might do to her figure. You heard that testimony.
You know that Mrs. Douglas smoked cigarettes for a variety of reasons, and one of those reasons was to control her weight to suppress her appetite. That’s the evidence you’ve heard.
Right around the same period of time, maybe the late seventies, early eighties, you heard that Charlotte Douglas attends the Schick Center. You heard that from Barbara Albrecht. Her deposition was read to you during the course of the case.
And you know that Mrs. Douglas quit for several weeks while she was attending the Schick Center.
It was a several-week course. And while she didn’t quit for good thereafter, she quit for several weeks during the time she went to the Schick Center.
Now, I asked Mr. Douglas several questions.
You all heard them. I asked him if they didn’t terminate Oldrich and Ivana Unger because they were experiencing financial problems? You remember those questions?
The evidence you heard was that in about 1984, April of 1984, Mr. and Mrs. Douglas terminated the Ungers. Mr. Douglas denied several times that they had any financial problems. Eventually, when I showed him a letter showing that he owed $200,000, he acknowledged not that he had financial problems, but that he had cash flow problems. That was his language, cash flow problems.
Why did I ask him these questions? I asked him these questions because he denied that his wife experienced any stress. He denied that his wife experienced any stress.
You know, you’ve heard the evidence now.
Stress relief was one of the significant reasons why Charlotte Douglas smoked cigarettes. It
helped her cope with stress. She led a busy, active lifestyle. She was the director of this fashion and modeling agency. She raised three children. She home schooled her oldest -- excuse me, her youngest son, Lamont. She helped her husband run his businesses. Mr. Unger told you that. Of course that causes stress. And you don’t have to -- you don’t have to take it from me. We showed you the medical records.
Mrs. Douglas expressed to her own doctors that at times she experienced stress and anxiety and depression. And this doctor’s note is very poignant: I suspect she is taking care of everyone else’s needs rather than her own.
We all deal with stress all the time.
Everybody has a stressful lifestyle. So did Mrs. Douglas. You’ve seen the evidence. That’s why we asked Mr. Douglas those questions. And he denied that his wife experienced any stress. You all know that stress is a part of life. And for Charlotte Douglas, smoking cigarettes helped her cope with that stress.
Now, you also know that as we move from the late eighties into the nineties, that Mr. and Mrs. Douglas and their children moved to Scotland.
They leave California in 1987, and they move to Scotland, and they live in this castle called Faside. I told you in the opening statement that there would be evidence that around this time they moved to Scotland in the late eighties, early nineties, there would be evidence that Mrs. Douglas was already beginning to experience some symptoms consistent with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. That's what I told you in the opening statements.
Now, what you heard during the course of this trial was when we asked Mr. Douglas questions in writing, Where have you lived in your life? Where have you lived? He never mentioned living in this castle in Scotland. He never mentioned it. In fact, during the deposition you heard me ask him, Was your wife ever in an automobile accident?
Here is the question and answer.
And when we asked you in your deposition 17 months ago whether your wife was ever injured in an automobile accident, your answer under oath seventeen months ago was, Not that I'm aware, right?
Right, correct. And I was absolutely wrong, and I just did not recall it at that moment in
time.
You didn't recall the accident?
I should have, but I didn't.
He didn't recall that they lived in Scotland.
He didn't recall that his wife was in an automobile accident.
And you heard the details of that. She was life-flighted by helicopter from a field about a mile from the castle to a hospital in Scotland.
Her son Lamont witnessed the accident from the castle and ran to his mother's aid. He was scared to death for his mother. And Mr. Douglas says, well, about the accident, he couldn't recall when he gave his deposition. My son Lamont is mistaken. He could not have seen the accident because the accident occurred in a valley between two hills, and you couldn't see it from the castle.
He remembers all that on the witness stand.
He didn't remember any of it 17 months ago when he gave his deposition. And this is important, because as you -- as you all know now, you've seen medical records. These medical records reflect periods of time, whether -- when Mrs. Douglas was smoking, her health complaints, what was going on
with her health, what was she telling her doctors about stress, about her cigarette smoking. We don't even know if she was smoking cigarettes in Scotland. We have not heard any evidence to that effect. But because we didn't know about it, we couldn't get to those records. That's why we asked Mr. Douglas about that.
But I can show you -- I think I've got a board that shows this. Right around the same period of time, right around the same period of time when they apparently came back from Scotland, you heard some testimony about this. Mrs. Douglas fainted at a restaurant in Tampa in October 1989.
She reported difficulty breathing, which is panicking her. She says she feels like she simply can't get enough air. She is a smoker and is extremely worried about her lungs. Right around the time that they were in Scotland.
You can't really see it, but there is other records that show that they were going back and forth between Florida and Scotland right during this period of time.
We've put several of these records in evidence as a composite exhibit. You can look for it. It's a much more condensed set of records.
But it's PMU004248. It's a small packet of
records. And it's got all of these records that are important to the issues in the case.
They moved to St. Pete Beach sometime in '89 or 1990, in that period of time. And Mrs. Douglas began to see a doctor named Dr. Sumner, who testified in the case. You saw Dr. Sumner.
Dr. Sumner actually suspected that Mrs. Douglas had COPD in 1993. He formally diagnosis her in 1994. He tells her she should quit smoking. And we know somewhere in this time period -- we don't know exactly when, but Mr. Douglas told you this -- that his wife quit smoking for two or three months in this period of time. In that period of time for two or three months.
And you now know the significance of that. You've heard the testimony from all the experts. After two or three days, all the nicotine is out of your body. After two or three weeks, any withdrawal symptoms -- and, frankly, you haven't heard any significant withdrawal symptoms that Mrs. Douglas had -- but any withdrawal symptoms, with the exception of appetite, are gone after two or three weeks. Any of these changes in the brain that Dr. Benowitz talked about, the up-regulation,
reverted back to normal in two or three weeks.
That's the evidence you have heard. That is the significance of the fact that over periods of time she quit for months at a time.
And remember what you heard Dr. Sumner tell you about the encounter in 1994? He tells her she has COPD and she must stop smoking. He counsels her and gives her patches. X4W means types four weeks. A prescription for patches. Remember, he told you it was a prescription back then. Book given. Tape loaned. No evidence of present cancer. And he says, Follow up. Actually, that's typo. It should say, Follow up one month. That's what Dr. Sumner told you.
He told you he didn't know if she ever filled the prescription.
You also know that a month later on July the 5th, his assistant calls Mrs. Douglas and says,
Are you coming in to have the one-month followup that Dr. Sumner asked you to do? And Mrs. Douglas said, I'll call you back and schedule the appointment.
Twenty days later, when Mrs. Douglas has not called, they send a card. Dr. Sumner's office sends a card to remind Mrs. Douglas to schedule
the appointment. And one month later in August 25th, 1994, Mrs. Douglas has still not called to schedule an appointment.
At this point in time, quitting smoked was not a priority for Mrs. Douglas if she hasn't scheduled the appointment that Dr. Sumner has asked her to schedule.
Then we move into past '93, '94. You heard that in 1995 through 1999, Dr. Sumner continues to tell Charlotte Douglas she needs to quit smoking.
You heard the testimony of Matthew Templeton. That's Mrs. Douglas's former son-in-law. He said Mrs. Douglas quit smoking for 30 days with her daughter Jennifer in 1999. And what did Mr. Templeton tell you? He said he noticed no irritability, no mood change, no change in her disposition, no withdrawal symptoms to speak of in that 30-day period. Mr. Templeton was working with Mr. and Mrs. Douglas in their tax lien business.
Dr. Sumner told you -- and you saw this -Charlotte Douglas quit smoked for 16 months, from May 200 through September 2001. Sixteen months. Sixteen months.
And then I want to remind you of what
happened in 2003. You heard all the evidence all during the course of this trial that Mrs. Douglas was diagnosed with COPD in 1994 by Dr. Sumner. Yet on February the 17th of 2003, Mr. and Mrs. Douglas are applying for health insurance, health insurance coverage. Here are their signatures. They represent that answers and statements on this application are true, complete, and correctly recorded.
One of the questions they were asked was Question No. 21: In the last 10 years, has any applicant had any indication, signs, symptoms, diagnosis, or treatment of any disease, disorder, or abnormality of the respiratory system.
And they checked no. They checked no, that neither Mr. Douglas nor Mrs. Douglas suffered from any kind of respiratory problem.
This was in 2003. According to the plaintiff, she has been suffering from COPD since 1994.
Now, what did Mr. Douglas have to say about this? The insurance agent filled out the form wrong.
Think about that for a second. The first couple of questions I asked Mr. Douglas was when
you graduated from the University of Florida, what was your first job? He was an insurance agent for Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance. He sold insurance, and he trained insurance agents.
Mr. Douglas, he also said he ran companies. He was the president of international companies. Do you think Mr. Douglas would put his name on a document when he didn't understand the significance of what he was saying? Is that believable? That's what you saw happen in this courtroom.
You've heard all this evidence at this point, but let me recap.
Mrs. Douglas's COPD is exacerbated in November 2004. She quit smoking like that. Fortunately for her, she gets out of the hospital relatively quickly. She tells her doctor she quits, but occasionally she will take a cigarette from her husband, light it, bring it to her mouth and puff but not inhale. And Charlotte Douglas tells all of her doctors that she quit smoking.
Her husband and her go to Argentina and Brazil with her friends the Fords later that same year, over the holidays in 2004, 2005. In 2006, she's diagnosed with lung cancer. She passes away in
February of 2008.
That brings to us to 2009 and back to the Marlboro Man.
There is really only one reason why these cigarette ads were important. The fact that he was in the ads 40 years wasn’t important. What’s important is after Charlotte Douglas is diagnosed with COPD, after she’s diagnosed with lung cancer, after she passes away, after Mr. Douglas files this lawsuit claiming that Philip Morris and the other companies should be responsible for his wife’s death, he is still proud that he was the Marlboro Man and he was in the cigarette ads. How do we know that? We know that because you heard his testimony. In July 2009 -Well, let me back up.
He tells his fiancee that he was the Marlboro Man, his fiancee after Mrs. Douglas passed away.
In July 2009, he shows her one of those ads while they are remodeling, while they are renovating his Tennessee home. He is still proud that he was the Marlboro Man to this day.
He knew when he showed her that ad in July 2009 that we, the defendants, had asked for it.
We said, Give us a copy of the ad. He knew that
you might want to see that ad in this case, that you might find that ad significant. But despite knowing it had been asked by the defendants, despite showing it to his fiancee, what did Mr. Douglas tell you? What did he tell you?
Then I have no idea what happened to it. We were continuing to put stuff away. We were moving things, throwing things out, garbage bags every place. But I can’t find it. You know, I -because I knew that I should send it, and I was going to.
And then I asked him: The ad disappeared?
I don’t think it disappeared. I think it just went away.
It just went away.
Ladies and gentlemen, you’ve heard the expression a picture is worth a thousand words. Undoubtedly, Mr. Douglas has heard the same expression. He knows that if you saw that ad, you would understand he is still proud today and what that means, even though he has filed a lawsuit against the same companies who sold those cigarettes.
Now, you’ve heard the entire story, the entire story of James and Charlotte Douglas.
You’ve heard all the evidence. And I’m going to talk now about the quality of the evidence you have heard. And I’m going to focus on three expert witnesses you have heard from so far in this trial.
I want to start with talking about Dr. Benowitz. You saw Dr. Benowitz. He testified by videotape deposition. He was on the screen.
Dr. Benowitz told you essentially every cigarette smoker is addicted. If you smoke 10 cigarettes a day for 10 years, you are addicted. And that was Dr. Benowitz’s standard.
What’s significant about Dr. Benowitz was he never read a single deposition in this case; he never reviewed a single medical record of Mrs. Douglas; he knew nothing about Charlotte Douglas. In fact, he did not know Mrs. Douglas’s name.
So what weight should you give to an opinion that has absolutely nothing to do with the evidence that you all have sat through here for the last four days? That was Dr. Benowitz.
You also heard from Dr. Goldman. Mr. Acosta and Mr. Boyce have talked about Dr. Goldman, but let’s talk about Dr. Goldman for a second.
Dr. Goldman is a pulmonologist at the University of South Florida. You remember he told that he ran the very first smoking cessation program. He started the very first smoking cessation program in about 1974, ’75. He told you his program had a zero success rate. A zero success rate. But what else did Dr. Goldman tell you? Dr. Goldman told you that every regular cigarette smoker is addicted. Every regular cigarette smoker. He offered you no real medical criteria, no real criteria of any kind by which you could evaluate for yourselves whether or not Mrs. Douglas was addicted. And what do we know? He didn’t read a single one of the depositions.
And why is that important? Because that’s where all the evidence you’ve heard about when Mrs. Douglas quit comes from.
She quit in 1970, according to Mr. Douglas in his deposition. Dr. Goldman didn’t read it. She quit when she went to the Schick Center, also from the deposition testimony. Dr. Goldman didn’t read it.
According to Mr. Douglas, she quit in 1993 or 1994 for two to three months. Not in the medical records. Again, Dr. Goldman didn’t read it.
1999, Matthew Templeton said she quit for 30 days. That's a deposition. Dr. Goldman did not read it.
All Dr. Goldman knew was she quit in 2004. That's all he knew.
What else do you know about Dr. Goldman? You know that none of that matters to him, because if you are a regular cigarette smoker, you are addicted. He doesn't care what any of the family members or friends say in the deposition.
Thank you.
What else do you know about Dr. Goldman? You know that Dr. Goldman and Mr. Acosta have been working together on lawsuits for 30 years,
Dr. Goldman told you that. And they have been working together on tobacco cases for 15 years.
But what's significant? Mr. Acosta has asked Dr. Goldman to testify 32 times. Thirty-two times. And what has Dr. Goldman said in all 32 cases? The smoker was addicted.
Do you think Mr. Acosta knew what Dr. Goldman was going to say about Charlotte Douglas before he ever sent him a single medical record? Of course he knew. Every cigarette smoker is addicted, according to Dr. Goldman.
We brought you Dr. Eric Kaplan. And Dr. Eric Kaplan brought you a real diagnosing criteria, a medical criteria for determining whether a person is addicted or dependent upon nicotine. And I want to show you the difference, ladies and gentlemen, I would submit, between Dr. Kaplan and the experts you heard from the plaintiff, because you -- you also got this instruction.
You can accept -- this was the instruction that Judge Pendino gave you. You can accept or reject any or all of the expert testimony you have heard in the case. You get to decide.
And when it comes to deciding whose opinion you want to rely upon, look at who had the information. Who had all the information? When we walked into the courtroom Dr. Kaplan had reviewed all the medical records. He had read the deposition of Mr. Douglas, the plaintiff in the case, the single most important deposition. He had read the depositions of all the family members, all the friends, and he brought you a real medical diagnostic criteria. And he walked you through that. He walked you through that. He explained to you why Charlotte Douglas was not addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. He walked you
through this.
All Dr. Goldman had were medical records, and Dr. Benowitz had none of that.
So who are you going to rely upon when you deliberate in this case? You should rely upon the expert who came here with all the evidence, all the facts, prepared to discuss all of that with you and who applied a real criteria.
And what did Dr. Kaplan tell you? He told you that to determine whether someone is addicted to any substance -- any substance, including nicotine -- there must be a clinically significant impairment or distress. Clinically significant impairment or distress. Your cigarette smoking must affect some important aspect of your life.
And he walked you through the criteria. And he explained to you that Mrs. Douglas didn't meet the criteria.
And even Mr. Acosta had to acknowledge the Surgeon General -- the Surgeon General -- cited the American Psychiatric Association and the DSM in the Surgeon General's report.
Dr. Kaplan told you that cigarette smoking did not prevent Charlotte Douglas from doing anything she wanted to do in her life. Didn't
prevent her from doing anything she wanted. And you know from the evidence, we just walked through the time line all the significant events, you know that Charlotte Douglas did everything she wanted to do. You know the kind person she was.
Intelligent, courageous, strong-willed, a hard worker, a quick learner, a doer. You know all this. Dr. Kaplan told you that.
Mr. Douglas, he didn't want to acknowledge it at certain points, but he begrudgingly acknowledged that fact as well.
What Dr. Kaplan told you yesterday, that Mrs. Douglas was not addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes, is supported by all the evidence you've heard in this case; supported by the personality that Mrs. Douglas, who she was, what she accomplished.
Dr. Kaplan told you that Mrs. Douglas was in control of her smoking. She was in control of her smoking, not Philip Morris, not R.J. Reynolds, not the Liggett Group.
And what did both Dr. Kaplan and Dr. Benowitz tell you? The significant point in this case, the reason why the plaintiff cannot prove that an addiction was the legal cause of Mrs. Douglas's
disease and death -- even Dr. Benowitz agreed with this simple but significant point -- with the right motivation, with the right support, any smoker can quit. What did Dr. Benowitz tell you?
I think that's true. I think that's true. The two experts in the case you have heard from,
Dr. Benowitz and Dr. Kaplan agree.
What else did Dr. Kaplan -- excuse me -Dr. Benowitz agree with Dr. Kaplan about? When I put this board together, I put this board together knowing what Dr. Benowitz had said. Dr. Benowitz agrees with all of this: Sixty million Americans have quit smoking in this country. Three thousand per day. Most of those are heavy smokers, people who smoke as much or more than Charlotte Douglas. Ninety percent have quit cold turkey. Ninety percent. And what do both Dr. Benowitz and Dr. Kaplan and even Dr. Goldman agree is the key element to quitting? It's motivation. It's motivation.
And ladies and gentlemen, where does motivation? It comes from within. It doesn't comes from a patch. It doesn't come from the gum.
It doesn't come from a Zyban. It comes from within. And you know Mrs. Douglas had motivation
when she wanted to because of all the things that she accomplished in her life you know that.
Could Mrs. Douglas have quit smoking whenever she was truly motivated to so? The answer is clear and unmistakable: Absolutely yes. Could she have quit smoking at a point earlier in time and avoided the COPD and the lung cancer that took her death? Absolutely she could. Absolutely she could.
Let me show you one more thing that I talked to Dr. Benowitz about. I asked Dr. Benowitz about this pamphlet from the American Cancer Society called Smart Move. The American Cancer Society has been encouraging people in this country to quit for more than 40 years. They are a true authority on cigarette smoking and the methods which by which people can quit smoking.
And what does the American Cancer Society tell us about what it takes to quit smoking?
Three questions. According to the American Cancer Society, if you can answer these three questions you can quit.
Do you want to stop smoking? You've heard all the experts tell you that. You've got to want to quit smoke. Are you willing to make some
changes in your daily routine? And, three, are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping? If you can answer yes to all three of these questions, according to the American Cancer Society, you can quit smoking.
Could Mrs. Douglas very answered yes to all three of those questions? Undoubtedly. Undoubtedly. And that's supported by the mountain of evidence we presented to you during course of the last several days. And we know that she could because she did. 1970, late seventies, early eighties with the Schick Center. 1993, 1994, two to three months. 1999, for 30 days. 2000 for six months. And finally, for good, in 2004. That's the evidence you've heard.
Mrs. Douglas was decisive, strong and independent. You know that now, having heard the evidence. She had the will power to accomplish anything she wanted in life. Anything she wanted in life. Nicotine did not prevent her from making a free choice to smoke cigarettes. Nicotine did not prevent her from exercising her free choice to decide to quit smoking when she wanted to quit. That's the evidence you've heard, ladies and gentlemen.
The truth is -- and you heard both Dr. Benowitz talk about this and Dr. Kaplan talk about this -- for many years Charlotte Douglas made a lifestyle choice, a lifestyle choice.
Dr. Benowitz talked about it.
He mentioned the fact that he treats patients who have hypertension, high blood pressure, and heart disease, and he tells them, You know what? You have to stop eating McDonald's; you have to cut the fatty foods out of your diet; you have got to exercise more.
And what did Dr. Benowitz tell you? He said, yeah, these things aren't addictive, but I have a hard time getting my patients to do these things. It's difficult to make changes in your lifestyle. And our motivation to do those things changes as we get older.
Dr. Benowitz talked about the same thing. When you are in your twenties and thirties, you don't worry about your health. It's not until you get later in life and when you begin to see the possibility that you're really jeopardizing your health that you finally reach the point where you have the motivation to make the changes in your behavior necessary to eliminate these health
risks. And cigarette smoking is no different. No different. And Dr. Benowitz told you that.
Now, I want to pause for a second and mention one or two things. Mr. Acosta is going to get back up here, he is going to have the last opportunity to speak.
He talked a little bit about Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds and the Liggett Group. All of that is a distraction. All of that is a distraction. When you look at the verdict form, you’re going to see there is no mention of all these things he talked about, no mention of any of those things, no mention that anything Philip Morris said or didn’t say or R.J. Reynolds or Liggett had anything to do with why Charlotte Douglas smoked cigarettes, why she chose to resume smoking at point in time after she quit or why she ultimately quit in 2004. Absolutely nothing to do with that.
But because he brought that up, I need to be responsive. That’s the test. The plaintiff has failed to prove that an addiction -- that an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was the legal cause, the but for cause, the substantial cause of why Charlotte Douglas smoked.
She smoked because she enjoyed smoking. Plaintiff has acknowledged her own actions. Her own failure to quit was a legal cause. And, ladies and gentlemen, I would submit to you that it was the legal cause. The legal cause.
You know the whole story about Mr. and Mrs. Douglas. All the evidence has been presented to you. I think, frankly, this case really comes down to several simple points.
James Douglas at his deposition in a rare moment of candor told you he did not believe his wife was addicted to cigarettes. Now after learning that whether she was addicted and whether that addiction was the legal cause of her disease and death, after learning that that’s the key issue, he came into this courtroom, swore an oath to tell the truth, and told you the exact opposite.
Despite everything that Mr. Douglas would like you to believe, what do we know about Charlotte Douglas?
We know she was intelligent. We know she was strong. We know she was decisive. We know she had motivation. Charlotte Douglas accomplished everything she wanted to accomplish in her life,
and those things took motivation, persistence, and discipline. That's who Charlotte Douglas was.
And there is nothing about Charlotte Douglas that you’ve heard of during the course of this trial that would give you any reason to believe that she wasn’t any different from the 60 million Americans who quit smoking prior to today.
And finally and most importantly, Charlotte Douglas was in control. She always had the ability to quit smoking when she was sufficiently motivated to do so. And we know that because the plaintiff has admitted that her own decisions, her own choices were the substantial contributing cause, the but for cause. In other words, but for Mrs. Douglas’s own choices, her own decisions, she would not have developed COPD. She would not have developed lung cancer. She would not have died.
We talked about this concept in opening. You cannot be responsible. And the plaintiff has acknowledged she is responsible unless you are in control. Charlotte Douglas was in control. And we know that because she quit. We have gone over all the times that she has quit. There is no dispute about that. There is none whatsoever based on the evidence that you’ve heard.
The truth is Charlotte Douglas smoked cigarettes because she enjoyed smoking, because she liked to smoke cigarettes. And for many years, for Charlotte Douglas, she made a lifestyle choice. She decided that she would enjoy the benefits of cigarette smoking. And to her, at least, those benefits outweighed the long-term health risks of smoking. And it wasn’t until 2004 when she suffered from an exacerbation of her COPD that she finally said, Enough is enough; it’s time to quit. And when she came to that realization, she quit just like that.
Ladies and gentlemen, in a few short minutes you’re going to have the case in your hands.
You’re going to go back into that jury room, and you’re going to deliberate, and you’re going to render a verdict. And I would submit to you that based upon all the evidence you’ve heard, the only fair and just verdict for you to return based on the evidence that you’ve heard from that witness stand and the instruction from Judge Pendino is a verdict for Philip Morris and the other defendants in this case, based upon what I told you in the opening statement, the three simple truths.
Charlotte Douglas made an informed choice to
smoke; she enjoyed smoking cigarettes; Charlotte Douglas was in control. She always had the ability to quit whenever she chose to do so.
Thank you very much for your time and attention.
MS. LUTHER: Your Honor. May it please the Court.
Good morning still. Just barely. As a reminder, I'm Kelly Luther. Along with Mr. Thomas, who has been very patiently sitting back in the corner there, we represent Liggett Group.
I want to begin by saying on behalf of Mr. Thomas and myself that it has been a privilege to represent Liggett before you in Judge Pendino's courtroom. And we thank you for your time, your attention and your commitment to this jury service. We really do appreciate it.
As Mr. Boyce mentioned, Mr. Geraghty is going to kind of do wrap-up for us, and he is going to cover the bulk of the issues that apply to all the defendants. So as usual, I'm going to be very brief.
When I addressed you last week in my opening statement, I told you what I believed this case is all about and what I expected the evidence to
show. And that is that it's really only about a man who wants the companies to pay him money because of decisions his wife made. She started smoking as an adult. She made an informed choice to smoke for approximately 35 years, and she got sick notwithstanding a lifetime of messages, information, warnings, and actual knowledge about hazards of smoking.
Now, as Mr. Boyce mentioned, Mrs. Douglas graduated high school in 1965 when she was about 19 years old. Charlotte Parker, Mrs. Douglas's best friend, someone who said that she spent a great deal of time at the Marrs with them -because that was Mr. Douglas's maiden name -- her senior year. She said she was over there all the time after school. She is someone who would have known if Mrs. Douglas was smoking back then, and she testified that she was not smoking.
So we know that Mrs. Douglas did not start smoking until sometime after 1966. And that was one to two years after the 1964 Surgeon General's report came out linking smoking to lung cancer.
We also know that the first warning labels went on the packs of cigarettes and the cartons of cigarettes starting in 1966 around the time that
she started smoking. The warnings went on the packs in January of 1966. We also know that Mrs. Douglas believed that warning, because Mr. Douglas testified that they were both aware of the health hazards of smoking by the late 1960s.
By all accounts, Mrs. Douglas was a lovely woman. You have the pictures. We've all seen them. I -- I thought it was kind of interesting that in all of the photographs here in evidence you don't see a single cigarette in her hand.
She was uniformly described by the witnesses in this case, including her husband, her friends, her family, her treating physician, Dr. Sumner, as an intelligent woman. According to Mr. Douglas, she was a doer. And I don't know if you remember the exchange, doer, d-o-e-r, versus dour, d-o-u-r. And he finally confirmed that no, he did mean she was a doer. She got things done. He told us that she was a strong person with great courage. Those are Mr. Douglas's words. She is no one's victim.
The bottom line is that someone with these personality traits understood her actions and the potential consequences. Mrs. Douglas chose to start smoking with actual knowledge that the behavior presented a risk to her health, and she
chose to continue smoking through the years with actual knowledge that the behavior presented a risk to her health.
Now, when I sit down I'm not going to have an opportunity to address you again before you deliberate. Plaintiffs counsel will have the opportunity to speak to you again after all the defendants have gone, because the plaintiff bears the burden of proof, so the rules allow him to speak last.
During jury selection, you each committed to set aside what is only natural -- your sympathy for Mr. Douglas at the loss of his wife. And you also committed to holding the plaintiff to his burden of proof. We appreciate your willingness to do so. And because the plaintiff failed to satisfy his burden of proof, I ask that you return a verdict in favor of all the defendants. Thank you.
