MR. FURR:  May it please the Court, counsel,
16 Mr. Duke.  Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
Ladies and gentlemen, I think the only possible place I
18 can start this morning is to begin by thanking you for your
19 jury service.  We have the greatest justice system in the
20 world.  And the jury system is right at the heart of our
21 justice system.  Serving as a juror is one of the highest
22 civic responsibilities we have in our society.  It may be
23 secondary only to serving in our military.
Why is our system so great?  Our system is great
25 because our system is fair.  It's fair to everyone.  If
    47
 1 someone thinks they have been wronged they can bring a
 2 lawsuit.  They can come to court and ask a jury to award
 3 them money.  But it's fair to both sides because they have
 4 to prove their case.  They don't get money just because they
 5 filed a lawsuit.  They have to prove their case.
 6
How do they have to prove their case?  They have to
 7 prove their case with facts, they have to prove their case
 8 with evidence, they have to prove their case under the law
 9 that the Court is going to instruct you on, that I'm going
10 to discuss with you a bit this morning.
They can't prove their case with rhetoric, they can't
12 prove their case with speculation or guesswork, they can't
13 prove their case by trying to engender sympathy for one of
14 the parties.  They have to prove their case with the
15 evidence, with the facts.  Ladies and gentlemen, with all
16 due respect, there has been a complete failure of proof in
17 this case.
The plaintiffs have made multiple claims and they've
19 proven none of them.  And I'm going to spend my time talking
20 about the way that they have failed to prove any of their
21 claims.  It's very important at the outset to remember --
22 you've heard it already -- it's their burden to prove their
23 claims.  Their claims are not proven unless they produce the
24 evidence and facts to do so.  That's the burden they take
25 when they come in here and ask you for money.
    48
 1
So what's this case about?  Let's remind ourselves.
 2 This case is about Mrs. Sarah Duke.  It's not about all
 3 smokers, it's not about other smokers.  The class action
 4 portion of this case is over.  It's now a case where
 5 Mr. Duke gets to try to prove his claims.  It's not about
 6 the public health.  I mean the only witnesses they brought
 7 you were public health officials.  And I'm going to talk to
 8 you about their perspective on things and why it simply
 9 doesn't add up to proof in a case about an individual.
It's about Sarah Duke.  And what else is this case
11 about?  They didn't get to it until the very end but the
12 case is about money.  You have now heard that Mr. Duke is
13 here to ask you to make him a millionaire because his mother
14 smoked cigarettes for decades, despite being warned over and
15 over and over about the dangers without ever trying to quit
16 for decades.  That's their claim as to why he should be made
17 a millionaire.
Now, they have made very specific legal claims in this
19 case.  The case is not just a general issue of who's right
20 and who's wrong.  He's filed legal claims.  He has to prove
21 the specific issues that you're going to see on your verdict
22 form.  And he has the burden to do that.  But the trouble is
23 he can't prove his claims because he doesn't have the
24 evidence.  When evidence is missing, when it's not
25 available, that's the plaintiff's problem.  Not the
    49
 1 defendant's problem.  Because the plaintiffs have to prove
 2 their claims.
 3
You will see that they can't prove their claims because
 4 the evidence is either missing or the evidence is even -- or
 5 the evidence is inconsistent with the claims that they have
 6 made here.
 7
Let's look at the evidence that's missing.  What is it
 8 that we don't know about Mrs. Duke?  Because they can't meet
 9 their burden of proof without their evidence.  That's what
10 they have got to produce to you.  You know, we don't really
11 know when she started but more importantly, we don't know
12 what brand she started with.  We don't know what Mrs. Duke
13 smoked until 1961 to 1963.  That's the first time there's
14 any evidence that she was smoking Winston cigarettes.  She
15 would have been around 36 years old at that time.
If the medical records are accurate with respect to
17 when she began smoking, she would have been smoking
18 somewhere in the range of 15 to 17 years when we don't know
19 whose brand she was smoking.  There's no evidence that she
20 was smoking R.J. Reynolds' brand during that time.  And
21 that's the plaintiff's problem.  Because they have the
22 burden of proof.
But they're asking you to blame R.J. Reynolds for
24 everything.  And you have to decide whether that's right,
25 whether they met their burden of proof.  Not only do we not
    50
 1 know a lot of the evidence, not only do the plaintiff not
 2 have the evidence, like I said, a lot of the evidence is
 3 inconsistent with their claims.
 4
What do we know we know?  We know that Mrs. Duke was
 5 warned about the dangers of smoking the entire time she
 6 smoked.  She was warned by the public health community, she
 7 was warned by the media, we know she was warned by her
 8 family, she was warned by her doctors.  And of course we
 9 didn't talk a lot about this, but from 1966 on she was
10 warned by every package of cigarettes that she picked up
11 that had a warning label on the side of packs.  From 1971
12 on, every advertisement she saw had a warning label in the
13 advertisement.
And she had very powerful personal warnings that we're
15 going to talk about.  But you all know the evidence.  You
16 know that her doctors and family gave her very powerful
17 personal warnings.
What else do we know?  We know that despite those
19 warnings that she did not make a single serious quit attempt
20 before 1996.  That's a very important fact that relates to a
21 number of the issues that I'm going to discuss as we go
22 along.
Finally we know when she was diagnosed with lung cancer
24 and her surgeon refused to operate on her unless she quit,
25 what did she do?  Put them down, quit, cold turkey, no
    51
 1 withdrawal symptoms, and never picked them up again because
 2 for the first time in her life she chose to stop smoking.
 3
Now we also know that the plaintiff has admitted that
 4 her failure to try harder, that her failure to quit sooner
 5 with a legal cause of her own death.  You heard counsel make
 6 that admission this morning during his closing argument.
 7
Ladies and gentlemen, this is just the wrong smoker for
 8 this type of case.  This is not a case about a smoker who
 9 didn't know that smoking was dangerous.  It's not a case
10 about a smoker who tried over and over and over and made
11 some serious quit attempts and was simply unable to quit.
This is a case about a woman who chose to smoke for
13 decades without trying to quit despite being warned and
14 begged by her family members to quit and despite watching
15 her husband die, what Mr. Duke described to us as a terrible
16 death caused by lung cancers related to smoking, and yet she
17 never even tried to quit.  That's the type of plaintiff that
18 we have in this case.
Okay.  I'm going to move to talking to you a little bit
20 more about some other issues in the case.  And I'm going to
21 organize my closing around the verdict form.  And I'm going
22 to start with an issue that plaintiff's counsel did not even
23 discuss with you for one second during his closing argument.
24 And there's a good reason that he didn't discuss it with
25 you, because there's only one possible answer to the issue
    52
 1 that I'm about to discuss.
 2
It's going to be the last question on your verdict
 3 form.  I believe it's question 10.  It relates to something
 4 called the statute of limitations.  And here's the
 5 instruction that you're going to get:  In this case -- it
 6 will be on page 21 of your instructions, by the way,
 7 page 21.  
 8
In this case, plaintiff's suit would be barred, barred
 9 if Mrs. Duke knew or by the exercise of reasonable care
10 should have known before May 5, 1990, that she had been
11 injured and that there was a reasonable possibility that the
12 injury was caused by cigarette smoking.  Defendant does not
13 need to prove that Mrs. Duke was actually diagnosed with a
14 smoking related injury before May 5, 1990, to prevail on
15 this defense.  For purposes of this defense, the critical
16 event is not when a disease or medical condition was
17 actually diagnosed by a physician, but when the disease or
18 medical condition first manifested itself.
Mrs. Duke knew or should have known that there was a
20 reasonable possibility an injury was caused by cigarette
21 smoking if the injury manifested itself to her in a way that
22 supplied some evidence of a causal relationship to cigarette
23 smoking.
Okay.  What is this all about?  It's a statute of
25 limitations defense.  This is not some technicality.  This
    53
 1 is a rule of law.  The purpose of this rule of law is so
 2 that claims have to be filed timely.  Why do we want claims
 3 to be filed on time?  Because when claims aren't filed on
 4 time the evidence gets lost.  And that's not fair to any of
 5 the parties.  And that's exactly what happened in this case.
 6 The evidence has been lost.
 7
So you see the instruction, a lot of words there, so
 8 let me try to sort of unpack that instruction a little bit.
 9 And you will get an opportunity and I encourage you to spend
10 time looking at page 21 on your instructions when you get to
11 them.  But what you will see is that the question becomes
12 this when you sort of parse through it all:  Before May 5,
13 1990, did Mrs. Duke have some evidence that she had a
14 medical condition for which there a reasonable possibility
15 that it was caused by smoking?  That's the question you have
16 to answer on verdict form question 10.  And, ladies and
17 gentlemen, it wasn't discussed because there's only one
18 possible answer.  And you know that already.
This is the August 28, 1980 medical record from
20 Dr. Lloyd.  Mrs. Duke is a 54year-old white female who comes
21 in to establish with a local physician.  Sarah has no
22 significant medical complaints until recently when she began
23 to have fullness in what she felt was congestion through her
24 chest region with mildly increased shortness of breath,
25 although this problem has been present for the past year or
    54
 1 so.  She had no significant chest pain, per se, except for
 2 the pressure and fullness in her chest region.  She had no
 3 other medical complaints.  She has been followed in the past
 4 by Dr. Andrews, and her only real problem has been that of
 5 significant smoking where she smokes one to two packs of
 6 cigarettes per day.  
 7
So what happens?  She comes to her doctor complaining
 8 of shortness of breath.  As the medical record reflects, she
 9 had been having problems with her breathing for about a year
10 or so and she'd been seeing Dr. Andrews for that.
Then what happens?  Look at the diagnosis.  Probable
12 early chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and acute
13 bronchitis.  And what does Dr. Lloyd prescribe to treat
14 that?  Number 2.  Begin stopping smoking.  Attempting to
15 come from two packs of cigarettes per day to none over a six
16 week period of time.
So think about how that applies to the facts in this
18 case.  Did she have a medical condition?  Yes, she had
19 shortness of breath.  The doctor didn't have to tell her
20 that.  It was something that she experienced and which led
21 her to come and see Dr. Lloyd.
Did she have some evidence that the shortness of breath
23 was related to smoking?  Dr. Lloyd tells her, what you need
24 to do, Sarah, to improve your health is to stop smoking.
Did she have that problem before May 5, 1990?  This is
    55
 1 a medical record from August 28, 1980.  She had it 10 years
 2 before the time of May 5, 1990.
 3
It's inconceivable that she did not know that she was
 4 experiencing a medical condition that she believed was
 5 related to smoking 10 years before the statute of
 6 limitations.
 7
But we have more evidence than that, because the
 8 witnesses in this case all told you the same thing.  This is
 9 why this issue was ignored by plaintiffs.  All the evidence
10 points in one direction.  There's only one possible answer.
11 We talked about she subjectively recognized her symptoms,
12 her shortness of breath.  That's why she came to the doctor.
Dr. Lloyd, based on her symptoms and smoking history he
14 diagnosed her with early chronic COPD and he told her to
15 quit to improve her breathing problems.  That's what you
16 will recall he told you during his deposition.
Then -- this is probably why they did not address this
18 on closing statement -- their own witness, Dr. Cummings,
19 came here and told you that based on the 1980 medical record
20 Mrs. Duke continued smoking cigarettes despite knowledge
21 they were harming her.  That's their witness.
Dr. Tucker told you yesterday, and he did his DSM-IV
23 analysis, he was balanced, he was fair, he judged the
24 criteria early.  We are going talk about that.  But what he
25 told you on criteria number 7 in the DSM is that she
    56
 1 satisfied that because she smoked despite her knowledge of
 2 smoking-related problems in 1980.
 3
And even the fact witnesses told you this.  Everyone
 4 knew it.  Laura Duke came here and told you that she was
 5 having a smoker's cough and breathing problems more than
 6 five years before 1995.
 7
So all of the evidence points in one direction.  The
 8 only possible -- I'm missing verdict question 10.  Here it
 9 is.  It's a little bit dangerous when I have control of the
10 clicker.  Sometimes I go a little fast.  
But you're going to see on verdict question 10, this
12 question:  Did Mrs. Duke know or should she have known in
13 the exercise of reasonable care on or before May 5, 1990,
14 that she had been injured and that there was a reasonable
15 possibility that her injury was caused by cigarette smoking?
16 Answer:  Yes or no.  There's only one possible answer.
17 There's no evidence to the contrary.  It's an easy question
18 for you.
I'm going to turn to discussing class membership.  And
20 I'm going to continue discussing with you the questions on
21 the verdict form that you have to answer.  It's important to
22 remember why class membership is so important, because
23 unless Mrs. Duke is a class member, the Engle findings don't
24 even come into play.  Unless Mrs. Duke is a class member
25 this case is over.  If you find -- and you will see the way
    57
 1 that your verdict form is structured -- that if she's not a
 2 class member that you will be required to answer no to that
 3 question, and then the case is over.
 4
So I'm going to start with what she has to prove to be
 5 a class member in this case.  And the first thing I want to
 6 remind you of is that this is a wrongful death case.  It's
 7 not a personal injury case.  It's a wrongful death case.  So
 8 when you look to question 2 on your verdict form, this is
 9 what you're going to see:  Do you find from a preponderance
10 of the evidence that Mrs. Duke's addiction to cigarettes
11 containing nicotine was a legal cause of her lung cancer and
12 death?  That's the question you're going to you have to
13 answer.
Now there's actually two parts to that.  One is whether
15 addiction to nicotine was a cause of her death; the second
16 is whether addiction to the nicotine was a legal cause of
17 her lung cancer.  I'm going to address them both while I'm
18 talking to you this morning.  I'll begin by talking with you
19 about this issue of whether addiction to nicotine caused her
20 death.
You heard this morning from plaintiff's counsel that
22 they were quite clear that their theory is that her lung
23 cancer caused her death.  I'm missing 9.  The next one -- I
24 apologize.  So here's the theory.  Here's the question
25 you're going to have:  Has plaintiff proved that Mrs. Duke's
    58
 1 death was caused by lung cancer?  
 2
And I've sort of drawn this little picture here.  It's
 3 supposed to sort of depict a hurdle.  This is one of the
 4 things that plaintiffs have to prove to you, that Mrs. Duke
 5 died from her lung cancer.
 6
In fact, during opening statement, the plaintiffs told
 7 you that the dispute in this case is whether her lung cancer
 8 caused her death.  So that's the issue we're going to focus
 9 on.
What was the evidence?  Mrs. Duke died.  We know what
11 the evidence is.  Mrs. Duke died from a stroke.  It was
12 unrelated to her smoking.  Now, there was some -- this
13 morning you heard all the witnesses we brought to you
14 characterized disrespectfully as bought and paid for
15 mouthpieces.  I hope you will take the time to think about
16 the credibility of the witnesses that we brought to you.
There's an issue about stroke in this case.  What did
18 we do?  We brought to you a board certified neurologist,
19 Dr. Amos, who's treated thousands of stroke patients in his
20 life.  You will have to decide whether or not he looked like
21 a bought and paid for mouthpiece.
There's issue about cause of death.  Who do we bring to
23 you?  Dr. Bennett.  He's done thousands of autopsies.  He's
24 an expert on cause of death.  You heard how he spends his
25 time.  You have to decide whether he's a bought and paid for
    59
 1 mouthpiece.
 2
And we brought to you Dr. Tucker.  He's spent decades
 3 trying to help people with addiction-related problems, and
 4 they claimed he's a bought and paid for mouthpiece from
 5 California.
 6
You know, there's a old parable, "People who live in
 7 glass houses shouldn't throw stones."  They tried to prove
 8 their whole case to you through Dr. Burns, who under their
 9 standard -- I won't say this about him -- but under their
10 standard he would be the $2 million man who has been bought
11 and paid for from California.  But that's not really the
12 issue in the case.
What did they tell you?  Dr. Amos told you that her
14 cause of death was complications due to stroke.  Aspiration
15 pneumonia.  Dr. Bennett, the only doctor who really backed
16 up, did a forensic analysis of the case, a full analysis
17 looking in hindsight at everything -- remember, this is what
18 he does for a living.  He's a cause of death expert.  He's a
19 doctor that other doctors consult to help them figure this
20 out.  What did he tell you?  The death -- there's no
21 evidence that lung cancer was the cause of death.  He also
22 agreed that the death was secondary to complications from
23 the stroke.
And even Dr. Lloyd, he told you during his deposition
25 that although when he initially filled out that death
    60
 1 certificate he listed lung cancer, he told you that in
 2 hindsight knowing now what he should have known then that he
 3 would have changed that and he would have put
 4 cerebrovascular accident stroke or pneumonia as the primary
 5 causes of death.
 6
How did the stroke cause -- we didn't stop there.  How
 7 did the stroke cause the death?  Both Dr. Amos and Bennett
 8 explained to you that unfortunately for Mrs. Duke her stroke
 9 caused paralysis in her face and her throat area.  The
10 paralysis led to aspiration, which in turn led to her
11 getting food particles and other materials down in her
12 lungs, it caused pneumonia, and the pneumonia caused her
13 death.  Even Dr. Lloyd, the treating physician, told us
14 during his deposition that he could not rule out that
15 pneumonia was the primary cause of her death.
Well, what happened during this case?  Plaintiffs came
17 into this case telling you that the lung cancer caused the
18 death.  The evidence is overwhelmingly clear that the death
19 was caused by stroke.
So what did the plaintiffs do?  They changed their
21 theory on us in the middle of case.  And their theory became
22 that, well, actually, the lung cancer caused the stroke by
23 metastasizing to the lung.  That became the new theory of
24 wrongful death.  There's only one problem with that.  There
25 is no evidence of that.  And there's no evidence because
    61
 1 Mrs. Duke's treating physicians very carefully and
 2 thoroughly worked her up throughout her treatment to make
 3 sure that there was no metastatic disease in the brain,
 4 because if there was, they wanted to treat it.  You've seen
 5 the evidence.
 6
There was a CT-MRA prior to surgery, they evaluated her
 7 during surgery, they looked at pathology after surgery, they
 8 did a whole series of CT -- MRIs and CTs, and she never
 9 received any radiation in the brain because there was no
10 evidence of metastatic disease in the brain.  That's a
11 theory that was developed for this lawsuit.  That's not how
12 she was treated.
Let's look at the medical records before surgery.  This
14 is a 2-26-96 operative report in evidence.  This is her
15 surgeon describing looking backward as to how she became his
16 surgical patient.  She was evaluated with pulmonary function
17 testing, CT scans, MRI scans, and there is no evidence for
18 metastatic disease.  Why is that important?  If she had
19 metastatic disease they weren't going to operate on her.
20 They would not have subjected her to this surgery for her
21 lung cancer if she had metastatic disease.
During surgery, the evaluation never stopped.  We get
23 to surgery, here's the pathology report from her actual
24 surgery.  What happened as you heard is this:  After she was
25 opened up they very carefully examined the lymph nodes
    62
 1 surrounding her lung to make sure there was no cancer in
 2 those lymph nodes.  Because if there was, that would mean
 3 that the cancer had metastasized, because you heard that the
 4 lymph nodes is where the cancer goes first if it spreads to
 5 the lung.  And again, they would not subject her to this
 6 surgery if it had already metastasized.
 7
So here you have the 2-28-96 pathology consultation in
 8 which the pathologist looked at materials taken from her
 9 during surgery, looked lymph node after lymph node after
10 lymph node, and what'd you see?  No tumors seen.  No tumors
11 seen.  No tumors seen.  Margins free of tumor.  There was no
12 tumor outside the lung.
But they didn't stop there.  She subsequently had her
14 strokes, which of course ultimately her cause of death, but
15 they kept evaluating her.  They considered this theory the
16 plaintiffs have.  Could her strokes be caused by spread of
17 lung cancer?  To her brain?  Her doctors wanted to make sure
18 that is not the case.
Look what Dr. Lloyd wrote.  The MRI was performed to
20 rule out, again, again, any potential underlying tumor.  It
21 was felt that if tumor could be found she would receive
22 radiation in the area.  None was found.  Thus, Dr. Mack did
23 not pursue any further radiation therapy on her head.
She had good doctors.  She was received good treatment.
25 They were careful.  They were cautious.  They worked this up
    63
 1 thoroughly.  And no cancer was ever seen in her brain.
 2 Plaintiffs and witnesses want you to speculate and guess,
 3 well, maybe it was there and they just missed it.  But the
 4 problem is when we cross-examined Dr. Burns -- remember the
 5 plaintiffs have the burden of proof to prove their case by
 6 preponderance of evidence -- here's what Dr. Burns admitted:
 7 The preponderance of evidence is that Mrs. Duke's strokes
 8 were caused by a bleed, not metastatic disease.  Completely
 9 defeats this theory of metastatic lung cancer.
Second, Dr. Lloyd told me that she didn't receive any
11 treatment in her brain because none of the tests showed
12 metastasis.  Dr. Amos told you that -- and so did
13 Dr. Bennett, that there's simply no evidence that the lung
14 cancer metastasized to the brain.  In fact, remember
15 Dr. Amos even showed you what lung cancer would look like if
16 it metastasized to the brain?  He showed you those CT scans
17 where it would be peripheral, where it would be multiple
18 lesions, instead, Mrs. Duke had a single lesion deep to the
19 brain.  And that's not the way lung cancer metastasizes to
20 the brain.  Again, all the evidence points in one direction.
So, what happened next in this case?  Well, the next
22 theory that the plaintiffs adopted when the metastatic
23 disease theory fell flat because of Dr. Burns' admissions
24 and because of the medical record, next they said, well,
25 maybe the stroke was caused by smoking directly.  First of
    64
 1 all, you're going see on your verdict form that's not the
 2 question you're here to answer.  The question you're here to
 3 answer is whether the lung cancer caused the stroke.  But
 4 nonetheless, I'm going to go ahead and address that issue.
 5 Because it's very important and very revealing.
 6
Despite this new theory, not a single medical witness
 7 testified that Mrs. Duke's strokes were caused by smoking.
 8 You know, there's no dispute in this case that smoking can
 9 cause strokes.  Dr. Amos told you that.  Dr. Burns told you
10 that.  That's not the issue you're here to decide.  You're
11 her to decides Mrs. Duke's case.  And not a single medical
12 witness took the stand, raised their hand, and told you that
13 to a reasonable degree of medical probability that
14 Mrs. Duke's death -- excuse me, Mrs. Duke's stroke was
15 caused by smoking.  There's no such evidence in the case.
16 Yet in general it can, but nobody said it did cause hers.
17 Instead what they talked about was her other risk factors.
You just heard plaintiff's counsel admit this morning
19 could have been a cause for stroke.  What's the leading risk
20 factor?  Her age.  As we age, this is just one of things
21 that we become at risk for.  Her high cholesterol -- this
22 morning it sounded as though it was being challenged as to
23 whether she a hyperlipidemia.  You might recall that during
24 Dr. Lloyd's deposition when he was shown the medical records
25 showing that she had a triglycerides level of 570, that he
    65
 1 whistled and said, wow, that's sure something that should be
 2 treated.
 3
Dr. Burns, Dr. Amos also agreed that alcohol abuse --
 4 that alcohol abuse increases someone's risk of developing a
 5 stroke.  By the way, we didn't discuss alcohol to try to do
 6 any type of character assassination or anything else on
 7 Mrs. Duke.  I hope you believe we have been totally
 8 respectful of her.  We have had nothing negative to say
 9 about her, including the choices that she made about her
10 life.  It's her life.  She gets to decide how to live.  But
11 we had talk to you about this alcohol abuse because the
12 alcohol abuse greatly increased her risk of stroke.
Finally her hypertension.  So she had multiple,
14 multiple risk factors that could have explained her stroke.
15 Although we don't have to explain to you what her stroke
16 was.  It's not even on the verdict form.  I'm simply
17 addressing this to round out your understanding of the
18 medical case here.
So I would suggest to you there's simply no evidence
20 that the lung cancer caused her death.  And when you get to
21 verdict question number 2, I know I'm skipping around a
22 little bit.  I hope this order will be helpful to you as you
23 reason through the case.  When you get to verdict question
24 2, Do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that
25 Mrs. Duke's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was
    66
 1 a legal cause of her lung cancer and death, that the answer
 2 will be no, because she doesn't die from lung cancer.
 3
There's more.  There's more they have to proof to
 4 establish class membership.  One of the next -- because the
 5 next thing they have to prove is that Mrs. Duke was a
 6 nicotine addict.  You've heard that.  They have to prove
 7 that she was addicted to nicotine.  Again, I would depict it
 8 this way because it's their burden to prove that she was
 9 addicted.  They can't do it with assumptions or rhetoric.
10 They have to offer you evidence to prove she was addicted.
Now, the jury instructions that you're going to receive
12 do not contain a definition of addiction.  You-all get to
13 decide what standard of addiction to use in this case.  But
14 we would submit to you that before someone comes to federal
15 court and makes a claim for millions of dollars that they
16 should at least establish that under medical diagnostic
17 criteria that they are addicted.  They shouldn't come in
18 here with some watered-down definition that really amounts
19 to only that I smoked every day, and try to establish a
20 claim in federal court for millions of dollars.  They should
21 come to you and prove to you that she was medically
22 addicted.  So that's what I'm going to talk about.
Dr. Tucker came to you and he told you that she was not
24 tormented -- the type of tormented smoker that he sees that
25 has nicotine addiction problems.  And, you know, the facts
    67
 1 are really -- again, they're all aligned in one way.  She
 2 never complained about her smoking, she never told anyone
 3 she was addicted.  During her lifetime never -- no doctor
 4 ever told her she was addicted.  You're not going to see any
 5 medical record saying that Mrs. Duke was addicted.  When she
 6 chose to quit she quit on her first try cold turkey.  No
 7 withdrawal symptoms.  Which is extremely important.  Every
 8 set of criteria you-all saw, the doctors emphasized that
 9 when somebody quits an addictive substance they withdrawal
10 from it.  Everyone knows that from common sense.  She had no
11 withdrawal symptoms.  By definition she wasn't addicted.
12 She simply chose to smoke.
Now, Dr. Tucker was the only, only addiction specialist
14 that came to this case to talk to you.  He was the only
15 witness that came in here and walked you through their
16 analysis using medical diagnostic criteria to evaluate this
17 question of whether she was addicted.
Now, I'm not going to spend much time on this, but
19 let's be candid about the cross-examination of Dr. Tucker.
20 It was full of misdirection, gimmicks, tricks.  Do you
21 remember this whole bit about Dr. Tucker's testimony that
22 about 50 percent of smokers are addicted?  And they kept
23 trying and trying to cross-examine him with the DSM-IV that
24 says that 90 percent of smokers are addicted?  And he told
25 them that's 10 years old.  That's 10 years old.  There are
    68
 1 new data.  Subsequent studies show 50 percent.  And then
 2 this really illustrates the complete lack of merit of the
 3 plaintiffs' claims in this case.  They said oh, no,
 4 Dr. Tucker this, is a 2011 edition of the book and it says
 5 90 percent.  And he had to explain to us -- we shouldn't
 6 have wasted time on issues like this.  This was a reprint of
 7 the 2010 edition because they needed more copies of the
 8 book.  That type of gimmickry and trickery is not the way
 9 this case should be viewed.
Mrs. Duke's diagnosis as being a nicotine addict was
11 developed solely for purposes of this lawsuit.  She never
12 said she thought she was addicted.  She never said she felt
13 compelled to smoke.  No one ever told her that she was
14 addicted during her life.  Remember Mr. Duke's testimony, I
15 would have never said that to my mother; that would be
16 disrespectful.  Nobody told her she was addicted.  Her
17 doctors never diagnosed her as addicted during the course of
18 her life.
And now here we are -- I'm just going to be candid
20 about this -- here we are 16 years later.  When they come
21 here asking you for millions of dollars they want to pin
22 this label of addiction on her and turn her into some weak
23 helpless addict who can't control their own behavior, 16
24 years after she died in the interest of convincing you to
25 award them millions of dollars.  That's what's going on
    69
 1 here.
 2
As I said, plaintiffs didn't bring you a medical doctor
 3 that specializes in treating addiction.  And importantly,
 4 the witnesses they did bring, Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns,
 5 they're public health-oriented doctors.  They have a very
 6 strong anti-smoking agenda.  They have every right to have
 7 that agenda.  I'm not criticizing them for being
 8 anti-smoking.  That's perfectly fine.  But that's an agenda
 9 that goes to the legislature, to Congress.  It's shouldn't
10 be brought here in the courtroom and used to try to convince
11 you to award millions of dollars.  You heard they've both
12 been testifying for decades against tobacco companies.
Since this issue of expert compensation is a big deal,
14 let me remind you Dr. Burns is the $2 million man.  Dr.
15 Cummings has testified over 50 times.  This was the seventh
16 time this year already.  Here we're in April.  Seems like
17 July maybe.  But here we're in April and he's already
18 testified seven times against the tobacco companies.  This
19 is what he does.
Now think about when they told you.  If there's any
21 doubt that they were here pursuing a public health agenda as
22 opposed to helping you decide this case, Dr. Burns told you
23 that he thinks that even roll-your-own cigarettes are
24 defective and unreasonably dangerous.
Dr. Cummings told you that his real agenda is he would
    70
 1 like to make it illegal to sell cigarettes or to smoke
 2 cigarettes.  He wants cigarettes banned.  And you know what,
 3 he has every right to have that view.  I'm not criticizing
 4 him.  But that's not what we're here for.  We're here to
 5 decide a lawsuit for money.  And you should decide based on
 6 evidence related to the plaintiff and not some anti-smoking
 7 agenda.
 8
Do you remember, with all due respect, what they did
 9 was come in here and repeat over and over and over and over
10 she's addicted, hoping if they said it enough you would
11 believe it.  But they didn't offer you any analysis of
12 really why she was addicted.  The closest they came was to
13 bring you that Heaviness of Smoking Index that Dr. Cummings
14 testified about.  But when I cross-examined him he admitted
15 that that test assumes that everybody is addicted, because
16 if you score zero on that test you're still lowly dependent
17 or addictive.  That doesn't help you-all decide the issue in
18 this case.  That's of no help to you whatsoever, if his test
19 indicates that everybody is addicted.
You need something real, something substantive.  You
21 need a real measuring stick to decide whether she was
22 addicted.  And I would submit to you that the only measuring
23 stick you have is Dr. Tucker's testimony that she was not
24 addicted, using standard medical diagnostic criteria, which
25 is a test that should be demanded before you come in federal
    71
 1 court and ask for millions of dollars.
 2
Ladies and gentleman, when you get to -- this is your
 3 first question.  I know I'm going in a little different
 4 order, like I said, but the very first question on your
 5 verdict form will be:  Do you find from preponderance of the
 6 evidence that Mrs. Duke was addicted to cigarettes
 7 containing nicotine?  The answer to that question is no.
 8 That means she's not a class member and that means this is
 9 case is over.  I suggest to you that that should be the
10 answer to your first question.
I'm going to move to the question number 2, which I
12 already answered in part.  You remember we talked about how
13 lung cancer didn't her death?  Well, in question 2 of your
14 verdict form they have to prove something else.  They have
15 to prove that addition was a legal cause of her lung cancer.
16 So they have to prove to you that addiction was a legal
17 cause of her lung cancer.
First it failed, because of course we already
19 discussed, she wasn't addicted.  But second, even if she was
20 addicted, it was her choice to smoke without ever trying to
21 quit, that was the sole, only legal cause of her lung
22 cancer.  The only legal cause of her lung cancer.
Let's think about it this way.  Well, I should make
24 sure you understand this I guess.  On page 10 of your
25 instruction, you're going to get instruction about what
    72
 1 legal cause means.  In order to prove that addiction to
 2 smoking cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of
 3 decedent's death the plaintiff's must prove that such
 4 addiction directly and in a natural and continuous sequence
 5 -- in other words uninterrupted -- produced or contributed
 6 substantially to producing such death.  So it could be
 7 reasonably said that but for the addiction, the death would
 8 not have occurred.
 9
We already know she wasn't addicted; we didn't know --
10 we already know that she didn't die from lung cancer.  But
11 the third way that the plaintiffs have failed to prove class
12 membership is that nicotine addiction was not a legal cause
13 of her lung cancer.  I would suggest to you that you think
14 about this issue like this.  I mean it's kind of an abstract
15 concept, legal cause of her lung cancer.  But I think if you
16 think about it this way, it might be helpful to you as you
17 consider the evidence.
Did Mrs. Duke have the ability to quit but choose to
19 continue smoking?  I submit to you that if she had the
20 ability to quit but chose to continue then nicotine
21 addiction cannot be a legal cause of her lung cancer.
22 Because you can't have it both ways.  You can't have the
23 ability to quit and say, well, yeah, I know I didn't quit
24 when I should have and I knew to, but it was really the
25 addiction.  It was really the addiction that caused me to
    73
 1 continue smoking until I got lung cancer.  You just can't
 2 have it both ways.
 3
On the other hand, if plaintiffs have proven to you
 4 that nicotine addiction controlled Sarah Duke and left her
 5 no choice, no matter how hard she tried, but to continue
 6 smoking until her death, if they prove that to you, they
 7 have proven their case to you.  But you know that's not what
 8 the evidence is about nicotine addiction in general or Sarah
 9 Duke specific.
Because here's what you know.  And there's no dispute
11 about any of these points, none.  Because we got these
12 points from plaintiffs' experts.  One, nicotine addition
13 does not prevent smokers from understanding the risk of
14 smoking.  That doesn't happen, so that doesn't relieve them
15 of their knowledge that they have gotten from the warnings.
Two, any brain changes caused by addiction in nicotine
17 does not prevent smokers from quitting.  You know, a lot of
18 time was spent discussing these brain changes.  How does
19 that help you?  You heard that everything we do changes our
20 brain.  This experience that you-all are having right now,
21 having to listen to me for an hour and a half is changing
22 your brain in some way or another.  I don't want to
23 speculate about what I might be doing to it.  But it's
24 changing you brain somehow.  Everything we do, everything we
25 encounter, every stimulus we encounter changes our brain in
    74
 1 some way or another.  So that is not helpful because it
 2 doesn't prevent people from quitting.  Because you heard
 3 that 60 million ex-smokers live in the United States right
 4 now.
 5
According to Dr. Cummings, all of them would have had
 6 these brain changes.  Didn't prevent them from quitting.
 7 And in fact, Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns admitted two things.
 8 They admitted that any smoker can quit.  Any smoker can
 9 quit.  And that -- that includes heavily addicted smokers.
Now, this issue again entirely defeats plaintiff's
11 theory of legal causation.  Now I had the drag it out of
12 Dr. Cummings because he understands the significance of this
13 admission for plaintiff's claims because he's an experienced
14 witness in these types of case, as you have heard.  So
15 instead of just admitting to me the answer I was entitled to
16 have, when I asked him, Isn't it true, sir, that any smoker
17 can quit?  He made me run back and forth and grab all his
18 prior testimony and show him over and over and over his
19 prior sworn testimony where he had admitted exactly what I
20 was asking him to tell you all, so that you would have that
21 information to decide this case with.  But instead I had
22 drag it out of him by impeaching him with his prior
23 testimony.
Now, another issue that I can only describe as red
25 herring.  Dr. Tucker told you that 90 percent of smokers who
    75
 1 have quit had quit cold turkey.  And there was some
 2 prolonged effort yesterday to try to impeach that statistic
 3 with the DSM.  But, in fact, Dr. Cummings told you the same
 4 thing.  So why they're throwing those -- releasing these red
 5 herrings into the courtroom, I don't know.  Why would they
 6 spend time on trying to disprove a fact from Dr. Tucker that
 7 Dr. Cummings had already admitted to?  But that's what they
 8 did.
 9
Ladies and gentlemen, we would submit to you again,
10 before you come to the courtroom, federal court, and ask for
11 millions of dollars, claiming that you had been injured by
12 addiction, at a minimum the smoker should have tried and
13 tried and tried to quit.  That should be a necessary
14 predicate to your finding here.  But that's not the evidence
15 in this case.  Because you know what the evidence is in this
16 case.
There's no evidence -- and again, you know, if there's
18 no evidence, that's plaintiff's problem, not our problem,
19 because they have the burden of proof.  There's no evidence
20 that Mrs. Duke tried to quit in the '50s, '60s, '70s -- I
21 actually wrote it twice there -- or 80s.  No evidence of her
22 attempting to quit during any of these decades.  And then we
23 get to the 1990s and we heard all this discussion about
24 chewing gum, using filters, and this effort to inflate those
25 to a big deal that she was trying to quit, struggling.  But
    76
 1 Mr. Duke during his cross-examination admitted to you
 2 squarely that even he viewed those as half-hearted quit
 3 attempts.
 4
Why is that important?  That's important because Dr.
 5 Burns testified that a real quit attempt requires sincere
 6 motivation and that a half-hearted quit attempt is not
 7 sincere.  It is not sincere.
 8
And then of course as we know she quit cold turkey.
 9 And she quit the first time she actually tried.  The first
10 time she tried, ladies and gentlemen, she could have quit
11 sooner if she decided to.
Now, let's talk about Mrs. Duke a little bit more
13 because it's a case about Mrs. Duke.  Did she fail to quit
14 earlier because she was a weak and indecisive, passive
15 person who did not have the ability to make decisions and
16 get things done?  Is that the type of smoker we're dealing
17 with?  That might be a different case.  But that's not who
18 Mrs. Duke is.
You heard from all the fact witnesses, primarily
20 Mr. Duke and his wife, Mrs. Duke was a -- he put polite, a
21 very strong-willed woman, she was decisive, she was
22 intelligent and avid reader, she stayed up on current
23 events, and he told you that no one could push her into
24 doing something she did not want to do, and that she made
25 her own choices about how to live.
    77
 1
Do you remember him talking to us about how he -- in
 2 his own words he pestered, her badgered her and begged her
 3 to quit, and she told him, you heard the testimony, she told
 4 him, I'll quit when I'm ready to quit.  It's my business
 5 whether I smoke or not.  I'll quit when I'm ready.  Not
 6 because you're asking me to.  That's the type of smoker we
 7 have here in this case.
 8
I just discussed those points.  So, let's try to get to
 9 bottom line on this.  Because here's the thing.  When
10 plaintiffs come here and try to prove to you, like I said,
11 that nicotine addiction was a legal cause of her lung
12 cancer, they are essentially taking on the burden of proving
13 to you that she was an involuntary smoker.  That's what
14 they're claiming, that she was an involuntary smoker that
15 had no choice but to continue to smoke until she developed a
16 smoking related disease.  But you know that's not the case.
Here's what we know.  She always had the ability to
18 quit.  In fact, plaintiffs have admitted that she was at
19 fault, a legal cause of her own death for not quitting
20 sooner.  She told us that smoking was her business, that she
21 would quit when she wanted to quit, not when others wanted
22 her to.
She decided how she wanted to live her life.  And, you
24 know, I want to be clear.  I'm not criticizing Mrs. Duke in
25 any way.  Like I said before, she had every right to decide
    78
 1 how to live her life.  That's what we all get to do in
 2 America.  But with the privilege of deciding how to live
 3 your life comes the responsibility of being responsible for
 4 the choices that you make in life about allow to live.
 5
Ladies and gentlemen, I suggest that when you go to
 6 your verdict form, question 2, here's yet another reason why
 7 the answer to question 2 should be no.  The first reason was
 8 that she didn't die from lung cancer.  The second reason was
 9 that addiction to nicotine was not a legal cause of her lung
10 cancer.  The only legal cause was her choice to continue
11 smoking without trying to quit even though she had the
12 ability to.  You just can't have it both ways on this
13 question.  It's an either/or question.  And the answer
14 should be no.
Okay.  I want to move next to this issue that
16 plaintiff's counsel told you we had ignored -- in fact
17 you're going to see that we addressed the conduct issues in
18 this case two ways.  Number one, Dr. Gentry and Dr. Cook
19 testified to you for a combination of about four or five
20 hours by deposition, as painful as it might have been to
21 watch those depositions, that's what happened.  And, second,
22 we addressed the conduct in this case through
23 cross-examination, and I'm going to show you how we did that
24 as we go forward.
Now, remember, in you find her to be class member then
    79
 1 the Engle findings do come into play.  But as Court has told
 2 you already, and we would instruct you again, the Engle
 3 findings do not establish that R.J. Reynolds is responsible
 4 or liable to Mrs. Duke.  You see, the Engle jury had a very
 5 different job than you do -- did.  The Engle jury never
 6 heard of Sarah Duke.  They didn't hear any evidence about
 7 her, about her awareness of the dangers, about her smoking
 8 behavior, about the choices she made.  They didn't make any
 9 decisions about Sarah Duke.  They made decisions about
10 general principals.
Your job in this case, if you get to this part of the
12 trial, which obviously we don't you will or should, but if
13 you get here your job is to evaluate whether or not Mr. Duke
14 has met his burden of proof to build a bridge between the
15 Engle findings and Mrs. Duke's death.  In fact, that's what
16 the plaintiff's counsel acknowledged in opening statement.
17 He said we have to build a bridge with evidence and facts
18 between the Engle findings and Mrs. Duke's death.
Okay.  So again, these are the four claims that they
20 have to try to build a bridge for.  You're going to see that
21 there are four questions on your verdict form.  I'm going to
22 address them altogether, because the evidence related to
23 these four theories of liability is all very overlapping,
24 very similar.  I'm going to try to hit for you some of the
25 high points that were established on cross-examination.  But
    80
 1 the point we need not lose sight of is that on this claim,
 2 again, plaintiffs have to prove to you legal causation.
 3 Again you're going to see on page 12 in this instance in
 4 your jury instructions they have to prove to you that but
 5 for the wrongful conduct that death or damages would not
 6 have occurred.  They're going to prove -- try to prove to
 7 you that but for R.J. Reynolds' conduct, I guess that
 8 Mrs. Duke according to what we heard this morning, would
 9 still be alive today.
Here's the basic claim they made.  Relates to all the
11 theories.  I'll talk more about it.  The real claim is that
12 Mrs. Duke died because of dangers of smoking weren't known
13 to her.  That's sort of the central premise of all their
14 claims.  But you know that's not true.  You know that for a
15 variety of reasons.
First, Dr. Burns and Cummings told you that the media
17 had been publicizing the dangers of smoking for almost 100
18 years in this country, and that, in fact, it has been known
19 for centuries that smoking is dangerous and hard to quit.
20 In other words, it's been common knowledge.  And I'm not
21 going to spend a lot of time going through this stuff with
22 you.  You saw the cross of Dr. Cummings and Burns.  The
23 public warnings about the dangerous of smoking have been
24 like an iceberg.  And all I can do right now is show you the
25 tip of iceberg.  And I'll show you a few things we know
    81
 1 would have been relative to Mrs. Duke.
 2
Two years before she was born -- two years before she
 3 was born Reader's Digest reported that smoking sometimes
 4 causes lung cancer.  No secret.  No secret.
 5
1952, Reader's Digest describing the dangers of smoking
 6 by saying cancer by the carton.  Cancer by the carton.
 7 Again, no secret.  You have heard all this about how the
 8 message about the dangers of smoking was pervasive.  It was
 9 everywhere in our society.
Dr. Cummings.  And this may have been the critical
11 admission that he made in this whole case.  And once again,
12 I had to go get those transcripts out and make him admit
13 this is what he said before, because he didn't like to say
14 it because it defeats their claims.  But he admitted that
15 everybody had heard and knew that smoking is dangerous in
16 1954.  Everybody had heard and knew in 1954.  Of course
17 you've heard, you know, I don't know why we even spend much
18 time in this case because during opening statement the
19 plaintiffs admitted that they would never deny that
20 Mrs. Duke knew what was out there, common knowledge was
21 being disseminated publicly.  But then they're still trying
22 to convince you that she was injured because she doesn't
23 know that smoking was dangerous and because it was concealed
24 from her.
Well, it's a pretty simple common sense proposition you
    82
 1 cannot conceal something from somebody if they already know
 2 it.  Dr. Cummings admitted that.  You can't conceal
 3 something from somebody if they already know it.
 4
Gainesville Sun.  She read it every day.  The day after
 5 the '64 surgeon general's report, front page, above the
 6 fold, Smoking is Principal Lung Cancer Cause.
 7
The warning labels.  We didn't talk about them a whole
 8 lot.  But once again, how can someone come in here and say
 9 that I was injured because I didn't know the product was
10 dangerous because it was concealed from me, when the product
11 itself had a warning label on side of the pack every day
12 after 1966.  There's no dispute about that.
It changed in 1970, as you see, and every day after
14 1971 this warning was in the advertisements.  In the
15 advertisements.  And yet they're here asking you for
16 millions of dollars telling you she was injured by
17 concealment of a fact that she already knew.  It just defies
18 common sense.  Once you know something you can't be injured
19 by somebody hiding a fact.  It's too late.  You know it.
There was much more about the dangers of smoking.  I
21 don't have time to go through all this with you, but just a
22 couple of these things were really, really illustrative.
23 You heard about this Congressional hearing in 1957 where the
24 surgeon general said we have done an excellent job of
25 warning the public through radio, TV, newspaper.
    83
 1
Dr. Horn, a very powerful -- Dr. Horn, the head of the
 2 Office of Smoking and Health in 1968, you can stand on a
 3 rooftop and shout, "Smoking is dangerous," at the top of
 4 your lungs and you would no be telling anyone anything they
 5 did not already know.
 6
And Dr. Burns, 1975, more people know that smoking is
 7 dangerous than know the name of the president of United
 8 States.  The information was everywhere.  Some people chose
 9 to quit.  As can you see, between 1955 and 1965, 17 million
10 American chose to quit.  Between '64 and '79, 30 million
11 more American chose to quit.  We now have 60 million
12 quitters.  The message has been out there.  What people do
13 with it is up to them.  Some continue to smoke.  Some quit.
Of course Mrs. Duke didn't have to rely on general
15 information.  She had the most personalized powerful
16 warnings you could ever have.  In 1975 her husband became
17 ill with cancer.  She and her son watched him die over a
18 three year period from cancer that they believe was smoking
19 related.  That they believe was smoking related.  He quit
20 smoking.  She never even makes an attempt to quit smoking,
21 despite watching what they described as a terrible death by
22 her husband.
You couldn't have a more personal powerful warning than
24 that.  Mr. Duke admitted to you that they believed that the
25 lung cancer was caused by smoking in 1975 -- the 1978
    84
 1 timeframe.  And now they're in here trying to tell you that
 2 she died from smoking from lung cancer because she didn't
 3 know that smoking was dangerous?  Defies common sense.
 4
Why is it so important?  Why is this warning so
 5 important?  Dr. Burns told you that had Mrs. Duke just quit
 6 smoking by 1980 that she had would have prevented her
 7 cancer.  That's why her failure to quit is so Important.
 8 Certainly in the '70s she knew, unequivocally she knew, and
 9 she knew lung cancer from her husband's situation.  She
10 never even tried to quit.
But Dr. Burns, their expert from California, who knows
12 his statistics pretty well, he does know this, and he
13 admitted the reason he had been pushing people to quit for
14 decades and decades was because when you quit you improve
15 your likelihood of living longer.  You decrease your risk.
16 And had she quit in 1980, he admitted she wouldn't have
17 developed lung cancer.
A lot of discussion about -- a lot of discussion about
19 statements made by the tobacco company.  Again the bottom
20 line is, a smoker can't rely on something they didn't see
21 her hear.  There's zero evidence that Mrs. Duke ever heard
22 statements by The Tobacco Institute or the Franks statement
23 or any statements about filtered cigarettes or non-filtered
24 cigarettes or any of that.  Why didn't we bring witnesses to
25 address the company conduct?  Because the issue is whether
    85
 1 or not the company conduct affected Mrs. Duke.  That's the
 2 issue in the case.  That's the plaintiff's burden.  That's
 3 the bridge they're trying to build.  And they have zero
 4 evidence that she ever saw or relied upon anything that the
 5 tobacco companies did.
 6
Advertising.  I don't know why we talked about
 7 advertising so long.  First, it's legal.  It's legal to
 8 advertise.  Second, it didn't have any influence on
 9 Mrs. Duke.  Again, there's zero evidence in this case that
10 she said she began smoking because of advertising or that
11 she smoked Winston cigarettes because of advertising, or
12 that she smoked filtered cigarettes because of advertising,
13 or that the advertisement somehow convinced her that it was
14 safe to smoke or that filtered cigarettes are safer.
15 There's none of that.  There's no evidence that the
16 advertising influenced her in any way.
Cigarette design.  Here's what the evidence really is,
18 and that's that tobacco is dangerous and addictive,
19 cigarettes cannot be made safe.  Cannot be made safe.
But Dr. Cummings did admit that R.J. Reynolds worked
21 hard to try to take the carcinogens out of tobacco smoke,
22 but it can't be done as long as tobacco is burned.  Dr.
23 Cummings also admitted that non-filtered, filtered,
24 full-flavor, light, additive free, cigarettes with
25 additives, they're all dangerous and addictive.  Those
    86
 1 design issues, it's another red herring.  They're all
 2 dangerous, they're all addictive, and they don't have any
 3 influence on whether you can quit or not.  No cigarette's
 4 different than another.  Dr. Tucker told you yesterday that
 5 someone who treats people who -- for addiction problems --
 6 he doesn't ask what brand you smoke because these design
 7 features have nothing to do with quitting smoking.
 8
Ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to go to the verdict
 9 form now.  You're going to see questions 3, 4, 5 and 6.  If
10 you get to them, these are the questions at which you have
11 to answer the question of whether or not -- whether or not
12 the plaintiffs have met their burden of proof to build a
13 bridge between R.J. Reynolds' conduct and Mrs. Duke's death.
14 Submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, the answer should be no
15 to each and every one of these.  There's just been a
16 complete failure of proof.
The allocation of fault for Mrs. Duke's death.  You
18 heard a lot this morning about the allocation of fault and
19 how, if you get to this point, you're going have an
20 opportunity to compare the fault of the parties and you get
21 to decide how to assign fault.  
There's a couple things I want to mention to you.
23 First, the most important thing to remember is that
24 plaintiff admitted that Mrs. Duke's conduct was a legal
25 cause of her own lung cancer and death.  Let's unpack that a
    87
 1 little bit.  I mean, what can that mean?  What underlies
 2 that?  What's absolutely logically necessary for this to be
 3 the case?
 4
First, that she -- what would you have to know before
 5 you admit it that your plaintiff was a legal cause of her
 6 own death?  You would have to admit that they knew that
 7 smoking was dangerous.  How can you be a cause of your own
 8 death if you didn't know?  Second, you have to admit that
 9 they had the ability to quit smoking.  You know when they
10 stand up here and say she should have tried harder, she
11 should have quit sooner, that's an acknowledgement that she
12 could have quit.  You wouldn't say those things if you
13 didn't admit that she could quit.  Finally, she had to have
14 the ability to quit smoking at a time that would have
15 prevented her lung cancer.  All those things are absolutely
16 necessary before you could ever make the admission that she
17 was at fault.  
And again, why is it so important?  Dr. Burns told you
19 that had she quit in 1980 or sooner, she would have
20 prevented her own lung cancer death.  She would have
21 prevented her own lung cancer death.
Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings concede -- now if you get to
23 this comparative fault issue, it's very important to
24 remember what their witnesses conceded.  They both conceded
25 that smokers are fully -- fully, not partially -- fully
    89
 1 consequence.  That's fully in control of the smoker.  The
 2 smoker is 100 percent responsible for that choice.
 3
Damages.  You heard the plaintiffs are going to ask you
 4 for -- they're asking for millions of dollars.  I'm not
 5 going to say much more about this except to say when you see
 6 your instructions, you will see that any damages awarded
 7 must be just and reasonable in light of the evidence.  I
 8 will also point out to you that the plaintiff is not asking
 9 for damages related to pain and suffering of Mrs. Duke.  You
10 will see that's not one of things you're being asked to
11 award damages for.  You're being asked to award damages for
12 their out-of-pocket funeral expenses, which was $30,000, and
13 for Mr. Duke's injury that he suffered or he's claiming to
14 have suffered by virtue of his mother's death.  That's what
15 you're asking for to Mr. Duke's injury, not his mother's
16 injury.  That's not -- that's not the measure to damages in
17 this case, as your instructions will make clear to you.
Finally, the only potentially recoverable damages are
19 actual damages suffered by Mr. Duke as a result of his
20 mother's death.  That's a standard that you will see in your
21 instructions.
I'm going to say, ladies and gentlemen, just use your
23 common sense.  Use your common sense.  Use your common sense
24 when it comes to damages.  But I will say this one more
25 time.  Nobody should be made a millionaire because their
    90
 1 mother chose to smoke for decades despite knowing the
 2 dangers without being warned.  Nobody should be made a
 3 millionaire for those choices.  Okay.
 4
Verdict question 10, the question that -- can you put
 5 up question 10 -- verdict question 9.  Okay.  Do you find
 6 from clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages
 7 against the defendants are warranted under the circumstances
 8 of this case?  Now this is the issue that Mr. Lantinberg
 9 spent so much time on, because this is what they're really
10 interested in.  Because this is where they hope to get many
11 more millions of dollars.
First thing I want to point out to you is that there is
13 a different standard under this case -- under this claim.
14 And that's clear and convincing evidence.  And I'm going
15 talk to but what that means.
Second, we need to understand a little bit more about
17 punitive damages, because you haven't heard much about
18 punitive damages.  Punitive damages are damages that are
19 designed to punish and to deter a defendant.  But some other
20 things that you need to know are, first of all, punitive
21 damages are not awarded to punish generalized conduct for
22 which you disapprove.  That's not your function.  You're not
23 here to award punitive damages because you don't like in
24 general the way the companies did business, if you get to
25 this question.
    91
 1
Instead, as this slide indicates, they can only be
 2 awarded for conduct that was a legal cause of Mrs. Duke's
 3 death.  We talked over and over about the fact that there
 4 was no conduct that was a legal cause of her death, but
 5 that's a standard you have to meet.
 6
Second, punitive damages can only be awarded to
 7 Mr. Duke.  They can't be awarded to any public health
 8 organization or some hospital or smoking cessation program
 9 or the American Cancer Institute or anything like that.  If
10 you award punitive damage they go to Mr. Duke.  
And finally you need to understand that punitive
12 damages are in addition, in addition to damages compensating
13 the plaintiff.  So that's what punitive damages are.
What do plaintiff's have to show you to prove they're
15 entitled to punitive damages?  You didn't see this morning.
16 All you heard was the conduct was bad, the conduct was bad,
17 the conduct was bad, you ought to punish it.  That's not the
18 test.  Here's the test that you will see in your
19 instructions.
At pages 19 and 20, you will see that to be entitled to
21 punitive damages, the plaintiffs have to prove that the
22 defendants acted with reckless disregard of human life, or
23 that their conduct showed an entire lack of care, or that
24 their conduct recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare
25 of the public, or that there was equivalent to the
    92
 1 intentional violation of his rights.  So that's the
 2 standard.  Again, that's the yardstick you use to measure.
 3 It's not this generalized test that was suggested to you
 4 this morning.
 5
I want to go back to the burden of proof because this a
 6 really important.  You know, think about this, ladies and
 7 gentlemen.  A request for punitive damages is an
 8 extraordinary claim.  Because Mr. Duke is here saying I want
 9 you to award me money unrelated over and above what I lost.
10 Even if you fully compensate me, I want more money.  I want
11 you to give me money to punish them.  That's what he's here
12 asking you to do.  That's an extraordinary claim.  As a
13 result, there's a very, very high burden of proof that he
14 has to meet.
You will see on page 20 of your instructions, that in
16 contrast, clear and convincing evidence -- which I just
17 showed you is their burden of proof -- is evidence that is
18 more compelling and persuasive.  It is evidence that is
19 precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and such weight
20 that produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation
21 about the matter at issue.  Without hesitation.
In other words, when you get back there you will be
23 deliberating.  If you hesitate, if the evidence is
24 confusing, if you can't decide whether or not punitive
25 damages are entitled, you by definition have decided that
    93
 1 punitive damages should not be awarded in this case.
 2
THE COURT:  Mr. Furr, we need to take a brief
 3 break.
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
MR. FURR:  Thank you very much.
THE COURT:  Someone needs to go to the restroom.
MR. FURR:  Thank you.
(Recess) 
THE DEPUTY CLERK:  Plaintiff's counsel, I have
 9 marked on the exhibit list that --
THE COURT:  I just got a note that somebody needed
11 a bathroom break.
MR. FURR:  Everybody did.
THE COURT:  Well, yeah.  It's just kind of hard to
14 figure out when to do it without interrupting somebody.
MR. NEALEY:  I had a closing argument in a trial
16 one time.  And in the middle of the defendant's closing
17 argument, a juror was trying to read something.  She stood
18 up and said "Your Honor, I have to go to the bathroom now."
THE COURT:  Well, at least we got a note.
MR. NEALEY:  It was commotion.
(Jury present -- 11:21 a.m.) 
THE COURT:  Go ahead, Mr. Furr.
MR. FURR:  Thank you, Your Honor.
Okay.  Ladies and gentlemen, the home stretch.  We're
25 going to finish closing before lunch, and then the case is
    94
 1 going to be yours.
 2
The issue I'm now addressing is this extraordinary
 3 claim that plaintiffs have made where they're asking you to
 4 award them more money, even though they have already asked
 5 you for millions of dollars already.  We talked about how
 6 they have a very high burden of proof of clear and
 7 convincing evidence, and that they have to demonstrate those
 8 very specific standards that I showed you on the jury
 9 instructions I won't go back to now.  But you saw them on
10 Pages 19 and 20 of your jury instructions.
Well, let's talk about what the evidence is.  This is a
12 little hard to piece together for you because most of the
13 evidence that I'm about to talk to you about came in through
14 three sources.  Number one was Dr. Cook's testimony.  You
15 might recall Dr. Cook was the very first witness in this
16 case.  The gentleman with the British accent, the scientist
17 at R.J. Reynolds, that they played you the video deposition
18 of.  This evidence also came in in part through Dr. Gentry's
19 testimony, who was the last witness that you saw whose
20 videotape they again played, and part of this evidence came
21 in through the cross-examination of Dr. Cummings.
In the interest of time, I'm not going to sort through
23 exactly who said what.  I represent to you that if you
24 consult your notes, you will see that this information came
25 in through their testimony.  The first issue we're talking
    95
 1 about whether R.J. Reynolds should be punished because they
 2 have had a complete lack of care, a complete disregard for
 3 public health.
 4
Well, here is the story that Dr. Cook told you.
 5 Dr. Cook told you that R.J. Reynolds, Brand Williamson, and
 6 American, and other tobacco companies funded three
 7 researchers at the University of Virginia Commonwealth named
 8 Larson Haines Tobacco,and that these three individuals put
 9 together a publication that reviewed 6,000 articles from
10 12,000 journals, and that it was provided to the Surgeon
11 General when they prepared the 1964 report.  You keep
12 hearing -- you keep hearing that the tobacco companies did
13 not provide information to the Surgeon General.
In fact, Dr. Cook told you what the tobacco companies
15 did.  They funded these researchers to put together the
16 whole world's literature about the dangers of smoking and
17 provide it to the Surgeon General.  And they continued doing
18 so as Dr. Cook told you, after the Surgeon General's Report
19 came out, tobacco companies didn't say, well, that was
20 pretty bad idea.  The Surgeon General's Report was very
21 adverse to us. 
Instead, they continued funding this process so that
23 the information could be put together and public health
24 scientists and anybody else who wanted to read this could
25 find it.
    96
 1
Again, you keep hearing that the tobacco companies did
 2 not provide documents to the Surgeon General.  This is in
 3 evidence.  If you chose to look at this document in evidence
 4 on Page IX in the introduction of the Surgeon General's
 5 Report, here is what the Surgeon General said:  "The
 6 committee, however, does acknowledge with gratitude and deep
 7 appreciation and with sincere apologies to any individual
 8 inadvertently that the substantial cooperation and
 9 assistance of the following:  Brown and Williamson Tobacco
10 Corp., the P. Lorillard Company, Philip Morris Inc., and the
11 R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
So whenever you hear that these companies didn't
13 cooperate, and wouldn't provide information to the Surgeon
14 General, right there is a Surgeon General's reference
15 itself.
And again, they're asking you to punish R.J. Reynolds.
17 But the evidence is that, in fact, R.J. Reynolds worked to
18 reduce carcinogens in cigarettes.  You were told this
19 morning that we didn't try to do anything to make cigarettes
20 safer?  Dr. Cummings told you that we worked to reduce
21 cancers in cigarettes.  Those are the chemicals that cause
22 cancer.
Dr. Cummings and Dr. Cook also told you that the
24 company implemented design features recommended by the
25 public health community.  This design of cigarettes was not
    97
 1 going on in a vacuum.  The public health community was
 2 making recommendations about how you could would change
 3 cigarettes to try to make them safer.  And when they would
 4 make those recommendations, R.J. Reynolds and the other
 5 companies would try them.  In fact, the Surgeon General --
 6 you heard this.  The Surgeon General found that many of the
 7 design features implemented by the cigarette companies
 8 actually reduced tumor density on average. They changed
 9 design feature they put into cigarettes that the public was
10 receiving.  And then, they would test those against other
11 cigarettes.  The rate of cancer being developed in the
12 animal experiments was going down.  And they are telling you
13 that we should be punished for complete absence of care?
You know, there's a lot of focus on Winston cigarettes.
15 Ladies and gentlemen, you heard the evidence.  There's --
16 they want us punished over Winston cigarettes?  There's zero
17 evidence in this case that Winston cigarettes are any more
18 dangerous or more addictive than any other cigarettes.
19 There is simply no such evidence in the case.  Consult your
20 notes thoroughly.  Please, I beg you to do that.  You will
21 see there is no evidence that Winston cigarettes are more
22 dangerous or addictive.
They're basically asking you to punish us for selling a
24 legal product called cigarettes that has inherent dangers,
25 including cancer and addiction.  That's what they are asking
    98
 1 you to do.  They're asking you to punish us.  They're asking
 2 you to second-guess the legislature.  They're asking you to
 3 second-guess our society's decisions.  What's society has
 4 decided is this:  Cigarettes are dangerous.  We're going to
 5 put warnings labels on them, and adults in a America get to
 6 choose.  That's our societal choice, and they're asking you
 7 to punish us because of the inherent dangers in cigarettes. 
 8 That's what you're being asked to do.  
 9
They made a big deal during their case about flavors.
10 But do you remember Dr. Cummings' testimony?  R.J. Reynolds
11 reduced the level of flavors between 1954, and in about
12 1990, reduced level of flavorants in the Winston cigarettes
13 by about 70 percent.  Remember, it was kind of an a ha
14 moment for Dr. Cummings because he had just made that
15 admission the previous Friday in a deposition in yet another
16 tobacco case, and he had forgotten about it over the
17 weekend.  And I showed him the transcript and said remember
18 what you said a couple of days ago in your deposition?  And
19 he admitted this.  And they say entire absence of care and
20 safety?
Finally, you know there is this testimony about there
22 was a suggestion this morning that we should be punished for
23 some kind of issue related to lights or low tar cigarettes,
24 that we should have never made them.  That they advertised
25 them wrong, and that somehow that harmed Mrs. Duke because
    99
 1 remember, Reynolds could only be punished even in theory for
 2 conduct that harmed Mrs. Duke, not for general conduct. 
 3
So the suggestion about lights and low tar, first of
 4 all, has to be tied to Mrs. Duke.  But you remember what the
 5 evidence really is?  Mr. Duke told you that he never
 6 remembers his mother ever smoking Winston lights.  His wife
 7 came in here and said oh, yeah, now that you shown me
 8 pictures of the pack, I can tell by the color that that's
 9 the cigarettes that my mother-in-law smoked for a while.
10 But then when Mr. Bassett cross-examined her, she admitted
11 that during her deposition, she had told us that she didn't
12 remember the color of the pack.  And this memory that she
13 now has appeared only after the plaintiff's lawyers sat with
14 her and showed her advertisements of cigarettes.
One of the things you're entitled to do is jurors is
16 decide what you think about the credibility of witnesses. 
17 I'm not going to say any more on this topic.  That's for you
18 all to decide how credible you think that testimony is.
Finally, the final point I'm going make on punitive
20 damages is this.  Again, they want you to find without
21 hesitation that there was a complete absence of care by R.J.
22 Reynolds, what could R.J. Reynolds do?  They can't make the
23 product safer.  There's no way to make it safe.  It can't be
24 done.  We have tried and tried.
So what do we do?  R.J. Reynolds' parent company goes
   100
 1 out and buys the company called Niconovum.  Niconovum.  You
 2 remember the cross-examination of Dr. Cummings and
 3 Dr. Gentry's explanation?  Niconovum is a company that
 4 makes -- that makes smoking cessation products.  That makes
 5 nicotine replacement products, and you've heard that R.J.
 6 Reynolds is in the process of trying to get those products
 7 introduced in the United States.  What more can we do than
 8 do the best we can to make them safer.  Put warnings on the
 9 packs, and for people who decide to quit, go to Sweden and
10 buy the best smoking cessation product we can find and try
11 to introduce it into the United States to help people who
12 want to quit quit.  An entire absence of care and safety,
13 Ladies and gentlemen, it's not even close.
So when you get to this question, Number 9, do you find
15 from clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages
16 again the defendant are warranted under the circumstances of
17 this case, no matter what else you've said in this case, the
18 answer to this question should be no.  Now, as you received
19 in instructions if you answer this question yes, we'll come
20 back and have a second phase of this trial where we will
21 talk about punitive damages, but we should never get in a
22 second phase in this trial.  We should never get there for
23 all the reasons I have been talking about.  The case should
24 end with class membership.  There is no bridge between the
25 plaintiffs evidence and defendant's conduct.  There
   101
 1 certainly, certainly should not be a punitive damages award
 2 in this case.  So the answer to this question should be no.
 3
I want to wrap up with you, and suggest to you somebody
 4 asked me recently what's your defense in this case?  I
 5 thought I said, they said give it to me in two sentences,
 6 three sentences.  I said okay.  Everybody knew that smoking
 7 was dangerous.  Anybody can quit the smoking -- can quit
 8 smoking that wants to, and the plaintiffs have admitted that
 9 Mrs. Duke was the legal cause of her own death.  Use your
10 common sense, ladies and gentlemen.  Take a step back, from
11 the plaintiff's rhetoric., and all these random documents
12 that are being thrown up here, these ancient documents that
13 have no relationship to Mrs. Duke, and think about the
14 fundamental nature of this lawsuit.  Make me a millionaire,
15 even though everybody knew anybody can quit, and I admit my
16 mother caused her own death.
Here is the fundamental nature of this lawsuit.  Not
18 only did they admit that everybody knew, they admit that
19 Mrs. Duke knew that smoking was dangerous.  Not only did
20 they admit that anybody can quit, the evidence is clear that
21 Mrs. Duke quit the first time she really tried.  Not only
22 did the plaintiffs' experts admit that all smokers are
23 responsible for their smoking choices, they admitted that
24 Mrs. Duke was responsible for her smoking choices.
So here we are in 2012, and they are asking you to find
   102
 1 that somehow, despite these irrefutable facts, that this is
 2 all new, and that you should award millions of dollars.
 3 Let's take a brief trip back through history about the way
 4 these issues have been viewed in our society over time.  And
 5 we will start with Dr. Hammond, one of the famous early
 6 researchers of the dangers of smoking.  And let's look at
 7 what he had to say.
 8
(Whereupon a tape is being played in open court but not
 9 transcribed herein.)
MR. FURR:  In 1954, I mean, the parallels are
11 uncanny.  And in 1954, people are being warned, and what
12 they then want to do is their business.  And what did Sarah
13 Duke tell her daughter-in-law when they asked her to stop
14 smoking?  She said that's my business.  That's my business.
15 It's written in there.  Let's look at the coverage of the
16 1964 Surgeon General's Report.  You will see the same basic
17 message.
(Whereupon, tape is being played in open court, but not
19 transcribed herein.)
MR. FURR:  So it sounds familiar, doesn't it? 
21 Once again, it's been known for 50 years that smoking is
22 dangerous, but in America, people get to make choices.  But
23 they have to take responsibility for the choices that they
24 make.
Let's look at Dr. Koop.com.  Do you remember Dr. Koop,
   103
 1 a famous Surgeon General who wrote the report that
 2 nicotine -- who was responsible for the report in 1988 about
 3 smoking addiction.  But here is what he also said
 4 afterwards.  "The choice --you note they mention you this
 5 word choice.  They keep ridiculing and saying that addiction
 6 -- once you are addicted, there no choice.  Look at what
 7 Dr. Koop said.  "The choice to light up is always yours.
 8 Ultimately, you are the one that has control over your
 9 behavior.  The cigarette is not going to light itself and
10 jump into your mouth." 
The cigarette is not going to light itself and jump
12 into your mouth.  This is nothing new, ladies and gentlemen.
13 These are not themes or arguments developed by me, or the
14 tobacco companies, or anyone over here.  This is the way
15 smoking has always been viewed in our society.
Ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to finish up with this
17 thought.  As I said before, I'm going to say it a little
18 more directly.  We live in the greatest country in the
19 world.  And maybe the greatest thing about the greatest
20 country in the world is that we get to make choices about
21 how to live.  We decide how to live.  But the only way that
22 works is that we also must take responsibility for the
23 choices that we make in life.  That's how our country works,
24 and that's why our country is so great.  
That's one of first messages we teach our children when
   104
 1 they are young.  That's what we tell our loved ones, our
 2 spouse.  That's what we tell our friends, and we sure hope
 3 they live up to it because we want to live approximate a
 4 society where people get to make choices, but take
 5 responsibility for their choices.  That's how this whole
 6 thing works in the America.
 7
Mrs. Duke made her choice to smoke.  She made her
 8 choice to smoke, notwithstanding the fact that she knew that
 9 smoking was dangerous.  She didn't try to quit.  That's
10 fine.  That's her choice.  She gets to make those choices.
11 But now, here we are 2012 with her son, Mr. Duke.  As you
12 heard, he and his wife are on the verge of retirement.  And
13 they're asking you to make them millionaires and turn his
14 wife -- excuse me, turn his mother into the victim that she
15 never was during the course of her lifetime.
Ladies and gentlemen, for all of reasons I have
17 discussed today, I would ask that you return a verdict for
18 R.J. Reynolds on all counts in this case.  I want to tell
19 you it's been a pleasure working in front of you.  And I
20 appreciate your attention.  Thank you very much.  Thank you,
21 Your Honor.
