MR. LANTINBERG:  Good morning.  How are you?
It was about a week ago that I had the first
15 opportunity to introduce myself to you, and it was your
16 first opportunity to learn a little bit about this case.
17 Certainly when you walked into this courthouse you had no
18 idea whether you would be picked as a juror, what kind of
19 case you might be selected on, whether it would be a civil
20 matter or a criminal matter, and not knowing, you know, what
21 the issue would be.  
You have learned an awful lot about George Duke and his
23 mother, Sarah Duke, and you've learned an awful lot about
24 the tobacco industry and the design of cigarettes and
25 nicotine and lung cancer, stroke, death certificates.
     6
 1
You've received a lot of evidence in a lot of different
 2 forms.  You've received it in the form of live witnesses
 3 that sat right here.  You could look at them, watch their
 4 demeanor, and evaluate for yourself the truth and veracity
 5 of their answers to questions both by myself, my co-counsel,
 6 and as well as R.J. Reynolds.
 7
You probably have a unique understanding of the
 8 workings of the tobacco industry, more unique than perhaps
 9 the vast majority of people in this country.
I've told you that there would be a great many things
11 that we would show you and that there would be many things
12 that we would not need to reprove.  And Her Honor gave us a
13 limited amount of time in that opening statement and I've
14 got a limited amount of time with you this morning as well
15 to try to close and bring together a lot of information. 
Information in a trial unfolds in a, perhaps not the
17 most ideal way.  We have to bring in witnesses when they're
18 available.  I told you there was a great many pieces of
19 evidence that were already in evidence, some of which have
20 been talked about in detail, some of which have been glossed
21 over in this case, and some of which have not been talked
22 about at all.  And all of that will be available to you to
23 look at, and I'm going to try to point out as we go through
24 this some of the important information and some of the other
25 documents that I think are relevant.
     7
 1
This case has got several components, as you know.
 2 There is this class action component and whether or not
 3 Sarah Duke is class member, and we're going to talk to you
 4 about both the Court's instructions that Her Honor will read
 5 to you at the conclusion of my presentation, as well as R.J.
 6 Reynolds, and then there's a verdict form.  And at the end
 7 of day this case is reduced down to this document.
 8
All of the witnesses, all of the documents, all the
 9 evidence, all of the disputes that Her Honor told you about
10 at the beginning, her preliminary instruction she said this
11 is a case about disputes.  And we're asking you to resolve
12 some very fundamental disputes that we were unable to
13 resolve for ourselves.  
There was certainly some disputes that we were able to
15 resolve.  We have told you about smoking and Sarah Duke's
16 smoked and that it caused her lung cancer, and we have told
17 you about other facts -- and I'll go through some of those
18 and I've got some slides to help refresh ourselves on that.
I want to talk a little bit about really this place,
20 this courtroom.  There's been an awful lot of, if you will,
21 pomp and circumstance, a lot of formality that's been forced
22 on all of us, and it's been really out of respect out of
23 this process that we call the jury system.  You've noticed
24 that we haven't been able to talk to you if we see you in
25 the hallways or see you downstairs.  There's a rule.  We're
     8
 1 not allowed to do that.  Her Honor has, you know, governed
 2 this courtroom very strictly and very firmly, and it's out
 3 of respect for the process.
 4
The only thing that litigants, plaintiffs, defendants,
 5 individuals, corporations want when we come to a courthouse
 6 is justice.  And Her Honor gave you a taste for how
 7 important that is at the beginning of this case in what we
 8 call voir dire in which there was -- obviously there were
 9 many more people seated in this courtroom and she asked a
10 series of questions intended to bubble to the top, if you
11 will, anyone's particular feelings or bias that they might
12 have about this type of case or cases in general, about
13 smokers that might bring lawsuits, about feelings that you
14 might have about tobacco companies, feelings you might have
15 about plaintiffs in general, feelings you might have about
16 the rights of people to seek redress in a courtroom.
And each of you took an oath.  We all took an oath.
18 We're all subject to an obligation to try to ensure
19 fairness.  The only thing that any one of us in this
20 courtroom wants for either George Duke, Frank Duke, his
21 mother, Sarah Duke, or R.J. Reynolds is fairness and
22 justice.  And whatever the outcome is, as long as it's been
23 procedurally fair and substantively fair that's all anyone
24 can ask you is that when you walk into a courthouse they get
25 justice, and they walk out and say, Well, I gave it my best
     9
 1 shot and whatever the outcome is, is the outcome.
 2
So, you know, we're all probably familiar with the
 3 image, the sculpture of the blind lady of justice.  And it's
 4 worth talking about a little bit this morning because it
 5 bears on everything we're about to do here today.  The blind
 6 lady of justice, as we all recall, is blindfolded and she's
 7 holding the scales of justice in her hands, and those scales
 8 are even and they're empty.  And there's a number of
 9 important images there.
First of all, the blind lady of justice goes to that
11 issue of bias and impartiality.  All we can ask for is that
12 whatever bias or impartialities, impartialities that you did
13 have when you came into this courthouse you leave at the
14 door, and that you evaluate the evidence that we presented
15 to you based on the facts and as instructed on the law and
16 draw the conclusion and answer the verdict form questions
17 the way that they're intended and the order in which they're
18 intended.
And the scales are empty and they're even.  And that's
20 an important imagery.  That expresses the fairness goal that
21 when everyone starts out in this courtroom they start out
22 even, not with a little bit of influence on one side or a
23 little bit on the other side.  It's completely empty and
24 it's completely even.
And then of course Your Honor will tell you about the
    10
 1 burden of proof, which is the preponderance of the evidence.
 2 We're not in a criminal case.  And we're all, you know, very
 3 familiar with the CSI dramas and the Quincys and the whatnot
 4 in which a much higher level of proof is required.
 5
In a civil action, and it's our system, all that's
 6 required is a preponderance of the evidence.  And those
 7 scales of justice give us sort of a good way to think about
 8 that.  And I'll give a simple example.  If there was a car
 9 accident case in which there were a series of witnesses that
10 came into the courtroom and one of those witnesses said, "I
11 saw the light.  The light was red.  And I saw the driver go
12 through the red light and strike the other car."  That would
13 be evidence in favor of one person or another on those
14 scales.  And you put some weight on that scale and it would
15 carry the weight down and it would no longer be even.  There
16 would be evidence in favor of one party on that disputed
17 issue.
And if another witness came in and said, "I was there
19 at the scene.  I remember hearing the noise and I saw the
20 crash but I was texting at the time and I didn't see
21 anything."  That's not evidence of anything.  There's no
22 evidence presented in that circumstance that goes on the
23 scale.
And so if a second witness came in and said, you know,
25 "I heard it too and I looked up and I saw the accident but I
    11
 1 was reading my paper," that's not evidence of anything.  So
 2 as you evaluate the evidence that's been presented in this
 3 case, perhaps keeping that image in your mind will make it a
 4 little easier.  And I say that because I think there's been
 5 an awful lot of what I would describe as distraction in this
 6 case.
 7
I told you this case is an Engle class action case.
 8 Her Honor described that to you.  And one of the threshold,
 9 initial things that needs to be established is that Miss
10 Sarah Duke is a member of the Engle class.  And the Engle
11 class definition, as I told you before, encompasses Florida
12 residency.  Not a dispute in this case.  It involves an
13 Engle disease.  Lung cancer is a Engle disease, stroke is an
14 Engle disease.  It has to be a disease that's caused by
15 smoking, and it has to be a disease that's caused by a lot
16 of smoking, addicted smoking, addictive smoking.  And
17 counsel for the defendant spent really their entire case on
18 these issues.
I have told you a lot about the Engle findings and that
20 there were things that were proven that we didn't need to
21 reprove, and I explained to you those findings of
22 negligence.  The prior Court had determined that Engle class
23 members are entitled to the finding that the tobacco
24 companies, including R.J. Reynolds, were negligent.
25 Negligent in their marketing, negligent in the design of
    12
 1 their product, negligent in the promotion of their product.
 2
I told you that there was a finding about strict
 3 liability.  Strict liability is a law in the concept when
 4 someone -- a concept in the law that when someone sells a
 5 product that is defective, that is unreasonably dangerous
 6 and it causes harm, the actor who put that product on the
 7 market is strictly liable.  And there's a finding in that
 8 regard.
 9
And then we talked about this agreement to conceal that
10 was formed between each of the major tobacco companies and
11 culminated in the creation of a public relations arm called
12 The Tobacco Institute and The Tobacco Institute Research
13 Committee, and from the 1950s until the late 1990s that
14 entity perpetrated scores of acts in furtherance of the
15 conspiracy, in furtherance of the agreement to conceal, and
16 the -- and flawed on the American public as well as the
17 public health authority.  So those are issues that need not
18 be reproven, but we did present a fair amount of evidence in
19 that area.
You heard from Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns, both of whom
21 are -- both by education, by training and by choice, public
22 health officials.  They dedicated their lives to the
23 advancement of public health, both domestically and
24 internationally.  They have been recognized for their work,
25 not just by juries and courtrooms, but by their peers.  They
    13
 1 have been participants and authors of just about every
 2 modern surgeon general report that's been issued, and you
 3 will have many of them here.  This is the stack of evidence
 4 that will go back with you into the jury box.
 5
We brought to you these two experts to talk about --
 6 I'm going get into some details, but I do want to talk about
 7 some broad areas.  We brought these experts and we presented
 8 all these documents not because we had to reprove what we
 9 had to reprove, but because there's another claim in this
10 case which is for punitive damages.  And in cases of
11 punitive damages we have to show more.  It's not enough to
12 say that it happened or have the unrebutted testimony of
13 these experts come in.  We need to show it.  It needs to
14 have sort of a force and effect that is meaningful.
The Court will instruct you that the standard of proof
16 is even slightly higher, it's clear and convincing evidence.
17 It's more than just simply the scales.
But I mentioned this punitive damage point here at the
19 beginning of this closing statement because I want you to
20 consider all the evidence in that light as we move through
21 it.
So I also want to leave one more sort of general
23 thought perhaps before I go into some of the details; and
24 that is, think about the evidence that you saw, and think
25 about what you didn't see.  What you never saw was any
    14
 1 executive, employee, janitor of the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
 2 Company walk through those doors, sit in that witness box
 3 and raise their right hand to tell you the truth.  They
 4 never brought a witness in to talk about any of the
 5 documents that we showed you from the '50s, the '60s, the
 6 '70s, the '80s, the '90s.  They never brought in a witness
 7 to rebut a single conclusion that Dr. Burns or Dr. Cummings
 8 talked about from the surgeon general's report, the National
 9 Cancer Institute, the power and import of those formally
10 secret documents that became public in late 1999 or 2000
11 that Dr. Cummings described as in the tens of millions of
12 pages.  And we have only given you a sample here.
And I would suggest to you that the failure to bring in
14 anybody from the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, all they
15 would have had to do was put them on $300 ticket from
16 Winston-Salem and have them talk to you.  They didn't do it.
17 And I think that's important.  And I point that out because,
18 (a), we have these Engle finding that say what they say;
19 (b), we have documents that show what they show; and we have
20 the reports of the surgeon general and the National Cancer
21 Institute and Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns that conclude what
22 they conclude.  And they conclude about the design defects
23 that we have talked about and the conspiracy that we have
24 demonstrated and the negligence that we've asserted.
And all of these things had an impact, not just on the
    15
 1 public but on Sarah Duke.  Sarah Duke did exactly what they
 2 wanted Sarah Duke to do.  She smoked the cigarettes they
 3 wanted her to smoke, she switched to the lights and the
 4 filters when they wanted her to switch -- and we will point
 5 out some of those periods in time as we go through this --
 6 and they addicted her.
 7
So what I want to do is start with a little bit of
 8 information about Sarah Duke.  And so here of course
 9 remember we have got some photographs of Miss Duke and her
10 family, and we've got some of these stipulated facts that we
11 know about that smoking was a medical cause of her lung
12 cancer.  Not in dispute.  This is really important.  A
13 medical cause of her lung cancer.  It's also the legal cause
14 of her lung cancer.
We know that when it was diagnosed in January of '96,
16 and that was, therefore, between those two dates in 1990 and
17 in November of '96, those are some of those class action
18 statute of limitations dates.  And then we know that Brown
19 and Williamson and American Tobacco, you will see some of
20 these other names on other documents, they're all R.J.
21 Reynolds.  And also to the extent you see documents from any
22 of the tobacco companies, they're all part of the
23 conspiracy.  They all are in furtherance of this concealment
24 of the dangers and of the agreement to keep those things
25 secret.
    16
 1
So we're going to talk about the verdict form which has
 2 got the first two questions, and here's an image of the
 3 verdict form.  And as I said, at the end this is really all
 4 you're going to be doing.  You're going to reduce all of
 5 these disputes down to the answers to a number of questions.
 6
And the first one is:  Do you find by a preponderance
 7 of the evidence that Mrs. Duke was addicted?  
 8
And then the second one is sort of an extension of that
 9 is:  Did the addiction cause her lung cancer:  Did the
10 addiction cause her death?  The addiction to cigarette
11 smoking.  We know she smoked cigarette her entire life.
12 That's really not in dispute.  And these first two questions
13 used the word "cigarettes."  They don't use the word
14 "defendant," they don't use the word "R.J. Reynolds."
Class membership is brand blind, if you will.  Makes no
16 regard to what you smoked.  You're either in or you're out
17 of the class.  And you're either in because you were
18 addicted and you smoked so much that you got the disease or
19 you're not.  And Mr. Furr told you in his opening statement
20 this was one of the most important questions you will have
21 to deal with in the case.  And it is important for us, and
22 it's important for them, because if you don't get past this
23 they don't have to explain any of their conduct.  They don't
24 have to explain why they were negligent, how the defect hurt
25 her, how the conspiracy was bad, why they engaged in the
    17
 1 fraud, why they should be responsible.  So they want you to
 2 stop right here.  And I think this is really fundamentally
 3 not that difficult to overcome.
 4
You heard an awful lot of evidence, and lot of time has
 5 been spent on this, and an awful lot of money was spent by
 6 the defendants to come in here and tell you things about
 7 Sarah Duke and that she wasn't addicted and all that and
 8 we'll go through some of it.  So the first question is --
 9 is, was she addicted?  And so we're going through the
10 verdict form.  We're going to talk about addiction.  Was she
11 addicted?  All right.  
So let's talk a little bit about the last witness that
13 you heard from, and we will go a little bit in reverse here.
14 You heard from Dr. Tucker.  I'll call him the $84,000 man.
15 They brought in an expert from California, a doctor who
16 said, as a mouthpiece for the tobacco company, to tell you
17 that she wasn't addicted to cigarettes, that she smoked for
18 53 years, no dispute about that; that she smoked with such
19 force and regularity that she got lung cancer, no dispute
20 about that; but that she was never addicted for a moment in
21 her life that her switching to the Winston filtered
22 cigarette, which we know she did at around the time that
23 they introduced it, they did it around -- she -- the Winston
24 cigarette was introduced in response to the health scare of
25 the '50s, and they marketed it as a health reassurance
    18
 1 cigarette.  She then switched in the late '70s -- we know
 2 this from Laura Duke -- to a light brand of Winston
 3 cigarette.  Again another product that was sold as a
 4 reassurance cigarette.
 5
She did exactly what they wanted her to do, and she did
 6 it because she couldn't quit.  They knew that if they
 7 marketed a filter where they marketed a light that it would
 8 be an alternative to quitting.
 9
And I do want to talk about quitting and choice because
10 it's really, really important.  But I want to talk a little
11 bit about the facts that go to these addictions and then we
12 will get into this concept of choice.
So Dr. Tucker came in and he told you not addicted.
14 Dr. Tucker told you that he uses a book, he uses the DSM-IV
15 book, which on cross-examination was shown to him, that
16 showed that 80 to 90 percent of smokers are addicted.  But
17 Dr. Tucker rejected that concept as simply inaccurate,
18 really didn't have much of an explanation for that.
We know from all of the evidence, the surgeon general
20 report, Dr. Cummings, Dr. Burns, that relapse rates are
21 high, that the number of people that smoke and then are able
22 to quit on their own is teeny.  And yet Dr. Tucker came in
23 and told you that these numbers are almost half within two
24 trials.  Simply not the case.  It's not supported by any
25 law -- any facts rather, it's not supported by any
    19
 1 documentation.  He simply came up here and said it, but I
 2 urge you to look in here for an article or a report that
 3 supports that proposition.  It's an $84,000 opinion that was
 4 bought and paid for but is not supported.  And they spent a
 5 lot of money to say "not addicted" because they don't want
 6 you to find that she's addicted.  But you use your common
 7 sense.  You decide.
 8
You know, so let's talk a little about, again, one of
 9 those addiction facts, and we'll get there.  I'm going to
10 quickly blast through some these and then we'll come back to
11 it.  The second question would ultimately be was the
12 addiction a part of her death?  The other three questions on
13 the verdict form, and I'll show these to you really in the
14 second part of my closing.  Fault and damages.  And we'll
15 get to damages.  All right.
So here we know about addiction, 53 years of smoking,
17 lung cancer, persistent use by disease, drug reinforced, and
18 knowledge despite harm.  We know the brands that she smoked
19 and when she switched and why she switched.  I told you
20 about the filtered and the lights and then the Merits.
Statistically Miss Sarah Duke was a heavy smoker and
22 she's the kind of smoker that they expect that grew and
23 became a very important, valuable asset of the R.J. Reynolds
24 Tobacco Company between the '60s and the '80s, and certainly
25 ultimately to her death in 1985.  This is from the 1989
    20
 1 surgeon general report.  You have this in evidence.  It
 2 shows how much increase there was in heavy smokers, females
 3 in particular.
 4
As we talk -- I guess I want for a moment, talk briefly
 5 about Sarah Duke's quitting and the period of time between
 6 when she was told that she had a mass on her lung and when
 7 we're told she ultimately quit.  So we know that in August
 8 or -- rather September of 1995 she had some x-rays, she
 9 ultimately has a -- in January she's told to start reducing
10 her smoking and she does.  And she reduces herself down to a
11 quarter pack of cigarettes a day, which Dr. Burns reminded
12 you is really the minimum level of addiction.
She then went in and had some biopsies to have her lung
14 tissue determined to be whether it was in fact cancerous.
15 She was in for three days and after that she never quits --
16 she never smokes again.  That's the evidence.  She tried to
17 titrate it down, and ultimately because of three days in the
18 hospital and her inability to smoke she did quit.
And she substituted -- one of these things that
20 Dr. Tucker talked about was sort of substitution.  She
21 substituted for a period of time with alcohol.  And there's
22 some inconsistencies in what Dr. Tucker talked about with
23 respect to the alcohol and we'll get to that.
So choice versus addiction.  There really is --
25 remember Dr. Tucker talked about these lists of things that
    21
 1 people do and why they like to smoke.  There's no evidence
 2 of that.  There's no evidence that she chose to smoke for
 3 those purposes; rather, she smoked because she needed the
 4 drug reinforced nicotine.
 5
Abnormal behavior, I mean, you know I always find it
 6 remarkable to talk about smokers simply doing it for choice
 7 and yet they walk across hot parking lots at lunch time and
 8 smoke, you know, on their own, in the -- huddled in the
 9 doorways of buildings where it's raining or where it's hot,
10 they leave family gatherings when they're with their
11 grandchildren or their family or at dinner to go outside and
12 smoke.  That's exactly what Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings told
13 you are the signs of an addicted smoker.  Persistent use,
14 drug reinforced.
The modern definition of addiction is this whole
16 concept of nicotine changes to the brain, and the
17 up-regulation which Dr. Tucker acknowledged and recognized
18 but failed to give credit to the way that the surgeon
19 general does, the way that the National Cancer Institute
20 does, the way the World Health Organization does.
So this concept of choice is important because choice
22 has nothing to do with addiction.  Choice is not about
23 whether or not the drug -- and that's why I talked to you
24 about this verdict form -- there's nothing about the concept
25 of choice in the verdict form, and there's nothing about the
    22
 1 concept of choice in addiction.  Choice may go to whether or
 2 not someone does quit or can quit.  
 3
And we talked to you early in the case about
 4 comparative fault.  And we're going to talk to you about
 5 comparative fault later.  There is a concept in the law that
 6 says that, you know, it's not all or nothing, that there's a
 7 place for you to say, well Sarah Duke should have tried
 8 harder.  She should have.  Certainly her father -- her son
 9 wanted to and her family wanted her to stop and stop
10 earlier, and she should have.  And, you know, she continued
11 to smoke, not because she wanted to but because she was
12 addicted.  And anybody who's ever met or known a smoker
13 knows that they probably don't want to smoke.  We know the
14 statistics.  Most would quit if they could.  Many can't.
15 Not just my words but the words of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
16 Company in their own documents.  And again no one came in
17 here to suggest otherwise.
So choice has nothing to do with these questions one
19 and two, was she addicted and did it cause the disease.  If
20 it comes in at all it comes in later on when we get to the
21 concepts of comparative fault.
Addiction.  Remember we heard from Dr. Cummings what is
23 addiction.  It's chronic.  It's repeated.  It's relapse in
24 the brain disease. It's this constant need to refill the
25 nicotine levels in the body.  It's compulsive and it's done
    23
 1 despite harm.  Those are the definitions of addiction.  And
 2 I think that what you should do is evaluate all the evidence
 3 that you have heard over the six or seven days that we have
 4 been here and fold it into these definitions and decide for
 5 yourself.  I can come up here and tell you that she's
 6 addicted.  That's certainly my job.  But ultimately all of
 7 this has been presented so that you can make the decision
 8 based on the law, based on the information, based on the
 9 standards that the experts that came in here and spoke to
10 you about.
You heard Dr. Burns talk about the Heaviness of Smoking
12 Index and the two major factors.  Smoking every single day
13 30 to 40 cigarette a day, it's a big deal.  It's not, you
14 know, some minor thing, you know.  Dr. Tucker would have you
15 believe that smoking five or six packs a day is the only
16 definition of a really heavy smoker or chain smoking, or
17 that you have to have some maladaptive pattern of behavior
18 that somehow smoking is such a part of your life that you
19 can't maintain normal social relationships or normal
20 business relationships.  I guess by his definition the only
21 type of addictive smokers are, sadly, the homeless people
22 that we see on the streets picking up the butts of
23 cigarettes.  I really don't think that's what DSM-IV is
24 about, and certainly not what the surgeon general's about.
25 It's not what all of these health professionals around the
    24
 1 world talk about.
 2
Remember, there's no dispute in this courtroom as a
 3 matter of law and a matter of fact that nicotine in
 4 cigarettes is addicting.  It's not maybe addicting.  It's
 5 not might be addicting.  It is.  Dr. Gentry, who you heard
 6 by video, disputes that, despite that being modern science
 7 they still sort of live in the dark ages.
 8
We saw this effort to distract you.  You remember you
 9 saw those Monopoly cards in which citations were to the '74
10 and the '84 surgeon general's report about it being a
11 personal choice?  That's ancient.  That's ancient science.
12 That's the deception that occurred when the tobacco
13 companies, despite being requested to provide documents to
14 the surgeon general, didn't.  And so in 1988 the surgeon
15 general comes out with the '88 report that says nicotine and
16 cigarettes is addicting.  What do they do the next day?
17 They have a counter blast.  They say these scare tactics are
18 irresponsible.  So citing to ancient concepts of addiction
19 doesn't carry the day.
So definition of addiction, surgeon general reminds us
21 it's powerful, and that it's similar to heroin and cocaine.
22 That's -- those aren't words that are expressed lightly, but
23 they're expressed with great thought to convey the power of
24 addiction.
Dr. Cummings of course used the Heaviness of Smoking
    25
 1 Index and scored Miss Sarah Duke in the 5-6 range.  She
 2 smoked early in the morning, she had her pack of cigarettes
 3 in her bed, she had her ashtray on her nightstand, she had
 4 here ashtray in her bathroom, she had the coffee on the
 5 timer and she got up and smoked.  There's really nothing --
 6 that's nothing that's unrebutted.  So again, I think that we
 7 have clear evidence of the addiction.
 8
We talked a little bit about the relapse in this issue
 9 of choice and cessation and that it is just simply a tiny,
10 tiny fraction of people that are able to quit right off the
11 bat, completely inconsistent with what Dr. Tucker was paid
12 to tell you.
Key characteristics.  Again, Dr. Cummings went through
14 these primary characteristics:  Persistent daily use, time
15 to first, amount smoked per day.  All those are present in
16 spades.
Age of initiation.  We know from the internal
18 documents, we know from the surgeon general that if you
19 don't get a person hooked by the time they're 24 you never
20 will, as a business matter for the tobacco companies.  Age
21 of initiation matters.
And in the era in which Sarah Duke started to smoke,
23 the 1940s, born in 1927, everybody smoked.  And, yes, there
24 was influence from family; yes, there was influence from
25 doctors; yes, there was influence -- you could smoke in the
    26
 1 courtroom.  All the way up into the '80s.
 2
One of the most heavily smoked areas in American
 3 society in those days were emergency rooms.  And you heard
 4 about the fact that people smoked in public health offices
 5 and doctors offices and emergency rooms.
 6
So she started early and she smoked her entire life.
 7 Difficulty refraining from smoking, we know that we saw it.
 8 I don't want to repeat that too much.
 9
Withdrawal symptoms.  Admittedly not a lot of evidence
10 of that.  Does it mean it didn't happen?  I think it goes to
11 the concept there's simply no evidence.  It's not one way or
12 another.  And certainly to the extent that the R.J. Reynolds
13 Tobacco Company wanted to present any such evidence, they
14 could have brought people in, they could have brought you
15 depositions, they certainly could have deposed and examined
16 as many witnesses as they would have liked.
It's not my words that nicotine addiction is powerful.
18 It is.  And all of these entities of course point that out.
I talked a little bit about Dr. Tucker and we know how
20 he was challenged on cross-examination and couldn't stand up
21 for the propositions that he had in terms of the percentage
22 of smokers and how long it takes, the percentages of people
23 that quit, unsupported.
You know, comparing Dr. Tucker and the DSM, the surgeon
25 general report, again it's simply -- it's simply not modern
    27
 1 science.
 2
Now we heard from Dr. Lloyd.  Dr. Lloyd as we know was
 3 the treating doctor.  And he's the doctor that knew Sarah
 4 Duke.  He's the doctor that had hands on Sarah Duke.  He
 5 told you that she was addicted, he told he treated thousands
 6 of patients and could count on one hand the number of
 7 patients that weren't addicted or that quit unaided.
 8
Dr. Lloyd.  This is -- now I'm going to get sort of
 9 into the second concept here, both in terms of addiction and
10 in terms of disease causation.  This a big deal in the case,
11 you know.  The defendants spent their entire case on two
12 issues.  Never dealing with their conduct, only trying to
13 put the blame and responsibility on Mrs. Sarah Duke.
So we know what the death certificate says.  We know
15 what the medical records say.  We know what the doctors that
16 treated her say.  They all say that she died of lung cancer.
17 And the defendants R.J. Reynolds would have you believe that
18 there's some technical difference in there, that somehow the
19 stroke was unrelated to smoking, the stroke was unrelated to
20 cigarettes, that somehow she would have died on exactly the
21 same day at exactly the same moment had she never had lung
22 cancer, had she never had her lung removed, and she never
23 had those biopsies and she never had the complications. 
Remember Dr. Amos?  He admitted that losing your lung
25 is a risk factor for pneumonia.  And there was even
    28
 1 inconsistencies between Dr. Bennett and Dr. Amos.  I mean
 2 Dr. Amos would have put -- I think Dr. Bennett said he would
 3 have put history of lung cancer on the death certificate and
 4 Dr. Amos would have said nothing about lung cancer.  These
 5 are all opportunistic opinions of spokespersons having been
 6 bought and paid for by the tobacco company and they should
 7 be given the weight of their source.  And that's your job.
 8 It's not my job.  I believe that they are biased, I believe
 9 they're brought --
MR. FURR:  Your Honor, excuse me.  I hate to
11 object.  Counsel should not be expressing personal opinions.
THE COURT:  Sustained.
MR. LANTINBERG:  But it's for your determination
14 as to their credibility, as to their believability, and as
15 to their probative value in terms of proving whether or not
16 she was in fact a victim of lung cancer and smoking from the
17 lung.  
We know what the medical records tell us.  Remember the
19 death certificate that's signed in this case, 1996, by the
20 doctors, carcinoma of the lung is the primary case.  And
21 secondary cause is cerebral vascular accident and bone
22 metastasis.  And this is important.  There is no dispute
23 that she had bone metastasis.  It wasn't talked about a lot.
24 They want to say there's no pathology for it.  
Again, the evidence at the time, the radiation therapy
    29
 1 that was given to her back was palliative, it worked.  It
 2 worked.  Because radiation works on cancer.  But she had a
 3 death sentence once it metastasized.  If they -- when they
 4 removed her lung they told her, We got it all.  We got it
 5 all.  There's no micro-cancers that have spread.  You got a
 6 30 to 40 percent chance of life.  But if we don't get it all
 7 you have literally a zero percent chance of life.  That's
 8 what happens with cancer.  It's aggressive, it's powerful,
 9 it's deadly.  And once it metastasizes it metastasizes fast. 
We know that 27 days after her first x-ray came back
11 clear following her lung removal there's metastasis in the
12 spine.  It spread.  The spinal column is connected to the
13 brain as we know.  It metastasized.  
The evidence may be, you know, imperfect, if you will.
15 It's not CSI.  We don't have the autopsy of the brain.  Not
16 required.  We don't have the image that shows that little
17 micro-cancer in the brain.  But the preponderance of the
18 evidence, the doctors that were there, the neurologists that
19 treated her, the pulmonologists that treated her, those that
20 took care of her, said it was lung cancer.
And even Dr. Lloyd who had the chance to -- he came
22 back, was asked questions about this confirmed lung cancer,
23 and that -- whether he flipped it or not, whether lung
24 cancer as a secondary cause or cerebrovascular accident as
25 the first cause, lung cancer in toto played a role in that
    30
 1 death.  And that's certainly the evidence from all of the
 2 scientists as doctors that have come into this case.  All
 3 right.  So we know what the medical record says.  Long term
 4 prognosis is uncertain but probably poor.  And it's signed
 5 by Dr. Lloyd.
 6
All right.  So Dr. Burns told us that the tumor was
 7 large, it was greater than 3 centimeters in her lungs, and
 8 that there was a more likely than not chance that it would
 9 metastasize.  That's the preponderance of the evidence.  We
10 know about the percentages of survival.  That percentage of
11 survival, the inverse is that it metastasized.  Sixty to
12 75 percent of the patients don't live because it
13 metastasizes.  More likely than not.  Preponderance of
14 evidence.  And we know there's a zero percent chance of
15 survival once that bone cancer had spread, or that the lung
16 cancer had spread to the bone.
All right.  Causation.  This is -- the judge is going
18 to read you the jury instruction on causation.  Causation is
19 an important legal as well as sort of a human concept.  In
20 this case, you know, the causation issue is the nicotine
21 addiction directly and naturally and in continuous sequence
22 to produce or contribute substantially to producing the
23 death.
So the medical cause of her lung cancer was smoking,
25 the legal cause of her lung cancer was smoking, and the
    31
 1 evidence makes it clear that it also led to her death.
 2
And it doesn't need to occur all by itself.  It can
 3 occur with other things.  And so the debilitated state of
 4 her body from losing her lung, the weaknesses that she had,
 5 all contributed to her ultimate demise.  
 6
We heard from Dr. Amos who came in all the way from
 7 California and came up with a number of concepts for -- to
 8 explain why he says she died of something else, none of
 9 which are reflected in the medical records, and some of
10 which were never even expressed before he came into this
11 courtroom.  They were new ideas, new concepts.  Again, the
12 paid mouthpiece of the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company to give
13 you -- to distract you from the facts of the case.
Again, rely on your memory of the evidence.  You will
15 have those medical records.  You can look for some these
16 words, see if they appear anywhere.  They don't.  This
17 concept of some birthmark on her brain; one, on direct
18 examination suggested that's what killed her, and then on
19 cross-examination when Mr. Nealey asked her some
20 questions -- asked him some questions he made it clear you
21 can only know from an autopsy.  So he tells you that it's
22 the medical probability on direct, but then he concedes that
23 you can't know.  That's no evidence.  That's the scales of
24 justice again, trying to put evidence there that's not
25 there.  The evidence is undeniable what Dr. Lloyd and the
    32
 1 medical records reflect.
 2
Dr. Lloyd linked the cancer to the stroke, as did Dr.
 3 Burns.  There was this issue about hyperlipidemia as a
 4 potential risk factor, whether she had it, great.  He sort
 5 of diagnosed it even though it was in the medical records,
 6 but it doesn't matter.  It's helpful to the plaintiffs'
 7 case, because it's one of those other contributing causes.
 8 It acts in combination.  The jury instruction tells you that
 9 it need not be the only cause.  It can act in combination
10 with other causes, including natural causes.  Natural causes
11 are Sarah Duke, her body, her weaknesses, those are other
12 natural causes.  So if any of these things, if smoking, but
13 for smoking, Sarah Duke would have lived if but for the
14 smoking.  I'm trying get this out here.  
The concept is that the defendants would have you
16 believe that smoking had nothing to do with her death.  And
17 it's simply not the case.  The science and the evidence
18 doesn't support that.  And legal -- and legal cause and
19 medical cause all point to the smoking as the cause of
20 death.  
So we talked about Dr. Amos, the same things that are
22 risk factors for lung cancer are the same things that are
23 risk factors for stroke.  The surgeon general tells us that
24 particularly with respect to risk factors for stroke,
25 they're multiplicative.  So if you have hyperlipidemia, and
    33
 1 that's a two factor for risk of stroke, and you have smoking
 2 then you have a four factor for stroke, if you have another
 3 risk factor, then you have an eight factor for -- in terms
 4 of the risk factors for stroke.
 5
So here we have sort of a diagram -- forgive my
 6 artwork, but it's an effort to sort of point out the issues
 7 that relate to stroke, the concurring factors that come
 8 together to produce stroke.
 9
I want to move on a little bit.  We're running low on
10 time.  So, all right, let's talk about the cigarette itself.
11 Remember, one, again I'm going to remind you the defendants,
12 R.J. Reynolds, talked nothing about their design defect.
13 They brought no expert, they brought no employee of the
14 tobacco companies to tell you anything we said about the
15 design features of the cigarette weren't true.  The surgeon
16 general tells us that it had an impact on addiction and
17 disease and that it was powerful.  
So this graphic here is meant to remind us of this
19 cigarette that we saw, and you will have the cigarette.
20 There was a bag here earlier with the cigarette in it.  And
21 you will have that you can look at the different pieces and
22 look at the vent holes.  
We talked about additives.  The cigarettes were made to
24 be addictive.  They added constituents, they added flavors,
25 they added chemicals, they studied and understood and
    34
 1 adjusted PH in a way that would maximize the impact,
 2 maximize of intake, maximize the inhalation.
 3
Here the surgeon general is reminding us, confirming
 4 for us the power of these ventilation holes and what they
 5 did.  They produced higher levels of free base nicotine.  We
 6 talked about how they attached, how important nicotine is.
 7 The internal documents.  Again, unrebutted.  I'm not making
 8 this stuff up.  This is unrebutted evidence.  No one came in
 9 here to say that these things didn't happen and they weren't
10 studied.  And the surgeon general confirms it.
Smoother, cooler smoke, diluted, initiation, and
12 inhalation, both of which were designed in the product,
13 because happily for them nicotine and cigarettes habituating
14 and the more that they sell, the more profits they make,
15 they need a bigger bag of money to take it to the bank.
Important.  This is the tobacco industry documents.  We
17 talked about the internal documents that were formerly
18 secret and made public.  And the surgeon general confirms
19 how important they were and their impact they had in
20 creating the health reassurance.  We had sort of a
21 chronology, the time line.  And then we have the health
22 scare of the '50s, the introduction of filters including the
23 Winston in the '50s.
We know we have this scientific concept in the '70s
25 that if we can reduce tar and increase nicotine, more people
    35
 1 will smoke what we would call those light cigarettes.  And
 2 internally they knew what would happen is people would
 3 compensate.  There's this elasticity built into the
 4 cigarette that there's a way to overpower the cigarette.
 5 The only design feature between a light cigarette and a
 6 filtered cigarette is an extra set of holes.  There's
 7 nothing different about the rod of tobacco.  It's just as
 8 engineered, it's just as reconstituted, it's just as blended
 9 for nicotine.  But if you dilute the air more with the vent
10 holes, then you get less nicotine or less tar was the
11 theory.  But they're overpowered.  They knew this.  If you
12 breathe really fast then those vent holes are overpowered if
13 you draw.  And the cigarettes are built for draw, resistance
14 to draw.  The filter, the filter composition, the density,
15 they knew it, they understood it, they worked on it.  And
16 here's an internal document, all work in this area should be
17 directed towards presuming -- providing consumer
18 reassurance.  Not my words.  Their words.  And again
19 confirmed by the surgeon general.
Here we have a document, an internal document.  We know
21 it's Exhibit 76.  In 1972, they have to convince the
22 customer to start smoking with wholly irrational reasons.
23 Philip Morris, they're using the illusion of filtration as a
24 way of selling their product.  You know in the '60s was sort
25 of heyday of science.  We're going to the moon, we're going
    36
 1 to use science to solve our problems.  They knew if they put
 2 a filter on it and said, Oh, all the bad stuff comes out, it
 3 would sell.  And it did.  You know, the non-filtered
 4 cigarettes almost went out of business and the filtered
 5 cigarette became 95 percent of the market within just a few
 6 short years.
 7
The conspiracy leading up to the fraud of the surgeon
 8 general report in 1964.  Internal documents reflect a clear
 9 understanding that nicotine is connected with addiction.
10 The modern science that Dr. Burns testified about.  And they
11 kept these results in a very high level of secrecy.  They
12 kept them internal.  They didn't tell the surgeon general.
13 They didn't tell the public.  This said that the submission
14 to the surgeon general was undesirable and ultimately they
15 didn't give them to the surgeon general, and we know this
16 because the millions of documents that were produced in the
17 '90s.  Again, no one came in here and said what we're
18 telling you about isn't true.
And here the surgeon general in 2010 is acknowledging
20 the power of those internal documents.  And it's not
21 surprising that the tobacco industry, R.J. Reynolds, knew
22 what the science of their own product was in the '50s and
23 '60s and '70s.  But the surgeon general did and they kept it
24 as a secret.
Here again, the health -- the changes that were made to
    37
 1 the cigarette made the cigarette more addicting.  And by
 2 making it more addicting they made it more dangerous, a
 3 major defect in the product.  And again a part of the whole
 4 conspiracy in the fraud.  
 5
These are some of the design features we talked about.
 6 The surgeon general is confirming the manipulation of PH,
 7 the manipulation of ventilation, the manipulation of blends,
 8 filters, ingredients, all of which were for purposes of
 9 initiating use and continuing use and increasing inhalation.
In 1962, they possess a knowledge of effects of
11 nicotine far more extensive than is in the public
12 literature.  And they didn't tell the surgeon general.  They
13 can genetically determine any level of nicotine they want
14 and they have for decades, and Dr. Cummings told you about
15 that as well.  Why?  All about profits.  It's a business
16 purpose, their sales pattern is positively correlated with
17 nicotine, they sell and they perpetuate that product.
We heard from Dr. Gentry and some of his contrasting
19 ideas relative to the surgeon general report.  He doesn't
20 believe nicotine addiction is a problem.  Dr. Cummings,
21 Dr. Burns told you it's a public health problem, then
22 they -- R.J. Reynolds' position is completely at odds with
23 the modern science, with the surgeon general, with the
24 National Cancer Institute, and I'll certainly leave it to
25 you to draw those conclusions as to why we know, it's
    38
 1 because to admit addiction is a problem would be to admit
 2 that their product is defective.
 3
Eighty, 90 percent of nicotine dependence, we talked
 4 about that.  
 5
Dr. Gentry disagreed that the modern cigarette is more
 6 dangerous.  We heard in opening statement, Mr. Furr tell you
 7 that rolling your own is just as dangerous.  We have shown
 8 you the level of design, of study, of engineering.  They
 9 have studied every millimeter of the cigarette, every aspect
10 of its ingredients, every additive, every psychological
11 issue about this cigarette so they could make it more
12 profitable for them.  Reconstituted tobacco is simply a way
13 to use stems and other parts of tobacco to make it more
14 profitable.
You heard about this, you know, the surgeon general
16 says that they made it more dangerous.  Dr. Gentry was
17 asked, Don't you have a crash program to try to figure out
18 if the surgeon general is right or wrong?  His comments were
19 we had a crash program for decades.  They haven't changed.
20 And this is an important part of the punitive damages
21 aspect.  They have to change.  And only in a courtroom like
22 this can a message be sent that that conduct is wrong.
Dr. Burns talked about this, about these changes in the
24 smoking.  There used to be small cell lung cancer.  It was
25 sort of the prevalent cancer from smoking.  And then over
    39
 1 time adenocarcinoma has taken over, and the belief is that
 2 that deep inhalation brings more of the smoke into the lungs
 3 and kills those cilia, damages those cells, turns them into
 4 callus cells that ultimately turns into cancer is the reason
 5 for that.  And all of these design features are a part of
 6 that.
 7
Dr. Gentry, you know, again on deposition that we
 8 played for you, he says, you know, if you're not -- if
 9 you're addicted to something without risk it's not an issue.
10 But what do the internal documents tell us?  Unlike other
11 high risk activities smoking is addictive.
How do we reconcile their own internal inconsistencies?
13 I submit to you that there is no way to reconcile it, but
14 that it's a self-serving position taken in the case in order
15 to protect their position.
They recognize internally their position on causation
17 is unacceptable.  But they maintain for decades that there's
18 nothing about smoking that causes disease.
1953, they have already acknowledged more than 50 years
20 ago, 60 years ago, we know what's in our cigarettes, we know
21 it causes cancer.  And there's a document -- and I'll talk
22 about it probably on my second close -- but there's -- the
23 Philip Morris Tobacco Company once said if there's anything
24 dangerous in our product we will go out of business.  A lie.
25 A public lie meant to create a wholly irrational reason for
    40
 1 people to continue to smoke.  Wholly irrational reasons to
 2 smoke.
 3
Monograph 13.  There's no evidence the tobacco
 4 companies conducted any research to detect whetter or not
 5 what they were doing was actually more safe.  So they came
 6 out with these health reassurance cigarettes the National
 7 Cancer Institute shows -- you heard about -- I heard this in
 8 opening but I never saw any evidence -- billions of dollars
 9 have been spent to make safer cigarettes.  Mr. Furr said
10 that in his opening.  I haven't seen the first bit of
11 evidence to suggest that a dollar was spent, let alone
12 billions of dollars to make the cigarette safer.
1963, nicotine is addictive, at least they're in the
14 business of selling a drug.  And here we are, 1964, you
15 know, it should be characterized a habituation, not an
16 addiction.  There's a gap in the knowledge.  That gap was
17 known internally and ignored and rejected and not submitted
18 to the surgeon general.  
Again, 1967, it's an addictive habit attributable to
20 nicotine.  A modern understanding of the nicotine, its
21 impact on the nicotine receptors, the physiological, the
22 physical need for nicotine, fully understood internally.
23 It's a vehicle for the delivery of nicotine.  Happily for
24 the tobacco industry nicotine is habituating.  Business
25 purpose.  All about the money.
    41
 1
Emphasize nicotine, the key role in customer
 2 satisfaction.  The dominant specifications, again,
 3 continuing through '64, '70s, '80s, internal documents,
 4 nicotine delivery, attractive form.  They study this
 5 tremendously.  1982, if the exit gate showed we would be out
 6 of business overnight.  They know a non-addictive cigarette
 7 is not a saleable cigarette.  And so despite their comments
 8 about it being a safe cigarette, despite their comments to
 9 the public that what they sell not habituating.  They knew
10 that it was the only way they could sell.
We talked about compensation.  They understood this in
12 the '80s.  I'm running a little bit out of time.  In '88 we
13 talked about the conspiracy, the counter-blasts, the surgeon
14 general comes out in 1988, 24 years after the '64 surgeon
15 general statement that it's addictive, all the internal
16 documents say that it is, and yet The Tobacco Institute, the
17 group of tobacco companies, the conspiracy, the agreement to
18 conceal, the agreement to defraud the American public, comes
19 out and says that claims that cigarettes are addictive are
20 irresponsible and scare tactics.  How can we reconcile that
21 with the internal documents?  I suggest to you that you
22 can't.
As part of this perpetuation of a fraud, and remember,
24 the Engle findings tell us that they did this.  We brought
25 this evidence to you to support our claim ultimately that we
    42
 1 would like you to say that this conduct is so wrong that you
 2 should award punitive damages.  And you will be asked to put
 3 a check mark on the verdict form about that, and we will go
 4 about that.
 5
You heard, you know I showed you a video of the
 6 executives of the tobacco companies raising their hand
 7 before Congress under oath, 1994, that nicotine is not
 8 addictive.  A lie.
 9
And then here's internal document from the lawyers.
10 The lawyers tell us that the entire matter of addiction is
11 the most, quote, "weapon" a prosecuting attorney can have in
12 his lung cancer case.  Because they can't defend smoking is
13 a free choice but also is addictive.
Now, if you want to talk about free choice, free choice
15 if at all, comes in this case in the allocation of fault and
16 comparative fault.  But it has nothing to do with addiction,
17 whether she was addicted or whether it killed her.  And this
18 makes it pretty clear I think that that's exactly the point.
And the physician described in his document in 1989 is
20 the same strategy that's being employed in this courtroom
21 and the same denials that have been made for decades have
22 been made in this courtroom.
Winston cigarettes again promoted and advertised
24 millions and millions of dollars were spent to promote the
25 Winston cigarettes, Barney Rubble and Fred Flintstone in
    43
 1 1967.  The FTC recognizes the power of the advertising,
 2 which is virtually all Americans who either or understand
 3 the slogan worked.  Advertising was everywhere.  It was the
 4 doormats into the gas station, there was the pencil holders,
 5 it was in the windows.  It was everywhere.  Billboards.  We
 6 know in 1979 R.J. Reynolds was one of the biggest
 7 advertisers in the country, and had half of all billboards
 8 sponsored.  
 9
1927, youth marketing.  Why am I talking about youth
10 marketing?  Youth marking is wrong.  It's the kind of
11 conduct that we shouldn't sanction as American -- in
12 America.  We shouldn't sell a deadly, addictive product to
13 children.  1927, school days are here, big business, let's
14 go for it.  They continue to move forward into the '80s,
15 going after replacement smokes, young smokers.  Again I told
16 about the statistics about if we don't get a smoker by age
17 24 we don't get them.  This a study of that concept.
Every younger adult smoker is a critical factor of the
19 growth -- every major brand over 50 years.  Bad conduct.  We
20 shouldn't be going after children.  Sixty-eight percent of
21 all children smoke by the time they're 18.  If they're going
22 to smoke at all they're going to get them by the time
23 they're 18.  If they don't get them by 18 they're not going
24 to get them.  Certainly not going to get them for -- much
25 later than that.
    44
 1
1984, talking about strategies and concept segments,
 2 Attract an early smoker at the earliest opportunity and turn
 3 them into a valuable asset.
 4
All the smoker was for them was money.  And yes this is
 5 a case about money.  And yes, we're going to ask you to
 6 award money.  But that's all that Miss Sarah Duke was to
 7 them.  And in this justice system the only thing I can do in
 8 this case is ask you to award money.  And it's a hard thing
 9 to do.  It's a hard concept.  You know what, you know,
10 should a smoker admittedly -- I mean I have strong feelings.
11 Should a smoker be able to come into a courtroom, you know,
12 and say, you know, I was injured by the cigarettes?  Some
13 people think that's a bad thing.  But I told you at the
14 beginning that the company that makes a product that
15 injuries the customer is responsible.  And that's the law.
16 And the jury verdict form deals with that in a very specific
17 way.
And the only way to change behavior, and the only way
19 to change behavior in this system is to award money.  So we
20 have to ask for it.  And so we will.  And we wish you to
21 award a fair number.  And I'm going get this now, but I'm
22 going to save a little bit of time for my second part of the
23 case.
The -- I can tell you that this is a wrongful death
25 case.  Sarah Duke died 15.3 years before her expected date
    45
 1 of death.  She'd probably be alive right about now based on
 2 those actuarial tables.  And I could tell you that you
 3 should award $10 million for Sarah Duke's death.  And no one
 4 could say that a human life isn't worth $10 million.  I
 5 don't think you should award $10 million. I think it's a
 6 very high number.  But it's not my -- unfortunately that is
 7 one of the very, very hard things that falls on you, which
 8 is to say if I believe that Sarah Duke was addicted, if I
 9 believe that they sold the product intending to addict her,
10 if I believe that the smoking of that cigarette during that
11 addiction killed her, then that's a wrong.  That's a
12 wrongful death and compensation should be given.
Now what that number is, you know, that is ultimately
14 your job.  And I think it should be significant, I think it
15 should be more than a million.  I don't think it should be
16 10 million.  I think that ultimately we have ask you to say
17 that you want to learn more, you want to know more and you
18 want to understand why punitive damages should be awarded
19 and in what amounts.  And we want you to check yes on the
20 verdict form that says, Have we demonstrated a reckless
21 disregard for human life?  And an intentional sort of
22 mindset that said we're going to sell our product despite
23 the harm to the public.  And by putting a check mark --
Dr. Gentry is one of the top 15 people within the R.J.
25 Reynolds Tobacco Company.  He's on the leadership team.  We
    46
 1 would ask you to send a message that in this courtroom in
 2 Orlando on this day that's not the kind of conduct that is
 3 permissible.  It's not the kind of conduct that we sanction.
 4 The corporations shouldn't sell products as part of a
 5 conspiracy, as part of a fraud over a 50-year period that
 6 they know will addict the smoker and will kill them.  One in
 7 two -- Dr. Gentry told you this -- one in two of their
 8 customer will die of a cigarette related disease.
 9
I'm going to reserve some additional time.  I'm going
10 to allow counsel for defendants to present.  But I thank you
11 for your time, and thank you.


MR. LATINBERG:  May it please the Court?
THE COURT:  Yes.
MR. LATINBERG:  Wow.  I have a lot of things to go
25 over and a lot of topics to touch on because I do want to
   105
 1 respond to a number of items that counsel talked about.  But
 2 I want to start on this concept of punishment and this
 3 concept responsibility.  The concept of punitive damages is
 4 not a creation of plaintiffs' lawyers.  It's a creation of
 5 the legislature.  It exists in the law to compensate or
 6 really to punish and deter corporations from engaging in the
 7 kind of conduct that is reprehensible.  That is with
 8 reckless disregard for human life.  And with the -- and the
 9 absence of such power of a jury, the eight of you have the
10 power to make a statement.  
To tell corporations whether it's the R.J. Reynolds
12 Tobacco Company, or any corporation that when you make and
13 sell a product that's defective, that when you make and sell
14 a product that is inherently dangerous, that when you do so
15 with full knowledge that when that product is used and
16 ingested and purchased exactly the way that you intend it
17 to, and that it causes harm injury, illness, sickness,
18 death, that there's a mechanism by which juries have the
19 power to say no.  That's not right.
And it is not, I think, a logical construct to tell you
21 that everything that happened to Sarah Duke was the product
22 of her own choice.  You only see the word "choice" in the
23 verdict form.  You don't see the word "choice" in the
24 concept of addiction.  And in terms of choice and
25 responsibility, that choice and responsibility starts with
   106
 1 the maker of products.
 2
Juries establish the standard of care.  It is juries
 3 that decided that seat belts are required.  Juries that
 4 decided that air bags are necessary.  And there's scores of
 5 other examples where juries decided what is the standard of
 6 care?  What is the responsibility of individuals, of
 7 corporations, of -- we live in a society in which in order
 8 for us to have choices, there have to be rules.  In order
 9 for us to enjoy the privileges that come with being able to
10 come and go as you wish, to work, to assemble to pray, to
11 enjoy your own backyard in the safety and confines and not
12 be interfered with by others, that comes with rules and
13 responsibilities. 
And corporations are critically important to our
15 society.  In the absence of organized corporations that
16 manufacture and make products for us, you know, it would be
17 impossible for us as a organized society to survive.  And
18 the responsibility or the privilege that comes with being
19 able to sell in the masses, and generate millions of dollars
20 of profits, and provide by products, there is a
21 responsibility that what you make and what you sell is safe
22 and done prudently.
And the difference in this case is that they knew with
24 eyes wide open for 50 years what they were doing.  You know,
25 counsel showed you a number of documents.  He showed you
   107
 1 this document from Niconovum.  Well, a Niconovum product
 2 never went to market.  They bought it in 2007.  Where is it?
 3 And it had nothing to do with Sarah Duke.  It didn't help
 4 Sarah Duke when she was alive. 
 5
They showed you a slide -- let's see the slide here --
 6 I'll find the slide.  But let's -- let's go ahead and move
 7 on to an important point, which is this verdict form. 
 8
 9
MR. LATINBERG:  Your Honor, if I may use the Elmo?
And then, we'll talk a little bit about that and go
10 over on to the verdict form because, as I said to you
11 ultimately, this is the final work product, if you will, of
12 what you are going to end up with in this case.
So the first question is the addiction question.  We
14 have talked about it.  Did they contain nicotine?  I think
15 the answer to that is yes.
Now, the second question is one that counsel focused
17 quite a bit on, and that question really breaks down into
18 two parts.  It says, "do you find by a preponderance of
19 evidence?"  We talked about the scales, and Mrs. Duke's
20 addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal
21 cause of her lung cancer.  And then, was it a legal cause of
22 her death? 
So was the smoking and the addiction a legally cause of
24 her death?  And I think we've sort of exhausted that.  And I
25 may go through with you some of these other notes and point
   108
 1 out some of the specific features there.  But we know what
 2 happened in terms of the smoking, the doctors' testimony
 3 about a stroke.
 4
And actually, this is -- I would like to focus on this
 5 for a second.  Here, we have the word "cigarettes."  We have
 6 the word "cigarettes."  It doesn't say Winston.  It doesn't
 7 say R.J. Reynolds.  These are the class membership
 8 questions.  They are without regard to brand and without
 9 regard to defendant.  And so the only question is whether or
10 not she smoked sufficiently -- smoked cigarettes with
11 sufficient quantity and intensity such that you determine
12 that she was addicted.
That's the class membership question.  And then once we
14 overcome that requirement by a preponderance of the
15 evidence, and I submit to you that we have, then you get to
16 the next four questions.  And these are four questions,
17 these are the Engle questions.  And if you read the way that
18 reads it says, "Do you find by the preponderance of evidence
19 that negligence on the part of the defendant was a legal
20 cause?" 
In the instructions, the Court will tell you R.J.
22 Reynolds was negligent.  So if this was a car accident case,
23 and I had to show you that the defendant was speeding at the
24 time of the accident, that would be me being required to
25 prove the negligence of the driver.  The negligence is
   109
 1 already determined.
 2
So once we get past the cigarette question, we then get
 3 to the defendant question.  And that's where we have really
 4 unrebutted testimony about what she smoked.  There is really
 5 no reasonable dispute that she smoked Winston cigarettes for
 6 most of her life, or that she switched to lights.  And there
 7 is certainly nothing improper or incorrect about refreshing
 8 a witness' recollection about something that they don't
 9 remember by showing them pictures. 
And there's been no inference or suggestion at all that
11 that is improper, and certainly it was fully within the
12 purview of counsel when Mrs. Duke was examined by deposition
13 to show pictures to refresh her recollection.
All right.  So we get to this question and these four
15 questions really follow in natural sequence.  Negligence,
16 the next question is defect.  So we have the defect
17 question.  We have at negligence question.  Then, we have
18 the concealment question.  And then, we get to the
19 furtherance of the conspiracy question.
Each of these falls in -- we talked to you about the
21 defect in Winston cigarettes.  She smoked it.  All of the
22 things that they did internally to make the cigarette
23 inhalable, addictable, dangerous, the PH, the additives. 
24 All of that, I would submit to you mandates a verdict of yes
25 on each of those four questions.
   110
 1
I guess I got the wrong verdict form.  Sometimes, we
 2 have different drafts and we end up with some change.  But
 3 let me just get the right iteration here and see if we can't
 4 -- the first four questions or the six questions I just
 5 showed you are exactly as I have showed you.  And then, what
 6 I'll do is I'll use the jury instructions that I think I
 7 might have the right one here.  So then we went through 3,
 8 4, 5, 6, is the -- the sixth question is the agreement to
 9 conceal.  And agreements to conceal and reliance can take
10 two forms.  It can take certainly a form when someone says
11 overtly something that's someone relies on, or they don't
12 say something that they're required to say. 
As we pointed out before, the fact that R.J. Reynolds
14 concealed information is not in dispute.  The only question
15 is whether or not you find that the way that Mrs. Duke acted
16 shows by a preponderance of the evidence that she relied on
17 what they said.  She transferred to filtered cigarettes in
18 the '50s when the healthcare became evident.  You saw that
19 yourselves in the black and white video of Dr. Horn in which
20 they are talking about the health scare in the '50s and then
21 they converted to filtered cigarettes, and those became the
22 dominant cigarette in the '50s. 
And then ultimately, we have a switch over to the light
24 cigarettes in the '70s, and Mrs. Duke became a loyal
25 customer of the Winston brand there.  We think that the
   111
 1 question here is going to be answered in the affirmative as
 2 well.
 3
So then, we get to the question of 7, Number 7.  And
 4 this is where if you wish to allocate a fault, if you wish
 5 to say the choice comes into this equation, it's here that
 6 it comes into the equation.  And we do respectfully submit
 7 that Mrs. Duke bears some responsibility.  But R.J. Reynolds
 8 also bears responsibilities, and counsel said that you know,
 9 they sort of talked about these documents or these video
10 depositions of Dr. Cook or Dr. Gentry.  Interestingly, and
11 again, I point out they could have been certainly brought
12 those people here to talk to you directly about the
13 documents. 
There was a reference to this book by Silvette, Larson
15 Haig.  Do you remember in Dr. Cook's testimony, he talked
16 about two, two things that I thought were pretty
17 interesting.  One, we talked about the AMA, and how they had
18 placed Dr. Haig in a position to infiltrate the AMA and
19 provide information back to the tobacco companies.  And
20 forestall certain conduct.  That's the same Dr. Haig.  And
21 the other is Dr. Larson, who you heard was basically paid
22 for by a grant to the Virginia Medical College.  And here,
23 counsel brings up this document by Larson and Silvette and
24 Haig as some sort of evidence of good deeds.
It is true that the Surgeon General in 1964 thanked the
   112
 1 tobacco industry for providing what they provided.  But a
 2 half truth is still a half truth.  And in 1964, the tobacco
 3 industry withheld, you know, submission of stuff to the
 4 Surgeon General as undesirable.  Withheld key documents that
 5 reflected their keen -- their keen understanding of the
 6 addictive nature of cigarettes and the dangerous properties.
 7 And then, so, for the Surgeon General to thank them for what
 8 they got without knowing what they didn't get until the year
 9 2000 is really sort of a misleading suggestion to you as a
10 jury that somehow the Surgeon General was satisfied with
11 what they got.  They only knew what they knew, and
12 certainly, couldn't know what they weren't told.
So this assignment of fault is where you deal with the
14 allocation, and if you wish to assign some percentage of
15 fault to Sarah Duke and some portion to R.J. Reynolds for
16 what they did, this is where that gets done and her honor --
17 and I submit to you that this is one of those tough things
18 that you as a jury have to do.  It's not up to me to tell
19 you how to do that.  I could certainly give you my
20 suggestions, but that's all they are.
And then next, of course, you will be asked to allocate
22 or award sums of money.  And again, as I pointed out, it's
23 the only mechanism we have.  You know, is this -- is this
24 millions of dollars a lot of money?  Sure, it is.  But it's
25 the only mechanism that will have any impact on the
   113
 1 defendant.  And if you say that the defendant did something
 2 wrong, if you believe that their conduct was not the right
 3 kind of conduct, and the only way to make it meaningful, to
 4 give that statement some magnitude is to do it with money.
 5 And if there was a different way to do it, perhaps we would
 6 ask you to do that.  But this is the only mechanism allowed
 7 under the law, and that's the way that it's done.
 8
So we would ask you to award the expenses to the Estate
 9 that you have heard about in the $30,000 range, and then
10 certainly, whatever you deem is fair and reasonable.
11 Mrs. Duke would have survived at least 15 more years
12 according to the mortality tables.  She would enjoyed 15
13 more years of Gator games.  She would have enjoyed 15 more
14 years with her family and her children, and her
15 grandchildren.  And Mr. Duke would have had an opportunity
16 to have observed that and enjoyed that and watched that. 
17 And for that, he has suffered a loss.
We then get to these -- these complicated questions of
19 punitive damages and the standard.  And Mr. Furr presented
20 some of those to you.  And I do wish to address those a
21 little bit.  In response to the health scare of the '50s,
22 they mounted a campaign of doubt and those documents are in
23 evidence, and they have been shown to you. 
And that is the kind of conduct that I would suggest to
25 you shows a gross and flagrant disregard of human life worth
   114
 1 the safety of persons exposed to the effects of such
 2 conduct.  I can't imagine a different set of facts that
 3 would be more directly connected to this type of standard.
 4 The conduct showed an entire lack of care that the defendant
 5 must have consciously -- been consciously indifferent to the
 6 consequences.
 7
Other examples were punitive damages are when people
 8 get drunk and drive.  That is reckless indifference for
 9 human life.  And here, the internal -- the deep
10 understanding internally of the mechanisms of disease of the
11 product that they made and their deep understanding of
12 addiction, and their deep understanding of how to manipulate
13 both factors, inhalation and addiction, in order to maximize
14 profits is what shows a conscious indifference to the
15 consequences.
And so what we would ask you to do there, and you are
17 going to be asked a question.  It's a yes/no question.  It's
18 not a how much question.  It's a yes/no question.  Do you
19 find that the concept of punitive damages warrants a further
20 proceeding?  It will last less than a day, a further
21 proceeding in which you will be presented some additional
22 information from which you can conclude if, and to how much,
23 if any, punitive damages will be awarded.  But it's for a
24 different day.  It would be more, tomorrow or later in the
25 day, depending on how you do it.  But this a yes/no
   115
 1 question.  This isn't a how much question.
 2
And then the final question, and it is the final
 3 question, it's this question about what is described as a
 4 statute of limitations question.  You have seen the word May
 5 5, 1990.  You have seen that date.  We know without a doubt
 6 by stipulation and agreement when Mrs. Duke's lung cancer
 7 was diagnosed, it certainly was after May 5, 1990.  And
 8 then, there has been this discussion about the COPD, and
 9 some vague references in the record. 
I think if you go back to your recollection, and you go
11 back to your notes, you will recall that Dr. Lloyd said he
12 didn't diagnose her at all with COPD in 1993.  What he said
13 was that heavy smokers maybe have these things, but even
14 then, I would suggest to you that the mere diagnosis of COPD
15 is not enough to trigger a lawsuit.  To trigger a knowledge
16 that someone invaded your rights such as to prime the filing
17 of a claim.
There was this inference during the closing that
19 somehow the reaction or the response by the tobacco company
20 to provide light cigarettes was somehow exactly what the
21 Surgeon General wanted them to do.  And remember, we have
22 shown you the documents internally that reflected a deep
23 understanding of this concept of elasticity and compensation
24 that was not understood by the Surgeon General until 2010.
25 And therefore, when the Surgeon General made those
   116
 1 recommendations, it was making those recommendations on the
 2 basis of half truths.  And when the full truth came out,
 3 those opinions of the earlier '80s were clearly wrong.
 4
Dr. Lloyd, there was some suggestion no one ever said
 5 that Mrs. Duke was addicted.  Dr. Lloyd, the doctor who
 6 treated Sarah Duke, testified in his deposition and
 7 testified in the video before this Court, she was addicted.
 8 This is what doctors do.  Dr. Burns told you that it is the
 9 primary care doctors in this country that see, diagnose, and
10 treat smokers with addiction.  It's not the $600 an hour
11 psychiatrist, and indeed Dr. Tucker, told you he doesn't
12 treat singularly addicted smokers.
The bridge, you know, this notion of a bridge, again, I
14 think the bridge is shown clearly between smoking and R.J.
15 Reynolds with the Winston cigarettes.  As for quitting
16 attempts, I think quitting attempts that they come in at
17 all, come into the concept of comparative fault, but the
18 evidence of her quitting is in the record.  They were
19 efforts in the -- certainly, in the '90s as we know where
20 she reduced herself down to a quarter pack, and then was in
21 the hospital for a few days and quit.  We also know that she
22 tried earlier than that with things like gum, with things
23 like filter tips.  We don't have the benefit of Mrs. Duke
24 here to testify and tell you all the things.  We can only
25 tell you what we know.  But certainly, it's a reasonable
   117
 1 proposition and it's been demonstrated to each of you.
 2
There's a lot of documents that you've got.  You have
 3 got the Surgeon General Reports.  Mr. Furr told you that
 4 there is no singular standard that says what's addiction.
 5 And again, I told you that it's for juries to determine what
 6 the standard of care and the Surgeon General respects and
 7 reflects and acknowledges the power and the benefit of the
 8 Heavy Smoking Index.  All of the factors that Dr. Cummings
 9 testified is both primary and secondary causes are
10 indications of addiction.  All of those are clearly embodied
11 in the Surgeon General's Report, and properly considered,
12 recognized, and used by Drs. Burns and Cummings. 
Mr. Furr made some comment about pervasive.  That the
14 knowledge with respect to the hazards of cigarette were
15 known.  And we told you from day one we were never going to
16 come in here and tell you that she didn't know something
17 about the hazards.  We also showed you how one, the Tobacco
18 Companies knew, how they could overcome them.  The FTC
19 reports recognized the power of advertising and how, and in
20 essence, all of those warnings were not heeded. 
And importantly, Mrs. Sarah Duke, that she did begin to
22 smoke in the early '40s.  It wasn't until 1966 that there
23 was any kind of warning, and it really was just a caution
24 until '71.  So what we have is a 20-year smoking history, a
25 20-year addiction before even the first possible warning
   118
 1 came out.
 2
There was a suggestion that perhaps Mr. Duke has waited
 3 all this time until his retirement to bring this lawsuit. 
 4 And unfortunately, this lawsuit was started in 1998, and
 5 well, it does take a while.
 6
MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor.  There is no --
 7 there is no such evidence.
 8
 9
MR. LATINBERG:  There is such evidence.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. LATINBERG:  And that's how long it took.  So
11 there has been no sort of purposeful delay in order to --
12 for that purpose.
You know the statistic that keeps getting thrown out --
14 thrown out there about 60 million quits.  You know, if
15 smoking was -- quitting was such a big deal or such an easy
16 thing to do, why do we keep track of it?  Internally, they
17 know how hard it is.  We know it's an addiction.  It is not
18 easy to quit, and you all know that simply as a matter of
19 common sense.
Mr. Furr said this was the wrong smoker for this case.
21 The wrong smoker for this case.  This is Sarah Duke's case.
22 Sarah Duke is the right smoker for this case.  Sarah Duke
23 did everything they wanted her to do.  She was the poster
24 child.  The poster child for the Winston customer, and I'm
25 not sure that I could find a better smoker for this case.
   119
 1
The internal documents really were ignored.  They were
 2 ignored during the case, and they were ignored during the
 3 closing.  And there was some vague recommendation to things
 4 that Dr. Gentry here said.  Really, the best that you can
 5 take away from Dr. Gentry and Dr. Cook is this notion that
 6 in the year 2000 -- later than that.  The 2010s, they now
 7 somehow are a different better tobacco company.  That they
 8 are changed, that they have this Niconovum product that
 9 hasn't come to market.  And that they have spent -- and
10 remember, I told you in opening Mr. Furr said they spent
11 billions of dollars on making a safer cigarette.  I
12 challenge you to look to your memory, and look to the record
13 where there is a shred of evidence as to a dime that they
14 spent to make a safer cigarette.  They spent billions on
15 marketing, no doubt about it.  And they spent billions of
16 dollars on designing their product, but I saw no evidence in
17 this case that they spent anything on making a safer
18 product.
So I guess what I'd like to do is, I want to leave you
20 with sort of where I started, and that is that companies
21 that make products that are harmful are responsible.  That
22 the only people that can hold a corporations accountable are
23 juries.  And that this is -- that the only thing that we
24 want -- any of us want, including R.J. Reynolds, is a fair
25 view of the evidence, a fair review of the law, and a fair
   120
 1 and just verdict based on the facts.
 2
I want to thank you for your time and attention.  I
 3 know that we have taken you away from your own busy lives. 
 4 For us, this is our job.  But I think that you can see
 5 simply by the very room that we're in, the building that
 6 we're in, by the formality with which all of this is
 7 handled, how incredibly important all of us consider this
 8 process, and what you do.  So I do thank you, and I
 9 appreciate your time, and we would urge you to find for the
10 plaintiff in such ways and amounts as you fair -- you
11 feel -- you deem fair appear and appropriate.  Thank you.
