         MR. PINDER:  Thank you, Your Honor.  May it
    please the Court.
         THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
         MR. PINDER:  Counsel, members of the jury,
    good morning. 2271 First and foremost, I want to thank you for
    your patience and your sacrifice over the past two
    weeks now, going on to the third week.  It's not
    lost upon us that you have other responsibilities
    and other obligations, and we know you've had to
    make a sacrifice to be here.  So I think I can
    speak for all of us when I say thank you.
         Over the past several years, it's been our
    honor and privilege to represent Donna Dupre.
    It's been a long haul.  It's been a long haul
    through Engle, the various appeals and the
    subsequent proceedings.  But today and over the
    past few weeks, she's finally had her day in
    court.  You are her only jury.  This is her only
    case.  What you do matters.
         Now, the judge told you in the instructions,
    talked about common sense.  And one of the unique
    things about this process is when you walk through
    the doors right there, we don't ask you to check
    your common sense at the door.  You bring it with
    you.  You also bring it with you when you go back
    into the room to begin your deliberations.
         And what does your common sense tell you when
    you hear the story of a man who smoked for 30
    years, at least a pack a day, and then suffered 2272 from a smoking-related disease and died?  Your
    common sense tells you that the addiction caused
    the disease.  You heard about that at length.  We
    brought several witnesses to tell you about that.
         Give me just a moment to get set up here.  Is
    it okay to put this here, Your Honor?  It's going
    to obstruct --
         THE COURT:  That's fine.
         MR. PINDER:  Okay.  Thank you.
         Can I have the slide show, please?
         That didn't work out too well.
         THE COURT:  Would you like the lights dimmed
    at the time?
         MR. PINDER:  Pardon?
         THE COURT:  Would you like the lights dimmed?
         MR. PINDER:  Not at this point, Your Honor.
         This is Dick Dupre, a man who excelled at
    everything in life.  A family man.  The father of
    Kevin, Tim, Rick, Connie and Danny.  A man who
    worked hard.  He excelled in everything in life
    but in his ability to quit smoking.  And you now
    know that because of that, the addiction caused
    his disease.
         At minimum, based upon the testimony you've
    heard in this case, this is one pack year.  He 2273 smoked at least a pack a day.  In one year, this
    is how much he smoked.  Twenty cigarettes in each
    pack for 30 years.  You could cover the walls of
    this courtroom in the packs of cigarettes that he
    smoked.
         This is where the disease came from.  This is
    where the death came from.  This is where the
    addiction came from.  This is also where RJR's
    money comes from.
         The defense theory in its simplest form asks
    you to ignore this.  They tell you it's a choice.
    Over the past two weeks, they told you that this
    is insubstantial.  You know better.  That's not
    what the evidence has shown, and that's not what
    the evidence reflects, and it's not what your
    common sense tells you.
         They came in here and they told you that he
    chose to smoke, despite the patch, despite the
    gum, despite hypnosis, despite the fact that he
    woke up in the middle of the night and couldn't
    breathe and tried to quit and continued to smoke.
    And they tell you that's a choice?  Your common
    sense tells you that's addiction.
         I told you at the beginning of this case,
    there is a fundamental disagreement. 2274 Judge, could we dim the lights a little bit?
    I'll take you up on that now, if you don't mind.
         THE COURT:  Yeah.
         MR. PINDER:  We believe it's a shared
    responsibility between Dick Dupre and the tobacco
    company, R.J. Reynolds.  They disagree.  We told
    you at the outset that we accept responsibility
    for a 14-year-old, a child, a boy, regularly
    smoking at 14.  We also accept responsibility for
    his inability to quit.  He tried, but he couldn't
    do it.  We accept his responsibility for that.
         But R.J. Reynolds has told you that it
    believes it has no liability for his addiction and
    death, and you get to decide whose position is
    correct.
         I'm not going to stand before you and compare
    this case to an optical illusion.  For Donna Dupre
    and Dick Dupre's children and anyone -- everyone
    else in the family, it was anything but an optical
    illusion.  It smacked them right in the face when
    he died on their living room floor.  They deal
    with it every day.  She deals with it every day.
         You now know that their paths crossed, and
    that because of their conduct, and his too, he
    became addicted and had a smoking-related disease. 2275 This man was the cornerstone of the family,
    the glue that held it all together.  And he
    dropped dead at 45 years of age, far too early.
         This case is not about tobacco in general.
    I'm not going to rehash this with you.  We're
    going to go through the verdict form.  We're going
    to talk about it.  You're not going to find choice
    on there.  You're not going to find whether or not
    he was able to quit and whether or not he could
    control his smoking.
         Cigarettes are a legal product.  I told you
    that when I stood up there in opening statements.
    We don't take issue with that.  But it is illegal
    to sell a defective product, be it a toaster, any
    other item.  It's also illegal to sell to minors.
    If you sell a defective product that's addictive
    and you don't tell the truth, there are
    responsibilities that come along with that.
         This case is about the Engle findings and
    whether or not Dick Dupre is a member of the Engle
    class.  These are the findings.  You saw them in
    opening.  You're going to see them again.
         For class members.  If you determine that
    Dick Dupre is a class member, these findings will
    apply.  Smoking cigarettes causes coronary heart 2276 disease.  Nicotine in cigarettes is addictive.
         We can go on and on.  You see them up there.
         Having brought in witnesses and proved our
    case to you, if Dick Dupre is not a member of the
    Engle class, who is?
         Facts you must accept as true.
         He was a citizen of Florida, died May 11th,
    1994.
         R.J. Reynolds is a successor in interest for
    Brown & Williamson and The American Tobacco
    Company.
         What does that mean?  That means that the
    acts of those entities when Robert Heimann spoke
    to you as the president of The American Tobacco
    Company in 1994, R.J. Reynolds is a successor and
    they are responsible for that conduct.
         Defendant admits its products have been sold
    in Florida, authorized to conduct business in
    Florida, and you can see the rest.
         Every cigarette he smoked contained nicotine,
    and nicotine is addictive.  Those issues are not
    in dispute.
         A place to start.  You are going to have a
    ton of documents when you go back in there.  There
    is going to be lots of evidence that came in 2277 throughout the course of this trial.  This chart
    provides you a road map of where you can go from
    the documents we put into evidence.
         If you want to look at the medical records,
    you can start with Exhibit 3011, the autopsy
    report.  3017, cardiology report.  Those are
    dealing with his medical records.
         There's also internal documents regarding the
    knowledge of health hazards and addiction,
    targeting youth smokers, documents designed around
    nicotine addiction, and then their public
    statements and ads.
         Greater weight of the evidence.  We talked
    about this at the beginning of the case.  And the
    greater weight of the evidence means the more
    persuasive and convincing force, a slight tipping
    of the scales, just 51 percent.
         We talked about how it's kind of like two
    kids on a teeter totter, a 51-pound kid and a
    49-pound kid.  That's what is required for the
    burden of proof in this case.  It's not a criminal
    case.
         But you now know that we've exceeded that
    burden, and we've gone well beyond it in proving
    the addiction that caused Dick Dupre's disease. 2278 In order to be a class member, you must be a
    Florida citizen or resident.  That's not in
    dispute.  The parties agree.
         Addicted.  Absolutely, Dick Dupre was
    addicted.
         Addiction.  Was it a substantial contributing
    cause of his coronary heart disease?  We're going
    to talk about that, and absolutely, yes, it was.
         This is what the judge instructed you upon.
    The issues that you must determine.
         Whether smoking cigarettes was a legal cause
    of his coronary heart disease and death.
    Absolutely.
         Addiction.  Absolutely.
         Did the addiction to cigarettes containing
    nicotine, was it a legal cause of his coronary
    heart disease and death?  Absolutely.
         We're going to talk about each one of those
    items.  The Surgeon General's report from 1988.
    We discussed that during the course of this trial.
    The Surgeon General of the United States serves at
    the pleasure of the President.  And ever since the
    administration of Gerald Ford, that Surgeon
    General has asked Dr. David Burns for his advice
    on smoking and health and contributed to this 2279 report.  Dr. Burns came in here and he told you
    the information in his report and he shared his
    opinions with you, the same reports, U.S. Surgeon
    General reports, that the defendant expert,
    Dr. Jaffe, would not tell you are authoritative
    and that he would not rely on them.
         Dr. Jaffe is a very smart man.  I don't take
    any issue with that, and I'm not saying that.  But
    for him to come in here and tell you that these
    are not authoritative?  Use your common sense.
         Major conclusions.  Cigarettes and other
    forms of tobacco are addicting.  Nicotine is the
    drug in tobacco that causes addiction.
         The Court will not provide you with a
    definition of addiction.  You need to use your
    common sense.  And that's why we talked about it
    at length and brought in several experts to share
    it with you.  But using your common sense about
    addiction, and your life experiences, you know
    that Dick Dupre was addicted.
         This is RJR's definition of addiction.  This
    was before this case, before Engle.  How did they
    define it?  R.J. Reynolds Company believes that
    smoking can be hard to quit once a person starts,
    and, therefore, smoking is addictive. 2280 Ask yourself why now, in a court of law, do
    they come in and tell you that it means something
    else?  The reason is because they say they're not
    at fault.  Use your common sense.
         Signs and symptoms of his addiction to
    cigarettes containing nicotine.
         I'm not going to go through each one of these
    with you.  You saw the evidence.  You recall it.
    You remember Pam Bishop said that by the time
    Dick Dupre was 14, he was smoking cigarettes.  We
    talked about the quit attempts, hypnosis and gum.
         An important thing to remember when we talk
    about the gum and the patch, that in the lifetime
    of Dick Dupre, it took a doctor to obtain those
    cessation devices.  His treating physicians, in
    their own discretion, looking out for the well
    being of Dick Dupre, prescribed the gum and they
    prescribed the patch.  Doctors don't do that for
    people that are not addicted.
         Dr. Shannon Miller.  What did he tell you?
    Regarding his opinion as to whether or not the
    addiction caused his continued smoking despite the
    consequences, it did.
         Dr. Miller is a psychiatrist.  He's treated
    thousands of patients for addiction.  He's 2281 published 50 peer-reviewed papers on this topic.
    He told you that the long-term success rate is in
    the ballpark of three to seven percent of smokers.
         Pam Bishop.  When do you first recall seeing
    Dick Dupre smoke a cigarette?
         When I was 13 or 14.  I remember smoking
    together when I was 13 or 14.
         They were a year apart, so we know that he
    was smoking as child.
         Tim Dupre.  Described his father as a chain
    smoker.
         Chuck Brown, a witness in this case that has
    no skin in the game, no bias whatsoever.  He was a
    friend.  Came in here and told you, yes,
    Dick Dupre was a chain smoker.  Chuck also told
    you that Dick smoked during workouts.  You heard
    that from Rick, Tim, and Kevin also.  The man took
    breaks in between sets to smoke cigarettes.  Use
    your common sense.
         Donna.  She talked about the different
    devices.  She told you that he wasn't proud of his
    smoking, and also that he had withdrawal.
         Heart disease and death.  This is more of
    that lawyer talk we discussed.  But a legal cause.
    A legal cause, not the legal cause.  It can 2282 operate in combination with the act of another or
    another natural cause.  A cause, not the only
    cause.  That's what legal causation is.
         Substantial contribution.  We talked about
    this in opening.  It's like the batteries in a
    flashlight.  Every single battery makes a
    substantial contribution.  In this case, the
    biggest battery was smoking.  Like a battery, if
    you take one light out -- one battery out, like a
    flashlight, if you take one battery out, the light
    doesn't work.  In this case, if you take smoking
    out, he doesn't die at 45.  You heard that from
    the experts.  It worked in concert, in combination
    with the other factors, if you choose to believe
    them.  And we're going to talk about that some
    more too.
         I told you during opening that if you take
    their position at face value, they owe him 20
    years.  All his siblings are alive.  But you also
    know now from Brenda Mulder that from today, he
    would be expected to live another 18.1 years.
    38.1 years of his life that were lost.
         This instruction from the Court tells you
    that the defendant takes the plaintiff as it finds
    him.  So if you choose to believe, which we've 2283 demonstrated to you otherwise, and we'll talk
    about, but even if you choose to believe there was
    a family history of heart disease, that he would
    have died earlier than anticipated, they take him
    as they find him.  No one else in his family died
    at 45.  So just because he may be more
    susceptible, they take him as they find him.
         I also anticipate when the defense gets up
    here, and we're talking about different batteries
    and causation, the one thing they won't tell you
    is that the product, which you're looking at right
    there, sold by their client day after day in this
    country, is the No. 1 leading preventable cause of
    heart disease in this country.  The same thing
    that killed Dick Dupre.
         And that's exactly what Dr. Wilson told you.
         What else did Dr. Wilson say?  He said that
    he's done 4500 autopsies in his career, about a
    thousand dealing with coronary artery disease.
    He's a medical examiner for this Circuit.  It's
    good enough for the State of Florida in a murder
    case, what his opinions are and what the cause of
    death may be, but it's not good enough for
    R.J. Reynolds here in this trial.
         When we talk about the cause of death, 2284 atherosclerotic coronary heart disease; two,
    smoking.
         Conditions contributing to death.  What does
    that mean?  Well, in a car crash case, you may see
    cause of death, blunt force trauma to the head.
    That's what caused the death.  In the section for
    contributing cause, you will see car accident.
    The manner of death, the cause of death.
         In this case, the manner of death was
    atherosclerotic coronary heart disease caused by
    smoking.  That's what Dr. Wilson told you.  And at
    the time he formed that opinion, he wasn't
    involved in this case.  He was working for the
    State of Florida.  No involvement whatsoever.
    That was his opinion as a medical examiner, the
    one person to look inside Dick Dupre.
         We also know that there was nicotine found in
    his urine.  He smoked until the day he died.  We
    know that there wasn't a patch on his body.  There
    was an EKG patch.  That was the only patch that
    was there.  He was thoroughly examined.
         Dick Dupre smoked until the day he died.
         This is more from the medical examiner's
    report.
         Cigarettes was a contributory factor to 2285 atherosclerotic heart disease that caused
    Mr. Dupre to die.  That was his conclusion.
         Batey Cardiology Center, May 22nd, 1992.
    What do his treating physicians say when they
    place hands upon Dick Dupre and they see him face
    to face?  No interest in this lawsuit.  Negative
    for family history of premature coronary disease.
    Negative for hypertension or diabetes.
    Cholesterol is not presently available.
         The defense wants you to believe otherwise,
    but that's not what his treating physicians were
    saying.
         Dr. Jackson, cardiologist.  She's treated
    over 10,000 patients with coronary artery disease.
    And she told you, regarding the potential risk
    factors for his death, that smoking was the
    significant reason for experiencing a sudden
    cardiac death.
         I do not believe he would have died from a
    heart attack in 1994 if he didn't smoke.  It's
    likely that he would still be with us today.
         That's what this case is about.  A
    contributing cause to the premature death of
    Dick Dupre.
         Once again, if he had not smoked, do you have 2286 an opinion as to whether he would still likely be
    alive?
         Yes.  He would have a high probability of
    being alive, and it's quite likely he would have
    been alive today in his sixties if he didn't
    smoke.
         The defense expert, Royce Yount.  Once again,
    another very smart man.  I don't take issue with
    that.  But when you use your common sense, it just
    doesn't make sense.  What did he say about Dr.
    Wilson?  I'll defer to his report.  It's his
    report, sure.
         And Mr. Finch asked:  In his report, he said
    contributory factor was smoking, right?  The cause
    of death, coronary heart disease, smoking.
         No.  I'm not here to dispute his autopsy
    report.  No.
         He's telling you that he agrees with the
    conclusions in the report.  And when it comes to
    making a diagnosis upon Dick Dupre, who is the
    best person to do that?  Dr. James Wilson.  What
    did Dr. Wilson tell you?  Smoking caused the
    death.
         Their own expert, Royce Yount, told you
    smoking was the cause of Dick Dupre's death. 2287 That's exactly what this case is about.  If he's
    not a class member, who is?
         Once again, Dr. Yount.  Certainly, no
    question, smoking was one of his risk factors,
    yes, and it aggravated the progression of his
    heart disease.
         More from Dr. Yount.  He told you that he
    could still be here today.  It's a possibility.
    And obviously he can't say when it would have
    happened, but he told you the cause of what did
    happen in 1994.  And that was heart disease caused
    by smoking.
         Dr. David Burns.  A reasonable degree of the
    medical certainty.  Yes, I do.
         And what's your opinion?
         Addiction is the critical linchpin.
         You recall the testimony from Dr. Burns.  I
    don't need to go through it piece by piece.
         Dr. Shannon Miller.  Once again, nicotine is
    what causes this.  It causes the addiction and
    results in other problems, heart disease and
    cancer.
         This is a family history chart.  Once again,
    use your common sense.
         First, Grace Dupre.  Mom, 85 years old. 2288 Still living.
         Does that look like a family history of heart
    disease, of premature death?
         Gerald Dupre.  Dad.  Smoker.  Died at 74,
    well beyond premature heart disease.
         The siblings, everyone in green is still
    alive today.  And that triangle at the top means
    they are alive.  He is the only one in his family
    to die at 45.
         And the defense would have you believe that
    smoking played no role, not one percent.
         May I have the ELMO, please?
         Let me see if I can get this right.  This is
    the verdict form that you will see in this case.
    The first two questions:
         We, the jury, return the following verdict:
         1.  Was Richard Dupre a member of the Engle
    class?
         This is up to your determination, and we will
    respect whatever you decide.  But my job here
    today is to make some suggestions for you, based
    upon the evidence and the law in this case.
    That's exactly what I'm going to do.
         Was he a member of the Engle class?
         Yes.  Absolutely.  If not him, then who? 2289 Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by
    defendant R.J. Reynolds a legal cause of Richard
    Dupre's death and coronary heart disease?  That's
    exactly what we just went through.  Yes.
         If you answer yes to those questions, he's a
    class member and the findings apply.
         If you answer no, Donna goes home and it's
    over, and you're patting R.J. Reynolds on the back
    saying, This is how you do business in America.
    That's not consistent with the facts and the law.
         Go back to the slide show.
         The law.  What is the law?  Tell the truth
    about your products.
         RJR broke this one.
         Don't market dangerous and addictive drugs to
    children.
         They broke this one too.  You've seen it in
    their documents.  Inside the halls of RJR, when no
    one else was looking, what did they talk about?
    What was their goal?  What was their plan?  The
    same nationwide campaign we discussed, the one
    Dick Dupre, along with millions of other
    Americans, was caught up in.
         Business model, attract, addict, repeat.
         Robert Heimann, president of American Tobacco 2290 Company.  What did he tell you?  He told you that
    they wanted customers to rely on their ads and
    they're entitled to rely on them.
         And I'm going to talk about reliance, because
    that's a component and a word you will see on the
    verdict form, so I'm going to spend some time
    discussing that.
         But what does he say?  He says, of course, we
    run ads.  We want customers to rely on them, and
    they're entitled to do so.
         This is the culture that he grew up in, that
    Dick Dupre grew up in.  It's also the culture his
    parents grew up in when they smoked.
         Arnold Palmer, today's Tiger Woods, walking
    down the fairway smoking a cigarette.  Selling
    cigarettes with celebrities, sports stars.  It was
    so commonplace.  I said it over and over again,
    but you really do have to get into a time machine.
    You could smoke anywhere and everywhere.  It's not
    like today.
         Movie stars.  Cigarettes were glamorous.  It
    was a different culture.  You can infer reliance
    based upon the advertising and the culture alone.
    But you don't have to.
         Remember, Chuck Brown told you that everyone 2291 smoked back then.  He was Dick Dupre's
    contemporary.  He said that The Tonight Show,
    Johnny Carson, the celebrities, they would be
    smoking left and right on TV.  A different world.
         Advertisements.  You've seen plenty of them.
         Winston.  I told you that you don't have to
    rely upon the advertisements alone and the culture
    that was created.  Why?  Because Dick Dupre smoked
    Winston Lights.  We see here in the ad, they're
    promoting filter and flavor.  Filter and flavor.
    Why is that important?  Lights.  Why is that
    important?  It's the same reason today that people
    drink Diet Coke instead of regular Coke.  It's the
    same reason someone may want a light beer instead
    of a regular beer.  A perceived health benefit.
         That's why he smoked lights, because he
    relied on their statements.  And what did they
    tell him?  What did they tell Dick Dupre?  Winston
    tastes good like a cigarette should.
         You know the one thing they didn't tell him
    in this ad?  It could kill you.
         They created a controversy with the American
    public.  And I'm going to get into this some more.
    But don't be fooled by some of the defense
    questions. 2292 I'm going to take this down so I can see you
    guys.
         Don't be fooled by some of their questions
    when for each and every witness that came and
    spoke to you from this podium, you heard, Did they
    ever talk to you about The Tobacco Institute?
    They asked that to all the children.  They asked
    that to all the friends.  Did he ever talk about
    the Council for Tobacco Research?
         What did Chuck Brown tell you?  No, we didn't
    talk about that stuff when we were lifting weights
    or in the middle of a set.
         That's not how people talk.  That's not the
    conversations that we have.  But they want you to
    believe, they launched a nationwide advertising
    campaign, the largest one in the history of our
    culture, in the history of America, and what are
    they telling you?  They are telling you he didn't
    get the message, that he didn't see it.  Use your
    common sense.  That flies in the face of common
    sense.  That's why he smoked lights and why they
    advertised filter and flavor.  Right below, they
    make a huge deal with filter blend.  Dick Dupre
    smoked filtered cigarettes.
         There is also a concealment component to 2293 this.  And I want to make it abundantly clear that
    we're not saying that during the life, the entire
    life of Dick Dupre, that he was tricked or that he
    was fooled and his eyes were covered by the
    tobacco company.  That's not what we're saying.
    What we're saying is they perpetrated a fraud.
    They provided misinformation.
         Dick Dupre as a child wasn't going to the
    library and checking out the Florida Health Notes
    from 1907.  He wasn't researching cigarettes.  But
    when you talk about a fraud and you talk about the
    information that was out there, what you need to
    ask yourself when you see Reader's Digest and you
    see newspaper articles is what was R.J. Reynolds
    saying?  What was their message?  What did they
    say about the products they sold?  That's the
    fraud.  They created misinformation; a
    psychological crutch to smokers.
         They never said our products are addictive,
    they are dangerous, they can kill you.  In the
    early 1960s, that wasn't the message to Dick Dupre
    as a child.
         There is also going to be discussion of
    warning labels.  We're going to talk about the
    statements that the tobacco companies made, and 2294 we'll get into that.  But the first pack that he
    picked up in 1964 -- in 1962, excuse me -- did not
    have these labels on them.  It wasn't until '66
    that a caution label came out and then a warning
    label came out.  We're not disputing the fact that
    there were labels on these packs.  But what we're
    saying is their message, their mass advertising
    campaign was completely different.  You need to
    ask yourself, what did R.J. Reynolds say to the
    American public.
         Their scheme, their design, their intent as
    early as 1927 was to entice teenagers.
         School days are here.  Big tobacco business
    for somebody.  Let's get it.
         1928.  Dick Dupre isn't even around yet, and
    what are they doing?  They're talking about summer
    school, high schools, prep schools, colleges.
         1959.  Dick Dupre is 11 years old.  What are
    they concerned about from the Esty Advertising
    Company?  Cigarette smoking among high school
    students and college students.
         Engineer addiction.  When we're talking about
    the teenagers and enticing the teenager.  It's
    also important to remember what Dr. Burns told you
    from the witness stand.  He told you that they're 2295 still doing it today.  Engineer addiction.
         This is one of the documents that you saw.
    And you can also recall during the course of
    testimony, there was a document that the defense
    published.  And in that document it contained
    certain ingredients.  Mr. Finch couldn't read it.
    He said, I can't quite make it out.  And then he
    realized that it said licorice.
         When you talk about the additives and what
    they want to put in cigarettes, licorice was in
    there.  And they discussed other items that were
    approved by the FDA, such as cocoa, items used in
    the strawberry ice cream.  Why did they do that?
    To make it easier to inhale.  It's a different
    product and a different animal than a nicotine
    plant, tobacco plant that grows out of the ground.
         1959.  What did they say?  They knew how much
    nicotine should be in the Winston blend.  Nicotine
    in the smoke should range from 1.5 to 2 milligrams
    per cigarette.  They knew how much to put in there
    to keep people addicted.
         1972.  What was Claude Teague saying behind
    the walls of R.J. Reynolds?  The tobacco industry
    may be thought of as being a specialized, highly
    ritualized and stylized segment of 2296 pharmaceutical industry.  They deliver nicotine, a
    potent drug, with a variety of physiological
    effects.
         That's not what they were telling Dick Dupre
    in 1972.
         The tobacco product is a vehicle for delivery
    of nicotine, designed to deliver nicotine in a
    generally acceptable and attractive form.
         Addiction, dosage, nicotine.  They didn't
    discuss this with Dick Dupre.  Instead, they said
    Winston tastes good like a cigarette should.
         Repeat.  The beginning of this model, 1900,
    1910.  That's before the modern cigarette.  When
    you think of a tobacco plant growing out of the
    ground, that's more closely of what it would
    reflect.  You can see as the modern cigarette
    began mass production, billions of cigarettes were
    consumed in America.  In 1980, almost 700 billion
    cigarettes.  They created an entire industry.  And
    as Dr. Burns told you, they made it something that
    no one used before, it wasn't commonplace, that no
    one specifically had a need for, a drug.  They
    made it socially acceptable.  They made it cool,
    just like the pictures and the ads that you saw.
         Dr. Burns also talked about this graph. 2297 1953.  Claude Teague.  Survey of cancer
    research.  What did he say?  1953, studies of
    clinical data tend to confirm the relationship
    between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and
    incidence of cancer of the lung.
         1953.  Dick Dupre would have been roughly
    five.  They knew there was a connection with
    smoking and cancer.  This has to do with the mouse
    painting studies that we talked about.  And this
    is where they hit the fork in the road.  You can
    do what a responsible manufacturer would do and
    tell your customers and let them know, or you can
    go a different direction.  And that's exactly what
    they did.  And that's exactly what we're asking
    you to hold them accountable for.
         What else did Claude Teague say?  It is
    recommended that management take cognizance of the
    problem and its implications to our industry.
    Positive research action should be planned and
    initiated without a delay.
         He makes the connection with cancer and
    cigarettes, and he says, tell management and begin
    positive research action.
         They knew.  R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
    knew.  And this is where the 40-year conspiracy 2298 begins.
         They made a decision to respond.  How did
    they respond?  They responded with A Frank
    Statement.  A Frank Statement to Cigarette
    Smokers.  We accept an interest in people's health
    as a basic responsibility, paramount to every
    other consideration in our business.
         That's a lie.
         We believe the products we make are not
    injurious to health.
         That's a lie.
         We always have and we always will cooperate
    closely with those whose task it is to safeguard
    the public health.
         They responded to these studies for one
    reason.  Do you think it was consumer health?  No.
    Do you think it was consumer safety?  No.  They
    did it for money.  They lied for money, because
    they knew their bottom line would go down.  And
    this is how they responded.  They created a
    controversy.  Why?  Because if the secret got out,
    it would affect their sales.
         We saw R.J. Reynolds' website from today, and
    what do they do in their website?  They direct
    smokers to the Surgeon General, the same place 2299 that Dr. Jaffe wouldn't rely upon.
         What else do we know?  We know that less
    people smoke today than they did in the fifties
    and the sixties.  Why?  Because the truth is a
    powerful thing.  And R.J. Reynolds knew it, and
    they didn't want the truth coming out in 1954.
    Instead, they initiated this conspiracy and
    created doubt.
         Signed by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
    They issued a press release in 1957 telling the
    public that no substance has been found in tobacco
    smoke known to cause cancer in human beings, and
    they talk about the mice.
         1962.  Dr. Rodgman.  What does he say?
    Obviously, the amount of evidence accumulated to
    indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is
    overwhelming.
         Battelle, HIPPO 1 and 2, 1963.  Dick Dupre
    would have been about 15 years old.  He's already
    smoking.  What do they know?  That it causes or
    predisposes individuals to lung cancer and
    contributes to cardiovascular disorders.
         '68.  More of the same.  They talk about the
    fact that their position may be subject to a
    finding that they're making false or misleading 2300 statements to promote the sale of cigarettes.
    Absolutely.  They know it.  They talk about it.
    They don't want the truth to get out.
         1982.  We can never be comfortable selling a
    product which most of our customers would stop
    using if they could.
         Dr. Burns told you that the public health
    community bought into this too; that these
    defendants knew more than the public health
    community regarding the information that was
    shared back then.
         This is what they talked about, what they
    knew.  We're going to get into what they said.
    What did they tell the American public and smokers
    just like Dick Dupre.  Can we have an open debate
    about smoking?  R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
    Over the years, you've heard so many negative
    reports about smoking and health, you may assume
    the case against smoking is closed.  This is far
    from the truth.
         They create a controversy, misinformation,
    that Dick Dupre relied upon.
         Let's look at what they said.
         (Whereupon, a video clip was played in open
    court as follows:) 2301 A SPEAKER:  Cigarette smoking may be
    hazardous to your health.  It may not be.  We just
    don't know.
         A SPEAKER:  I don't know.  Frankly, I think
    that smoking may be hazardous.  It may not be.
         A SPEAKER:  Smoking may be hazardous.  It may
    not be.  No one, including TV7, knows for certain.
         A SPEAKER:  It may be or it may not be.  We
    don't know.
         A SPEAKER:  I don't know if cigarettes are
    bad or they're not bad.
         A SPEAKER:  We don't know what causes the
    ailments that have been attributed to cigarette
    smoking.
         A SPEAKER:  I am saying that the science to
    date and over a hundred million dollars of our
    industry's money indicates that there is no causal
    link.
         A SPEAKER:  I'm not denying the fact that
    cigarette smoking could be a risk factor involved
    with some people.
         A SPEAKER:  You know, we know that a rabbit
    runs through a briar patch, it's pretty hard for
    him to look and see which briar stuck him.
         (The video clip concluded.) 2302 MR. PINDER:  So after 40 years of lies, lies
    just like the ones you saw there, and deceit.
    They come into this courtroom and they tell you
    they're not one percent at fault.  Not one
    percent.  Common sense tells you otherwise.
         You're going to have a section on the verdict
    form that discusses comparative fault.
         I will move this back so I'm not so close to
    you guys.  Sorry.  It's just as bad set up here.
         When assessing comparative fault, what do you
    need to take into consideration?  The fault, which
    we admit, and what their -- what they deny.  They
    say it's 100 percent Dick Dupre's fault.  So
    consider some of the stuff that was shared with
    you during the course of this trial.
         Ask yourself, when addressing the defendant's
    fault, why does RJR fail to address their
    statements made in their confidential internal
    documents?  They didn't ask Dr. Burns one single
    thing about their internal documents.  They didn't
    show him one.  They want you to believe they are
    not there.  Why?  Because then they would have to
    address them, and that's admitting fault.
         When they get up here in closing, I don't
    anticipate they're going to show you any internal 2303 documents or talk about those internal documents.
    It's what they knew and what they said, and they
    misrepresented to the American public.
         Why do they act as if they don't exist?
    Because they will be at fault.
         Why, when they knew by the 1950s that
    cigarette smoke causes lung cancer and heart
    disease, did they choose not to tell the American
    public?
         When they knew by the 1950s that nicotine was
    an addictive drug, why did they choose not to tell
    the American public?
         And while professing to accept an interest in
    people's health, the Frank Statement, and
    cooperating with those tasked with safeguarding
    the public health, why did they say that the
    Surgeon General's conclusions were wrong?
         Exactly what Dr. Burns told you.  As a public
    health official, someone who writes Surgeon
    General reports, he told you that he and the rest
    of the public health community did not know as
    much as what was going on inside the walls of RJR.
    They knew, and they didn't share it, and they're
    at fault because of that.
         Why did RJR choose to respond to the strong 2304 evidence linking cigarettes to cancer and heart
    disease with a campaign designed to create doubt
    about the health risks and addictive nature of
    cigarettes for the next 50 years?  If you make a
    product and it's defective and dangerous, you need
    to tell people.
         Did they want the public, including
    Dick Dupre, to believe its message, that its
    products are not harmful, and if a harmful
    substance was found in cigarettes, it would be
    removed and RJR would tell the public its
    cigarettes are dangerous?
         That's what they said.  It's not what they
    did.  It was a lie.  And Dick Dupre followed their
    plan to a T.  He was their ideal customer.  They
    knew that you've got to get them young and get
    them addicted, because it would lead to a lifetime
    of profits.  That's exactly what Dick Dupre did.
         And the last one.  Did they want him to
    become addicted and purchase their products?
         When you take into account Dick Dupre's
    fault, the fault which we admit, there are two
    things to consider.  When he picked up cigarettes
    and was smoking by the time he was a 14-year-old
    boy, and also his unsuccessful attempts to quit. 2305 Can I have the ELMO, please?
         I'm going to make some more suggestions to
    you.  You are asked, just like that board
    reflects, to make certain determinations when it
    comes to comparative fault.  I told you that we
    and Donna accept responsibility.  No one held a
    gun to Dick Dupre as a boy.  No one held a gun to
    his head and said, Smoke this cigarette.  So for
    whatever responsibility you can place upon a child
    or boy, we accept that.  And I suggest to you that
    that responsibility is five percent as a child for
    picking up that first cigarette.
         What other responsibility does he have?  He
    tried to -- he tried to quit and he didn't.  When
    did he first try and quit?  We know that in 1979
    he already had the message.  He had heard some of
    the statements, that it could be dangerous.  He
    also heard their misinformation which the defense
    asked you to ignore.
         For fifteen years, '79 to '94, he tried to
    quit smoking and he couldn't.  Put one percent on
    him for each year.  Fifteen percent, plus five, 20
    percent.  The remainder of which, 80 percent would
    fall on R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company for their
    lies and their misrepresentations. 2306 The next question.  Was the concealment or
    omission by RJR material -- concerning -- let me
    try that again.
         Was the concealment or omission by the
    defendant R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company of
    material information about either the health
    effects or the addictive nature of smoking
    cigarettes a legal cause of any of Richard W.
    Dupre's coronary heart disease and death?
         Absolutely.  They concealed information.
    It's the same reason that I told you today.  Less
    people smoke, because the truth matters.  And the
    truth would have mattered to Dick Dupre if they
    would have told him.
         The answer to that question is yes.
         Was the conspiracy between RJR and the other
    cigarette manufacturers to conceal or omit
    material information concerning the health effects
    of smoking or the addictive nature of smoking
    cigarettes or both with the intention that smokers
    and members of the public would rely upon them a
    legal cause of Dick Dupre's coronary heart disease
    and death?
         Yes.  He relied on their statements.  He got
    the message.  They created the culture that he 2307 lived in.  He smoked lights, he smoked filters.
         Go back to the slide show, please.
         So the next section we start to get into is
    full and fair compensation.  It requires
    evaluation of the past and the future for the
    harms and losses suffered by the Dupre family.
    You have to value those losses.  It's like what we
    discussed during voir dire.  How do you put a
    value on the fact that you can't pick up your kid
    anymore?  That's what you're faced with.  What's
    the value of not hugging your spouse, not having
    your dad around?  That's your role in this case.
    It's not easy, but it's what you're asked to do
    based on the facts and the law.
         Losing a father, Easters alone, family
    get-togethers, birthdays.
         Can we go back to the ELMO, please?
         The next question is what is the total amount
    of any damages lost by the estate of Richard Dupre
    for the loss and net accumulations resulting from
    his coronary heart disease and death?
         And this is what Brenda Mulder discussed with
    you, the items that she went through for the loss
    of support and net estate accumulations.  And that
    amount is $869,000. 2308 The next question:  What is the total amount
    of any damages sustained by Donna for the funeral
    expenses resulting from his death and coronary
    heart disease?
         There is an item in evidence for the funeral
    expenses, and it's $11,000.
         We're not here for $11,000.  We wouldn't have
    asked you to take two weeks away from your life
    and your responsibilities for that.  But it's part
    of the losses that she incurred.  And when you
    start talking about injustice for the acts of
    R.J. Reynolds, it's a lot more than $11,000.
         What is the total amount of any damages
    sustained by Donna Dupre for the loss of Richard
    Dupre for his support and services resulting from
    his coronary heart disease and death?
         These are the items we discussed regarding
    household duties and stuff he used to perform
    around the home, cutting the yard, taking care of
    the pool, stuff that he can no longer do.  The
    amount of that from Brenda Mulder was $149,000 for
    the past.  That was 20 years.  She still has 18.1
    years to go based on how long he would have lived.
         And the suggestions that I make to you here,
    I'm going to make suggestions for the past, and 2309 I'm going to leave it within your discretion and
    your power to deem what is appropriate for the
    future, for the next 18.1 years.
         Can you please go to the slide show?
         The next question.  What is full and fair
    compensation for the pain and suffering of Donna
    Dupre?
         What did she tell you?  She said I don't have
    my husband to do things with, so I would rather
    not do.  She's alone.  What's the value of being
    alone?  What's the value of waking up every
    morning to an empty pillow next to you and kissing
    it, wishing your husband was there?
         The simple things in life.  Eating alone,
    going to dinner by yourself, not having your
    spouse there.  When your son becomes a rocket
    scientist or an engineer, you don't have anyone to
    talk to, to tell them how proud you are.  The
    burden, the debt that was placed upon her.  What's
    compensation for that?  Her house is still like a
    time machine.  His picture is on her night stand.
    There is 30 pictures of him in the house.  It's
    like he never left.  She went on one date, lunch.
    Beforehand she went to the cemetery to see her
    husband, and as soon as it was over, she went back 2310 to the cemetery.
         What's the burden placed upon her?
         Can you go to the ELMO, please?
         In a case like this, based upon the facts and
    the evidence, the discussion should start at three
    million.  Should you deem it's more appropriate to
    exceed that, that's well within your power.  If
    you think that's too much, that's within your
    power also.  But based upon the facts and
    circumstances of what you've seen in this
    courtroom, three million is the place to start, I
    would suggest.
         In the future, that's up to you.  What's the
    value of the next 18.1 years when she goes into
    the twilight of her life alone?  That's what
    you're asked to determine.
         Next, what are the damages sustained by
    Richard Dupre Jr., Rick Dupre for the loss of his
    father.  And what we're talking about here is
    companionship, instruction, and guidance, the
    loss.  And our suggestion to you for not having
    his father around is $500,000.
         Before I go any further, I need to point out
    you're probably wondering, why isn't Danny on
    here?  Well, under the law, he's not entitled to 2311 recover as a survivor because he was too old when
    his dad died.  That's why he didn't testify before
    you during this trial.  So we're talking about the
    survivors that are entitled to the estate of Donna
    Dupre at the time Dick Dupre died.
         What is the amount of damages sustained by
    Connie Damron for not having her father there, not
    having guidance, not having a grandfather for her
    son?  In the past, $500,000.
         What is the total amount of damages sustained
    by Tim Dupre for the loss of his father for
    companionship, instruction, guidance, and support?
         In the past, $500,000.
         Kevin Dupre.
         Can we go to the slide show, please?
         This is Kevin along with the rest of the
    family after his father died and the plaque was
    placed on the wall at the Postal Service.  That's
    the boy, 14 years old.
         What value do you place on coming into your
    home at 14 years of age and finding your father
    dead on the living room floor and performing CPR
    before you call 911?  What's the value of that?
    What's the debt placed upon him and how does it
    affect him today?  You recall how emotional he was 2312 on the witness stand.  What value do you place
    upon that?
         Can I have the ELMO, please?
         For walking in the living room and finding
    your father dead on the floor in the same house
    that your mom still lives in today, the discussion
    needs to start at 1.5 million for the past.  The
    future is up to you.  And we will respect whatever
    you determine.  The past is up to you also.  All
    these decisions are up to you.  And we will
    respect it and accept whatever you choose to
    determine.
         The final question.  Under the circumstances
    of this case, whether punitive damages are
    warranted by clear and convincing evidence.
         Go back to the slide show, please.
         Does R.J. Reynolds need to be punished for
    what it did to Dick Dupre?  Yes.  There is a typo
    there.  But do they, RJR, need to be deterred from
    engaging in similar conduct?  Absolutely.
         One month before Dick Dupre died, one month
    before he died in 1994.  We talked at length about
    what they knew inside the walls of RJR in 1954.
    What were they telling the American public 40
    years later in 1994? 2313 (Whereupon, a video clip was played in open
    court as follows:)
         A SPEAKER:  Let me begin my questioning on
    the matter of whether or not nicotine is
    addictive.  Let me ask you first, and I would like
    to just go down the row, whether each of you
    believes that nicotine is not addictive.  I heard
    virtually all of you touch on it, and just yes or
    no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
         A SPEAKER:  I believe nicotine is not
    addictive, yes.
         A SPEAKER:  Mr. Johnston.
         A SPEAKER:  Congressman, cigarettes and
    nicotine clearly do not meet the classic
    definitions of addiction.  There is no
    intoxication --
         A SPEAKER:  We'll take that as a no.  And
    again, time is short.  If you could just -- I
    think each of you believe nicotine is not
    addictive, and we just would like to have this for
    the record.
         A SPEAKER:  I don't believe that nicotine or
    our products are addictive.
         A SPEAKER:  I believe nicotine is not
    addictive. 2314 A SPEAKER:  I believe that nicotine is not
    addictive.
         A SPEAKER:  I believe that nicotine is not
    addictive.
         A SPEAKER:  And I, too, believe that nicotine
    is not addictive.
         (The video clip concluded.)
         MR. PINDER:  It's a lie.  Ask yourselves what
    they knew and what they said.  It's a lie.  They
    lied to the American public and they lied before
    Congress.  This may be some of the worst type of
    conduct you will ever see.
         Every year 440,000 people die of a
    cigarette-related disease.  You could fill the
    Trop up 10 times in one year.
         Corporations are viewed as people.  The judge
    instructed you that.  R.J. Reynolds sold a quarter
    of the cigarettes in this country; 100,000 deaths.
    If an individual were responsible for 100,000
    deaths, what is the appropriate punishment?  Are
    punitive damages warranted in this case?
         Go to the verdict form, please.  The ELMO.
         With question 14, punitive damages.  Under
    the circumstances of this case, state whether
    punitive damages are warranted by clear and 2315 convincing evidence against defendant
    R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.  You decide how
    important it is that they violated basic safety
    rules.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. PINDER:  You decide how important it is
    that they violated the law.  And under the
    circumstances of this case, the answer to that
    should be yes.
         If you do answer yes, there will be another
    phase.  It will be very short.  Very, very short.
    One day or less.  We're going to ask you to hold
    them responsible for their lies and their deceit
    and how it killed the cornerstone of the Dupre
    family.
         What you do here matters.  You know it.
    Thank you.


         MR. FINCH:  Okay.  The first time and only
    time I've got a chance to talk to you.  You all
    know who I am.  You have seen me ask a lot of
    questions of lot of witnesses.  Ever since I have
    been a little boy, I have always liked to ask
    questions.
         So you're probably sitting there with some
    questions.  But, ultimately, a trial comes down
    to, Who do you believe?  Do you believe Donna
    Dupre and the witnesses and the evidence and 2383 documents that she presented to you?  Or do you
    believe the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and the
    documents that it presented to you?
         And in assessing that, in assessing that
    credibility, you don't check your common sense at
    the door.  And I want you to keep in mind the
    entire time Dick Dupre was smoking, his entire
    life, what was the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
    saying publicly about its cigarettes?  It was
    saying smoking our cigarettes doesn't cause
    disease; smoking our cigarettes is not addictive.
    So what are they saying to you now?  They are
    saying to you, Smoking our cigarettes --
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.
    Motion in limine.  Can we approach?
         THE COURT:  Okay.
         (At the bench)
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  This is the old -- they did
    it then, and they are doing it now.  Just by
    defending a case somehow.  It's a continuation of
    the deception of the 1950s.  I filed a motion in
    limine on this.  They said they wouldn't do it,
    but we just heard it.
         MR. FINCH:  Your Honor, they have taken the
    position that smoking does not cause -- didn't 2384 cause this guys heart disease and smoking didn't
    cause his addiction.  That's all I was going to
    say.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  Just try to avoid any
    suggestion that they are -- their bad behavior
    continues today.
         MR. FINCH:  Okay.  I understand.  Thank you.
         (In open court)
         MR. FINCH:  They came into court and their
    position here is that Dick Dupre wasn't addicted
    to smoking and that the smoking didn't have
    anything to do with his heart disease.  And that
    just doesn't make sense.  The best evidence that
    he was addicted -- yeah, documents don't lie;
    documents don't lie; don't die; documents don't
    forget things and they don't misremember.
         Donna Dupre testified that Dick Dupre got a
    prescription for the patch and a prescription for
    the gum.  Remember, we got to step back in a time
    machine.  Back in 1992 you couldn't get the patch
    or the gum without a doctor prescribing it to you.
    Every doctor on the witness stand, including
    Dr. Yount, testified that they wouldn't prescribe
    a drug to somebody with no medical benefit.  They
    had to -- some doctor had to make a diagnosis that 2385 he was addicted to cigarettes in order to
    prescribe a Habitrol patch.  That is clear and
    convincing evidence that he was addicted.
         What other evidence did you see that he was
    addicted?  You are talking about the weight of the
    evidence, more likely than not, the greater weight
    of the evidence.  Dr. Miller, who has a tremendous
    amount of experience -- the Air Force relies on
    him to treat addiction substances disorders when
    he was in the Air Force.  He concluded based on
    both DSM-5 and his clinical medical judgment that
    Dick Dupre was addicted.  Dr. Burns testified that
    of the people --
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  I'm going to object to this.
    This is improper rebuttal.  All this could have
    been presented.
         THE COURT:  I believe it's a fair comment.
    Overruled.
         MR. FINCH:  Dr. Burns testified that the vast
    majority of smokers who smoke a pack a day for 20
    years are addicted.  Two thirds of the smokers
    born in Dick Dupre's age cohort kept on smoking in
    1990.  That's the power of addiction.  And he also
    testified that the medical question, addiction to
    nicotine, causes heart disease. 2386 R.J. Reynolds secret documents.  If these
    documents were all public, why do they have
    "secret" and "confidential"?  They weren't
    available to the public until the mid 1990s and
    even later, after Dick Dupre was dead.  This is a
    document, AT575, where they talk about Dr. M.A.H.
    Russell, who was an eminent researcher in Britain
    on addiction in the mid seventies.  And this is
    when Dick Dupre is smoking Winston Lights.
         You heard a lot of commentary from
    Mr. Kaczynski about how we got the carcinogens out
    of the Eclipse cigarette.  But they didn't get the
    carcinogens out of this.  Every single cigarette
    Dick Dupre smoked that was made by R.J. Reynolds
    was dangerous and unreasonably defective.  It was
    dangerous and -- it was defective and unreasonably
    dangerous because it was more addictive than it
    should have been and it caused health problems.
         Anyway, Dr. Russell, what was he writing in
    Consumer -- he was writing a medical article in
    Consumer Reports.  What is he saying?  Eighty-five
    percent of teenagers who smoke more than a single
    cigarette become regular smokers.  Three out of
    four smokers either wish to or have tried to stop
    smoking, yet only about one in four ever succeeds. 2387 Who did they bring you, their only witness
    that Dick Dupre wasn't addicted?  A witness who --
    what R.J. says outside of court, they say, Go look
    at the Surgeon General's report.  Go look at the
    Surgeon General's report.  Do they list anywhere
    on here DSM-5?  Yeah, that's one tool.  That's one
    tool that a doctor can use to assess nicotine
    addiction.
         But in the Surgeon General's report, which
    Jaffe didn't agree with, there is no established
    consensus on criteria for diagnosing nicotine
    addiction.  And I would suggest to you that when
    Dr. Jaffe said -- well, I got that sideways.  Now,
    I've got it upside down.  I'm sorry, ladies and
    gentlemen.  I'll -- I was trying to get you to
    lunch.
         Clinically significant impairment.  He said
    there was no clinically significant impairment.
    Well, think about this.  In 1992, Dick Dupre goes
    to the doctor.  He wakes up in the middle of the
    night and can't breathe, got a heart condition.
    And he's -- you don't think that causes
    psychological impairment?  You don't think that is
    making you worrisome?  So he goes to the doctor,
    clinically significant impairment.  And within 12 2388 months what's going on?  Remember this 12
    months -- this 12-months thing?  Clearly, he's
    attempting to quit, because he's getting the
    patch.
         Clearly, he is taking cigarettes in over a
    larger amount, over a longer period of time than
    intended, because he's -- he is having significant
    health problems.  Clearly, he is having -- he's
    had in the past spending a great deal of time
    using tobacco.  That's a chain smoker.
         So Dr. Jaffe, I would submit to you, spun the
    evidence a little bit.  He disagreed that Dick
    Dupre began smoking as a adolescent.
         All right.  Pam Bishop.  Can you tell us, How
    old were you when you started smoking?
         I was approximately 13, seventh grade.
         And then, What -- in your recollection, when
    was the first occasion you learned that your older
    brother Dick was smoking?
         ANSWER:  I can't recall the first.  I have no
    idea when the first time was, but I know he was
    smoking when I started smoking.
         Memory is not like a videotape recording.  We
    don't have a videotape recorder following Dick
    Dupre around his entire life.  But if you think 2389 about your own life, I know for a moral certainty
    I ate Cheerios as a little kid.  I know I eat
    Cheerios.  I know I eat Cheerios at lot.  Can I
    tell you exactly when I started eating Cheerios?
    No.  Can I tell you how often I ate Cheerios
    versus Rice Krispies or --
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.
         MR. FINCH:  The point is that memory is --
    you use your common sense.  What else did Pam
    Bishop say?  She also said, When did you smoke?
         I remember he and I smoking together when I
    was 13 or 14.  When we were together and we were
    away from home, we would smoke.
         And then Dr. Yount even said that he read --
    he read Pam Bishop's deposition.  You know from
    reading her deposition she started smoking at 13
    or 14.
         I think that sounds right.
         And Dick Dupre was smoking when she was
    smoking?
         Again, that sounds right.
         Dr. Jaffe said Dick Dupre was not a chain
    smoker.  You heard testimony from multiple
    witnesses, including Charles Brown, that he was.
         You heard testimony that Dick Dupre never 2390 attempted to quit.  I think you can make your own
    assessment of whether or not getting on the patch,
    getting on Nicorette gum, which had to be
    prescribed, going to hypnosis, trying to quit, was
    serious attempts to quit or not.  Dick Dupre tried
    hard at everything he did in his life, and this
    was no different.
         Mr. Gordon showed you a quote out of C.
    Everett Koop's website.  This is a document in
    evidence.  You can read it.  It's ANS923.  What
    they didn't read to you is the rest of it, which
    is how hard it is to quit.  I'm not going to take
    the time to read that to you now.
         But what Dr. Koop says, if you felt that
    quitting your smoking habit is the hardest thing
    you have ever done, you are not alone, you are not
    crazy or exaggerating the truth.  Tobacco is
    highly addictive with addictive behaviors that are
    very hard to change.
         This man was addicted.
         As to the question of whether addiction
    causes disease, that's a medical question.  Both
    Dr. Burns and Dr. Miller testified that nicotine
    addiction is the fundamental reason people persist
    in smoking cigarettes, which leads to disease. 2391 That's right out of the Surgeon General's report.
    They didn't put on any evidence doctor to say that
    addiction wasn't a medical cause of the disease.
         Now, let's talk about whether or not the
    coronary heart disease was smoking related or not.
         Again, the weight of the evidence.  What do
    we have?  I urge you, please take the medical
    records in this case.  Take the autopsy report,
    Exhibit 3011; take the cardiology report, Exhibit
    3017; take the National Guard records, 3025; take
    his records from when he was in the military the
    first time around, Exhibit 5001, and look through
    them and think about the expert testimony, think
    about all the doctors who testified.  At the end
    of the day, all of them, even Dr. Yount, agreed
    that smoking was a major factor in causing this
    man to die in 1994.
         Think about weighing the evidence.
    Dr. Wilson.  What did he say?  Smoking.  Smoking
    in people who are susceptible will cause an
    aggravation or acceleration of development of
    coronary artery disease.
         If I'm going too fast, I apologize.  Ever
    since I have been knee high to a duck, I have
    talked too fast.  I'm trying to get you all to 2392 lunch.
         But what I want you to understand is that the
    overwhelming weight of the evidence is that
    smoking was a legal cause of this man's death, and
    addiction attributable to smoking.
         Dr. Jackson had written many, many
    peer-reviewed articles that specifically addressed
    the causation of lung cancer.  And she talked
    about how the interrelation of the factors worked.
    And you saw statements from the American Heart
    Association that smoking aggravates and makes
    worse some of the other risk factors.  So smoking
    makes worse the risk factors from cholesterol, if
    you find cholesterol.
         And even if you had a perfect genetic history
    and a family history, that doesn't negate smoking
    as a substantial contributing factor.
         The judge read you at the beginning of this
    morning the jury instructions on legal causation.
    I won't repeat them here.  But they are
    instruction No. 7 and instruction No. 8.  And they
    make very clear that any pre-existing weakness
    caused by a previous injury or a previous existing
    condition that renders Mr. Dupre more susceptible,
    they are responsible for that unless there's some 2393 way to separate it out.  And Dr. Yount said that
    you can't.
         Now let's talk about Dr. Yount.  I think he
    proved our case.  I think he thought his job was
    to focus on anything but cigarettes, A, B, C.
    Cigarettes was like the elephant in the room with
    this man.  What did he say?  He's never published
    anything on heart disease.  He didn't look at Dick
    Dupre's heart, like Dr. Wilson did.  He said he
    deferred to Dr. Wilson.  He said all risk factors
    are important.  He agreed that smoking greatly
    aggravated it.  And finally, he testified that --
         First of all, he back off from his
    hypertension conclusion.  He said, I can't say to
    a reasonable degree of medical certainty that Dick
    Dupre had hypertension.  And ultimately he agreed
    that the treating doctor never concluded that the
    family history was an important factor.
         NFL draft is next weekend.  Football.  I love
    football.  There's such a thing as Monday morning
    quarterbacking.
         That's what they're doing here.  They are
    saying let's look at what their doctors did and
    say his treating doctors, the doctors who had
    responsibility to care for him, they got it wrong. 2394 There's no family history that they felt was
    important.  And even if there was, family history
    combined with smoking is a legal cause of the
    disease.
         Dr. Yount agreed.  Cigarette smoking combined
    with a family history of heart disease, also seems
    to greatly increase the risk.
         Yes.
         Do you agree with that?  Two risk factors?
         Yes.
         What else did he say?  Dr. Jackson said,
    Look, if the man hadn't smoked, he'd probably be
    here today, more likely than not.
         I think that's a common sense conclusion
    based on what we have seen, given what the rest of
    his family --
         I mean, heck, his grandparents, born around
    the turn of the century, they all lived to be in
    their sixties.  So clearly he would here.
         Royce Yount.  What he did say?  You can't say
    to any degree of reasonable certainty that if he
    never smoked, he would have died in 1994?
         No, he couldn't say that.  He could still be
    here today.
         So on the legal cause question, the answers 2395 absolutely have to be yes.
         Finally, comparative fault.  We're not saying
    Dick Dupre was tricked.  We're not saying that he
    understands -- had some concept of the health
    risks.  But he certainly didn't know everything
    that R.J. Reynolds knew inside of its own files.
    And I'll show you some exhibits in evidence that
    will help you assess who is more at fault.
         This is exhibit No. 94.  We can't defend
    continued smoking as free choice if the person was
    addicted.
         In 1963, in a strictly private and
    confidential memorandum, before the Surgeon
    General's report came out -- remember, in 1953, 10
    years before, they that had concluded internally,
    you know, that you --
         Mr. Kaczynski showed you some of the memo.
    Read the whole memo.  That's Exhibit 160, written
    by Charles Teague, 160.
         He concludes, from a clinical basis, smoking
    causes lung cancer, and you've got to tell
    management about the problem.
         Well, in 1963, again, they are writing
    nicotine is addictive, smoking may cause or
    predispose to lung cancer and contributes to 2396 certain cardiovascular diseases.
         That's Exhibit 163.
         In that same document -- judge them by their
    own words -- a jury might, whether instructed or
    not, operate under the theory that a comparative
    negligence.  True, the buyer was negligent in
    smoking a product he knew was dangerous, but he
    was lulled by the seller, and the seller's
    negligence was the greater in failing to make his
    product safe.
         And as to the question of whether the doubt
    and controversy campaign that got kicked off in
    1954, whether that mattered, whether that impacted
    Dick Dupre, remember, every single cigarette he
    smoked was dangerous, every single cigarette he
    smoked was addictive.  But what was going on
    before he ever picked up a cigarette?  This is a
    letter, Exhibit 56 in evidence, July 30th, 1957,
    from the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company to the
    American Tobacco Company.
         You took a bold and courageous action in
    December 1953 when you called for a meeting of
    manufacturers and other industry group to discuss
    ways and means of presenting a unified front
    against claims that are being paid that cigarette 2397 smoking causes lung cancer.  There is absolutely
    no question in my mind that if this committee had
    not been formed, the cigarette industry would now
    have been in a deplorable position.
         Imagine, what if they had come out in 1954
    and said, Yeah, smoking our products causes
    cancer, and yes, it's addictive.  You should be
    aware of that, parents, so you can protect your
    children.  If they had said that, how would the
    world have been different?
         And in assessing comparative fault --
         That's the R.J. Reynolds person.  It's a
    corporation, but you treat it like a person.
    Think about what it was doing and what it knew in
    1913, 1928, 1948 -- Dick is born -- 1953 and '54.
    What did they know and what did they do with that
    knowledge?  Dick was learning how to read.  1962.
    Dick is smoking.  What did they know?  What did
    they do with that knowledge?  What they knew in
    1962 is obviously the amount of evidence
    accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health
    hazard is overwhelming.  The evidence to challenge
    such an indictment is scant.
         I would suggest to you that as between the
    company that made the cigarettes and sold 2398 cigarettes and pushed the cigarettes towards
    minors and designed their whole program around
    nicotine addiction, they bear more of the
    responsibility than Dick Dupre does.  Yes, he has
    responsibility.  And if you find that he's a
    member of the class and that smoking was a cause
    of his disease, then you have to assess what fault
    goes to him and what fault goes to them.  And I
    suggest to you that the greater weight of the
    fault belongs on the bad pharmaceutical company
    and the less of it on the person who was taking
    the drugs.
         Finally, on the question of punitive damages.
    Punitive damages, Mr. Kaczynski said that the
    money is not going to the American Cancer Society,
    it's not going to the American Heart Association.
    He doesn't know that.  That's just pure
    speculation.  Mrs. Dupre could do anything she
    wants with that.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection.
         THE COURT:  Well, I'll sustain the --
         Well, I'll sustain the objection.
         MR. FINCH:  That's pure speculation, what
    happens to the money.  But what we do know is that
    ever business decision that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco 2399 Company made the whole time Dick Dupre was alive,
    money was the paramount consideration.  Money is
    the language that they can understand.
         If you think what happened here was bad, if
    you think R.J. Reynolds shouldn't be able to get
    away with this -- yes, they have changed; they
    have changed some.  But if you catch somebody 20
    years after they commit a crime, do they still not
    deserve to be punished?  That's your call.
         I suggest to you that the evidence is, by
    clear and convincing evidence, they do deserve to
    be punished.  And if you decide that, and I think
    you should, I promise you we will be able to prove
    up the amount of the punishment in 15 minutes or
    less.
         So I would suggest to you that the answers on
    the verdict form are --
         Do you have the verdict form?
         -- exactly what Mr. Pinder suggested to you
    in terms of the yes or no.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  You need to wrap it up,
    Mr. Finch.
         MR. FINCH:  Yes.
         In terms of the value of the compensation,
    that's in your discretion.  There is no right 2400 answer to that.  I can tell you that when a good
    man reaches his mid forties, the most important
    thing to him is to be able to take care of his
    wife and children.  And Dick Dupre is no longer
    there to take care of his wife and children.
         Two months from now you will probably have
    forgotten all the names of the lawyers in this
    case.  Six months from now you will have forgotten
    Mrs. Dupre's name.  What you do here today, she
    and her children will remember the rest of their
    lives.  And if you do the right thing, R.J.
    Reynolds will remember it forever.  It's your
    chance to write the final chapter of Dick Dupre's
    life and to say what the right answer is here.
         I thank you for your time and will respect
    any decision you make.  I apologize for the little
    bit of a delay that we started with here today.
    But please, please, please give this case all of
    your attention when you go back and talk.  You all
    come at it from different points of view, and I'm
    sure you will come to the right conclusion.
         Thank you very much.  And thank you again,
    thank you for your attention and your patience and
    your service.