                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. LEWIS:  May it please the court.
          THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
          MR. LEWIS:  Members of the jury, in a
     little while you will go into that deliberation
     room and you will have three jobs.  One of your
     jobs, as Mr. Gustafson explained to you, is to
     fill out that verdict form and answer the
5662 questions that the judge has posed.
          Your second job is to make sure that
     everyone on the jury follows the law that the
     judge gives.
          And your third job is to reason together
     and explain to each other why you feel the way
     you feel when you answer those questions.
          Now, for the next few minutes, I want to
     discuss with you what I humbly believe is
     probably the most important part of the case.
     And in your verdict -- "verdict" means to speak
     the truth.  Your verdict must speak loud and it
     must speak clear.  And the truth your
     compensation verdict must speak is the amount
     of money it will take to compensate and
     equalize, balance the harm that has been done
     in this case.
          Now, instruction Number 6 is pretty
     simple.  Question Number 6.  And that question
     is, "What is the total amount (100 percent) of
     any damages sustained by plaintiff Kathleen
     Gafney for the loss of Frank Gafney's
     companionship and protection and for her pain
     and suffering as a result of Frank Gafney's
     injury and death?"
5663 It says, "In determining the total amount
     of damages, you should not make any reduction
     because of the responsibility you charge to
     Frank Gafney.  The court will make any
     reductions that is appropriate based upon what
     facts you find."
          So what your job is, is to equalize, to
     compensate, to balance the harm caused by the
     conduct of these defendants.
          So you got a harm, a big harm in this
     case.  And your money damages verdict needs to
     make up for that harm and balance that scale.
          Now, what I like to refer to this is,
     members of the jury, it's your call to action.
     When you see that compensation part of this
     verdict, it's your call to action.
          And the question was asked by
     Mr. Gustafson, what are you going to do about
     it?  What are you going to do about it?  This
     is your call to action.
          MR. BASSETT:  Your Honor, objection.
          THE COURT:  Legal basis?
          MR. BASSETT:  Sending a message, improper
     argument.
          THE COURT:  I'm sorry?
5664 BASSETT:  Improper argument on sending
     a message.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  Go on.
          MR. LEWIS:  Okay.  You can turn it off.
          Now, the evidence in this case, as
     Mr. Gustafson has pointed out, has not only
     shown more likely than not, but beyond and to
     the exclusion of any reasonable doubt that
     these cigarette companies, these defendants,
     Lorillard and R.J. Reynolds, knowingly and
     blatantly devalued human life for what they
     readily admit in their formerly secret
     documents, profit.
          And the evidence is clear that these
     companies knowingly and blatantly violated the
     basic rules that a company should tell the
     truth, that a company should not mislead, that
     a company, if they know something is dangerous
     in their products, they got to tell people.
     They can't keep it to themselves.
          So members of the jury, they didn't do it
     just by spinning like politicians do.  They
     didn't do it like that.  These companies took
     people like Mr. Gafney and didn't tell them,
     didn't tell them what they already knew about
5665 the products that they were selling.
          So the question is asked in order to
     compensate and help offset the damages to
     Mr. Gafney -- Mrs. Gafney for the wrongful
     death of her husband, who died decades earlier
     than he should have.
          Now, what exacerbates Mrs. Gafney's pain,
     her suffering, her lack of protection and
     companionship is that Mrs. Gafney, she suffers
     from seeing Mr. Gafney at the end of his life
     die a slow and painful and agonizing death at
     the hands of the companies that dishonestly
     manipulated him chemically, physically,
     psychologically and emotionally, without him
     truly ever recognizing it for the sake of their
     money.
          And so I say to you, members of the jury,
     that Mrs. Gafney' pain is real.  Her pain is
     immense because she lives with that fact every
     day of her life.
          Now, you heard her take the stand and
     raise her hand and give her testimony.  She
     told us -- and everybody that you heard in this
     case that took the stand and had something to
     say about Mr. Gafney -- and let me just try, as
5666 Mr. Gustafson did, to tell you some of the
     things that you heard, because I do that so you
     can understand just what condition her
     condition is in.
          They told you that Mr. Gafney was a
     friendly man.  He was an intelligent man.  He
     was a determined man.  He was a strong-willed
     man.  He was goal-oriented.  He was a
     God-fearing man.  He was loyal.  He was someone
     you'd say, I want to call him my friend.
          He was a fantastic guy.  He was kind.  He
     was honest.  He was trustworthy.  He was an
     excellent lawyer.  He was a wonderful husband.
     He was a wonderful father.  He was a wonderful
     son.  He was a wonderful brother.
          He picked hisself up when his father died
     and put hisself through school and took over
     the family as the head of the family because
     his brother went to seminary.  And Mr. Gafney
     as a young man couldn't go to Georgetown
     University, but he decided, I'll stay home and
     put myself through school.  He was a self-made
     man.
          MR. BASSETT:  Your Honor, I object at this
     point.  Argument is improper to the law and the
5667 evidence.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  Go on.
          The evidence you can respond to in your
     closing.
          MR. LEWIS:  Now, obviously, Mr. Gafney,
     from the evidence you heard -- and if you would
     have heard something different, I guarantee,
     you would have heard it -- he was a good man.
     He was a wonderful human being.
          And even though these cigarette companies
     say, yes, yeah, we lied to him, we concealed,
     but don't worry about our conduct, because
     Mr. Gafney should not have believed all the
     lies we told for the many years that we were
     telling the lies.  That's their position.
          But I tell you this, they can say what
     they will about Mr. Gafney, but to Mrs. Gafney,
     he was the greatest man to ever walk in her
     world.  And Mrs. Gafney, her suffering is
     magnified because he was taken from her in the
     cruelest, most callous and intentional way.
     And that, members of the jury, was for the
     money.
          Now, the truth your verdict must speak, it
     must make these cigarette companies meet its
5668 full responsibility also.  As Mr. Gustafson
     said, Mrs. Gafney accepts the responsibility
     that Mr. Gafney holds some responsibility, too.
     But now it's your job, it's your job, because
     they don't take responsibility.  They say zero,
     to make that determination.
          And for Mrs. Gafney for healing, for true
     healing -- Mr. Gafney died September 17th,
     1995.  The other day we were here in this
     courtroom was the anniversary of his death.
     She celebrated the anniversary of their
     marriage August 22nd when we were here in this
     trial.
          And, members of the jury, for her to begin
     the healing process, they got to give full
     account.  They got to give full account.
          MR. BASSETT:  Argument, Your Honor,
     sending a message.
          THE COURT:  I'm sorry?
          MR. BASSETT:  I object as it's sending a
     message argument, it's improper for this at
     this point in argument of damages.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  Go ahead.
          MR. LEWIS:  Now, when a person you love
     more than yourself is yanked away from you, and
5669 when they're yanked away from you for no good
     reason, there's a festering wound, and it can't
     heal properly.
          And you, members of the jury, have a rare
     opportunity.  You've got a rare opportunity
     that you may never get again.  And that is the
     opportunity to express a fair and full verdict
     to Mrs. Gafney and let her know that you
     understand what her condition is, and at that
     time there's a clear understanding of what
     happened here, it was wrong.  It was just
     flat-out wrong.
          It's wrong for cigarette companies to lie.
     It's wrong.  It's illegal for them to lie.
     And, members of the jury, now -- because it's
     flat-out illegal and it's wrong, now to the
     extent that the law allows, you can make it
     right.  You can make it right to the extent
     that the law allows.  You can't bring
     Mr. Gafney back.  If you could wave a magic
     wand and bring him back Mrs. Gafney will walk
     out of here out of this courtroom as happy --
          MR. BASSETT:  Objection, Your Honor,
     objection.  This is improper argument.
          THE COURT:  Sustained, Mr. Lewis.
5670 LEWIS:  Members of the jury --
          MR. BASSETT:  Your Honor, may we approach?
          THE COURT:  Not at this time, Mr. Bassett.
          MR. LEWIS:  Members of the jury, a fair
     and full verdict should reflect the enormity
     and the magnitude of the harm in this case.
          Now, I would suggest to you that
     protection, companionship -- just think, what
     is more important than protection and
     companionship that a husband can give a wife?
     The very thing that one fears the most in life
     is to be what?  Left alone and to be without
     protection.
          So when a couple like this bounds itself
     together -- and I showed you all of these
     photographs.
          Baron, can you put those up.
          That's the prom photograph.  When a couple
     bonds that way like Mr. and Mrs. Gafney did
     when they were so young, the bond, the bond
     gets stronger as they get older.
          Now, you can see -- go to the next one.
     Just go through them.  And I'm going to ask
     you -- I put those photographs into evidence,
     and I know it was painstakingly, so you could
5671 look at them.  And I didn't do it because I was
     trying to waste your time.  I wanted you to
     have the full extent so you understood a couple
     of things, and one of them was the magnitude
     and the enormity of what it was that she lost.
          Now, this unique bond is ripped away
     decades too early.  And, members of the jury,
     the only way you can say what the magnitude of
     harm is, is by your money verdict so that as
     alone as these companies have contributed to
     make Kathleen Gafney -- when she leaves this
     courtroom today, she will go home like she's
     done every day, to Tieka, one of her dogs, to
     Wrigs, one of her dogs, and she's going to be
     alone.  And as much as the conduct of these
     tobacco companies have contributed to
     destroying something that can never be brought
     back, the one thing that you can do is -- to
     help is to render that verdict.
          THE CLERK:  Counsel, 15 minutes.
          MR. LEWIS:  Thank you.
          Now, members of the jury, as I take my
     seat, give me a couple more minutes, but from
     Mrs. Gafney's perspective and through her eyes,
     there is no way that what they did makes
5672 anything that they did right.  And so for full
     compensation in this case, members of the jury,
     there are one of two things that you can do.
     You can give a verdict in this case that's a
     token amount of verdict, that's half what full
     compensation should be in this case.  Or you
     can give full compensation.  And we would
     respectfully request that you do just that,
     full compensation, and render a verdict that
     says when companies do what these companies did
     in this case, we place a full and uncompromised
     total value on the case, and that's why in this
     case, to finally step up and to start to
     protect and let Mrs. Gafney begin to heal, this
     is the kind of case where I need to ask you to
     return a verdict that's loud and clear in the
     amount of $10 million.
          MR. BASSETT:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Legal basis?
          MR. BASSETT:  Improper argument, sending a
     message, outside the evidence for that amount.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. LEWIS:  Now, members of the jury, let
     me explain something very clearly.  A lot of
     people say that when a lawyer says $10 million,
5673 he really means 5 million or 6 million or
     8 million so that someone can argue their way
     down.  But I tell you, I don't -- I stood here
     and I was the one that got to ask you questions
     when we selected you.  And at the end of the
     day, I asked you questions about full and fair
     compensation.  I and we, every step of the way
     since August the 16th, have told you what we
     wanted to do and tried our very best to do it.
          I don't want to try to manipulate and say
     20 million so you can come back 10.  No.  I
     want to make it clear that the right figure in
     this case is $10 million.
          It's not $11 million, it's not $9 million.
     The right figure in this case for this loss is
     $10 million.
          And I say that very clearly and very
     humbly, understanding what your role is as
     jurors, but there has been enough devaluing of
     the full worth of human companionship and of
     human worth and all the agony caused and
     contributed to by all that these companies did,
     members of the jury.  There has been enough of
     that.  And I say to you enough is enough.  And
     your verdict should speak loud and it should
5674 speak clear.
          MR. BASSETT:  Again, Your Honor --
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Mr. Lewis,
     sustained, focus on the damages.
          MR. BASSETT:  Your Honor, move to strike.
     And may we approach?
          MR. MAGUIRE:  May we approach?
          THE COURT:  No, you may not approach.  I
     will strike the last comments.
          MR. LEWIS:  That is why the verdict should
     be $10 million.
          It does not need to be a penny more.
          Now, members of the jury, as I take my
     seat, know that from Mrs. Gafney's perspective,
     the last thing that Mr. Gafney ever said to her
     was, "Katie, I love you."  And we respectfully
     request that you render a full compensation
     verdict that respects and shows that you
     understand the loss of protection,
     companionship, her agonizing pain and suffering
     that she has suffered as contributed to by
     these cigarette companies.
          Thank you for giving me the time and
     attention that you gave me, and now I ask you
     to give them the same attention you gave me.
5675 Thank you, Your Honor.


                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. MAGUIRE:  If it will please the Court,
     counsel.
          Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
          Let me start on behalf of myself and
     Lorillard and everyone here thanking you,
5695 frankly, for your service and for paying such
     close attention to us all these long, long
     days.
          I'm going to sum up the evidence on behalf
     of Lorillard and then you'll be hearing from
     Randy Bassett for R.J. Reynolds, but I just
     want to say, on behalf of all of us
     representing the defendants, from the
     defendants, we thank you for your time and your
     patience and your attention.
          As I said in my opening, this case is
     about one smoker, it's about Frank Gafney.  And
     the plaintiff has the burden of proving that
     Mr. Gafney was addicted and that his addiction
     was so powerful, so compulsive that he did not
     have control, that he did not have a personal
     choice, and that Lorillard and R.J. Reynolds
     deprived Mr. Gafney of his control of his
     personal choice.  And that was plaintiff's
     burden.
          Now, in fact, throughout this trial,
     you've learned a great deal about Mr. Gafney.
     That Mr. Gafney was aware of the risks, that
     Mr. Gafney enjoyed smoking, and until 1995 did
     not want to quit, and that Mr. Gafney was in
5696 control of his smoking and was able to stop
     whenever he made the decision that he wanted to
     stop.  That's what he wanted to do.
          You heard Mrs. Gafney acknowledge that she
     and her husband had very different views about
     smoking.  Mrs. Gafney never liked smoking.  And
     she made her views very clear.  But Mr. Gafney
     enjoyed smoking.  And he made it clear that's
     what he wanted to do.
          Mrs. Gafney has admitted that her husband
     made his own decisions.  And when he did, he
     knew everything he needed to know about the
     danger and about the addictiveness of smoking.
          Sometime in the 1970s, Mrs. Gafney has
     told us after smoking for some 20 years,
     Mr. Gafney stopped smoking cold turkey.  He
     stopped for an entire year.  He did it to get a
     better deal on life insurance.  He knew about
     smoking.  He knew the risks.  He knew the
     dangers.  And he also knew how to stop.
          We know from Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings,
     plaintiff's witnesses, that all of the nicotine
     was out of Mr. Gafney's body within a couple of
     days of his stopping for that year.
          And we know from Dr. Burns that if
5697 Mr. Gafney had quit for good during that year
     in the 1970s, instead of restarting and taking
     up smoking at the end of that year, he would
     have avoided his lung cancer.
          Mr. Gafney was in control of his smoking
     decisions, no one else.  And after that year
     with no nicotine in his system, he made a
     decision to start smoking again.  When he
     started to smoke again, he knew all of those
     things about cigarette smoking.
          He was in his late 30s, 1970s, late 30s or
     early 40s.  He was running his own business, he
     owned the business.  He was married with three
     children.  There were warnings on every pack of
     cigarettes.
          Now, Mrs. Gafney did not want him to
     smoke, but he did want to smoke and that was
     his decision, and there's no one here that's
     challenging his smoking decisions.  But
     Mrs. Gafney is asking to be paid for her
     husband's smoking decisions.
          Until 1995, Mr. Gafney did not want to
     quit, and until then, he never tried to quit,
     not once.  Until then, he never tried to quit
     for good.  He stopped for various reasons, but
5698 he never intended to quit.
          Until then, until 1995, Mr. Gafney made
     very clear to Mrs. Gafney and his friends that
     he didn't want to quit and that he enjoyed his
     smoking.
          As Mrs. Gafney admitted, he thoroughly
     enjoyed each and every single cigarette he ever
     smoked.  He chose to smoke.  He said that's
     what he wanted to do.  That was his choice.
          The only evidence in this case that is
     more powerful than Mrs. Gafney's words are
     Mr. Gafney's actions and the way that he lived
     his life.  And Mr. Gafney proved to all of us
     that he was able to stop smoking because that's
     what he did, he did stop.  Plaintiff cannot
     prove, could never prove in this case that
     addiction took over Mr. Gafney's life or
     prevented him from quitting because Mr. Gafney
     showed that he was able to quit whenever he was
     motivated to do so.
          Now, let's walk through how that evidence
     helps you fill out the verdict form that the
     Court is providing.
          We'll start with Question 1.
          May we put that up here.
5699 Was Frank Gafney addicted to cigarettes
     containing nicotine, and if so, was such
     addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and
     death?
          Now, this is the first question on your
     verdict form and it's the class action
     membership question.  This is the gateway
     question.  The first question that the
     plaintiff must meet in order to maintain this
     case.
          The Engle findings do not apply when you
     decide this question.  You, this jury, the only
     people who decide this question based on the
     evidence you heard in this case.
          If you answer no to this question, then
     your work is done, the Engle findings do not
     apply, the case is over.
          Only if you answer yes to this question do
     the Engle findings apply.  Then you have to go
     to the other questions on the form.
          And when you look at this question, you
     may remember we did briefly in voir dire, you
     see it's really in three parts.  The first part
     is was Frank Gafney addicted to cigarettes
     containing nicotine, that's the first part.
5700 And the second part is if so, whether his
     addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer.
     And the third part is whether his addiction was
     a legal cause of his death.
          If you answer no to any of those three
     parts of the question, any part, then the
     answer is no.
          And as you think about each subpart, each
     of those parts, remember that it is the
     plaintiff's burden to prove each and every one
     of those parts to you.
          So let's take the first part.  Was
     Mr. Frank Gafney addicted to cigarettes
     containing nicotine?
          Now, you just heard from Mr. Gustafson
     that various witnesses said that Mr. Gafney was
     addicted.  And each those witnesses said that
     based on the fact that he smoked a pack or more
     of cigarettes a day for 40 years.  And based on
     that, they concluded that he was addicted.
          If that's all we needed, we wouldn't need
     a trial.  We wouldn't need a jury.  But that's
     not all we need.  We need a jury.  We need a
     trial.  This is a question that has to be
     decided.
5701 We need you to judge the evidence.  When a
     plaintiff comes into a court of law seeking
     money, a lot of money, a great deal of money,
     the plaintiff has a burden of proof and she has
     to prove addiction.
          This is a legal question that must be
     based on the evidence.  And you heard medical
     evidence.  It's not simply addiction like we
     use in normal everyday life.  I'm addicted to
     the Soprano's or I'm addicted to, you know,
     shopping or I'm addicted to some TV show.
     Addiction is a medical term and it requires a
     medical diagnosis.
          In fact, Mrs. Gafney understands that, has
     recognized that for years.  You saw it earlier
     today what Mrs. Gafney said back in 2008 in her
     written answers to interrogatories where she
     was asked, did she contend that Mr. Gafney was
     addicted, and she said yes.  And you may
     remember that she specifically said that
     addiction is a medical diagnosis.
          "Yes, I do," that was the contention that
     Mr. Gafney was addicted.  "But addiction is a
     medical diagnosis."  There is no dispute here
     really between the defendants and the plaintiff
5702 that addiction is a medical diagnosis.
          At trial Mrs. Gafney testified and she was
     asked, and she agreed, addiction is a medical
     diagnosis.  So why then did her medical
     witnesses not give you the standard medical
     diagnosis?
          There is not one medical record that
     indicates that Mr. Gafney was addicted or
     diagnosed with addiction.  No one in this case
     has testified that Mr. Gafney met the medical
     standard for a medical diagnosis of addiction.
          MR. SALES:  Objection, Your Honor,
     misstates the evidence.  There is no evidence
     that there's just one standard.
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, you will
     rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
     Remember what the attorneys say is not
     evidence.  It's just to help you in determining
     what you believe the evidence has shown, but
     you rely on your own recollection.
          Go ahead, Mr. Maguire.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  You may remember that the
     plaintiff presented Dr. Cummings to you.  He
     said addiction is a brain disease.  But he is
     not a medical doctor and he did not say
5703 anything about Mr. Gafney.
          Plaintiff called two medical doctors,
     Dr. Burns and Dr. Cohn.  Dr. Burns is a medical
     doctor.  He is a pulmonologist.  He said
     Mr. Gafney was addicted.  But Dr. Burns never
     gave a medical diagnosis.  He was never asked
     to apply the DSM-IV.  In fact, in his entire
     testimony, Dr. Burns was never asked about it
     and never even mentioned the Diagnostic and
     Statistical Manual IV.
          Now, why is that?  If Mr. Gafney was
     addicted, if he really met the criteria for a
     medical diagnosis, why did the plaintiff not
     ask Dr. Burns whether he met the criteria of
     DSM-IV?
          Instead, Dr. Burns talked to you about
     smokers like Mr. Gafney, smokers who suffered
     from withdrawal, smokers who couldn't quit,
     smokers who were hopelessly addicted, smokers
     with Buerger's disease who kept smoking even in
     the face of amputations.  But Dr. Burns
     admitted that wasn't Mr. Gafney.  Mr. Gafney
     was in control of his smoking, and when
     Mr. Gafney decided to stop, he stopped.
          The fact is, Dr. Burns didn't remember an
5704 awful lot about Mr. Gafney.  Dr. Burns said he
     hadn't read the depositions in, I think it was,
     three years.  And you may remember that
     Dr. Burns has been testifying a great deal.
     With all the smokers that he has testified
     about over the last three years, even over the
     last year or so, Dr. Burns could not remember
     some details of Mr. Gafney's life.
          You may remember, just compare how
     Dr. Burns remembered the details of Mr. Gafney
     with Dr. Kaplan.  For example, Dr. Burns really
     couldn't remember the details of what
     Mr. Gafney's sister had related about his
     stopping smoking for Lent one year and how he
     wasn't happy about it and how he told her, even
     though he made it the full 40 days, that was
     the last time he was going to do it.  He wasn't
     going to do it again.
          Dr. Kaplan remembered all of that.
     Dr. Burns wasn't so sure and couldn't remember
     a lot of the details.
          Dr. Burns couldn't remember that
     Mr. Gafney had won the bet.  Or how Mr. Gafney
     told the insurance company that his weight had
     not changed the year he stopped smoking and his
5705 weight at the time was pretty much what you'd
     expect of anyone getting older.
          You may remember we looked at that
     insurance application from the 1970s, and
     Mr. Gafney was 205 pounds, which is -- that was
     in 1977.  And that was up from about 190 pounds
     when he left the Army Reserve about 12 years
     earlier.
          Dr. Burns was a little rusty on most of
     the facts about Mr. Gafney's life and his
     smoking history.  He just relied on the fact
     that Mr. Gafney had smoked a pack or pack and a
     half a day for 40 or 45 years.  And as you
     heard from Dr. Kaplan, that is not a basis for
     a medical diagnosis.  That's why Dr. Burns
     never mentioned the DSM-IV and never even tried
     to apply it to Mr. Gafney.
          The plaintiff also brought you Dr. Cohn.
     Dr. Cohn didn't remember Mr. Gafney at all.  He
     never diagnosed Mr. Gafney as addicted in 1995.
     And there's no evidence that any doctor who
     ever treated Mr. Gafney while he was smoking
     ever diagnosed him as addicted to nicotine.
          But plaintiff's witness, Dr. Cohn, did
     tell you that the DSM-IV is the medical
5706 profession's standard for diagnosing nicotine
     addiction.  Dr. Cohn said he doesn't apply that
     standard in his own practice.  He is focused
     mostly on treating people for cholesterol.
          Dr. Cohn admitted he's not a specialist in
     addiction.  He described himself as a
     quarterback.  He refers people out to
     specialists.  We presented a specialist.
          Dr. Kaplan, unlike Dr. Cohn and Dr. Burns,
     is board certified in psychiatry.  He does use
     the DSM-IV.  He does use it for medical
     diagnosis.  He uses it when he treats patients
     every day.
          Dr. Kaplan explained the DSM-IV, why it is
     the standard for the diagnosis of nicotine
     dependence, and he applied it to Mr. Gafney.
     And he showed you why he concluded Mr. Gafney
     was not addicted.  And he explained to you how
     Mr. Gafney was able to control his smoking.
          As Dr. Kaplan told you, Mr. Gafney did not
     have clinically significant impairment or
     distress.  He was in control of his life and in
     control of his smoking.  And fact that he
     smoked for a long time doesn't make him
     addicted.  Only about 50 percent of regular
5707 smokers meet the DSM-IV criteria of clinically
     significant impairment.  And Mr. Gafney was not
     one of those people.
          When you consider whether the plaintiff
     carried her burden of proof in this question,
     ask yourself, with all the doctors who knew
     Mr. Gafney or who treated Mr. Gafney, why did
     the plaintiff, a registered nurse, who knows
     that addiction is a medical diagnosis, not ask
     any of the doctors for a DSM-IV medical
     diagnosis?  There's no record, no testimony, no
     expert that diagnosed Mr. Gafney with addiction
     under DSM-IV.
          All that you were provided with,
     Dr. Cummings, showed you a Heaviness of Smoking
     Index and a Fagerstrom Test, and he admitted
     quite openly on cross-examination that under
     those tests, even somebody who has never smoked
     a single cigarette is addicted.
          Dr. Kaplan was the only doctor to make the
     medical assessment, the DSM-IV assessment, to
     answer the first part of the question:  Was
     Mr. Gafney addicted to cigarettes containing
     nicotine?  He told you why he did not diagnose
     Mr. Gafney as addicted.  So the answer to the
5708 first part of Question 1 is no, Mr. Gafney was
     not addicted.
          If you answer the first part of Question 1
     no, then you don't need to answer anything
     else.  You just write no for Question 1 and
     you're done.
          If you decide that Mr. Gafney was
     addicted, then you have to answer the next part
     of the question.  And the next part of the
     question is:  Was addiction to nicotine a legal
     cause of his lung cancer?
          Let me talk to you a little bit about that
     part of Question 1, the second part of
     Question 1.  Was addiction to nicotine a legal
     cause of Mr. Gafney's lung cancer?
          Even if you find that Mr. Gafney was
     addicted, that doesn't mean that addiction was
     a legal cause.  Why not?  Because the question
     of legal cause goes to control and it goes to
     personal choice.  Did Mr. Gafney --
          MR. SALES:  Excuse me, Your Honor, that
     misstates the jury instruction.
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, rely on
     the instructions.
          Go ahead, Mr. Maguire.
5709 MAGUIRE:  Yes, Your Honor.
          Did Mr. Gafney control his smoking, did he
     choose when he wanted to smoke and when he
     wanted to stop?  Or did addiction to nicotine
     take away his control and his personal choice
     to smoke?
          So this is why did Mr. Gafney smoke, why
     did he develop lung cancer?
          The plaintiff tried to prove that
     Mr. Gafney did not make a personal choice, that
     an addiction deprived him of his ability to
     stop smoking, it took away his control.
     Plaintiff presented Dr. Burns to tell you an
     addiction can take over someone's life.  He
     said you have a compulsive need for the next
     dose of nicotine.
          And Dr. Cummings described addiction as a
     relapsing brain disease that involves
     compulsive drug seeking.  To be a legal cause,
     that's what addiction had to do, it had to
     deprive Mr. Gafney of his personal choice, to
     take away his control.
          Let's take this right out of the
     instructions.  "Addiction to smoking cigarettes
     containing nicotine is a legal cause of," in
5710 this case Mr. Gafney's lung cancer and death,
     "if it directly and in natural and continuous
     sequence produces or contributes substantially
     to producing lung cancer and death so it can
     reasonably be said that but for the addiction
     to cigarettes containing nicotine, such lung
     cancer and death would not have occurred."  But
     for the addiction, he would have quit.
          So what does that mean?  It means the
     plaintiff has to show that addiction caused
     Mr. Gafney to continue to smoke against his
     will, caused him to smoke when he didn't want
     to, and not just by a little bit.
          MR. SALES:  Excuse me, Your Honor, that
     misstates the instructions.
          THE COURT:  Again, ladies and gentlemen,
     you've been given the instructions, and you
     will be able to rely on the instructions that
     you have been given by the court.  Thank you.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  And your instructions have
     the word "substantial."  Substantial.  It has
     to be so substantially that without addiction,
     he would have quit and quit in time to avoid
     getting his lung cancer.  It had to prevent him
     from quitting.  That's a heavy burden.
5711 So heavy the plaintiff brought you three
     witnesses to talk about it.  But every single
     one of them admitted that addiction does not
     prevent a smoker from quitting.
          I asked Dr. Burns, "In fact, do you
     believe that the vast majority of smokers who
     have quit were addicted?"
          And he answered, "I believe that's
     correct."
          Dr. Cohn agreed.
          I asked Dr. Cummings, "True or false, even
     addicted smokers can quit smoking?"
          And he answered, "True."
          He agreed that of the 60 million Americans
     who have quit smoking, 90 percent of those
     smokers would meet his definition of highly
     addicted.  And they still quit.
          So can addicted smokers quit?  Absolutely.
     Even plaintiff's experts, Dr. Burns,
     Dr. Cummings and Dr. Cohn all agree.
          So even if you think that Mr. Gafney was
     addicted, did that mean he couldn't have quit?
     No way.  That's why the plaintiff in this case
     could not meet her burden of proving legal
     cause you to, that addiction, any addiction to
5712 nicotine was a legal cause of Mr. Gafney's lung
     cancer or death.
          Addicted or not, Mr. Gafney showed that he
     was able to stop smoking, to quit, when he was
     motivated to do so.  At various points in his
     life, he proved that.
          Earlier we showed you a timeline of
     Mr. Gafney's life.  We described how he was
     able to stop once for 40 days for Lent, how he
     was able to stop smoking for as long as it took
     to win a bet with his smoking buddies, and how
     he was able to put his cigarettes down for an
     entire year in order to get better financial
     terms for life insurance.
          But each of these times, Mr. Gafney was
     not trying to quit permanently.  Each time, he
     was just stopping, pausing, for a while, for a
     particular reason.  Just long enough for his
     40 days, just long enough to win his bet, and
     just long enough for his insurance application.
          Each of those times, Mr. Gafney was able
     to control his smoking and to stop smoking
     without much difficulty.  He chose when he
     wanted to smoke and when he didn't want to
     smoke.  And each of those times, he stopped
5713 without any assistance.  He simply put the
     cigarettes down and stopped cold turkey and for
     exactly as long as he had set out to stop.
          We talked with Dr. Burns and Dr. Kaplan
     about Lent.  You heard from Jerry Riegelsberger
     about the bet.  It was for $20, and Mr. Gafney
     held the money for the winner.  The bet started
     immediately, and Mr. Gafney didn't use any
     smoking cessation aids.  Again, he stopped cold
     turkey.
          Mr. Riegelsberger, who lost the bet,
     remembers the bet, remembers seeing Mr. Gafney
     at the club when he wasn't smoking, that he was
     his same old good-natured self, and he
     remembers that Mr. Gafney held out the longest
     until he won the bet.
          His recollection was that it took
     Mr. Gafney a good part of the summer to win.
     But no matter how long it took, whether it was
     weeks or months, the point was Mr. Gafney was
     motivated to beat his buddies and win the bet,
     and he showed that he was the kind of guy who
     could go for as long as it took to win that
     bet.  That was the kind of man that Mr. Gafney
     was.
5714 Now, in the 1970s, Mr. Gafney made the
     decision to stop smoking for a whole year.
     Again, he didn't stop for the good of his
     health.  Mrs. Gafney was quite clear about
     that.  She acknowledged he stopped for
     financial reasons.  At that point in his life,
     Mr. Gafney was not motivated by his health.
     Just like he didn't want to exercise.  Doctors
     apparently told him he should exercise for the
     good of his health.  He didn't want to do that.
          Now, Mrs. Gafney did not remember exactly
     what year that was, but she did clearly
     remember that Mr. Gafney was able to stop, that
     he didn't smoke for the year, that he quit cold
     turkey, and that he did it for better terms on
     an insurance application.
          We know that Mr. Gafney never intended to
     stop for good, because Mrs. Gafney told us
     about how he was joking around as it came to
     the end of the year about lighting up right in
     front of his insurance agent.  So he had
     already decided that he was going to start
     smoking again even before he finished filling
     out his application.
          And when the year was up, he signed the
5715 application, he went right back to smoking.
          But both Dr. Burns and Dr. Kaplan told you
     what would have happened to Mr. Gafney during
     that year that he didn't smoke.  After just a
     couple of days, maybe three days, all of the
     nicotine would have been out of his body.  So
     Mr. Gafney's body didn't have any nicotine in
     it for almost 12 months.
          There was a lot of talk about withdrawal.
     Dr. Kaplan explained to you that Mr. Gafney
     didn't have withdrawal systems, but even if he
     had withdrawal, it would not have lasted more
     than a couple weeks or month or so.
          Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings told you that
     even addicted smokers who suffered withdrawal
     symptoms get the worst symptoms within three or
     four days, and they agreed that withdrawal
     generally doesn't last more than a couple of
     weeks or a month.
          You may remember Dr. Cummings explained
     that in his smoking cessation clinic, he has
     people sign a little contract and they make a
     ten-dollar bet that they'll stay off
     cigarettes, and they don't get the money back
     unless they stay off for a month.
5716 And he explained, he tells all this to
     them when they get everybody together and they
     throw out all of smoking ashtrays and
     cigarettes and they play Eye of the Tiger or
     Rocky, or whatever it is, and they make the
     commitment for motivation, and he said the
     critical period is a month.
          That's when you sort out who -- because
     most people have difficulty in that first
     month.  Making it past that first month is the
     toughest.  Well, Mr. Gafney made it past 12 of
     those months.
          Likewise, Dr. Burns and Dr. Kaplan both
     testified that Mr. Gafney's nicotine receptors
     would have returned to normal within a month or
     two.
          There was a lot of talk about nicotine
     receptors.  But you also heard that eating
     chocolate or drinking coffee also affects the
     receptors in our brains.  That's just a
     description of how our brains work.  That's not
     an injury.
          In any event, both Dr. Burns and
     Dr. Kaplan agree everyone has nicotine
     receptors, whether we smoke or not.
5717 The change in receptors is not permanent,
     and within a month or two of stopping smoking,
     the number of receptors goes right back to
     normal.
          So in that one year, Mr. Gafney proved to
     all of us that he could control his smoking.
     For the entire year, he didn't smoke.
     According to Dr. Burns, when he stopped for a
     full year, that put Mr. Gafney in the top most
     successful 3 to 5 percent of people who quit.
          He was motivated.  He wanted to save money
     on his application.  So he exercised strict
     determination not to smoke.  He controlled his
     smoking.  And he did it all by himself.  No
     help from anyone.
          By the time of that one year, Mr. Gafney
     knew full well about the dangers of smoking.
     He had lost his father back in 1954, some
     20 years before.  He lost his father the day
     before his 18th birthday, and he knew that he
     lost his father to smoking.  That's what he
     told Mrs. Gafney when they first met, that his
     father smoked all the time and had a heart
     attack from it, and he told her that he was
     concerned about his own health because of what
5718 had happened to his father and because he
     himself was a smoker.
          The year he stopped in the 1970s was also
     about five to ten years after Mr. Gafney had
     received a very personal warning from his
     stepfather.  After the death of his father, his
     mother had remarried, and in around 1967 or
     1968, Mrs. Gafney tells us Mr. Gafney's
     stepfather was diagnosed with severe emphysema.
          At that time, he was very vocal and he
     told Mr. Gafney, don't let this happen to you.
     And Mr. Gafney acknowledged to his wife that
     the Surgeon General's warnings were truthful.
     He acknowledged the dangers of smoking.
          When he stopped for that one year, that
     was about ten years later.  So at the end of
     that year, Mr. Gafney knew that smoking was
     dangerous, he knew it was addictive.  He had no
     nicotine in his system.  He was over any
     withdrawal symptoms that he might have had.
     All that remained, after all his years of
     smoking, was the memory of how enjoyable it was
     to smoke a cigarette.
          So as a man in his late 30s or early 40s,
     fully aware of the health risks and the effects
5719 that smoking had on his father and stepfather,
     Mr. Gafney made an adult decision to go back to
     smoking.  We may not agree or like that
     decision, but it was an informed and personal
     choice that Mr. Gafney made.
          You may remember we covered with
     Dr. Cummings his stop smoking pamphlet, Smart
     Move.  Dr. Cummings described that his pamphlet
     has a little test about whether you can quit
     smoking.  It asks people, do you have what it
     takes?  And it's three pretty simple questions.
          Skipping to Question 2 is:  Are you
     willing to make some changes in your daily
     routine?
          For one year, Mr. Gafney was prepared to
     check that box and make whatever changes were
     necessary to stop smoking.
          The third question is:  Are you willing to
     put up with some uneasy moments after stopping?
          Well, whether Mr. Gafney had to put up
     with some uneasy moments or not, he was
     prepared, if necessary, to do so for that full
     year.  He was prepared to check that box.
          And for that one year, for financial
     reasons, he also wanted to stop.  He didn't
5720 want to quit, he wanted to go back as soon as
     he signed his application, but for that one
     year, he wanted to stop.  For that one year, he
     was able to check all three boxes.
          And if you can answer yes to all three
     questions, you could stop smoking.  At the end
     of that year, however, it was pretty clear
     Mr. Gafney didn't want to quit.  So he made the
     decision to go back to smoking.  Because that's
     what he wanted to do.
          Now, Dr. Burns testified that if
     Mr. Gafney had quit smoking for good, instead
     of just for one year, he hasn't made the
     decision to go back and start smoking again,
     his risk of getting lung cancer would have been
     very similar, about the same, as someone who
     had never smoked.  If he had continued to stay
     off the cigarettes, having stopped for one year
     sometime in the 1970s.
          That was Mr. Gafney's choice, to go back
     to smoking after that one year.  It was also
     Mr. Gafney's choice to continue smoking every
     day from then on.
          Mr. Gafney, every day, continued to smoke
     and didn't try to quit.  Every one of those
5721 days, thousands of Americans chose to quit.
     They put the cigarettes down and they stopped.
     They tried to stop.  And they kept trying to
     stop and they succeeded.  Millions and millions
     of Americans, just like him, chose to quit.
          Mr. Gafney chose not to try.  His wife
     testified about that.  You may remember her
     testimony.  She testified that he talked about
     it, but he never did it.
          Mrs. Gafney was asked specifically, other
     than the Ash Wednesdays and other than the one
     year, were there any other times before January
     of 1995 when your husband tried to quit, and
     she said no.  He talked about it, but he never
     did it.  Think about that.  He never tried to
     quit in all of those years.
          In January of 1995, Mr. Gafney made the
     decision that he did want to quit.  He didn't
     need hypnosis, he didn't go to a stop smoking
     clinic, he didn't ask anyone for help.  Again,
     he just stopped cold turkey.  But this was the
     first time in 35 years that Mr. Gafney had made
     a decision that he was going to not stop, he
     was going to quit.  And he did.
          Until then, he did not try to quit, not
5722 once in that whole 35 years.  He told people he
     didn't want to.  And that's how Mr. Gafney
     lived his life.  He did what he wanted to do.
     The doctors may have told him to exercise; he
     didn't want to exercise.  His wife may have
     told him to stop smoking; he didn't want to
     quit.
          And he didn't stop smoking earlier than
     January of 1995 because that's not what he
     wanted to do.  When he did finally choose to
     quit smoking, he didn't need help from anyone,
     he stopped just the same way he did for the
     bet, just the same way he did for the one year,
     he just put the cigarettes down and stopped.
          In January 1995, for the one year, for the
     bet, each time that Mr. Gafney made the
     decision, he stopped right away.  It wasn't
     what you heard from Dr. Burns or from
     Dr. Cummings, that people who are hooked on
     cigarettes need many trials, and we all know
     that.
          People who smoke a lot oftentimes can't
     stop on the first try.  It's not like flipping
     a switch for a lot of people.  They need to try
     and try again and then they succeed.  With
5723 Mr. Gafney, he got it right the first time.  He
     stopped in January 1995 and he never smoked
     again.  That was it.  For the one year, he
     stopped.  That was it.  For the bet.
          It wasn't like Mr. Gafney had the
     opportunity to try a couple of times before he
     stopped.  This all happened at the club.  He
     was with his buddies.  He had to stop right
     there.  And he did it.  He stopped right there.
     And he didn't smoke until he won that bet.
     That's willpower.  That's discipline.
          Dr. Burns talked a lot about other types
     of smokers who are addicted, including smokers
     who couldn't stop even after they became ill
     with a serious disease and they still couldn't
     stop smoking no matter how ill they were or how
     ill they became.
          I mentioned the person with Buerger's
     disease.  Dr. Burns admitted that wasn't Frank
     Gafney.  Dr. Burns mentioned a smoker who had
     severe emphysema, who couldn't breathe and
     still kept smoking even though he was getting
     sicker and sicker.  Even he mentioned a smoker
     on his deathbed, still couldn't stop smoking.
     And he admitted, and that was not Mr. Gafney.
5724 Mrs. Gafney told you that her husband quit
     in January 1995, months before he was diagnosed
     with cancer.  For the next nine months, he
     traveled on his own to Cleveland, he drove his
     car, he went out in his boat.  By August, after
     his radiation therapy, his doctor was saying he
     could increase his daily activity, but he
     didn't smoke.  Mr. Gafney wasn't like any of
     those other smokers who couldn't quit.  He
     could.  He did.
          Now, step back and ask yourself, what is
     the pattern here?  When the plaintiff says that
     Mr. Gafney stopped for a year with strict
     determination, for the entire year he quit,
     Mr. Gafney used strict determination to do it
     day by day.
     "Question:  And he used strict determination,
correct?
     "Answer:  Yes, he did."
          On cross-examination here, Mrs. Gafney was
     asked:
     "Question:  And that kind of determination is
something that Mr. Gafney always had?
     "Answer:  Yes."
          When the plaintiff tells you that
5725 Mr. Gafney had -- that was part of who he was,
     that he had that strict determination, that
     ability to stop smoking.
          When Dr. Burns tells you that he had
     discipline and willpower, the pattern here is
     that Mr. Gafney was in control.  He had the
     ability to decide when he would smoke and when
     he would not smoke.  He called the shots.
          Everyone agreed that Mr. Gafney was
     extremely successful professionally.  He worked
     his way through law school, and within five
     years of graduating, he bought the business
     where he worked.  He built the business.  He
     had a large group of employees.  He had offices
     in three different cities in Ohio.  He was so
     successful, he was able to retire at 50 years
     of age.
          Dr. Burns told you that for the
     well-educated and successful, it's the ability
     to control your own behavior to accomplish
     things, to move forward in life successfully,
     that also predicts that you would move forward
     successfully with a cessation attempt.
          Well, Mr. Gafney had all of that.  If he
     had wanted to stop smoking, he could have
5726 applied his discipline and his determination to
     quitting at any time.
          This is a free country.  A person has the
     freedom to engage in any legal behavior, even
     risky behaviors, if he wants to.  Mr. Gafney
     didn't try to quit because he enjoyed smoking
     and he wanted to smoke.
          In all his years of smoking, there's no
     time when Mr. Gafney ever asked his family for
     help quitting.  Or his doctors or his friends.
     He didn't want that help.  He didn't want to
     quit.  He told Mrs. Gafney he enjoyed the whole
     experience of smoking.  He enjoyed the flavor.
     He found it relaxing.  It helped him deal with
     stress at the office or at home.
          Mr. Gafney enjoyed smoking so much, he
     told his wife he didn't want to quit and she
     told you he said that to her more times than
     she could count.
          Let's briefly look at her testimony on
     video on page 131 of her deposition, which you
     saw this morning, lines 12 through 23.
          (A videoclip was played and transcribed as
     follows:)
     "Question:  Did your husband ever tell you that
5727 he did not want to quit smoking?
     "Answer:  Several times.
     "Question:  What did he say?
     "Answer:  I don't want to quit.  I enjoy it too
much.
     "Question:  Did you ask him what about it he
enjoyed?
     "Answer:  He said he enjoyed the whole -- he
enjoyed the flavor, he enjoyed just the way it made
him feel.
     "Question:  You said several times he told you
that he did not want to quit.  How many times did he
tell you that he did not want to quit?
     "Answer:  Innumerable."
          (Thereupon, the video ended.)
          MR. MAGUIRE:  So Mr. Gafney was not that
     smoker who wants to quit, who really tries to
     quit, tries and tries again and is simply not
     able to do so.  He was very clear, he didn't
     want to.
          Dr. Burns, Dr. Cummings and Dr. Cohn each
     admitted that even an addicted person can make
     a personal choice to quit or at least try to
     quit.  All three also agreed that the smoker is
     responsible for trying to quit in making the
5728 effort.
          In 1995, Mr. Gafney was one of those
     millions of Americans who quit, and if he had
     only chosen to quit earlier in his life, he
     would have avoided his lung cancer because
     Mr. Gafney was able to stop smoking when he
     wanted to.
          So addiction is not a legal cause of his
     lung cancer or death.  The legal cause was
     Mr. Gafney's personal choice to keep smoking
     instead of staying off the cigarettes after he
     stopped for that one year, or instead of
     quitting on one of those days when he kept
     smoking after that one year.
          No one was stopping Mr. Gafney from
     using -- from quitting, from using his strict
     determination to put the cigarettes down.
     Mr. Gafney was an adult.  He could make his own
     decisions and it was his choice to smoke.
          The legal cause was his decision to smoke
     because if he had made a different choice, as
     Dr. Burns explained, if he had stopped smoking
     earlier in the 1970s, even in the early part of
     the 1980s, even up to, I think Dr. Burns put
     it, at 1986 or 1987, most of the risk would
5729 have been avoided.  And that's the answer to
     the legal cause question.  Mr. Gafney smoked as
     a matter of choice because that's what he
     wanted to do.
          So the answer to the second part of
     Question 1 on legal cause, was addiction to the
     nicotine and cigarettes a legal cause of his
     lung cancer is no.  And if you determine that
     addiction to nicotine and cigarettes was not a
     legal cause of Mr. Gafney's lung cancer, then
     the answer to Question 1, the whole question,
     is no.  You don't need to answer any other
     questions.  You stop, sign, date the form,
     you're done.
          If you do decide that Mr. Gafney was
     addicted and that addiction was a legal cause,
     then there's a third part.  So let me just deal
     with that very briefly.
          And that is whether -- and that is whether
     Mr. Gafney's death -- was such addiction a
     legal cause of his death.  And on this, the
     evidence is mixed.
          MR. SALES:  Excuse me, Your Honor.
     Misstates the verdict form question revealed by
     the slide itself.
5730 COURT:  You can rely on the slide,
     which is an accurate representation of the
     verdict form.
          You may go ahead, Mr. Maguire.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          None of the doctors who diagnosed and
     treated Mr. Gafney's lung cancer testified in
     this trial.  The death certificate lists lung
     cancer as the cause of death.  But it also
     lists pulmonary emboli.  And you've heard the
     instruction, the death certificate, in and of
     itself, does not answer question.
          So you need to determine this third part,
     whether the plaintiff was able to carry her
     burden, because Mrs. Gafney herself said on the
     stand that the cause of Mr. Gafney's death was
     pulmonary embolism.
          There's no question that Mr. Gafney had
     lung cancer.  And his lung cancer was not
     cured.  No question about that.  And there's no
     question that his lung cancer was caused by his
     smoking.  No question about that.
          But the medical records show that
     Mr. Gafney had been responding well to
     treatment.  You heard Mrs. Gafney said that his
5731 doctors told him by August of that year that
     he'd been responding well to treatment, that
     the tumor in his brain could not even be seen
     on a CT scan, and the tumor in his lung had
     shrunk and his doctors told him he had another
     seven years.  At the time he developed his DVT
     in September, Mr. Gafney wasn't even supposed
     to see his doctors for his lung cancer for
     another couple of months.
          Just two weeks after hearing that his
     cancer was responding well to treatment,
     Mr. Gafney was admitted to the hospital with a
     DVT in his left leg.  Dr. Cohn told you
     Mr. Gafney didn't need lung cancer to get a DVT
     in 1995.  And that's because Mr. Gafney already
     had a prior history, he'd been suffering from
     DVT for years.
          So you may find that Mr. Gafney would have
     suffered his DVT attack even if he had never
     smoked or never suffered from lung cancer.
          You may remember the history from 1990,
     February in Aspen, in July 1990, in July of the
     following year, in each of these times,
     Mr. Gafney had suffered attacks of DVT.
          And you heard from Dr. Cohn that once
5732 somebody has suffered from DVT, they are prone
     to a further attack.
          Dr. Burns and Dr. Cohn couldn't say
     whether the previous DVT has ever fully
     resolved between 1991 and 1995, so it could
     have even been the same DVT.
          Bottom line, Mr. Gafney had a history of
     DVT long before he developed lung cancer and
     none of the doctors said that his earlier
     history of DVT was caused by cancer or was
     caused by smoking.
          There was some question as to how
     Mr. Gafney was treated for his DVT and
     pulmonary emboli in 1995, and the medical
     records that could settle the issue just aren't
     available.  Dr. Cohn testified that he treated
     Mr. Gafney with blood thinner.  I asked him
     specifically and he said yes.
          Both Mrs. Gafney and Dr. Burns said that
     pulmonary embolism was the immediate cause of
     his death, a pulmonary embolism as a result of
     a DVT in his leg.  So you may find that the
     plaintiff has not met her burden that
     Mr. Gafney's lung cancer, as opposed to an
     unrelated DVT, was the actual cause of his
5733 death.
          So those are the three parts of
     Question 1.  And I submit to you that the
     answer to all three parts is no.  But if you
     find that any part of that is answered no, then
     the answer to that Question 1 is no.
          Question 1, the plaintiff must prove that
     without an addiction, Mr. Gafney would have
     been able to quit and avoid his lung cancer,
     that an addiction took away his control and
     prevented him from quitting.  And how could the
     plaintiff prove that here when her own
     witnesses admit that an addiction did not
     prevent Mr. Gafney from quitting and where she
     admitted that he always had the determination,
     the character to quit.
          So let's move -- so the answer to
     Question 1 is no.  And if you answer that no,
     then you're done with the form.  Just fill it,
     date it, sign it, and you're done.
          If you answer yes to Question 1, then you
     go to Question 2.  So let's take a look at
     Question 2.  Was smoking cigarettes
     manufactured by one or both defendants a legal
     cause of Frank Gafney's lung cancer and death?
5734 Now, I don't think you're going to get to
     the remaining questions on the form, but I have
     to --
          MR. SALES:  Excuse me, counsel's personal
     opinion, Your Honor, I object.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  And the answer to each of
     the remaining questions on the form as we'll go
     through should also be no because nothing --
     anything that the defendant said or did was the
     legal cause of Mr. Gafney's lung cancer or
     death.
          This next question, Question 2, asks you
     to determine whether smoking cigarettes made by
     Lorillard or R.J.R. was a legal cause of Frank
     Gafney's lung cancer and death.  And once
     again, the issue is legal cause.  Why did
     Mr. Gafney get lung cancer?  And as we
     discussed, it was Mr. Gafney's decision to go
     back to smoking and to smoke and to continue to
     smoke every day, that was the cause of his
     injury.
          Mr. Gafney started smoking with his
     friends.  He bought single cigarettes.  He
     bought whatever was available.  He never picked
5735 up a Lorillard product in his life until 1959.
     At that time Mr. Gafney was 23 years old.  He
     was married, he was going to law school, all
     that by the time he smoked his first Lorillard
     cigarette.
          And this question asks you to find whether
     smoking Lorillard or R.J.R. cigarettes was a
     legal cause of Mr. Gafney's death.  The
     question is not did the defendants make the
     cigarettes.  We all know that.  No dispute
     about that.  The question again is legal cause.
          And again, Mr. Gafney was in control, he
     made his decisions, he could have made
     different decisions.  Smoking was his personal
     choice.
          There's no dispute that the cigarettes
     that R.J.R. and Lorillard made were a legal
     product.  R.J.R. and Lorillard's decision to
     make a legal product did not cause Mr. Gafney's
     lung cancer and death.  It was up to Mr. Gafney
     to make the choice, to choose to smoke a legal
     product or not to.
          Mr. Gafney knew there were risks but he
     enjoyed smoking and he decided -- until he quit
     in 1995, he made clear to everyone that he
5736 wanted to smoke and that was his decision.
          So once again, answering Number 2, the
     legal cause of Mr. Gafney's lung cancer and
     death was his decision to smoke and not to quit
     until 1995.
          So in filling out Question 2, again, the
     answer should be no.
          If we go to Question 3.  This asks you to
     state the percentage of any fault that was the
     legal cause of Frank Gafney's lung cancer and
     death that you charge to each of R.J.R.,
     Lorillard and Frank Gafney.
          Now, this question is not asking you to
     compare Mr. Gafney's conduct to the conduct of
     Lorillard or R.J.R. Reynolds.  This assignment
     applies only to the conduct that was a legal
     cause, back to that again, a legal cause of
     Mr. Gafney's lung cancer and death.
          If you get to the percentage question, you
     should put 100 percent to Mr. Gafney's name.
     And here is why.  The plaintiff has admitted
     that Mr. Gafney has fault.  The plaintiff has
     admitted fault here, has admitted that
     Mr. Gafney is a legal cause, was a legal cause
     of his own lung cancer and death.
5737 Let's just think about what that means,
     the fact that the plaintiff admits Mr. Gafney
     was at fault.
          MR. SALES:  Excuse me, Your Honor.
     Misstates the instruction and plaintiff's
     admission.
          THE COURT:  Okay, Mr. Maguire.  I will
     listen to your explanation and if there's an
     objection, you can restate it, Mr. Sales.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          When you think about that, you cannot be
     at fault if you didn't have any information.
     How could you be blamed for something you
     didn't know?  And you certainly cannot be at
     fault if you didn't have any control.  How
     could you be at fault for something that was
     outside your control?
          Mr. Gafney has fault, that's admitted.
     The reason he has fault is because he did know.
     Of course he knew.  He knew the risks.  And
     this was in his control.  Of course it was
     within his control.  He showed to all of us he
     had the ability to stop smoking.
          So Mr. Gafney knew the risks, he was able
     to stop, and he made the decision, nonetheless,
5738 to smoke and to keep smoking.  And that's why
     Mr. Gafney is at fault.
          Let's talk a little bit about the evidence
     that you heard on those subjects, specifically
     about how Mr. Gafney knew that smoking was
     dangerous.
          Well, he was warned many times.  He
     heard -- we talked a little bit about the
     passing of his father just around his
     18th birthday.  Mrs. Gafney testified about
     that.  She told him -- she told us that the
     very first time she met Mr. Gafney, he
     described to her how he had just lost his
     father.  And he told her how he was worried
     about his own health.  He was worried about his
     health because he, Mr. Gafney, was smoking.
     And the reason was because his father had died
     just recently.
          Why don't we look at that testimony from
     the plaintiff's deposition you saw this morning
     at 125, lines 11 through 22.
          (A videoclip was played and transcribed as
     follows:).
     "Question:  Did your husband ever express to
you that he was worried about his health because he
5739 was smoking?
     "Answer:  Yes.
     "Question:  And what would he say?
     "Answer:  He knew his father had died when he
was 54, he was overweight and he was a smokeaholic,
he smoked all the time.
     "Question:  And do you recall the first time
that your husband expressed his concerns to you
about his health because he was smoking?
     "Answer:  The first time he ever mentioned was
when I first met him.  His father had just died."
          (Thereupon, the video ended.)
          MR. MAGUIRE:  Eighteen years of age,
     Mr. Gafney had the most personal warning any of
     us could have about the dangers of smoking.  In
     the late 1950s when his wife -- future wife was
     in nursing school and working as a surgical
     nurse, she told him, she brought him pictures
     of the cancerous lungs.  Later in their
     marriage they discussed the Surgeon General's
     Report.
          In 1966, the warnings came out.  Let's
     take a quick look at those warnings that
     started in 1966.  This is the first ones, the
     first four years.
5740 Then in 1970, they changed, from 1970 to
     1985.  And then you may remember starting in
     1985 there were four different rotating
     warnings.  Mrs. Gafney described, told you how
     she and her husband discussed the warnings on
     the Surgeon General's -- Surgeon General's
     warnings on the packs.
          In 1967 or 1968, Mr. Gafney's stepfather,
     Stuart Newkirk, was diagnosed with severe
     emphysema.  Mrs. Gafney told you how he was
     very vocal about that, telling Mr. Gafney don't
     let this happen to you, I don't want to leave
     you my breathing machine.
          And she testified how at that point
     Mr. Gafney acknowledged to her, admitted, that
     she was right with everything she said about
     the dangers of smoking and that he understood
     it was bad for his health.  That was in 1967 or
     1968.
          Let's look at Mrs. Gafney's testimony on
     that subject from her deposition at page 146,
     lines 6 through 20.
          (A videoclip was played and transcribed as
     follows:)
     "Question:  So when his stepfather was
5741 diagnosed with emphysema, that is when your husband
admitted to you that he was aware of the health
risks of smoking?
     "Answer:  Yes.
     "Question:  And finally recognized to you that
he had been right all those years?
     "Answer:  Right.
     "Question:  Correct?
     "Answer:  Correct.
     "Question:  And so that the point he understood
that the Surgeon General warnings were not just
garbage, that they were truthful?
     "Answer:  I think he knew before that.  He just
didn't want to talk about it.
          (Thereupon, the video ended.)
          MR. MAGUIRE:  And, of course, he had known
     before that because he had known since he was
     18 when he met Mrs. Gafney and told her at that
     point and told her in 1954 that he knew about
     the dangers of smoking.
          Mr. Gafney had friends who were doctors.
     Dr. Calinan, almost every time he saw him with
     a cigarette in his mouth, warned him, what are
     you doing smoking?  Your father had a heart
     attack.
5742 And from around the time that the Gafneys'
     kids were around ten years of age, Mr. and
     Mrs. Gafney told their children not to smoke
     because it was dangerous and because it was
     addictive.
          When Mr. Gafney caught his daughter Mary
     Kay smoking in high school in the late 1970s,
     he told her she knew better, it's dangerous,
     that it's addictive.  These are all warnings
     that Mr. Gafney got and that he personally gave
     to his own daughter.
          We use warnings for a reason.  You may
     remember the public service announcement from
     the American Cancer Society that you saw a
     little earlier in the trial.  If we can play
     that.
          (A videoclip was played and transcribed as
     follows:)
          (Sound of sirens.)
          (Sound of crying infant.)
          (Sound of automobile horn.)
          (Sound of buzzers.)
          ANNOUNCER:  We receive many warnings in
     our life and sometimes they can save our life.
          (Sound of fire siren and bells.)
5743 (Sound of whistles.)
          (Sound of a boat whistle.)
          (Sound of a man coughing.)
          ANNOUNCER:  This message is brought to you
     by the American Cancer Society.
          (Thereupon, the video ended.)
          MR. MAGUIRE:  With all of the warnings,
     the very personal warnings that Mr. Gafney got,
     he absolutely knew the risks.  He knew the
     dangers and so Mrs. Gafney acknowledged that at
     her deposition.
          Let's show that at page 132 of her
     deposition, Lines 21 to 133, line 9.
          (A videoclip was played and transcribed as
     follows:)
     "Question:  You told us that he told you
innumerable times that he did not want to quit.  I'm
trying to understand what you mean by "innumerable."
How much is that?
     "Answer:  Three, four, five times a year when
the subject would come up and we would get in a
serious discussion of it.
     "Question:  And the serious discussions that
you had three, four, five times a year would also
include the discussion about he should quit, it
5744 wasn't good for his health?
     "Answer:  That's right.
     "Question:  And he understood that it wasn't
good for his health?
     "Answer:  Absolutely."
          (Thereupon, the video ended.)
          MR. MAGUIRE:  So Mr. Gafney absolutely
     understood the risks, that it was not good for
     his health.
          Of course, Mr. Gafney didn't know that it
     would happen to him, but he certainly knew that
     there was a risk and he knew that he was taking
     that risk.
          With all of these warnings, Mrs. Gafney
     could not possibly carry her burden of proof.
     But you may remember there was some
     inconsistent testimony where she was asked when
     Mr. Gafney was aware of the dangers of smoking.
          And Mrs. Gafney testified:
     "Question:  Okay.  At some point you believe
Mr. Gafney absolutely understood that smoking was
not good for his health?
          And after the question was repeated she
     said, "Yes, in 1995."
          Well, of course he knew in 1995.  But
5745 remember, Mrs. Gafney also testified that he
     knew much earlier than that.  When his
     stepfather, Stuart, was diagnosed with
     emphysema, and we all know that was back in
     1967 or 1968, that was when Mr. Gafney admitted
     that he was aware of the health risks of
     smoking.  And that's when he finally recognized
     that she had been right.  All those years.  And
     Mrs. Gafney said correct.
          And at that point he understood that the
     Surgeon General warnings were not just garbage,
     that they were truthful and Mrs. Gafney said,
     "I think he knew before that, he just didn't
     want to talk about it."
          And, of course, he did know before that.
     He knew certainly from his 18th birthday.
          Then you may remember the testimony we
     just saw where Mrs. Gafney talked about the
     innumerable times that Mr. Gafney said he
     didn't want to quit.  She said it was three,
     four, five times a year.  This was not just in
     1995.  This was throughout their marriage,
     throughout their relationship when these
     serious discussions would occur three, four,
     five times a year, there would be serious
5746 discussions.
          And when they happened, they would also
     include the discussion about he should quit.
     It wasn't good for his health.  That's right.
     And he understood that it wasn't good for his
     health.  Mrs. Gafney confirmed, absolutely.
          So Mrs. Gafney's testimony is clear that
     Mr. Gafney absolutely understood that smoking
     wasn't good for his health and he understood
     that throughout their marriage.
          Now, Mr. Gafney knew that cigarettes were
     dangerous.  He knew that cigarettes were
     addictive and he knew he had the ability to
     quit because he had stopped smoking himself for
     an entire year.  He made the informed decision
     to go back to smoking after that and every day
     that he made the decision after that to
     continue smoking, that was his decision.
          We mentioned how quitting smoking greatly
     reduces risks.  That's called declining risk,
     and a number of the witnesses here testified
     about it.  You heard from Dr. Burns that if
     Mr. Gafney had quit smoking permanently in 1985
     when he was 49 years of age, he would have
     reduced his risk of lung cancer by 63 percent.
5747 If he had quit smoking in 1983, I think you
     heard this from Mr. Gustafson too, according to
     Dr. Burns, he would have reduced his risk by
     73 percent.  If Mr. Gafney had quit smoking as
     late as the mid-1980s, he would have avoided
     most of his excess risk of lung cancer.
          Dr. Burns testified that if Mr. Gafney had
     stopped in 1959 when he first met Mrs. Gafney,
     told her about the cancerous lungs -- I'm
     sorry, in 1954, or in 1964 when the Surgeon
     General Report came out, his risk of lung
     cancer would have been essentially the same as
     the risk of someone who had never smoked.
          Mr. Gafney could have quit in 1966 when
     the warnings went on the packs or in 1967 or
     '68 when his stepfather, Stuart, urged him to
     quit.  Or simply at that time in the 1970s when
     he already stopped for a year, instead of going
     back on to the cigarettes again.
          He if he had taken any of those
     opportunities to quit, he would have greatly
     reduced the risk and avoided his lung cancer.
     We wouldn't be here.
          But Mr. Gafney never tried to quit in all
     of those times.  He chose to stop a couple of
5748 times, for some particular reason, unrelated to
     his health, but he never wanted to quit and he
     never tried to quit.  And that was his choice.
          And that is why I say, you should put
     "100 percent" next to Mr. Gafney's name when
     you fill out that Question 3 on the verdict
     form.
          Before I move away from that, let me also
     just point out to you that those percentages
     there apply to the first couple of questions on
     the verdict form, but there are more questions
     on the verdict form, including the next couple
     of questions that I'm going to move on to,
     which are Questions 4 and 5 and Question 6.
          And there's an instruction on your verdict
     form I'll put up here.  If I can move over to
     the ELMO.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  I'm sorry.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  So we haven't gotten to
     Question 6 yet, but I just want to point out to
     you on the bottom of Question 6, you'll see an
     instruction that says -- it's in italics and it
     says, "In determining the total amount of
     damages, you should not make any reduction
     because of the responsibility you charge to
5749 Frank Gafney.  The court will enter a judgment
     based on your verdict and will reduce the total
     amount of damages by the percentage of
     responsibility which you charge to Frank Gafney
     in accordance with the requirements of the
     law."
          I want to emphasize the next sentence, and
     you'll see that I just highlighted it on my
     copy.
          "However, there will be no such reduction
     if you answered yes to either Question 4 or
     Question 5.
          That's why I'm going to spend some time
     with you on Question 4 and Question 5.  Because
     if you answer yes to Question 4 or Question 5,
     even if you put 99 percent of responsibility on
     Mr. Gafney and only 1 percent responsibility on
     the defendants, if you answer yes to those
     questions, 100 percent goes to the defendants.
     That's why Question 4, Question 5 are
     particularly important.
          Thank you.
          That is why you heard weeks of testimony
     and evidence in this case that had nothing to
     do with Mr. Gafney.  And that is why it is so
5750 important that when you get to those later
     questions, the answers to Questions 4 and
     Question 5, the answer is no.
          So for Question 3, you should put
     100 percent next to Mr. Gafney's name.  And
     then we should go to the next question.  Before
     I do, let me just say one other thing.
          You heard a little bit from plaintiff
     about concurrent or intervening cause and you
     have instructions on that.  And you can see
     from your instructions that concurrent cause,
     intervening cause use the same word as legal
     cause.  "An addiction must contribute
     substantially to producing lung cancer and
     death."  So there's no concurrent or
     intervening cause here because Mr. Gafney,
     again, was able to quit and it was his personal
     choice not to quit.
          So let's put up questions -- Question 4,
     "Did Frank Gafney reasonably rely to his
     detriment on any statement of material fact
     made by each defendant after May 5, 1982 that
     intentionally omitted material information
     concerning the health effects or addictive
     nature of smoking cigarettes and if so, was
5751 such reliance a legal cause of Mr. Gafney's
     lung cancer and death?"
          And Question 5:  Did Frank Gafney
     reasonably rely to his detriment on any
     statement of material fact made by defendants
     or other tobacco companies after May 5, 1982 in
     furtherance of the agreement to intentionally
     omit material information concerns the health
     effects or addictive nature of smoking
     cigarettes; and, if so, was such reliance a
     legal cause of Mr. Gafney's lung cancer and
     death?
          So, there's some multiple parts to these
     questions.  So let's just break it down a
     little bit.  One part is the date, 1982.  And
     that's an important date.  And you see that in
     your instructions, May 5 of 1982.
          If you determine that the plaintiff has
     proved -- has failed to prove that there's any
     statement that Mr. Gafney could reasonably have
     relied on after May 5, 1982, then the answer to
     this question is no.
          And second point is any reliance must be
     reasonable.  And the answer to that question
     again is no.
5752 How could Mr. Gafney have reasonably
     relied on any statement if he already knew that
     smoking was dangerous and addictive?  And he
     knew that before 1982.
          So let's start with the statement.  Let's
     start with the date.  The instruction:  In
     determining whether Frank Gafney reasonably
     relied to his detriment on a statement by each
     defendant that omitted material information,
     you may not consider evidence of alleged
     statements, concealment or other conduct that
     occurred before May 5, 1982.
          The plaintiff did not produce any evidence
     of any specific act or statement by Lorillard
     or R.J. Reynolds after 1982 that had any
     impact, any connection to Mr. Gafney.
          The plaintiff spent weeks showing you
     hundreds of ads, internal company documents and
     videos from the past.  There was a lot of talk
     about advertising and, in particular, youth
     marketing.  A lot of exhibits, documents,
     material from Surgeon General's reports, a lot
     of that stuff.  A bulk of that stuff was from
     the '50s, the '60s, the '70s, before May 5th of
     1982.
5753 A lot of what Drs. Burns and Dr. Cummings
     were talking about -- everything that
     Dr. Cummings was talking about had nothing to
     do with Mr. Gafney.  They talked about ads,
     articles, internal company documents, and they
     never applied any of that to Mr. Gafney.
          Not once did the plaintiff demonstrate
     that Mr. Gafney saw or heard a single tobacco
     company ad, a single internal tobacco document
     or any of the videos that they showed you.
          What you were provided with was little
     clippings from the Cleveland Plain Dealer and
     the Wall Street Journal and various other
     newspapers.  But there's not one Cleveland
     Plain Dealer or Wall Street Journal article
     that the plaintiff has provided to you that
     even postdates May 5th of 1982.
          And for the videos and press releases and
     other materials that the plaintiff has shown
     that come after May 5, 1982, there is no
     evidence that Mr. Gafney ever saw or ever heard
     any of those.
          That's talk about a couple of Cleveland
     Plain Dealer articles that we've seen.  One is
     LOR-010157.  That's from January 12, 1964.
5754 It's announcing the Surgeon General's Report.
     "Lung Cancer Laid to Smoking."  Mr. Gafney,
     anyone subscribing to the Cleveland Plain
     Dealer that day had it right there.  "Surgeon
     General Luther Terry of the U.S. Public Health
     Service said, 'I would advise anyone to
     discontinue smoking cigarettes.'"
          The Plain Dealer -- LOR-010233, the Plain
     Dealer from January 12, 1964, same edition, you
     saw the cartoon, "The New Danger Signal."
     Cancer.
          There was a Lorillard statement postdating
     1982 that plaintiff provided to you was the
     testimony of Lorillard's CEO during the 1994
     Waxman hearings, but the plaintiff failed to
     give you any evidence that Mr. Gafney ever saw
     or heard even about that.  And it could not --
     anything that happened in 1994 could not
     possibly have influenced Mr. Gafney to continue
     smoking, because he didn't.  It was right after
     that in January of 1995 that he stopped
     smoking.  He quit.
          Plaintiff showed you ads for Kent and
     True, both of which are Lorillard brands.  But
     plaintiff has not provided any evidence that
5755 any of those ads postdate May 5, 1982.  In
     fact, the latest date on any of the ads they
     showed you was 1976.  Again, no witness.  Not
     even plaintiff testified that Mr. Gafney ever
     saw or heard of any of those ads.
          And all of the ads after May 5, 1982, each
     and every single ad came with the Surgeon
     General's warnings.  Let's see those post-1979
     warnings, if we have them again.
          First from '82 to '85, it was a single
     warning.  Then from '85 on, they had the
     rotating warnings.
          A quick word on True cigarettes.  You saw
     the stipulation about True cigarettes.  The
     parties stipulated that the four brands at
     issue in this case were Lorillard brands, Kent,
     True, and R.J.R. brands Camel and Lucky Strike.
     But that's the extent of the stipulation.
          At trial, Mrs. Gafney told that you her
     husband smoked True cigarettes for 20 years.
     You might think that would be something that
     Mrs. Gafney would have remembered very clearly
     if her husband has smoked True cigarettes for
     20 years, but before trial, in her
     interrogatory answers and in her depositions,
5756 Mrs. Gafney did not say that her husband ever
     smoked True.  In fact, she never mentioned
     True.
          So Mrs. Gafney testified at her deposition
     that her husband's primary brand was Kent from
     1959 all the way to 1995.  He tried other
     brands, but Kent was his primary brand.
     Nothing else of note.
          You may have wondered why there were a
     number of questions for Mrs. Gafney about how
     that could be.  And it does seem odd if her
     husband was actually smoking True for 20 years,
     then why did Mrs. Gafney say he was smoking
     Kent?
          In any event, none of this really matters
     in terms of the burden of proof here because
     the more important issue is her husband knew,
     Mr. Gafney knew the danger and he knew the
     addictiveness of smoking.
          So in any event, the answer to that part,
     the statement of 1982 in both Question 4 and
     Question 5 is no.  There is no statement.  No
     evidence that Mr. Gafney ever heard or saw or
     relied on any Lorillard statement after May 5
     of 1982.
5757 The second part is reasonable reliance.
     And even if there was something, how could
     Mr. Gafney reasonably have relied on anything
     that Lorillard said, anything that anyone said
     after May 5 of 1982, if he already knew by that
     point?  He'd already known since 1954 about the
     danger.  He'd already known by the time Stuart
     Newkirk had got his emphysema in 1967 or 1968.
     And by 1982, how could he possibly be relying
     on any statement?
          By 1982, Mr. Gafney was 46 years of age, a
     successful lawyer at the very top of his
     profession.  The boss and an owner of
     Industrial Advisors Bureau, a take-charge guy
     who had shown the world he could achieve
     anything he set his mind to.  By 1982,
     Mr. Gafney absolutely knew the dangers of
     smoking.
          Mr. Gafney also knew that smoking was
     addictive.  In 1979 and 1980, Mr. and
     Mrs. Gafney talked with their children about
     the addictiveness of smoking.  Their daughter,
     Mary Kay, started smoking as a teenager.  They
     confronted Mary Kay and told her that she knew
     better and that once you start smoking, it's
5758 hard to quit.  And Mrs. Gafney testified
     specifically that Mr. Gafney warned Mary Kay
     about the addictiveness of smoking right back
     then, 1979.  So Mr. Gafney clearly knew about
     the addictive nature of smoking before 1982.
          Mrs. Gafney also told you during her
     testimony that her husband thought filtered
     cigarettes were safe.  But when Mr. Gafney
     found out that his daughter Mary Kay was
     smoking, he didn't tell her it's okay to smoke
     filtered cigarettes; he told her, you know
     better.  He told her that cigarettes were
     dangerous and addictive.  So from the 1950s to
     1982, Mr. Gafney was surrounded by warnings of
     risks of smoking.
          By 1982, he had been a smoker for about
     30 years.  And every cigarette he smoked for
     16 years had a warning on the pack.  For over
     ten years, there had been no advertising for
     cigarettes on TV or radio, and every print ad
     had the warning.
          If Mr. Gafney had any doubt about those
     warnings, he only had to ask his wife, a
     registered nurse, and he admitted to her in
     1967 or 1968 that the Surgeon General warnings
5759 were right.
          None of the warnings that he received and
     none of the warnings on the packs said filters
     or low-tar cigarettes were safe.  His wife kept
     telling him he needed to quit smoking long
     after, long after he switched to smoking a
     filtered cigarette.  His stepfather didn't say,
     it's okay as long as you smoke a filtered
     cigarette.
          Mr. Gafney knew better.  He knew better.
     He told his kids they knew better.  And every
     single pack that he bought after 1966 had a
     warning on the label, whether it was filtered
     or not.  The exact same warning.
          Now, everyone agrees that Mr. Gafney was a
     highly intelligent man.  This man was no fool.
     How could Mr. Gafney have reasonably relied on
     anything that Lorillard said after May 5, 1982
     if he already knew that smoking was dangerous
     and addictive?
          That's why I say the answer to the second
     part of Question 4, reasonable reliance, is
     also no.
          You've been shown a lot of ads.  I won't
     say too much more about ads.  Some of those ads
5760 were from brands like Old Gold, which were done
     20 or 30 years before Mr. Gafney ever smoked a
     Lorillard brand cigarette.  Those ads had
     nothing to do with why Frank Gafney chose to
     smoke 20 or 30 years later.
          Plaintiff also argues that these ads were
     designed to get kids to smoke.  But remember,
     Mr. Gafney was 23 years old when he switched to
     Kent cigarettes in 1959.  He had graduated from
     college.  He was married and he was in law
     school when he made the decision to smoke Kent
     cigarettes.  He was an adult and making adult
     decisions.
          And when Lorillard ran its ads, its Kent
     ads in the 1950s, you heard Dr. Burns admit
     that the Reader's Digest was reporting that
     Lorillard's Kent cigarettes performed best in
     independent tests by independent labs, not
     connected with Lorillard.  That was in 1957 and
     again in 1959.  That was LOR-000528, 1957.
     You'll see Kent was at the very lowest for tar
     and for nicotine.  That was in 1957.
          And 1959 was LOR-005298.  And this is
     where Lorillard, just in the space of two
     years, reduced the amount of tar in its Kent
5761 cigarettes from just over 30 milligrams to just
     over 17 milligrams, just more than 40 percent,
     the very amount that Dr. Wynder, Dr. Ernst
     Wynder had called for the cigarette companies
     to do.  And Lorillard did it.
          Remember that Reader's Digest was
     antismoking.  It took no advertising from any
     cigarette company.  Reader's Digest was
     completely independent.  And it found that
     Lorillard's Kent had the best filter.  That did
     not make Kent cigarettes safe.
          And Reader's Digest, of all people, never
     suggested to anyone that filtered cigarettes or
     Kent cigarettes were safe.  It was clear there
     is no such thing as a safe cigarette.
          But remember, Mr. Gafney had been smoking
     cigarettes with no filter at all, cigarettes
     that allowed all of the nicotine and all of the
     tar to go through without anything.  He wanted
     to keep smoking his nonfiltered cigarettes.
          Mrs. Gafney admitted she was the impetus
     for his changing over to filtered cigarettes
     and she said she knew the Lorillard cigarettes
     he was smoking were not safe and that she told
     him so.
5762 And you heard Mr. Riegelsberger's
     testimony that Mrs. Gafney would tell
     Mr. Gafney that his smoking would kill him.
     The Reader's Digest wasn't the only independent
     voice that was saying that filters were less
     hazardous, and that's all it was saying.
          The public health community recommended
     filters.  They said the best thing you can do
     is quit altogether.  That was the message from
     the public health community consistently, quit.
          They said, if you're not going to quit,
     only if you're not going to quit, then you
     should smoke the bad cigarettes, and that's how
     they described filtered cigarettes, not as
     safe, but as bad.  The only reason that "bad"
     is a compliment is because the other
     cigarettes, the unfiltered cigarettes, were
     worse.
          Let's take a look at LOR-016200.
          (A videoclip was played and transcribed as
     follows:)
          "The cigarette world is divided into the
     bad and the worse.  This is bad.  This is
     worse.  This has twice as much tar and
     nicotine.  There's as much tar and nicotine in
5763 one of these as in two of these.  That's quite
     a difference.  As a matter of fact, you can buy
     as much as 34 milligrams of tar in a cigarette
     or as little as 2, as much as 2.1 milligrams of
     nicotine or as little as 0.2.  With 130
     different cigarettes on the market, you can
     certainly find one with a lot less tar and
     nicotine than the one you're smoking.  Not a
     good cigarette, just one that isn't as bad.
     The Public Health Service has a free tar and
     nicotine list that shows them all.  Send for
     it.  Look them up.  If you must smoke, at least
     bad is better than worse."
          (Thereupon, the video ended.)
          MR. MAGUIRE:  The public health community
     made very clear there was no safe cigarette,
     only a choice between the bad and the worse.
          What Lorillard did was what Dr. Wynder and
     the public health community was asking them to
     do, design filters and make other changes to
     reduce the amount of tar and nicotine in
     cigarettes.
          The public health community made clear,
     though, that these cigarettes were not safe.
     They were just a step in the right direction.
5764 You've heard about the key scientists and
     public health researchers who studied the risks
     of smoking.  One of the great scientists was
     Dr. Hoffmann.  He was quoted in the Banbury
     report recognizing the work the tobacco
     companies were doing.  He said, "I do think the
     tobacco industry, voluntary or not, adjusts
     very well to the demands of the logical
     reasoning of the scientific community."
          Public health community had an enormous
     impact on the marketplace and an enormous
     impact on Lorillard and the other companies.
          Dr. Hoffmann recognized that the cigarette
     companies were doing what the scientists in the
     public health community wanted, make better
     filters and lower-tar cigarettes.
          Remember what you heard about Dr. Ernst
     Wynder.  Everyone you heard from in this case
     agrees that Dr. Wynder was a giant in the
     public health community.  He was a great man.
          Dr. Burns told you that Dr. Wynder was a
     giant in smoking and health research.  A
     scientist who discovered that if you paint
     tobacco tar on the back of mice, it causes
     cancer where you paint the tar.  His
5765 mouse-painting experiments were so famous that
     they were in a huge spread in LIFE Magazine.
          And in 1957, Dr. Wynder said if you reduce
     the amount of tar in cigarettes by 40 percent,
     that would be a good thing.  And that's exactly
     what Lorillard did and what Reader's Digest
     reported in 1959.
          You heard that the public health community
     was recommending filters.  Again, nobody was
     saying that filtered cigarettes were safe.
     They were simply saying that bad was better
     than worse.
          Let me talk just a little bit about
     addictiveness and nicotine, because you've
     heard a suggestion that there was some
     controversy, some dispute about the
     addictiveness of nicotine and that Lorillard
     and R.J. Reynolds lied or denied that smoking
     could be hard to quit.
          Absolutely not.  No way.  Now, how could
     they?  Everybody has known forever, for a
     hundred years, that smoking can be hard to
     quit.
          Let's take a look at those Florida Health
     Notes, LOR-015444.  You saw these earlier.
5766 This is from the State Board of Florida, back
     in 1906.  "Today the cigarette is looked upon
     by all smokers as the very worst form of
     tobacco addiction."  That's 25 years before
     Mr. Gafney was born.  Everyone knew.
          Plaintiff claims that Mr. Gafney smoked
     his first cigarette in 1950.  Three years
     before that was the Tex Williams song which you
     saw, "Smoke, Smoke, Smoke," talking about
     nicotine slaves.  It was so well known that
     smoking could be tough to quit.  That wasn't
     the debate.  That was never the debate.
          The only debate, the only question was
     what word do you put out.  Do you use the word,
     the label "addictive" or do you use the word
     "habit"?  Is smoking a habit or is it an
     addiction?  And people have used different
     definitions over the years.  That's all.
          If you go to 1964, the Surgeon General
     looked at this issue and he asked the question:
     Is smoking addictive?
          And he gave an answer.  And the answer was
     no.
          He said smoking is not addictive.  And he
     said so for a pretty clear reason.  In order to
5767 be addictive, he said it has to be
     intoxicating.  Smoking cigarettes doesn't
     intoxicate you and, therefore, smoking is a
     habit.  It's not addictive.  Does that mean
     it's easy to quit?  Of course, not.  And the
     Surgeon General was very clear, smoking is
     difficult to quit.  It's difficult to stop.  He
     just said, you don't use the word "addiction"
     because that's not the proper use of the word.
     The word "addiction" includes intoxicated.
          A couple decades later, 24 years later,
     the Surgeon General changed his mind.  And he
     said, yes, it is addictive.  Had smoking
     changed in that time?  No, it was exactly the
     same.  It was just as difficult to quit.  But
     he changed and says it is addictive because the
     definition changed.  And instead of just
     calling it a habit, he said now you can call it
     addictive even if it isn't intoxicating.  So
     that's all that was going on.  There was just a
     change in the verbiage.  But that didn't mean
     that smoking had become easier or more
     difficult to stop.  It was difficult to stop
     and everybody knew it was addictive.  Everybody
     knew it was difficult to stop.
5768 When the Surgeon General changed his mind
     and took a different definition, not everybody
     agreed with that change and it took cigarette
     companies another number of years to catch up
     and use the same terminology and say that
     cigarette smoking was addictive.
          But there's no evidence that the cigarette
     companies were saying to anybody or that
     Lorillard was saying to anybody it's easy to
     quit or that smoking is not difficult for
     people to quit or that people can always stop
     their smoking without any difficulty or
     anything of that kind, whatever.
          As you saw from the State of Florida
     Health Notes, that has been known for over a
     hundred years.
          Now, in Questions 4 and 5, the plaintiff
     must prove to you that Frank Gafney reasonably
     relied to his detriment on a statement of
     material fact after May of 1982 that
     intentionally omitted material information
     about the health effects or addictive nature of
     smoking.
          MR. SALES:  Excuse me, Your Honor.  The
     word "intentionally" is not in that
5769 instruction.  I object.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  I'll rephrase, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Thank you, Mr. Maguire.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  When you step back and look
     at Questions 4 and 5, plaintiff has not met her
     burden.  Plaintiff has shown you no statement
     that Lorillard makes since 1982 that caused
     Mr. Gafney to continue smoking.
          And finally, from 1982, no one was denying
     that smoking could be hard to quit.  As I say,
     that had been known for 100 years.
          For all of those reasons, the answer to
     Questions 4 and 5 is no.
          Now, there's one additional feature to
     Question 5, and that is the question about the
     agreement between the tobacco companies.  And
     there's a phrase there which talks about
     agreement.
          Let me just finish with Question 5 here.
          In furtherance of the agreement to
     intentionally omit -- I'm sorry, it should be
     in furtherance of the agreement to omit the
     material information.
          What does that mean?  We talked about the
     agreement.  Did an agreement have any impact on
5770 Frank Gafney when you think about it?  How
     could it?
          The evidence here is that Mr. Gafney
     smoked because he wanted to smoke, not because
     of any agreement.  There was not any agreement
     that you heard about that prevented Mr. Gafney
     from marrying the daughter of Sledgehammer Mike
     Blackwell, a registered nurse who warned him
     all his life about smoking.  And there wasn't
     any agreement that -- no agreement here to
     prevent Mr. Gafney from telling his future wife
     when he is 18 that his father had died from
     smoking.
          Any agreement here did not prevent his
     stepfather from warning Mr. Gafney about the
     dangers of smoking.
          And any agreement did not stop the Surgeon
     General from putting the warnings on the packs.
     All these things happened.  Any agreement had
     no impact whatever on Mr. Gafney of stopping
     any of these things, all those things happened,
     and all those things told an informed
     Mr. Gafney so that he knew, he absolutely knew
     the dangers and the addictiveness of smoking.
     And he absolutely had the ability to stop that
5771 smoking when he chose to do so.
          Mr. Gafney made up his own mind.  He
     didn't let anyone make decisions for him.  Not
     his wife.  Not his children.  Nor his friends,
     several of whom were doctors.  Not the Surgeon
     General.  Not the public health authorities.
     And certainly not any agreement among
     companies, most of which you may not have heard
     of.  He did what he wanted to do.
          So how can any agreement have any impact
     on Mr. Gafney when he already knew?
          Let me move to Question 6.  Again, the
     response to Question 5 is no.  Question 6 then
     is, what is the total amount from 100 percent
     of any damages sustained by plaintiff, Kathleen
     Gafney, for the loss of Frank Gafney's
     companionship and protection and for her pain
     and suffering as a result of Frank Gafney's
     injury and death?
          Your instructions tell you that any
     damages must be fair and just in light of the
     evidence, not be based on speculation or
     sympathy.  They have to be proven to you.
          Obviously, it's very tragic what happened
     to Mr. Gafney.  His illness and his death and
5772 the loss of a spouse is obviously a tragedy in
     Mrs. Gafney's family.  But to Mrs. Gafney's
     credit, she did move on with her life.  And she
     was lucky enough to be able to do so and to
     continue to enjoy her life and her family.
          In 1997, she began dating Mr. Hanners.
     She married him in 1999.  They were married for
     almost ten years.  While they are no longer
     married, during those ten years, Mrs. Gafney
     told you that she had a lot of fun.  You've
     seen some photographs of her and Mr. Hanners.
     Here is one.
          She and Mr. Hanners had a lot in common.
     They enjoyed boating and traveling together.
     He helped her around the house.  Her children
     accepted him as part of the family.  Even after
     she and Mr. Hanners had broken up, she told you
     that she would have gone to counseling to save
     the marriage, if she could have.  At the time,
     for those 11 or 12 years, from 1997 to 2008,
     that was a relationship that was important to
     her.
          And Mrs. Gafney has been able to move on
     with her life again.  She continues to spend
     time with her children, her grandchildren, her
5773 close friends, and her dogs.
          She enjoys her activities, her home, and
     her garden.  She travels with her family and
     friends and she describes herself as satisfied
     and content.
          Considering all of the evidence here, you
     heard that Mr. Gafney was retired.  There was
     no claim for lost earnings or any expense of
     any kind.  If you were to award any damages to
     Mrs. Gafney, I would suggest a number in the
     hundreds of thousands of dollars would be more
     appropriate than the millions and millions of
     dollars that you heard about from plaintiff's
     counsel.  But based on the evidence that you
     have heard, on all of the evidence that you
     have heard, we submit that the appropriate
     award of damages would be zero in this case.
          Now, let me turn to Question 7.  And that
     is concerning punitive damages.  "Please state
     as to each defendant below for which you
     answered yes to Question 4 or 5 whether you
     find, by clear and convincing evidence, that
     punitive damages are warranted against that
     defendant under the circumstances of this
     case."
5774 This is the final question.  And you'll
     have to decide whether additional money damages
     should be awarded to Mrs. Gafney on top of
     fully compensating Mrs. Gafney for her claim.
     Question 6 talks about full compensation.
     Question 7 is additional damages on top of
     that.
          You will see on the verdict form that
     punitive damages can be awarded only for
     concealment or agreement to conceal that was a
     legal cause of Mr. Gafney's death, and that
     means if you answered no to Question 4 or 5,
     you never get to punitive damages.  It says
     that on your verdict form.
          You're also instructed that the Engle
     findings we've talked about throughout this
     trial do not establish that Mrs. Gafney is
     entitled to punitive damages.  A finding of
     punitive damages has to be based on conduct
     linking concealment and an agreement to conceal
     to Mr. Gafney's death.
          MR. SALES:  Excuse me, your Honor.  I
     object.  That's an incorrect statement of the
     law applicable to this case and the Court's
     instructions.
5775 COURT:  Again, ladies and gentlemen,
     you'll have your instructions with you in the
     jury room and you should rely on those
     instructions.  Thank you.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  Punitive damages are an
     extraordinary award.  They are not automatic.
     They have to be proved.  They have to be
     related to Mr. Gafney, not to other smokers.
          MR. SALES:  I object.  That's contrary to
     the law as previously argued before closing
     arguments.
          THE COURT:  Sustained, Mr. Maguire.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  As you can see from the
     instructions, the burden is much higher for
     punitive damages than it is for any other
     question in this case.  As you can imagine, to
     get damages that are over and above full
     compensation, to get more than that is an
     extraordinarily high burden.  It's different
     from the burden of proof for compensatory
     damages.  The plaintiff has to prove punitive
     damages to you by clear and convincing
     evidence.  Evidence that is precise, lacking in
     confusion, and of such weigh that it produces a
     firm belief for conviction without hesitation.
5776 If you have doubts, the answer has to be no.
          For this question, the plaintiff has to
     prove to you that Lorillard and R.J. Reynolds
     acted with conscious indifference and with
     reckless disregard and punitive damages can
     only be awarded for conduct that caused
     Mr. Gafney's lung cancer and death and not
     based on the fact that the defendants made
     cigarettes or for the acts of defendants that
     did not cause Mr. Gafney's lung cancer or
     death.
          Bottom line, there's no conscious
     indifference or reckless disregard here and no
     reason to punish Lorillard or to deter bad
     conduct.  In fact, the evidence you heard shows
     that Lorillard had every business reason to
     work with Dr. Wynder and the public health
     community in doing what it could to make
     cigarettes less harmful.
          You heard the testimony from Dr. Burns
     about how Lorillard worked with Dr. Wynder,
     supported his groundbreaking research.  You saw
     that Lorillard gave its products to Dr. Wynder
     for its research earlier today.  You saw a
     letter sending 35,000 cigarettes to
5777 Dr. Wynder's lab.  Lorillard helped Dr. Wynder
     with a whole process of getting tar from
     cigarette smoke.  A complicated process called
     fractionation.  Breaking up smoke to identify
     the different components.  Lorillard helped
     Dr. Wynder with that important research.
     Lorillard did exactly what Dr. Wynder and the
     public health community was asking for.
     Dr. Wynder told the cigarette companies, get
     improved filters that reduce the amount of tar
     by 40 percent.
          Starting in the 1950s, Lorillard worked
     with Dr. Wynder on how to reduce phenols in
     cigarette smoke.  Dr. Spears, one of
     Lorillard's top scientist, helped Dr. Wynder
     develop a way to analyze the amount of phenols
     in cigarette smoke.  Phenols were a suspected
     form of cancer.  You may remember Dr. Burns
     describing how they interfered with the cilia
     in the lung, those little things that go
     swishing back and forth.  Dr. Wynder was
     investigating phenol as a cause of cancer.
          Lorillard shared its research on phenols
     with Dr. Wynder.  Lorillard published its
     phenol research and Lorillard came up with a
5778 filter to reduce the phenols in cigarette
     smoke.
          Lorillard supported Dr. Wynder's
     outstanding research at the Sloan-Kettering
     Cancer Institute and at the American Health
     Foundation and with Lorillard's help,
     Dr. Wynder and his science transformed the way
     we think of smoking and health today.  That is
     not reckless disregard.  That is not conscious
     indifference.  It was working with one of the
     preeminent cancer researchers and investigators
     of all time.
          When Lorillard cooperated with Dr. Wynder,
     there was no law that required it to do so.
     There was no law that said Lorillard had to
     give its products or its money or its science
     or its technology or its research to help
     Dr. Wynder's investigations into smoking and
     cancer.  Lorillard did that voluntarily.
          And beyond that, Lorillard shared its
     research on phenols with the Surgeon General.
     Lorillard helped the Surgeon General and the
     Surgeon General thanked Lorillard.  That's not
     reckless disregard.
          You heard Dr. Burns admit to me that there
5779 were many studies, some 50 scientific studies
     finding that filtered or low-tar cigarettes
     reduce risk.  Independent scientists not
     connected in any way with any cigarette
     company.
          Science that in 1997, Dr. Burns accepted
     as proving beyond a reasonable doubt that
     filters reduce risk.  Well, Lorillard followed
     that science, that independent science.  And
     Lorillard did the very research that the public
     health community asked it to do to try and
     reduce the danger of smoking.
          Researching nicotine.  That was an attempt
     by Lorillard to make a less hazardous
     cigarette.  You heard from Dr. Cummings on
     cross-examination that trying to lower the
     level of tar while maintaining the level of
     nicotine, that wasn't Lorillard's idea.  That
     came from Dr. Russell and the public health
     community.
          Back in the 1970s, scientists at the
     National Cancer Institute, the Federal
     Government National Cancer Institute were
     asking cigarette companies, including
     Lorillard, to do that exact research.  The
5780 objective of the government, the National
     Cancer Institute's Tobacco Working Group was to
     see if it was possible to develop a less
     hazardous cigarette and that's what Lorillard
     tried to do.
          The National Cancer Institute did
     research.  It looked at filters.  They looked
     at reconstituted tobacco.  They looked at paper
     porosity.  They looked at ventilation holes.
     This is, again, the Federal Government.
     National Cancer Institute.  They were going for
     ten years.  They looked at nicotine
     manipulation.  Higher nicotine to tar.  Again,
     if you lower the tar, keep the nicotine higher,
     they break that relationship so you can give
     the smoker the nicotine without the tar, that
     was what they were trying to do to find a
     cigarette that would be acceptable to people
     who wouldn't quit.  So if people would actually
     use it, it would be commercially acceptable,
     and they would be able to get the nicotine
     without the tar.
          And you heard Dr. Cummings admit it made
     sense, it made sense to give smokers the
     nicotine without the tar.  That is what the
5781 Federal Government, the National Cancer
     Institute was looking at.  Higher nicotine to
     tar ratio, a relationship, you heard
     Dr. Cummings talk about that, high nicotine
     tobacco, freebase nicotine, all this in the
     minutes of the National Cancer Institute.  They
     looked at the pH, they looked at additives.
          We can look very briefly at National
     Cancer Institute, November 7, 1976.
     LOR-000647.
          Cigarette variant should manipulate
     filters, paper, tobacco blend, additives,
     specific smoke components, and flavor
     additives.  Design considerations should
     include nicotine manipulations.  That's not
     Lorillard, that's the Federal Government.
          Let's look at LOR-000642.  National Cancer
     Institute, May 5, 1976.
          Nicotine may play a significant role as a
     determinant of smoking behavior.  Suitable
     quantities of the removed nicotine are added
     back to a modified tobacco sheet.  Nicotine has
     the greatest pharmacologic activity when it is
     in the freebase form.  The base form is also
     the distillable form, which readily transfers
5782 to cigarette smoke.
          A lot of science.  A lot of research by
     the Federal Government, the Department of
     Agriculture, the health departments.  People
     from Washington, D.C., government scientists,
     independent scientists, Dr. Wynder,
     Dr. Hoffmann, all working to try to find a less
     hazardous cigarette by looking at all the
     different components to see whether there's
     something that makes sense.
          Dr. Russell, from the United Kingdom, was
     one of the world's leading nicotine researchers
     and he was the one who subjected maintaining
     the higher nicotine yields while lowering the
     tar as a way of producing an acceptable and
     less hazardous cigarette, because nicotine
     doesn't cause disease.  It's the tar that
     causes the disease.
          And that idea was picked up in 1976 by
     Consumer Reports, and we can see that at
     LOR-000640.
          Consumer Reports, medium nicotine, low
     tar, that's exactly the same idea.  Breaking
     the ratio, the relationship, so the nicotine
     stays in a higher relationship to the tar could
5783 produce significant health benefits.  Such
     research should begin as soon as possible.
          That was the message from the public
     health community.  Let's do this research into
     nicotine.
          And you heard from Dr. Cummings that at
     the time, Lorillard hadn't done that research.
     Lorillard didn't have the technology.  They had
     to do a new program.  So Lorillard set up a new
     program.  Nicotine augmentation program to see
     if they could make a commercially acceptable
     cigarette in response to the recommendations,
     the pressure from the public health community.
          So what Lorillard was doing was exactly
     what the National Cancer Institute and the
     public health community had been suggesting,
     come up with a cigarette that has lower tar,
     but enough nicotine that it could be a less
     hazardous alternative to the full-flavored
     cigarettes with the higher nicotine and higher
     tar to people who were already smoking.
          If we take a look a LOR-000641, Minnemeyer
     memo, we see that memo which starts that
     program.  Recommendations from health-oriented
     agencies.  Well, that's the National Cancer
5784 Institute and that's Dr. Wynder and
     Dr. Hoffmann and Dr. Russell and the
     independent scientists who were saying this
     might be a good idea.  Why don't you do it?
     Lorillard is simply responding to pressure to
     put resources, research into nicotine to see if
     there was a way in which a less hazardous
     cigarette could be designed.
          Responding to public health agencies from
     health-oriented agencies and the Federal
     Government's National Cancer Institute is not
     conscious disregard.  It's not reckless
     disregard.  It's not conscious indifference.
          The government and the public health
     scientists knew that nicotine was important.
     In fact, they said if nicotine in a cigarette
     was too low, no one would smoke the cigarette.
          Let's look at LOR-000681.  And this is
     Dr. Russell.  He said, in 1980, in the Banbury
     report, "It is technically possible to produce
     a cigarette that will smoke and burn but
     deliver little more than warm air in the
     mainstream.  But obviously no one would smoke
     it.  This is the problem with the current
     low-tar, low-nicotine approach.  Inevitably
5785 there comes a point where acceptability is so
     low that a cigarette, though less hazardous, is
     useless.  Only non-inhalers would be likely to
     smoke it, and it makes little difference what
     they smoke."
          Lorillard thought that Dr. Russell and the
     other government and public health scientists
     might be right.  And you've seen that in a --
     PT02056, an exhibit from a Lorillard document
     from 1980, same year as Dr. Russell's statement
     in the Banbury report.  "We hypothesize that
     below some very low nicotine level, diminished
     physiological satisfaction cannot be
     compensated for by psychological satisfaction.
     At this point, smokers will quit or return to
     higher tar and nicotine brands."  It's useless
     to produce a less hazardous cigarette if nobody
     is going to use it, if they are just going to
     go back to smoking the higher tar and nicotine
     brands.
          So Lorillard followed the public health
     community and all the various improvement that
     Lorillard made over the years.  Does any of
     that involve adding any more nicotine than is
     already in the tobacco leaf?  No.
5786 Remember Dr. Cummings admitted that he was
     not contending that Lorillard added more
     nicotine back than was there originally.  He
     said that.
          Now, Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns are not
     against reducing tar in cigarettes.  Actually,
     they think that's a good thing.  They criticize
     filters.  And Dr. Burns says the public health
     community changed its mind about low-tar
     cigarettes, and he says low tar cigarettes
     don't work.  Some smokers, he says, compensate.
     They find a way to smoke more cigarettes or to
     suck more nicotine out of the cigarettes to get
     the same amount of nicotine as before.
          But that issue has nothing to do with
     Mr. Gafney.  There is no evidence that
     Mr. Gafney smoked any more or smoked any
     differently when he smoked a filtered cigarette
     or a low-tar cigarette.
          In fact, Mrs. Gafney testified that she
     was not aware of any change in his rate of
     smoking before and after he switched to Kent in
     1959.  And she said when he retired, Mr. Gafney
     reduced his smoking because he no longer had
     the stress of running his company.  So his
5787 smoking was more related to stress, not to
     compensation.
          And the witnesses you heard from go too
     far when they suggest that there was a
     compensation, a compensation was any kind of
     secret.  There was no secret.  In fact,
     Lorillard talked about compensation more than a
     dozen years before, back in 1963 when Lorillard
     made its admissions to the Surgeon General.
     That was LOR-000561.
          Lorillard expressly said, "Any reduction
     in tar content of the smoke is accomplished
     only if the consumer does not smoke more than
     formerly."  No secret.  Lorillard is telling
     that to the Surgeon General.
          And how could compensation be a secret
     when it's published in the Consumer Reports?
     Let's take a look at LOR-000640.
          Consumer Reports says, "There are also
     other ways to compensate" -- they even use the
     word -- "for a drop in nicotine yield by
     drawing the smoke deeper into the lungs, for
     example, or by holding it there longer before
     exhaling."  It's common sense.  That's in 1976.
          So compensation was no secret.  It was
5788 written up by Consumer Reports.
          A very brief word on youth marketing.  You
     heard a lot of that throughout the course of
     the trial, but I just ask you to remember, in
     1959, when Mr. Gafney started to smoke
     Lorillard's Kents cigarettes, he was in his
     20s.  He was an adult.
          And while we are on the subject, also, you
     did hear that Lorillard didn't place its
     products in motion pictures.  You remember you
     heard from Dr. Cummings that Lorillard had a
     policy of telling movie producers that
     Lorillard would not do that.  That Lorillard
     would tell movie producers, we don't want our
     product in your movies, in any movies.  That's
     not reckless disregard.  That's not conscious
     indifference.
          What company would refuse a movie producer
     who says, we want to put your product in our
     movie?  Well, Lorillard did.  And that wasn't
     the law.  That wasn't required.  There was no
     law at the time in the 1970s and 1980s and
     afterwards, there was no law that said
     Lorillard had to do that.  That was something
     that Lorillard did because Lorillard wanted to
5789 do it.  That's not conscious disregard.  That's
     not reckless indifference.
          Punitive damages.  Punitive damages simply
     aren't needed to prevent the folks from
     Lorillard from concealing the dangers of
     smoking.  You heard they are on the website.
     Lorillard doesn't dispute the dangers of
     smoking.
          And let's not forget, there is no conduct
     by Lorillard that was a legal cause of
     Mr. Gafney's lung cancer and death, because
     Mr. Gafney knew his smoking was dangerous, he
     knew it was tough to quit, and he was able to
     quit any time before he ultimately did in
     January of 1995.
          If there is one thing that is clear and
     convincing in this case, it is that Mr. Gafney
     was able to stop smoking when he was motivated
     to stop smoking.  So the answer to Question 7
     is no.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Maguire, you have five
     minutes remaining.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          So the bottom line, Question 1, the class
     membership question, the gateway question, you
5790 don't answer any question until you answer that
     question first, the answer to that question and
     every other question is no.
          This case comes down to, quite simply, to
     Mr. Gafney's control.  Mr. Gafney and his
     control of his smoking decisions during his
     life.
          His choice to smoke a legal product, his
     choice as an adult in a free country to start
     smoking after being smoke-free for one entire
     year in the 1970s and his choice every day
     after that to continue smoking and not to try
     to quit.  And his responsibility for his
     decisions that were within his control.
          Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your
     attention and for your patience.  After the
     defendants finish closing arguments, the
     plaintiff will do a rebuttal.  Under the rules,
     I don't get to talk to you again.  After
     Mr. Bassett sits down and he's finished, he
     won't get a chance to talk to you again.  We
     will not have an opportunity to come up to talk
     to you about anything that we hear from
     plaintiff on rebuttal.  This is my last word to
     you.  So I ask you if you hear anything in
5791 rebuttal that is new to you, which I've not had
     a chance to talk about, you might just think to
     yourself, what would the defendant say if they
     had a chance to respond to that?  What is the
     other side of the story?
          And remember when you retire to the jury
     room, you can ask for any evidence that you
     were shown or told about.  And thank you so
     much again for all of your attention in this
     case.  Thank you.


                  CLOSING ARGUMENT
          MR. BASSETT:  May it please the Court?
          THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
          MR. BASSETT:  Counsel, Mrs. Gafney.
          Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.  I'm
     going to start kind of where I left off when I
     got to speak on the opening statement and give
     that on behalf of Reynolds, and that is that
     you're going to hear less of me than you heard
     from counsel yesterday, both for plaintiff and
     for Lorillard.  My issues I want to address are
     going to be the issues concerning Reynolds, and
     in this case, involving Frank Gafney.
          I agree with what Mr. Maguire said and
     talked about the evidence yesterday, but for my
     purposes, rather than repeat what Mr. Maguire
     said, I want to focus your attention on some of
     the Reynolds specific issues and the
     plaintiff's claims and how they relate to
     R.J. Reynolds.  And what I want to do is walk
5825 you through kind of the facts, the evidence,
     and then the questions that you're going to be
     asked to answer as they relate to
     R.J. Reynolds.  All right?
          So, of course, first, let me say this.
     The evidence here shows that plaintiff has
     failed to meet her burden of proof as to her
     claims against R.J. Reynolds.  And remember, we
     talked about that at the beginning of the
     trial, that on every claim plaintiff has
     brought, she bears the burden of proof.  She
     has to prove with evidence that she's entitled
     to recover under her claims.
          And when it comes to the claims against
     R.J. Reynolds, there are really only four facts
     from the evidence you need to know to answer
     the questions.  First, Reynolds didn't cause
     Mr. Gafney to become a smoker.  Second, smoking
     Reynolds' cigarettes up to 1959 did not cause
     Mr. Gafney's lung cancer and death.  Third,
     Mr. Gafney knew the risks of smoking for
     25 years before 1982.  And I put "1982" out
     there because remember in openings, I talked to
     you about the importance of that date, May 5,
     1982 for this specific concealment claim, but
5826 I'll talk to you about that.  But the evidence
     clearly shows that Mr. Gafney knew those risks
     a full 25 years before 1982.
          And then in this case, the case of Frank
     Gafney, plaintiff hasn't proven that Reynolds
     should be punished for anything it did or
     didn't do as it relates to Frank Gafney.  And
     it's important to think about and remember when
     I also talked to you in opening, that this is
     the case of Frank Gafney, because I predicted
     that when the evidence started coming out, you
     were going to see a lot of other information
     that had no connection to Frank Gafney,
     documents that would have been created years
     after Frank Gafney smoked Reynolds cigarettes
     in this case.  And remember I asked you to keep
     in mind, I'm not going to be here to defend all
     those documents, but look for what the evidence
     is that connects that information and those
     documents back to Frank Gafney, and sure
     enough, plaintiff's proof has nothing to do
     with Mr. Gafney smoking here.
          You saw letters from the sales department
     of R.J. Reynolds back in the 1920s, years
     before Mr. Gafney was even born.  You were
5827 presented with advertisements for Reynolds
     cigarettes during times that Mr. Gafney, before
     he was born and well after he was smoking
     Reynolds cigarettes.  And, of course, you saw
     internal company documents from Reynolds, the
     majority of them from the '60s, '70s, 1980s,
     years after Mr. Gafney last smoked a Reynolds
     cigarette.
          Now, part of the reason you saw that,
     those internal documents, because one of the
     witnesses plaintiff chose to call was
     Dr. Cummings, but remember what Dr. Cummings
     admitted on cross, he was there as a generic
     witness, he wasn't there to talk to you about
     Frank Gafney.  He wasn't there to discuss with
     you Frank Gafney's smoking of Reynolds
     cigarettes.  He was there to talk generally
     about issues of tobacco and smoking, and that's
     why you saw all these documents that had no
     connection to Frank Gafney that had been
     created, in fact, years after Frank Gafney last
     smoked a Reynolds cigarette.
          So with that in mind, let's turn to each
     of those four points I just raised with you
     that will answer the questions on the verdict
5828 form for you.
          First is Reynolds did not cause Mr. Gafney
     to become a smoker.  No.  What the evidence
     was, Mr. Gafney started smoking loosies,
     individual cigarettes out of the baskets at
     Hecks at the corner store.  He went there with
     his friends because his friends were smoking as
     well, trying those cigarettes, those individual
     loosies.  There's no evidence here of when
     Mr. Gafney became a regular smoker of Lucky
     Strikes and Camel cigarettes.
          The evidence is that Mrs. Gafney testified
     when she started dating Mr. Gafney in 1954,
     those were the brands he smoked.  But there's
     no evidence of how much earlier, if at all, he
     started smoking those brands.  You will
     remember the testimony of even his friends,
     Judge Corrigan, Mr. McGinnis, Mr. Porter, they
     all talked about Mr. Gafney smoking in high
     school.  And they all acknowledge that at some
     point he was smoking Lucky Strikes and Camel,
     but they talked about it as being high school,
     college, law school, even practicing as a
     lawyer.  So there's no evidence of exactly when
     Mr. Gafney became a regular smoker of Lucky
5829 Strikes and Camel cigarettes.
          In fact, you will remember Judge Corrigan
     even talked about not only were those loosies
     bought individually at Hecks, but they really
     didn't know what the brand was, and Mrs. Gafney
     told us that Mr. Gafney didn't know what brand
     it was, it was whatever was in the basket at
     the time.
          But also, Judge Corrigan talked about OPs.
     Remember he had to define what OP was, "other
     person's," other person's cigarettes.  In other
     words, during those years, Mr. Gafney was also
     bumming cigarettes from others.
          Nothing Reynolds said or did prevented
     Mr. Gafney from quitting smoking.  And we heard
     a lot of that evidence yesterday that
     Mr. Gafney smoked because he enjoyed smoking.
     He didn't want to quit, and even when I talked
     with Mrs. Gafney about it here in the
     courtroom.  When he moved away from Reynolds
     cigarettes in 1959, remember I asked her,
     "Well, at that time, he really didn't want to
     quit, did he, Mrs. Gafney?
          And she acknowledged, "probably not,"
     because she also acknowledged he enjoyed
5830 smoking, and I'll talk to you a little bit
     further about that as well.
          Nothing that Reynolds -- excuse me.  And
     then the last is between 1954 and 1959,
     Mr. Gafney switched between the Lucky Strikes
     and Camel cigarettes based on price, based on
     convenience, certainly not based on any sort of
     advertising or anything else that Reynolds did.
     And Mrs. Gafney told us that.  She told us that
     in her conversations with Mr. Gafney, he went
     back and forth between those two brands for no
     other reason than what was convenient, what was
     cheapest at the time.  He was working at the
     grocery store earning money and used some of
     that money he earned to buy cigarettes that
     were sold at that grocery store.  Nothing more.
          In fact, there's not been any evidence
     that there's advertising for cigarettes at
     Hecks or at the grocery store or anywhere else
     where Mr. Gafney would have been working where
     he would have seen and been affected by or
     somehow lured into smoking those brands by
     advertising.
          So that comes to the very -- the second
     question on the verdict form I want to talk to
5831 you about.  And the bottom line is where
     plaintiff bears the burden of proof, plaintiff
     has not proven that Lucky Strikes and Camel
     cigarettes caused Mr. Gafney's lung cancer and
     death.  And I'm skipping the first question,
     because in the first question, you will recall
     from yesterday, is the question about class
     membership, whether Mr. Gafney is, in fact, a
     member of the Engle class.  And I agree with
     what Mr. Maguire told you yesterday about that.
     The evidence doesn't support that plaintiff has
     carried her burden of proof that Mr. Gafney is
     a member of the Engle class.
          But I don't want to repeat and go back
     over what Mr. Maguire talked about yesterday.
     So I'm going to skip forward to the next
     question, question No. 2 on the verdict form.
     I agree that you -- based on the evidence, you
     should mark "no" to the question of class
     membership.  But if you're going to go further,
     and we have to talk about these other issues, I
     want to make sure you understand what the
     evidence is and how those questions relate to
     the Reynolds cigarettes that Mr. Gafney smoked.
          So on this question, this question asks,
5832 "whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by
     each defendant was a legal cause of
     Mr. Gafney's lung cancer and death."  And then,
     of course, "legal cause" is defined and what
     you heard yesterday is that legal cause is
     something that acts directly in a natural and
     continuous sequence to produce or contribute
     substantially to producing such lung cancer and
     death so that you could say, but for smoking a
     defendants' specific cigarette, the lung cancer
     and death would not have occurred.
          In other words, the question is, has
     plaintiff proven that Mr. Gafney's smoking of
     Lucky Strikes and Camel cigarettes, that but
     for his smoking of those cigarettes, he would
     never have gotten lung cancer in 1995 when he
     did.  That's what plaintiff's burden is.  And
     the evidence is they have not -- the evidence
     shows they have not carried that burden.
          Now, yesterday I was a little surprised
     because what I heard --
          MR. SALES:  Excuse me, your Honor.  I
     object to counsel's statement of personal
     opinion.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
5833 BASSETT:  I heard argument that part
     of the plaintiff's burden of proof and part of
     their evidence of carrying their burden of
     proof is a stipulation, a stipulation
     concerning other cigarette brands.
          Mr. Philipson, can you put the ELMO up for
     me, please.
          And this stipulation No. 14, right here on
     the side, "To the extent that Mr. Gafney may
     have smoked cigarette brands other than Camel,
     Lucky Strikes, Kent, or True, such smoking was
     minimal and did not directly and in a natural
     and continuous sequence produce or contribute
     substantially to producing any injury to
     Mr. Gafney, if any, that was caused by smoking
     cigarettes."
          Thank you, Mr. Philipson.
          Well, that stipulation doesn't support the
     proof on this claim because, otherwise, you
     wouldn't be asked to answer that question.
          MR. SALES:  Excuse me, your Honor.
          MR. BASSETT:  Plaintiff still has to
     prove --
          MR. SALES:  I object to counsel's --
     counsel's statement negates the Court's
5834 instruction with respect to the effects of the
     stipulation of the parties.
          THE COURT:  Overruled, Mr. Sales.
          Go ahead, Mr. Bassett.
          MR. BASSETT:  Thank you, your Honor.
          The stipulation doesn't reach the burden
     of proof that plaintiff must carry on this.
     They have to prove the evidence on this.  In
     fact, you heard from testimony Mr. Gafney was
     smoking loosies, he was smoking OPs, other
     person's cigarettes, cigarettes that we don't
     know what the brands were.  That's what that
     stipulation goes to.  It didn't go to proving
     up that somehow plaintiff's smoking -- or
     Mr. Gafney's smoking of Lucky Strikes and Camel
     cigarettes met that "but for" requirement for
     answering that question too.
          In fact, let's talk about what the
     evidence was about those Lucky Strikes and
     Camel cigarettes that Mr. Gafney smoked,
     because you got a lot of evidence over the
     course of the last four or five weeks about
     highly engineered cigarettes, about cigarettes
     that had their nicotine manipulated, their pH
     manipulated, but that wasn't Camel and Lucky
5835 Strikes cigarettes that Mr. Gafney smoked, not
     the cigarettes he smoked in the 1950s.
          The cigarettes he smoked in the 1950s were
     unfiltered cigarettes, and when I got a chance
     to talk to Dr. Cummings about it, remember what
     he said?  He talked about those roll-your-own
     cigarettes and, in fact, there's no evidence
     that the Lucky Strikes and Camel cigarettes
     that Mr. Gafney smoked were any more dangerous
     than roll-your-own cigarettes.  No evidence
     that the Camel, Lucky Strikes cigarettes that
     Mr. Gafney smoked were any more addictive than
     roll-your-own cigarettes, cigarettes that were
     loose tobacco, rolled up in a paper and smoked.
          And, of course, there's no evidence that
     those Lucky Strikes or Camel cigarettes contain
     any type of manipulated nicotine or manipulated
     pH.
          In fact, what was Dr. Cummings' testimony
     on this?
          "Question:  Okay.  You mentioned ammonia
     as an additive during your direct, correct?
          "Yes.
          "And you recall discussing a document from
     Dr. Teague entitled 'Research Planning
5836 Memorandum on Effects of Ammonia and its
     Assaults on Smoke Quality,' a document from
     June of 1973, right?
          "Answer:  That's right.
          "And it's your testimony that Reynolds
     began adding ammonia to its products shortly
     after the work outlined in Dr. Teague's memo
     was done, correct?
          "Answer:  Correct."
          So all this evidence about some highly
     engineered cigarette with all these additives
     or ingredients that were intended to manipulate
     the nicotine, manipulate pH, and enhance
     somehow addictiveness, that doesn't apply at
     all.  The cigarettes that Mr. Gafney was
     smoking in the 1950s were Lucky Strikes and
     Camels.  And Dr. Cummings told you, the
     roll-your-own cigarettes, just as dangerous,
     just as addictive as those Lucky Strikes and
     Camels from the 1950s.
          What else did you see?  Evidence also
     showed, of course, Mr. Gafney made a complete
     switch away from those Lucky Strikes and Camels
     in 1959 and never again did he smoke a Reynolds
     cigarette.  And, of course, Dr. Burns, in
5837 offering his opinion, the plaintiff, that
     Mr. Gafney was addicted also conceded that it
     would have been easier for Mr. Gafney to have
     quit smoking in 1959 than at some later time.
          And, in fact, when pressed, he made the
     comment that he thinks Mr. Gafney was addicted
     sometime between age 13, 15, and 25 and 30.  It
     could have been during the time he was smoking
     Camel, Lucky Strikes, it could have been after
     he had switched away from those two brands of
     cigarettes, but in any event, it would have
     been certainly easier for him to quit at the
     time he switched away from those two brands of
     cigarettes.
          But more importantly, Dr. Burns testified
     that when it came to the smoking of Lucky
     Strikes and Camel cigarettes, that had he
     stopped smoking in 1959, that by 1995, his risk
     of cancer would have been essentially that of
     someone who had never smoked, never smoked.
          This is Dr. Burns' testimony about the
     fact that after 1959, he never smoked another
     Reynolds cigarette again.  And then as part of
     my questioning of Dr. Burns, I asked him this
     question:
5838 "Question:  And, likewise, if Mr. Gafney
     had quit smoking at the time he stopped smoking
     Camel and Lucky Strike cigarettes and stayed
     quit, his lung cancer risk would have
     essentially been that of someone who had never
     smoked by 1995, correct, sir?
          "Answer:  If he had quit in 1959, is that
     what you're asking?
          "Question:  Yes, sir.
          "Answer:  Yes, that would be -- it would
     be very close to that of someone who had never
     smoked if he had quit in 1959."
          And so when we're looking at this
     question, Question No. 2 on the verdict form,
     "Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by one or
     both defendants a legal cause of Frank Gafney's
     lung cancer and death?"  And you're to answer
     the question of but for the smoking of Lucky
     Strike and Camel cigarettes, would Mr. Gafney
     have gotten lung cancer when he did in 1995.
          Plaintiff hasn't met their burden of
     proof, because we know that taking that smoking
     alone, his risk of cancer in 1995 would have
     been essentially that of someone who had never
     smoked.  That's not a substantial contributing
5839 factor.  That's certainly not a but-for cause
     of Mr. Gafney's lung cancer and death in the
     case.
          So when you come to this Question 2 on the
     verdict form and you're looking at that
     evidence and you're remembering the testimony
     that you heard from Dr. Burns, the evidence is
     no -- or the answer to the question is "no,"
     the plaintiff hasn't met her burden of proof on
     that question.  And you should answer it "no"
     and move on.
          Now, the next question you're asked,
     Question No. 3, deals with the allocation of
     fault in the case, and you heard argument about
     that yesterday and, again, I'm going to focus
     in on the Reynolds-specific discussion of the
     evidence for that.  Where is the best --
     Question 2 only deals with the amount that
     Mr. Gafney smoked of Reynolds cigarettes and
     whether that was a legal cause of his lung
     cancer and death.
          This question also deals with what
     Mr. Gafney knew about the dangers and
     addictiveness of smoking and what he did with
     that knowledge, okay.
5840 And so you heard yesterday that somehow
     Reynolds should be 40 percent responsible,
     Lorillard 40 percent, Mr. Gafney himself 20.  I
     don't want to start by going back into what the
     Court has instructed you on that particular
     question, but I am going to remind you of this
     one point, that based on the Court's
     instruction, the assignment of fault relates
     only to the conduct that was a legal cause of
     Mr. Gafney's lung cancer and death.
          So what that means is R.J. Reynolds cannot
     be assigned fault for conduct that was not a
     legal cause of Mr. Gafney's lung cancer and
     death.
          So when you hear that 40 percent of the
     fault should go to Reynolds, what they're
     saying is they think they have proven that
     40 percent of Reynolds' conduct was a legal
     cause --
          MR. SALES:  Excuse me, your Honor.  That
     misstates the Engle findings and your Honor's
     instructions to the jury.  Douglas, Engle.
          THE COURT:  Again, ladies and gentlemen,
     you'll rely on the instructions that have been
     given to you by the Court.
5841 Go ahead, Mr. Bassett.
          MR. BASSETT:  Thank you, your Honor.
          We start with this one proposition
     Mr. Maguire brought to your attention
     yesterday.  Plaintiff has admitted fault
     already on behalf of Mr. Gafney.  I'm not going
     to go over this other than just to remind you
     of two points.
          That admission of fault has to mean two
     things:  One, that Mr. Gafney knew about the
     risks of smoking; and, two, that Mr. Gafney had
     the ability to quit and could have quit
     smoking, okay.
          And when it comes to this verdict form
     question, you're going to have to assign some
     fault to Mr. Gafney in the case as a result of
     that very admission.
          But what we know from the facts of the
     case and from the evidence presented is
     Mr. Gafney did not want to quit smoking, and
     that's what we heard directly from Mrs. Gafney
     about her husband.
          "Question:  Mr. Gafney told you he didn't
     want to quit smoking because he enjoyed smoking
     too much, correct?
5842 "Answer:  That's right."
          Well, that question -- when it's put in
     quotes, what that means is you will remember at
     times Mrs. Gafney had to be reminded of prior
     sworn testimony she had given in the
     deposition.  And so here at the trial when we
     see it in quotation marks, that just means
     she's having to be reminded of that prior
     testimony she had given, so . . .
          "Question:  You said several times he told
     you that he did not want to quit.  How many
     times did he tell you that he did not want to
     quit?
          "Answer:  Innumerable."
          Innumerable.  So we know Mr. Gafney didn't
     want to quit smoking, he enjoyed it.
          What do we know about what he knew about
     the dangers of smoking at the time he was
     smoking those Reynolds cigarettes, Lucky Strike
     and Camel up to 1959?
          Well, we know in 1954, Mr. Gafney's father
     died suddenly, unexpectedly, because he was
     overweight and he was a smokeaholic.  I'm going
     to touch on that a little bit further.
          We also know that in 1954, when
5843 Mrs. Gafney and Mr. Gafney began dating, that
     Mr. Gafney relayed that information to her and
     expressed concern about his own health based on
     knowing what had just happened with his own
     father.
          And, of course, we know in 1958,
     Mrs. Gafney is going to nursing school and
     she's learning about the dangers of smoking,
     she's communicating that with Mr. Gafney.
          We know in 1959 when she's practicing
     nursing and she's in the operating room, she's
     bringing home pictures of diseased lungs from
     smokers to show to Mr. Gafney, to talk to him
     about the dangers of smoking.
          This is the testimony of Mrs. Gafney at
     the trial discussing the fact that her husband
     had expressed to her his concern over his own
     smoking, his own health because his father died
     and that that discussion took place when they
     first met.
          And you will remember I came back in my
     questioning of Mrs. Gafney, and I asked her, I
     wanted to be very clear, "You never met
     Mr. Gafney's father, right?"
          And I said, "And so when you said that
5844 Mr. Gafney's father died because he was
     overweight, he was a smokeaholic and he died of
     a heart attack, that would be something that
     Mr. Gafney would have told you, too?"
          And the answer, of course, was "yes."
          The important thing is that those are the
     words coming from Mr. Gafney's own mouth to
     Mrs. Gafney that, one, he understood that his
     father died from smoking and, secondly, he
     described his father's smoking as being a
     smokeaholic.  Folks, we don't use terms like
     "aholic", "alcoholic," "chocoholic,"
     "shopaholic," "smokeaholic" unless we're
     talking about addiction.
          So when Mr. Gafney is relaying to
     Mrs. Gafney that his own father was a
     smokeaholic, he was saying that he understood
     that his father was addicted to smoking, and
     not only that, but the addiction to smoking led
     to his death unexpectedly, suddenly, a day
     before his 18th birthday.
          I can't -- there's not a more personalized
     warning that he could have received that early
     in 1954 that would have told him "smoking is
     dangerous" and "smoking is addictive," and he
5845 relayed that fact to Mrs. Gafney the first time
     they met.
          Plaintiff hasn't proven for allocation of
     fault that Reynolds was a legal cause of
     Mr. Gafney's lung cancer and death.
          Again, the evidence doesn't support that
     Reynolds caused Mr. Gafney to start smoking.
     There's no evidence that Mr. Gafney smoked a
     Reynolds cigarette after 1959.
          There's no evidence that anything Reynolds
     said or did prevented Mr. Gafney from quitting.
     We know that from the evidence.  His ability to
     stop smoking, start smoking, nothing Reynolds
     did prevented that.  And nothing Reynolds could
     have done would have prevented Mr. Gafney's
     lung cancer and death on the facts of this case
     involving Frank Gafney.
          So when you come -- if you get to this
     question on the verdict form, if you get to
     Question 3, in assessing what the evidence is
     for fault to R.J. Reynolds, I would tell you
     plaintiff has not carried its burden of proof
     and the answer should be zero, 0 percent as to
     R.J. Reynolds.  That's Question 3.
          Let's go to the Question 4.  And that's
5846 this question about concealment, fraudulent
     concealment.  And I highlighted what I think
     are the things that are important for you to
     consider as you're looking at the evidence and
     you're back there deliberating these issues.
          First off, "You may not consider evidence
     of alleged statements, concealment or other
     conduct that occurred before May 5, 1982."
          We mentioned that to you in opening.  So
     as you see all this evidence coming in, for
     this question, you can't consider any of that
     unless it's happened after May 5, 1982.
          And also at the very bottom, you will see
     what the Court has instructed.  "Frank Gafney
     cannot be found to have reasonably relied upon
     a statement if he knew it was false or its
     falsity was obvious to him or the facts
     allegedly concealed were already known to him."
     That means if he already knew smoking was
     dangerous and addictive, there's nothing to be
     concealed from him that he can reasonably rely
     on.
          MR. SALES:  I object, your Honor.  It
     misstates the jury instructions and verdict
     form.
5847 COURT:  Again, ladies and gentlemen,
     you will rely on the instructions and the form
     as given to you by the Court.  Thank you.
          MR. BASSETT:  Plaintiff hasn't carried
     their burden of proof on that.  Mr. Gafney,
     simply put, did not die because information
     about the dangers of smoking were unknown to
     him after May 5, 1982.
          Mr. Maguire went over this about what had
     been known for many, many years before
     Mr. Gafney began smoking and throughout the
     time he smoked.  I'm not going to go over that,
     other than to point out that when it came time
     for our opportunity to question their own
     experts, their own experts about those issues,
     Dr. Burns, Dr. Cummings, they acknowledged that
     for years, the type of information about the
     dangers of smoking, that people smoked for
     nicotine, that was known.
          You remember I had to -- I talked to
     Dr. Burns about a study done by the New York
     Department of Health in the 1880s on
     manufactured packaged branded cigarettes.  And
     what did that study conclude?  That study
     concluded that cigarettes as a product are
5848 inhaled and that inhalation of the product did
     certain things, including having a different
     effect on the nicotine of the tobacco because
     it went straight into the lungs.  That wasn't a
     secret.  That was being discussed back in the
     1880s.
          Remember this?  Back in 1914 -- I talked
     with Dr. Burns about an early study by the
     Surgeon General in 1914 looking at the smoking
     of cigarettes and its effects, including its
     addiction.  1914.
          Let's talk more specifically, because this
     is the case of Frank Gafney, let's talk about
     what we know from the evidence Frank Gafney
     knew.  And certainly he knew that smoking was
     dangerous 25 years before this critical date,
     May 5, 1982.  He already knew smoking was bad
     for him when his father died of smoking in
     1954, and he conveyed that information to
     Mrs. Gafney.
          Beginning in 1958, Mrs. Gafney and
     Mr. Gafney had numerous discussions about what
     she was learning in nursing school.  1959, she
     starts pleading with him to quit smoking.
          1968, Mr. Newkirk, Frank Gafney's
5849 stepfather, comes down with emphysema and he --
     that's caused by smoking, and he, again,
     provides a personalized warning to Mr. Gafney
     about the dangers of smoking at that time.
          1970s, Mr. Gafney warns his own children
     about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking.
     Also in the 1970s, his children start warning
     him back and asking him to quit smoking and,
     again, throughout his life, as Mr. Maguire
     explained yesterday, you see time and time
     again that discussion about the dangers of
     smoking occurring with Mr. Gafney and his
     friends, his doctors and, as you heard, some of
     his doctors who were also his friends.
          And, in fact, yesterday morning, when you
     heard additional testimony from Mrs. Gafney,
     you heard about Dr. Calinan going back to that
     seminal event, that singular event in 1954 when
     his father died of smoking and reminding him
     years later that the fact that his dad died of
     smoking, not at more -- I can't imagine a more
     personalized warning to tell someone that
     smoking is dangerous and addictive than that.
          Dr. Burns even testified on cross that he
     understood from the evidence that Mr. Gafney
5850 knew by the 1960s that smoking was dangerous.
          "Question:  I understand that's your
     position, Doctor, but you're not denying that
     in 1968, the testimony of Ms. Gafney is that
     her husband was aware of the health risks of
     smoking?
          "Answer:  As of that point in time, he
     accepted that it caused emphysema, yes."
          That's related to his stepfather coming
     down with that disease.
          Then the next question:
          "Question:  Mrs. Gafney testified that as
     of this date, 1968, at that point, Mr. Gafney
     understood that the Surgeon General's warnings
     were not just garbage, that they were truthful.
     That's what Mrs. Gafney testified to?
          "Answer:  That's what he understood and
     accepted as of that moment in time, yes."
          1968.  What was the warning on every
     cigarette pack beginning in 1966?  "Caution:
     Smoking is hazardous to your health."  You saw
     Dr. Maguire discuss that with you yesterday.
          Dr. Burns admitted that by 1968,
     Mr. Gafney understood the health risks of
     smoking.  The evidence shows he understood that
5851 much sooner.
          Now, when it comes to this date in 1982,
     what I saw from the evidence, what the evidence
     suggested is there was this single ad by
     R.J. Reynolds, Can We Have an Open Debate?
          And plaintiff's argument came to be that
     this single ad by R.J. Reynolds somehow has
     Mr. Gafney forgetting all that he had learned
     in the past 25 years or more about the dangers
     of smoking, that somehow this single ad caused
     him to forget more than 25 years of warnings
     from media, more than 25 years of warnings from
     the public health authority, over 25 years of
     warnings from family and friends, over 25 years
     of warnings from the Surgeon General and the
     over 20 years of warnings from every pack of
     cigarettes that he would have smoked beginning
     in 1966.
          But think about the evidence they
     presented to you about that ad, that one ad,
     the open debate.  No evidence that he saw this
     specific ad.  No evidence he made any smoking
     decisions based on the ad.  He smoked before
     that ad came out, he smoked after that ad came
     out.  He certainly didn't switch back to
5852 another Reynolds product.  He stayed -- he
     never smoked another Reynolds cigarette after
     1959.  And there's no evidence that had this
     specific ad not been published that
     Mr. Gafney's decision would have been any
     different.
          Plaintiff's theory simply seems to be
     that, hey, somehow Mr. Gafney reasonably relied
     on an advertisement, ran one time, to continue
     smoking with no proof, no proof that he ever
     saw or caused him to do anything.  That doesn't
     carry the burden of proof in this case, the
     case of Frank Gafney.
          In fact, the other testimony is to the
     opposite.  Remember when I asked Mrs. Gafney
     what conversations she and her husband had?  I
     said.
          "Question:  And, likewise, you'd never
     heard of the Tobacco Institute, correct?
          "Answer:  Correct.
          "Question:  That's not something that
     Mr. Gafney brought to your attention, right?
          "Answer:  No.
          "Question:  You had never heard of the
     Council for Tobacco Research, had you?
5853 "Answer:  No.
          "Question:  He didn't bring home articles
     discussing statements from The Council for
     Tobacco Research?
          "Answer:  No."
          This is the same questioning, of course,
     in the quotes which she had to be reminded of
     at the time about the testimony she had
     previously given about what her husband knew
     about the Surgeon General's warnings at the
     time Mr. Newkirk got his emphysema from
     smoking.
          And then also during her testimony, here's
     what she said about the confrontation with her
     daughter Mary Kay, over Mary Kay's own smoking.
          "Question:  And you and Mr. Gafney
     confronted Mary Kay together about her smoking?
          "Answer:  Yes.
          "Question:  And Mr. Gafney told Mary Kay
     again -- 'again' -- about the health
     consequences of smoking?
          "Answer:  Yes, he begged her not to smoke.
          "Question:  And Mr. Gafney told Mary Kay,
     when she began smoking -- again, we're talking
     1979 or 1978.  He told her that smoking -- she
5854 was foolish to start smoking because it was
     almost impossible to quit?
          "Answer:  That's right.
          "Question:  And he told her that?
          "Answer:  That's right.  He knew."
          He knew.  He knew by '78, '79, but he
     actually knew much earlier than that.  He knew
     going all the way back to when his father died
     being addicted to smoking and smoking-related
     disease.  Personalized warnings throughout his
     life.
          When it comes to a question of whether
     plaintiff has proven that some information
     concealed by R.J. Reynolds after May 5, 1982
     could have caused any -- could have been a
     legal cause of Mr. Gafney's lung cancer and
     death, there's no connection.  They haven't
     presented any evidence to meet their burden of
     proof on this.  And, of course, as I told you
     on that instruction, he can't conceal something
     that's already been known anyway.
          So when it comes to this question on the
     verdict form, Question 4 about concealment, I
     would tell you based upon what the evidence has
     been, plaintiff hadn't met their burden of
5855 proof and answer that question "no."  And based
     on all the evidence, the next question,
     Question 5, on that agreement to conceal,
     answer that "no" also.
          I want to turn now to this claim for
     punitive damages, winding it down to the last
     question.  I don't think you ever even get this
     far, but I have to --
          MR. SALES:  Your Honor, I object to
     counsel's statement of personal opinion again.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. BASSETT:  The evidence won't let you
     get this far, but I need to address it with you
     for my client.  As Mr. Maguire said yesterday,
     punitive damages are different than the other
     damages plaintiff are seeking in this case.
     They're damages in addition to damages to
     compensate Mrs. Gafney for the loss of her
     husband.  And as a result of that, the law
     requires that plaintiffs prove more than what
     they are otherwise obligated to prove for these
     other claims.
          They have to prove by clear and convincing
     evidence -- and you heard that being read out,
     that "clear and convincing evidence has to be
5856 precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of
     such weight that it produces a firm belief or
     conviction without hesitation about the matter
     in issue."
          It means that if you go back there and
     you're looking at the evidence and you
     deliberate and you hesitate, there's not clear
     and convincing evidence there.  It's a higher
     burden of proof, precise, explicit, without
     hesitation.
          The other thing to keep in mind is if you
     get to this question, punitive damages here can
     only be awarded for the concealment or
     agreement to conceal that was a legal cause of
     Mr. Gafney's lung cancer and death.  This issue
     doesn't go to some sort of the referendum on
     smoking generally, whether smoking should be
     legal or illegal, it only is limited to whether
     or not there was a concealment or agreement to
     conceal to Mr. Gafney that was a legal cause of
     his lung cancer and death.
          So what did you hear from the testimony on
     this issue?  What was the evidence?  Well, you
     heard testimony specifically from Dr. Cummings.
     Dr. Cummings talked about the Council for
5857 Tobacco Research, said a lot of things on
     direct.  But on cross he said some other things
     about the work that was being done by the CTR,
     during the time that Reynolds and other tobacco
     companies were providing funding to it so that
     it could provide funding to others.
          Hundreds of millions of dollars spent on
     research.  Thousands of CTR studies published,
     CTR funded research that, in fact, published in
     peer-review journals that the Surgeon General
     cited over 600 times in Surgeon General
     reports.  Funding that went to researchers who
     went on to win Nobel prizes and, of course,
     funding of research that included research
     specifically finding that smoking is addictive.
          You saw this published in 1963, the
     American Journal of Psychiatry, funding from
     CTR, which the study concluded that for heavy
     smokers, smoking is addictive.
          What else did Dr. Cummings tell you about
     when I was questioning him?  He told you about
     how CTR had spent money funding the collection
     and summary of all the known research on
     tobacco.  What did that research include?  It
     included chapters on smoking-related disease.
5858 It included lung cancer, heart disease, COPD,
     nicotine, addiction.
          And, in fact, that was -- that research,
     that -- I should say summary of thousands and
     thousands of articles was relied upon by the
     Surgeon General's advisory committee in
     preparing that very first 1964 Surgeon
     General's report that concluded that lung --
     smoking was a cause of lung cancer in men.
          And even after that, even after that
     conclusion in '64, CTR continued funding this
     Larson and Haag, continued making these
     summaries of the thousands and thousands of
     articles.  Four different volumes.  The
     original Green Monster and three other volumes,
     funded all those summaries.
          All those summaries are available to
     anyone who wanted to look them up.  And
     remember, this is happening in the '60s and
     '70s.  It's before the Internet.  It's before
     there's a ability to use Google to go search
     out this type of research.
          So CTR was funding these scientists from
     Medical College of Virginia to compile
     summaries of all that research, one easy place
5859 to be located by anybody that wanted to look it
     up.
          When it came to the 1964 Surgeon General's
     report, the advisory committee itself
     acknowledged its appreciation for the
     cooperation and assistance provided by tobacco
     companies and R.J. Reynolds, including
     R.J. Reynolds.
          Mr. Maguire also talked to you about this
     Tobacco Working Group that spent ten years
     looking for ways to reduce the hazards of
     smoking.  R.J. Reynolds participated in that
     through two of their top scientists and you
     remember in my questioning to Dr. Cummings, I
     showed him a letter from the president of
     R.J. Reynolds going to Dr. Murray Senkus, the
     head scientist at the time of the company,
     saying, look, cooperate with the company.  If
     there's a safer cigarette to be found, let's
     find it.
          And that led to this ten-year cooperation
     with the government, the public health
     authorities, known as the Tobacco Working
     Group.
          Remember who else participated in that,
5860 Dr. Rodgman.  You've seen some of his documents
     during the case, but what did Dr. Cummings tell
     us about Dr. Rodgman?  Well, Dr. Rodgman spent
     his career looking for ways to reduce and
     eliminate the carcinogens in tobacco smoke, the
     carcinogens that Dr. Cummings acknowledges was
     no secret in the 1950s.  Dr. Rodgman spent a
     career trying to do that and it was very, very
     difficult work and what he found, Dr. Cummings
     agreed, the problem with eliminating the
     carcinogens from tobacco smoking is when you
     burn tobacco or any organic material, any leaf,
     at that high temperature, the smoke it creates
     contains carcinogens.
          And, in fact, through Dr. Rodgman's work,
     what he also learned if you remove one
     carcinogen, another one pops up.  So it's very
     difficult work, but that didn't mean that
     Dr. Rodgman or R.J. Reynolds stopped trying to
     reduce and eliminate the carcinogens in tobacco
     smoke.  In fact, we know after the Tobacco
     Working Group disbanded in 1978, Reynolds
     continued that work, spending over a billion
     dollars, over a billion dollars looking for
     alternatives to burning tobacco and they came
5861 up first with the Premier.  You heard
     Dr. Cummings talk about Premier, which is a
     heat tobacco, not burning tobacco, less
     mutagenic, safer than conventional cigarette.
          But the problem was it smelled bad and it
     didn't taste right, so consumers rejected it
     and Reynolds pulled it from the market.  But
     they didn't give up.  They went back, took
     technology they learned from Premier, took more
     money and they came back out with Eclipse,
     another form of this heat, not burned tobacco.
     And, of course, Eclipse is still on the market
     and here's what Dr. Cummings had to say about
     Premier.
          "Question:  You agree that Premier was a
     safer product than conventional tobacco burning
     cigarettes, right?
          "Answer:  Yes.
          "Question:  Premier was less mutagenic
     than conventional cigarette, wasn't it?
          "Answer:  Yes.
          "Question:  And you believe that Eclipse
     is safer than a conventional cigarettes, right?
          "Answer:  Yes."
          THE CLERK:  Counselor, 45 minutes.
5862 BASSETT:  Thank you.
          So when it comes to this question on the
     verdict form, has plaintiff proven by clear and
     convincing evidence, evidence that's clear and
     precise that causes you without hesitation to
     say Reynolds should be punished in this case,
     the case of Frank Gafney?  Based on the
     testimony, the evidence you've seen, all the
     efforts and the work that they have put in to
     trying to reduce the hazard of smoking, put out
     a product that is, in fact, according to
     plaintiff's own expert, a safer product, I
     think the answer to that question is "no," the
     plaintiff hasn't carried its burden of proof in
     this case.
          So at the end, what this case really comes
     down to is a case of Frank Gafney and what we
     know from evidence you've seen, the testimony
     you've heard, as Mr. Maguire went over in
     detail yesterday, Mr. Gafney had the ability to
     quit smoking.  He was intelligent, he's well
     educated, he's well informed.
          In fact, you also even heard Mrs. Gafney
     talk about his education before he went to law
     school as an actuary.  As an actuary, he used
5863 statistics to assess risks.  He's a very
     bright, successful man.  We also know with
     that, when he had the need and he had the
     desire, Mr. Gafney showed the willpower to stop
     smoking, smoking to win a bet, smoking in order
     to qualify for life insurance for a full year.
          When it comes to the question of
     Mr. Gafney continuing to smoke, Mrs. Gafney
     tells us in answer to that.
          "Question:  Your husband enjoyed smoking,
     correct?
          "Answer:  Yes, he did.
          "Question:  He told you he enjoyed it?
          "Answer:  Yes, he did.
          "Question:  In your opinion, he thoroughly
     enjoyed every cigarette he ever put in his
     mouth, correct?
          "Answer:  Correct."
          That's what this case really boils down to
     is Frank Gafney enjoyed smoking, he enjoyed
     what it provided him and he never really wanted
     to quit until January of 1995, when he finally
     realized it was time to quit and he did quit.
          That was his choice and no one is here to
     criticize him for that choice.  But with choice
5864 comes a certain responsibility and while
     Mrs. Gafney is here admitting that her husband
     bears some fault for that choice, for what he
     knew about the dangers of smoking and for what
     he knew about his ability to quit smoking.
     She's here saying there's only partial
     responsibility for Mr. Gafney.
          From the weeks of evidence you heard and
     the testimony you've seen, the evidence shows
     that there's certainly no liability to
     R.J. Reynolds and as a result, I'd ask you as
     you go through back there to deliberate, that
     you return a verdict in favor of R.J. Reynolds
     in this case.
          Again, I want to thank you for your time
     and your patience during the process.  And as
     Mr. Maguire noted too, we as defendants do not
     get the last word because the plaintiff has the
     burden of proof and Mr. Sales will have an
     opportunity now to give a rebuttal and because
     we don't have the last word, what I'd ask you
     is as he brings up additional arguments and new
     evidence that may not have been discussed
     previously, ask how that goes back to the case
     of Frank Gafney and how I would have responded
5865 if I could of on behalf of R.J. Reynolds.
          Again, thank you very much for your time
     and very much for your patience.
          Thank you, your Honor.