         MR. WALKER:  Of course, Your Honor.  Thank you.
         Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.  It's
    nice to be able to talk with you directly again.  I
    mentioned at the start of the case that there's only
    a few times in the case where I can actually talk to
    you.
         And so it's nice now, at the end of the case,
    now that you've seen everything, to be able to come
    back and kind of give you at least our vision of what we think has happened here and why we think you
    should be coming back with a defense verdict.
         Before I say anything else, though, I certainly
    want to thank you all for your service, like Mr.
    Shields did.  You all probably have figured out by
    now that everyone in this room believes in the jury
    system, and we're all counting on you all to look at
    the facts, use your common sense, apply the Judge's
    instructions, and come to a verdict that you all
    think is the right verdict.  And I want to thank you
    on behalf of Reynolds as well.
         You all took your oath.  It's been almost two
    weeks, not quite two weeks yet.  I guess, about a
    week and a half ago, you took your oath to serve as
    jurors.  And some of us do this a lot.  When I tell
    you, I've been in cases where jurors, like, fall
    asleep or they're doodling and not paying attention,
    I know that's hard to believe that anything would
    happen in a courtroom that you might fall asleep to,
    but you all haven't done that.  You have been paying
    attention.  You have been listening carefully.
    We've noticed that you've been taking notes and
    really have been very diligent jurors.  And on
    behalf of everyone, I think plaintiff's counsel,
    too, we all really appreciate that, and that's what makes this process work.
         We've reached the end of the case.  And
    everything that we've done in this trial from start
    to finish leads up to this verdict form that the
    Judge talked to you a little bit about.  All the
    testimony that you heard, all the evidence, it's all
    supposed to give you the tools and the information
    that you need to do your job, which is to answer the
    questions on the verdict form.
         And that includes the instructions of law from
    the Judge, instructions on things like credibility,
    how to figure out who you can believe and who you
    can't believe, and so on.
         Mr. Shields started by saying a lot about how
    he doesn't think that the greater weight of the
    evidence supports their side of the case.  He thinks
    it's the only evidence.  And I want to address that
    right from the outset because you heard from seven
    witnesses in this case.  And although plaintiff's
    counsel called all of those witnesses, they were
    actually our witnesses, too.  And that's because the
    answers that they give to questions are evidence for
    whoever in the case is asking the questions.  So
    when I asked questions of those witnesses, their
    answers back to me are testimony and evidence that we can rely on and that you can rely on to support
    our side of this case.
         Now, it's true, we could have called more
    witnesses than you heard from.  We could have called
    more witnesses to tell you things that you already
    heard in the case.
         For example, we could have called a witness to
    tell you that Mr. Gamble was surrounded by
    information about the health risks of cigarette
    smoking.  We could have spent a day and a half on
    that or more.  But we didn't need to do that because
    Dr. Burns and Dr. Proctor, just to give you two
    examples, already admitted to those facts.
         We could have brought you a witness to tell you
    that Mr. Gamble was not influenced by advertising,
    but we didn't need to do that because their own
    Dr. Burns admitted that.
         We could have called witnesses to tell you that
    Mr. Gamble never really put down his cigarettes and
    tried to quit smoking, but we didn't need to do that
    because their own witnesses admitted that.
    Dr. Burns admitted that all the way up until the
    1980s, there's simply no evidence at all that Mr.
    Gamble was ever interested in quitting smoking.
         And it was that same Dr. Burns who said, in a way that only Dr. Burns could, that Mr. Gamble
    really didn't put down his cigarettes and stop
    smoking.  He said Mr. Gamble was not observed
    abstaining.  That means nobody saw him actually
    going without cigarette smoking.
         We could have called a witness to highlight for
    you that Mr. Gamble never really disliked smoking or
    never made up his mind that he was never going to
    smoke again, but you heard that from Mrs. Gamble
    herself.  We didn't need to bring you a witness to
    spend more of your time on something you've already
    heard.
         I told you during opening that the witnesses
    that you would hear from in this case -- some of
    them, the paid ones, would be some of the most
    biased witnesses on the planet.  And some of you may
    have thought, wow, you know, that's -- he's
    exaggerating, he's trying to make a point, he's
    advocating, but then you got to see them.
         And I said in opening about people like
    Dr. Burns and Dr. Proctor, I said, you know, don't
    take my word for it.  When they're on the stand,
    watch how they answer questions when they're talking
    with Mr. Shields or Mr. Kalil, and watch how their
    demeanor changes and the way they answer the question changes when I start asking the questions.
    Listen to their testimony and see, are they giving
    straight answers to simple questions, or aren't
    they.  And we'll talk in a little bit about that.
         Mr. Shields says that the 9 million dollars
    they collectively have been paid -- that's
    Dr. Burns, Dr. Krugman, and Dr. Proctor -- that that
    doesn't mean anything to them, that it doesn't
    actually affect the content of their testimony at
    all, that that 9 million dollars is just irrelevant
    to them.  But that's not what you saw.  You watched
    them testify.  You could see that it was important
    to them.
         You could see, for example, when Dr. Proctor,
    when I was going through with him about Reynolds'
    website today, and the website, right on Reynolds'
    website, says, "cigarette smoking is a leading cause
    of preventable disease in America," he wanted to
    quibble with me about why it doesn't say "the
    leading cause."
         At the end of the day, when it comes to
    tobacco, when they're hired by plaintiffs in cases
    like this, there's no answer, no conduct, no
    document that will ever satisfy the likes of
    Dr. Burns or Dr. Proctor. You all might even remember the point in time
    where I said to Dr. Proctor, what would you make of
    a statement from back in the eighties by somebody
    who was actually there, who said that 95 percent of
    Americans were thoroughly aware of the health risks
    of cigarette smoking?
         And Dr. Proctor didn't know what you probably
    knew, which was that the statement I was talking
    about was made by one Dr. Burns.  You had just heard
    us go over that testimony a few days before.
         Dr. Proctor, with the 4 million dollars he's
    been paid, he didn't care.  He tried to tell you
    that that statement by Dr. Burns must have been a
    highly-lawyered statement that the tobacco industry
    was somehow behind.  And obviously, that's not the
    case.  It was their own Dr. Burns who had made that
    statement.
         The truth of the matter is, no matter what the
    American Tobacco Company said or did, or Reynolds,
    or anyone else in the tobacco industry at any point
    in time, their witnesses who have been paid all that
    money were going to find fault with it, and they
    were going to tell you the same thing they tell
    every jury, no matter what the facts of the case,
    that there's this horrible, massive conspiracy that involves all sorts of conduct that -- even if it
    didn't have anything to do with the smoker in the
    case.
         And that's why one of the instructions that
    you're going to get is so important.  Can we pull up
    that first?  This is the one on credibility.  You'll
    have it in the instructions that you take back with
    you to deliberate.
         "In determining the believability of any
    witness and the weight to be given the testimony of
    any witness, you may properly consider the demeanor
    of the witness while testifying; the frankness or
    lack of frankness of the witness; the intelligence
    of the witness; any interest the witness may have in
    the outcome of the case," and it goes on.  Those are
    some of the same things I was just talking about.
         What did you learn from Dr. Burns' demeanor?
    What did you learn about the frankness or lack of
    frankness from Dr. Proctor?  And we've already
    talked about the interest these witnesses had in the
    case.
         I want to get back to the verdict form because
    that's really what your job is.  And I think, for me
    to be helpful to all of you, I need to try to walk
    through with you the verdict form that you'll get and how we believe the evidence relates to the
    questions on the verdict form.
         But before I do that, there's one thing I want
    to point out, and that's this.  Every single
    question on the verdict form is about one and only
    one smoker, and that's Mr. Gamble.  And as we move
    through the questions, you're going to see that
    Mr. Gamble's name is right there in the question.
         And that's why, at the beginning of this case,
    when I said you needed to keep your eye on the ball,
    sift through all of the allegations that are being
    hurled across the courtroom, pay attention to the
    facts that actually mattered to Mr. Gamble, because
    that's the only smoker you're going to answer
    questions about on the verdict form.
         When we started this case, I told you there
    were five key facts in the case, and that's still
    true.  I put them on a board because I thought it
    might make it easier to talk about them.
         And those five key facts that I talked about in
    opening are the ones that you can see us trying to
    establish through our questioning during the case:
    That Mr. Gamble knew the risks associated with
    cigarette smoking, warnings about the risks were
    coming at him from all sides, starting from even before he finished school; that nothing that the
    American Tobacco Company or R. J. Reynolds or any
    other tobacco company did had any impact or effect
    on Mr. Gamble because he wasn't relying on
    statements from the companies; that the evidence
    would be that Mr. Gamble never really tried to quit
    smoking.
         We'll come back to this, but when you're
    thinking about this, remember, the evidence was that
    for the first 25 years of Mr. Gamble's smoking, he
    wasn't trying to quit, not even once.  It wasn't
    that he tried to quit and failed because he was so
    addicted.  He didn't even try.
         Mr. Gamble smoked what he wanted to smoke.
    Mr. Shields talked a lot about advertising and how
    advertising supposedly makes people do things, but
    98 percent of the advertising for cigarettes
    starting in the sixties and seventies were for
    products that Mr. Gamble never bought.  He didn't
    even try them.  That's like saying watching
    advertisements for Toyotas makes you go out and buy
    a Ford.  It doesn't make any sense.  Or a bicycle,
    because it's even a different kind of a product.
         Lastly, no one forced Mr. Gamble to smoke.
    That is the bottom line fact that runs through every single thing that I'll talk about today.  Nobody put
    a gun to Mr. Gamble's head and forced him to smoke,
    and no one prevented him from trying to quit smoking
    either.
         So let's pull up, please, the first question.
    This is the first question on the verdict form:
    "Please state whether Donald Gamble was a member of
    the Engle class."
         And to even know what that means, you have to
    look at the instructions, so I put that underneath
    it:  "To prove that he was a member of the Engle
    class, plaintiff must prove by a greater weight of
    the evidence that Donald Gamble was addicted to
    cigarettes containing nicotine, and that cigarette
    smoking because of that addiction was a legal cause
    of his emphysema."
         Now, you heard evidence on both of those
    issues.  On the addiction point, most of the
    evidence that you heard came from this Dr. Burns.
    At $4,800 a day, he's the witness who travels all
    around Florida telling juries -- or jurors like you
    and others that, while not all smokers are addicted,
    every time he testifies, he testifies that the
    smoker in that case was addicted.
         And most of the facts that they're relying on to tell you that he was addicted and heavily
    addicted and so heavily addicted that he couldn't
    stop smoking are facts like these.
         Can I have the next demonstrative?  No, no,
    this is -- after that.
         All right.  They told you about using a product
    first thing in the morning; they told you --
         No, the next one.
         -- about using the product regularly and
    continuously throughout the day; about carrying this
    product in his pocket; using it everywhere in the
    home, including in the bed; using it outside; using
    it in the car; using it while watching TV; using it
    during meals; using it while at work; not
    interacting with others because of using it; anxious
    when you don't have it; and it being a normal part
    of life.
         Now, I put all of these on a slide to make a
    point, to show you all something about facts like
    these.  Because when you're talking about tobacco
    companies and cigarettes, the assumption is that if
    you're doing these things a lot, if you're using the
    product a lot during the day and in these ways, it
    must be that you're so addicted that you can't stop
    using them. But let's look at these again.  Imagine if the
    product that's being used in the way that this is
    described isn't cigarettes.  What if it were a
    product like an iPhone or a smartphone?
         Have you met people who first thing in the
    morning check their smartphone; who use their
    smartphone regularly and continuously throughout the
    day; who always carry their smartphone in their
    pocket; who use it everywhere in the home, including
    in the bed; who use it outside; who use it in the
    car -- although that one's illegal now, I think, in
    a number of places -- who use it while watching TV;
    who use it during meals, when they're supposed to be
    conversing with other people; who use it at work;
    who aren't interacting with other people because
    they're on their phone; who are anxious if they
    can't find it -- if you've ever seen somebody think
    they left their smartphone behind, watch out -- and
    that it's become a normal part of life.
         I'm not saying that to minimize the fact that
    cigarette smoking can be addictive.  Of course, it
    can.  I was one of the first people that told you
    that when I first met each and every one of you.
         My point is, that just because you're using a
    product in these ways, a lot, in a lot of places, doesn't mean that you can't stop using it.  It
    doesn't mean that you can't control your behavior
    and make choices and decisions about your behavior.
         You'll have to make up your own mind about
    whether Mr. Gamble was addicted, whether you believe
    Dr. Burns; but, honestly, it's not even the key
    question you have to decide here.  Because whether
    he was addicted or not, the more important question
    you have to decide is the one about legal cause.
         Can we have the next one, please?
         That's the second part of this question that's
    far more important:  "That cigarette smoking,
    because of addiction, was a legal cause of his
    emphysema."  And to know whether it's a legal cause,
    you need to look at the instructions on legal cause,
    and that's this one.
         Now, it's a long instruction.  I've highlighted
    what I believe will be the key points for you to
    look at in terms of evaluating evidence in this
    case.
         "His emphysema was caused by addiction to
    cigarettes that contained nicotine, if he was
    addicted, and his addiction to cigarettes directly
    and in a natural continuous sequence produced or
    contributed substantially to producing the emphysema so that it can reasonably be said, but for his
    addiction, his emphysema would not have occurred."
         And then there's another paragraph about it
    that comes back around to talking about whether
    addiction substantially contributed to producing his
    injury.
         Now, that's really the issue here.  It's one
    that might even be worth writing down if you're
    keeping track.  Did Mr. Gamble have an addiction
    that was so substantial that it kept him from
    smoking and prevented him from quitting?
         This is the evidence that you heard about
    nicotine and smoking and quitting.  The evidence was
    that nicotine does not prevent smokers from choosing
    to try to quit.  Dr. Burns was very clear about
    that.
         And through Dr. Burns, we learned -- pull up
    the next slide, please -- that even if you look at
    smokers in general, you find that there are many,
    many daily smokers who don't even claim to want to
    quit, as many as 31 percent, from Burns' own
    testimony.
         And even if you look at the smokers who are
    saying they want to quit, which is the second bar,
    when you look at the number of smokers who are actually doing something about it, the number goes
    down.  That's because, as many of you know from your
    own personal lives, that there are some times when
    people say they want to quit smoking, but actually
    aren't doing anything about it.
         It could be that they have a loved one who is
    pestering them about quitting, and they're not ready
    to try.  It could be that they just haven't reached
    a stage in their smoking where they're ready to try.
    It could be it's something that they want to do
    eventually, but aren't ready to do yet.
         Either way, Dr. Burns was clear.  All smokers
    can quit smoking if they are motivated and committed
    to trying and sticking with it.  Even addicted
    smokers can quit.  Even heavily addicted smokers can
    quit.
         And you learned in this case that over 50
    million Americans are former smokers in this
    country, and as many half of those smokers smoked a
    pack a day or more before quitting.
         Now, Mr. Shields said, well, addiction to
    nicotine is just brain disease.  It gets in your
    brain.  There are these nicotine receptors, and all
    this stuff is going on, and you can't quit.
         All of those allegations about what happens in the human brain apply to all 50 million Americans
    who are former smokers in this country, but
    nevertheless quit smoking.
         And by the way, Mrs. Gamble is one of those 50
    million Americans who quit smoking.  And we'll talk
    a little bit more about that.
         So, how do we figure out then if addiction was
    a legal cause of Mr. Gamble's illnesses?  The answer
    is something that we all know and have known for
    many, many, many years, that quitting smoking
    reduces risks to your health.  It's why doctors tell
    patients to quit.  And that's been known for decades
    and decades.
         So let's talk about emphysema.  This is the
    issue that's on the first question on the verdict
    form.  No.  Go back one.  Okay.
         Emphysema.  Dr. Burns testified that men who
    quit smoking by age 45 can eliminate the risk of
    getting emphysema from smoking, because the minute
    you stop smoking cigarettes, the damage that the
    cigarettes can do to the lungs starts to go away.
    The body starts to heal.  And Dr. Burns said, if you
    quit by age 45, you can eliminate that risk.
         In the case of Mr. Gamble, he turned 45 in
    1982.  So what I've done, I gave you a timeline that starts in 1959.  That's when Mr. Gamble was first
    seen smoking, when he met Mrs. Gamble.  And it goes
    all the way up to 1982.  That's the year that
    Mr. Gamble turned 45 years old.  And that is the
    period during which Mr. Gamble needed to quit
    smoking in order to avoid the risks of emphysema.
         If we take a look at the next slide, you'll see
    the similar information applied to lung cancer.
    According to Dr. Burns, the risk of getting cancer
    from smoking disappears after you have been quit for
    15 years.
         What does that mean?  Mr. Gamble's diagnosis
    was in 2003.  If he had quit smoking 15 years
    earlier, sometime before 1988, he would not have
    gotten cancer.  Those are the two critical dates for
    Mr. Gamble:  1982 for emphysema, 1988 for lung
    cancer.
         And Mrs. Gamble was actually a perfect example
    of this.  She actually smoked for 25 years, as much
    as two packs a day, but she quit in the early/mid
    1980s, while she was still in her thirties, and she
    avoided all of that excess risk of emphysema and
    lung cancer.
         Unlike Mrs. Gamble, however, Mr. Gamble did not
    stop, and therefore he did not avoid those risks. So here's the question I want to try to answer
    for you:  Was Mr. Gamble so addicted that he could
    not stop smoking, or was it that he knew the risks
    but was not really trying to quit smoking?
         And I want to review the evidence with you on
    that point, particularly because Mr. Shields said --
    one of the things he said before he sat down was
    that, hey, nobody's claiming Mr. Gamble wasn't
    warned, nobody's claiming he didn't know.  Well,
    that's not what Mrs. Gamble said when she took the
    stand because I asked her.
         Mrs. Gamble said, and she asks you to believe
    in support of her claim for 10 million dollars,
    she's asking you to find that Mr. Gamble knew
    nothing whatsoever about the health risks of
    cigarette smoking until the late 1990s.
         She's asking you to believe, for 10 million
    dollars, that she and Mr. Gamble both believed that
    cigarette smoking was perfectly safe until 1996;
    and, that the very first time it dawned on her and
    Mr. Gamble that there could be a problem with
    cigarettes was when he was diagnosed with emphysema
    in 1996.
         You're going to have to decide whether you
    think those claims are credible, but let me say this.  If you believe that Mr. Gamble was warned of
    the health risks of cigarette smoking, and that it
    wasn't in the late 1990s, but long before then, but
    he nevertheless was not really trying to quit
    smoking, then your verdict should be for Reynolds
    for the reasons that I will explain as we go along.
         Let's look at the facts.  Mr. Gamble went to
    school in Georgia, so we showed you what was in
    Georgia textbooks about smoking around the time that
    he was a youngster.
         "Tobacco is called a habit-forming drug.  This
    means that a person who starts to smoke soon finds
    that it is rather hard to stop smoking."
         "Tobacco contains a poison called nicotine."
         "Even moderate smoking shortens life."
         "Tobacco smoke injures the delicate tissue of
    the air passages."
         Those are textbooks that were in use in Georgia
    between the 5th and the 9th grade when Mr. Gamble
    was in school in Georgia.
         Polling from a few years before the Gambles met
    revealed that 90 percent of Americans had heard or
    read that cigarette smoking caused cancer.  And we
    told -- we showed you the evidence of why.
         The reason why -- put up the next one, please -- is the coverage, and it's referred to here as
    objective coverage in the press.
         "The public has been informed through the
    excellent coverage of the press, radio and TV," and
    then from Dr. Heller, as well, making the very same
    point, pointing out that it was a very objective
    job, not one sided, and that it's an exceedingly
    valuable way of informing the public.
         The evidence in this case, including the
    documents that we admitted just before we started
    moving on to closings, in the record in this case
    you will find, if you want to see it when you go
    back to the jury room, there are literally dozens
    and dozens and dozens and dozens of Jacksonville
    Journal and Florida Times Union articles from the
    fifties and the sixties and the time periods that
    are relevant to the Gambles going on and on and on
    about the health risks of cigarette smoking.
         I think there's a couple hundred articles like
    that in evidence, where you can see that this
    information warning about the health risks of
    cigarette smoking was all over the press.
         Dr. Burns admitted that there was no evidence
    that Mr. Gamble was addicted before she met him when
    he was 22. She meets him in 1959.  He's already smoking,
    but she starts smoking shortly afterward.  And then
    they're both smoking from 1959 on.
         Articles about the health risks of smoking are
    continuing to appear in Jacksonville papers.  We
    have given you some examples here out of the
    hundreds that will go back with you in the jury
    room.
         Within a few years, but before 1965,
    Mrs. Gamble realizes that cigarette smoking is
    either addictive, or that they are hard to lay down,
    or, at a minimum, they are hard to put down.  We
    went back and forth with her about that until she
    finally agreed that she knew before 1965 that
    cigarettes were hard to put down.  Mr. Gamble does
    not try to quit at that time.
         In 1964, the Federal Government comes out with
    the Surgeon General's report concluding that
    cigarette smoking is causally related to lung
    cancer.  It's front page news all over the country,
    and prime time news specials are being aired on
    every channel.  When there were three channels on
    TV, you couldn't miss it because they were all
    showing it.
         Right here in Jacksonville, the 1964 Surgeon General's Report was front page news.  And
    Dr. Proctor even said that this story was one of the
    biggest news stories of the century.  Mr. Gamble did
    not try to quit.
         That same year, in 1964, the American Medical
    Association said that the health hazards of
    excessive smoking have been well publicized for more
    than ten years and are common knowledge, as of 1964.
         By 1965, there are already almost 18 million
    former smokers in the United States.  And there's a
    fork in the road, like so many, for Mr. Gamble.  He
    could go left and try to quit smoking, like the 18
    million other Americans did, or he could go right
    and choose to continue smoking.  Mr. Gamble wasn't
    one of those who quit smoking.  He didn't even try.
         By 1966, warning labels go on the cigarette
    packages:  "Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to
    your health."  They are on the cartons that
    Mr. Gamble was buying at the time.  They are on the
    packages.  Right next to the "particular people"
    slogan that he was heard repeating, right next to
    that is that same warning label on every single
    carton and every single pack of cigarettes:
    "Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health."
    Mr. Gamble does not try to quit. And from 1966 forward -- this is really
    important -- the evidence was that 85 percent of the
    time that Mr. Gamble ever smoked, that he was ever
    seen smoking cigarettes, there were warning labels
    right there on the packages.  85 percent of the
    time.
         A few months after those warning labels go on
    the cartons and go onto the packages, a few months
    after that he fills out an application for cancer
    insurance for himself and for Mrs. Gamble, just a
    few months after the warning labels go on the
    cartons and the packages.
         Two years later, Daniel Horn, in 1968, said
    this.  He was a government official with the
    National Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health.
         "You could stand on a rooftop and shout,
    smoking is dangerous, at the top of your lungs, and
    you would not be telling anyone anything they did
    not already know."  Mr. Gamble still did not try to
    quit.
         By 1969, the polling data that you heard
    evidence about shows that almost three-quarters of
    Americans hadn't just heard about the risks, but
    actually believed that cigarette smoking was a cause
    of lung cancer.  Mr. Gamble did not try to quit. News accounts are starting to come out, not
    just about the health risks of cigarette smoking,
    but about the benefits of quitting smoking and how
    you can go about doing it.  Articles about
    anti-smoking groups, quit smoking clinics, how you
    can find them, why you might go to one, and advice
    about how to quit smoking.  Mr. Gamble doesn't even
    try.
         In fact, in the four years after that 1966
    warning label came out, just in those four years, 13
    million people made the choice to quit smoking, but
    Mr. Gamble is not one of them.  He still hasn't even
    tried to quit smoking even once.
         By 1970, the warning labels on cartons and
    packages are strengthened, and they now say, in big,
    bold, capital letters:  "Warning.  The Surgeon
    General has determined that cigarette smoking is
    dangerous to your health."
         And that shows up right on the packages as
    well, right next to the "particular people."
         And this is one of the warning labels that the
    Judge gave you the instruction about.
         Can we pull that up?
         The Court's instruction was:  "After 1969, the
    warning labels placed on cigarette packs by defendant and other Engle defendants complied with
    federal law, and defendant and the other Engle
    defendants had no legal obligation to make any
    additional warnings.  Plaintiff has made no claim
    for failure to warn after 1969."
         Those warnings that went on the packages were
    more than sufficient to warn people that cigarette
    smoking was dangerous, but Mr. Gamble still did not
    try to quit.
         In 1971, that same warning that we just looked
    at appears in all cigarette ads, print ads,
    including ads for Pall Mall cigarettes.
         In that same year, the cigarette companies
    stopped advertising on TV and radio, no more of
    those ads.
         A few years later, by 1975, Dr. Burns, who is
    alive and well and talking about this at the time,
    says:  "More Americans knew that cigarette smoking
    was dangerous for them than knew the name of the
    President of the United States."  Mr. Gamble still
    has not tried to quit smoking.
         By 1977, the polling data that you heard
    evidence about shows that nearly three-fourths of --
    we're now looking at smokers, not just Americans --
    nearly three-quarters of smokers believe that cigarette smoking causes cancer.  Mr. Gamble still
    is not trying to quit.
         1979, the data that you heard about was that 30
    million Americans have made the choice to quit
    smoking, just going back to the Surgeon General's
    Report of 1964.  And that same fork in the road is
    presented for Mr. Gamble, like so many other
    Americans, does he put down the cigarettes and try
    to stop smoking, like 30 million others did, or does
    he keep smoking?  And the evidence was Mr. Gamble
    chose to keep smoking.
         By 1981, the head of the Roper polling
    organization writes to the Federal Trade Commission
    and says that the public is highly aware of the
    reported dangers of smoking.  That same year is when
    Dr. Burns made the statement you heard about a few
    times:  "95 percent of people are thoroughly aware
    of the health dangers of smoking, and 90 percent of
    them realized that their own health could be
    affected."  Mr. Gamble still did not try to quit
    smoking.
         In 1982, Mr. Gamble turned 45.  That's the year
    he needed to quit smoking to avoid the risk of
    emphysema; but, the entire time from 1959 to 1982,
    when all of this information was coming out, and well over 95 percent of the American public was
    informed of the risks, Mr. Gamble still had not
    tried to quit smoking even one time.
         In 1985, the warnings are strengthened again.
    And now, alongside the "particular people" slogan,
    appears these warnings, the four rotating warnings
    that still appear on cigarette packages today, the
    one that tells about smoking causing lung cancer,
    heart disease, emphysema; about cigarette smoke
    containing carbon monoxide; and about quitting
    smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to your
    health.
         That same year, polling data now shows that 94
    percent of smokers -- looking at smokers now --
    believe that smoking is harmful to health.
         Then something interesting happens.  Ms. Gamble
    is about 39 years old in 1985.  She's been smoking
    for 25 years.  She believes that she's addicted.
    And what started out as a one-pack-a-day habit for
    her is now up to two packs a day.  She's actually
    smoking more than Mr. Gamble at this point in time.
         And she realizes that her cigarette smoking is
    affecting her health.  It's making her sick.  So she
    decides to quit smoking.
         Can I have the next one, please. She struggles, she fights through it, and she
    succeeds at quitting smoking, and she never smokes
    another cigarette again.  She went to the left in
    this fork in the road by quitting smoking.
         Mr. Gamble, who wasn't smoking even as much as
    Mrs. Gamble at this point in time, says he wants to
    quit smoking, but really he's just hiding the
    smoking.  The evidence was if Mr. Gamble had quit
    smoking when Mrs. Gamble did, he would have avoided
    the risks of emphysema and lung cancer just like she
    did.  It's just that he made a different choice than
    she made about quitting smoking.
         And you heard evidence that in this time
    period, in 1984 and 1985, Mr. and Mrs. Gamble were
    actually discussing the warning labels on the
    packages.  Before that time, we're relying on the
    common sense to know that if you're reaching for a
    carton like this or a package like the ones inside
    it to pull out a cigarette, you're going to see that
    warning.  You're going to see that warning
    throughout the day, throughout the week, throughout
    the month.
         But by the 1980s, when Mrs. Gamble is quitting
    smoking, you don't have to try to use your common
    sense about whether he saw it.  They were talking about the warning from the Surgeon General.  And
    that's one of the reasons why Mrs. Gamble quit
    smoking, because it was affecting her health.
         I want to move forward in time to 1988.  I
    mentioned earlier that 1988 was the point in time
    where, 15 years before Mr. Gamble's lung cancer
    diagnosis, if he had stopped smoking, he would have
    avoided the risk of lung cancer from smoking, but he
    kept on smoking.
         Over the years, Mrs. Gamble tries to get
    Mr. Gamble to stop smoking.  She goes out and buys
    carrots.  She comes up with the idea to cut them up
    and to give them to Mr. Gamble for him to hold
    instead of a cigarette.  She's the one who's giving
    him these peppermints to try to get him to stop
    smoking.  But those are all her efforts, not
    Mr. Gamble's efforts.
         And so he goes on telling people that he wants
    to quit smoking, but really just continuing to
    smoke.  He buys a pack of nicotine gum, but he
    doesn't finish the pack.  He doesn't complete the
    course of the nicotine gum program.  And he doesn't
    use the gum to actually put down the cigarettes that
    he's smoking.
         Instead of putting down his cigarettes over the years, the testimony that you heard is that while
    Mr. Gamble supposedly was trying to quit smoking,
    his smoking actually increased.  He goes from
    smoking about a pack a day up to as much as two
    packs a day or three packs a day.  That's like
    somebody who claims to be on a diet, but is actually
    just eating more and more unhealthy foods.
         By 1990, the data that you heard about shows
    that 94 percent of Americans believe that cigarette
    smoking causes cancer.  And a few years after that,
    Mr. Gamble is told that technically he has
    emphysema.  That's an illness that can become very
    serious over time, but he doesn't have any symptoms
    yet, and he doesn't need any treatment for it.
         The medical record that Mr. Shields put in
    talks about how at this point in time Mr. Gamble can
    climb stairs with no problem.  He's not coughing up
    blood.  He's asymptomatic.  He needs no treatment.
    He has no cough.  He's not wheezing.  And there's no
    further workup, and he only needs to return as
    needed.  And Mr. Gamble went on smoking.
         Now, what does all of this tell us about the
    true legal cause of Mr. Gamble's continued smoking?
    It means that it's not because he never heard about
    the health risks of cigarette smoking.  Dr. Proctor agreed it was one of the biggest stories of the
    century.  And think about this, if Mr. and Mrs.
    Gamble knew and had heard about the 9-11 terrorists
    attacks, the O.J. Simpson trial, the passing of
    Princess Diana, the moon landing, and the Kennedy
    assassination, how could it be that they missed all
    of this information about the health risks of
    cigarette smoking?
         They didn't miss it, like no one else missed
    it.  And, of course, they were warned, and
    Mr. Gamble knew the risks.
         The true legal cause of his continued smoking
    can't be addiction because addiction doesn't stop
    you from quitting if you're not trying to quit.  And
    for the 25 years leading up to Mr. Gamble's 45th
    birthday, he wasn't even trying to quit smoking.
         Think of it like this.  You can think of
    addiction as being like faulty brakes on a car,
    okay?  If you think of addiction making it harder
    for you to stop, it's like faulty brakes on a car.
    You put your foot on it, maybe it slows down a
    little, maybe it doesn't slow you down at all, and
    you keep going forward.
         But think about an accident where somebody is
    driving a car, and they're not paying attention. They're looking at their smartphone, like we talked
    about earlier, or they're yelling at somebody in the
    back seat, and they never put their foot on the
    brake, and then there's an accident.  Was the
    accident caused by the faulty brakes that the driver
    never used, or was the accident caused by the fact
    that the person never stepped on the brake to begin
    with?
         During the 25 years of Mr. Gamble's smoking
    history that mattered, the 25 years when he could
    have quit smoking to avoid the risk of emphysema and
    lung cancer, Mr. Gamble never put his foot on the
    brake.
         An addiction does not stop you from quitting if
    you're not even trying.  Addiction did not stop
    Mrs. Gamble from quitting when she was ready to quit
    and took actions to make it happen.
         I want to be clear about one thing, and this is
    really important.  I am not in any way trying to
    judge or criticize Mr. Gamble.  We have not sued
    anybody.  We're only here because Mrs. Gamble filed
    this lawsuit, and we have to respond to her
    allegations.
         And this is America.  People are entitled to
    engage in behaviors that they know aren't good for them.  We have been talking about cigarette smoking.
    There are people who like to smoke, know the risks,
    and aren't interested in quitting at this time.
         But it doesn't really even have to be
    cigarettes.  It could be, here in Florida, you can
    ride a motorcycle without a helmet.  You see people
    all the time riding down the highway, 80 miles an
    hour, on a motorcycle with no helmet.  Is it because
    they think it's safe?  Is it because they don't know
    the risks?  Or is it because this is America, and we
    let people do things that aren't good for them?
         That's the issue with Mr. Gamble.  Some people
    just don't want to quit.  And some people who want
    to quit aren't ready to actually do something about
    it yet.
         In the end, it's not about judging or
    criticizing Mr. Gamble at all, because the bottom
    line is, it doesn't matter what I think about
    Mr. Gamble's choices, whether they were good ones or
    bad ones.  Respectfully, it doesn't even matter
    whether you all think that his choices were good
    ones or bad ones.  What matters is that they were
    his choices, and his alone.
         No one forced Mr. Gamble to smoke cigarettes,
    not Reynolds, not the American Tobacco Company, not nicotine, not anyone.  And that's why the Surgeon
    General has called cigarette smoking a personal
    choice behavior.
         And even when they've recognized that cigarette
    smoking is an addictive behavior -- even when they
    recognize that cigarette smoking is an addictive
    behavior, the individual smoker still has a decision
    to make about whether or not to continue that
    behavior.
         I think it's best summed up by another piece of
    evidence that you heard from a website called
    DrKoop.com.  And it's this one:  "The cigarette is
    not going to light itself and jump into your mouth,
    nor are you going to go into a brain-induced
    hypnotic trance and light the cigarette.  No matter
    how much you have smoked or how much you like to
    smoke, the choice to light up is always yours."
         Each and every time Mr. Gamble lit up a
    cigarette, the choice was his, and that means that
    addiction was not the legal cause of Mr. Gamble's
    illnesses.
         To put a finer point on it, that means checking
    no to questions 1 and 2 on the verdict form.
         The second question is really the same
    question.  It just relates to the lung cancer and the death.  I talked about them together.
         Let's take a look at the next two questions on
    the verdict form.  These are the questions that
    relate to their fraud and conspiracy allegations,
    for which they're asking you to award them 10
    million dollars.
         "Please state whether R. J. Reynolds'
    predecessors' concealment or omission of a material
    fact about the health effects or addictive nature of
    smoking cigarettes, or both, were a legal cause of
    Donald Gamble's lung cancer and death."
         And then the second question is very similar,
    except it's talking about an agreement to conceal or
    omit a material fact.
         Once again, these questions are only about
    Donald Gamble.  And the instruction that you'll get
    for both of those helps understand exactly what
    those instructions mean:  "Reliance by Mr. Gamble on
    statements to his detriment is a legal cause of lung
    cancer and death if it directly and in the natural
    and continuous sequence produces or contributes
    substantially to producing such lung cancer and
    death, so that it can reasonably be said that, but
    for the reliance, his lung cancer and death would
    not have occurred." And then the instruction about material
    information refers to his decision-making process.
    And it's his decision-making process.
         Once again, note about this instruction,
    reliance is required.  It's not enough that somebody
    says something.  Mr. Gamble must have relied in some
    way on these allegations that they're making, and it
    must have been a substantial but-for cause of his
    injuries, in the same way that we looked at for the
    addiction.
         Again, the key here for that is 1988.  Did the
    statements that they're complaining about prevent
    Mr. Gamble from quitting smoking when it would have
    made a difference to him, before 1988?
         Now, when this case started, I told all of you
    that the plaintiffs would make all kinds of
    accusations about Reynolds and about the tobacco
    industry, and that they would do that using
    witnesses who collectively have been paid almost 9
    million dollars.
         So I ask you asked you to listen to see if
    those witnesses would give me straight answers to
    simple questions.
         Remember this?  I asked Dr. Burns if it was
    true that there was no evidence Mr. Gamble ever heard this clip from C-SPAN that he played.  This is
    what he said.  And he said it twice in exactly the
    same way.  "There's no indication that he heard the
    C-SPAN clip and remembered it in a way that was
    powerful enough to him that he discussed it with
    family members, in a way that was memorable enough
    to them that they recalled it and reported it at the
    time of the deposition.  So that's correct, yes."
         Now, he could have just said, yes, that was
    correct, but he gave that long answer, and you'll
    have to ask yourselves whether the millions of
    dollars that they have been paid, including the 4
    million to Dr. Burns, explains why he would give an
    answer like that.
         I said that their evidence about fraud and
    conspiracy would consist entirely of cherry-picked
    passages from cherry-picked documents selected from
    millions of available documents, and that a lot of
    them would be taken out of context, would be drafts,
    would be unsigned, or they'd be proposals where
    there was no evidence that the proposal was ever
    adopted.
         And so I asked you, again, to wait for us to
    show you the rest of the story.  And I could see
    that you all did that each and every time. Why was it important to wait for the other side
    of the story?
         Remember this?  This was the document that
    Dr. Burns showed you from 1962, where he showed you
    the six-page version that made the statement they
    wanted to make and came to a full stop.  I had to
    come back and say, wait a minute, you know there's
    another version of this document that's 24 pages
    longer, and it doesn't stop where you stopped
    reading to the jury.  It goes on and explains and
    puts into context what you showed.
         And we went back and forth about why he didn't
    show you the other document.  And at the end of it,
    what he said was he wanted to show the longer
    document, but the decision was made by counsel not
    to show that document.  That was his testimony.
         What about this one?  Do you remember this one?
    Dr. Krugman took the stand and told you that this
    document from 1984 defined younger adult smokers as
    people under the age of 18.
         Well, when you finally got to see what was
    actually in that document, when I went through it
    with Dr. Proctor the next day, you saw that that
    same document that he used actually defined younger
    adult smokers as people age 18 to 24, and did it over and over and over again.  I went page by page.
    And it wasn't until we were about 60 pages into that
    document that we found the one reference to somebody
    under age 18 -- using government statistics, not
    gathered by the company -- and then the rest of the
    document was 18 to 24.  That's why I asked you to
    wait to hear the other side of the story.
         What about this one?  Maybe you'll remember
    this one, too.
         Dr. Burns was here.  He kept showing press
    releases.  And I said, Dr. Burns, that press release
    is just what the companies hope will be published,
    right?  Oh, no, no, no, they were published.  Trust
    me, they were published.  They were published.
         And I said, well, maybe the jury would like to
    see that for themselves.  Why did I say that?  It
    wasn't because I was trying to say they were never
    picked up, none of them.  I wanted you to be able to
    see that when he says they're picked up and
    published, it's in papers like The New York Times,
    the Boston Globe, papers that Mrs. Gamble testified
    the very next day Mr. Gamble did not read.
         Then Dr. Burns said, oh, yeah, this one from
    1988 claims that cigarettes are addictive, are
    irresponsible and scare tactics.  Trust me, I'm Dr. Burns, this has been published, you can take my
    word for it.
         Then Dr. Proctor comes in.  He's been paid a
    different 4 million dollars than the 4 million
    Dr. Burns made.  And I asked him about this same
    press release.  And he came clean with you and said,
    no, that one has never been published.  Then he
    tried to say there was some other one that they
    didn't bring to show you that was.
         Well, this is why we said, wait for the other
    side of the story, because their whole case was like
    that.
         I told you in opening that their entire case
    would be about what tobacco company representatives
    said and what certain people in the tobacco industry
    hoped to accomplish.  And that most of the time, it
    didn't work.
         Remember this?  This was the polling data that
    we went over with -- I guess it was Dr. Burns, about
    who the American people were actually listening to,
    and, more importantly, who they weren't listening
    to.
         Mr. Shields kept talking about how the tobacco
    emissaries said X, Y, and Z.  He's talking about
    people like the ones in these clips that they showed you, Anne Browder, Mr. Dwyer, Mr. Johnson on TV,
    Mr. Horrigan.  Those are the very people that the
    polling data consistently, going all the way back to
    the sixties and seventies, people consistently said
    were not viewed as reliable sources of information
    on smoking and health.
         Remember this?  This is the conspiracy.  They
    kept talking about how powerful this conspiracy was
    and how it was keeping things from the American
    people.  But if you really look at the allegations
    they made -- remember, even today, Mr. Shields said,
    well, they tried to prevent Ernst Wynder from
    publishing his mouse skin painting studies.  That
    didn't work.  They were published.  He completed the
    studies.  They were splashed over LIFE magazine, one
    of the most popular magazines in America.
         Then they showed you a document that said,
    well, somebody in the tobacco industry tried to stop
    this Bill Talman public service announcement from
    being shown.  That was the one involving Perry
    Mason, the guy who, every time Perry Mason won, he
    lost.  That didn't work either.  It was shown.
         And not only was that public service
    announcement shown, when Mr. Talman passed away,
    they started airing that public service announcement on the news with a story about how he had passed
    away.
         They said a bunch of times, well, somebody in
    the tobacco industry tried to stop warning labels
    from going on cigarettes.  That didn't work either.
    There are warning labels on cigarettes.  And they
    went on in 1966, at the same point in time when
    supposedly the tobacco industry prevented them from
    -- was opposing that legislation.
         And then, lastly, the scare tactics press
    release we just talked about.  Supposedly, that was
    something that they wanted to put out there in the
    public.  And Dr. Proctor said, yeah, maybe they put
    it out there, but it didn't actually get published
    in any magazine.  That was another fail.
         Now, the last thing that I told you about what
    you would hear in their fraud and conspiracy case
    was that it would be almost entirely generic, that
    it would have almost nothing to do with Mr. Gamble.
    And that's exactly what you heard over and over and
    over again in their evidence.
         Can we pull up the next one, please.
         They started making allegations about filtered
    cigarettes that Mr. Gamble never smoked.  They made
    allegations about low tar and low nicotine cigarettes Mr. Gamble never smoked.  Advertisements
    that Mr. Gamble never saw for products that he never
    bought.  Marketing to young people after Mr. Gamble
    became an adult.  TV interviews, court depositions,
    press releases and other statements that Mrs. Gamble
    said Mr. Gamble never saw and never relied upon.
         They're just throwing stuff up against the wall
    and hoping something will stick, hoping that they
    can drown you in so many allegations of bad conduct
    to cigarette companies, low hanging fruit.  It's not
    hard to attack a tobacco company.  It's hard to try
    to prove to you that these attacks had anything to
    do with Mr. Gamble.
         Remember what Mrs. Gamble said about the Frank
    Statement, she never heard of it.  And it wasn't
    just the Frank Statement.  Because as soon as she
    said that, I said to her -- actually, what she said
    was she never -- not just that she never heard of
    it, but the first time she saw it was when her
    lawyers put it up on the screen here.
         And I said, well, that's interesting.  What
    about all of the other stuff the plaintiff's experts
    were showing, all these -- you know, Anne Browder
    and Howard Cullman, what about that stuff, did you
    see any of that?  No.  Never saw that before coming to this courtroom either.  And she was living with
    Mr. Gamble.
         I said at the beginning that I was going to be
    respectful of you all's time.  That we would respond
    to many of the allegations that they made, but that,
    in all candor, I wasn't going to respond to every
    accusation or allegation that they made, no matter
    how irrelevant to Mr. Gamble.
         I said you were going to have to keep your eye
    on the ball because this case is only about Donald
    Gamble.
         So over the weekend, I went back and added up
    their case.  You all listened to seven days of
    witness testimony by witnesses selected by
    plaintiff's counsel.  Six of the seven days that you
    heard testimony came from the testimony of those
    9 million dollar men:  Burns, Krugman, Proctor.
    That was six of the seven days of testimony that you
    heard.
         I counted all of the questions that they asked
    those three witnesses.  And it may not surprise you,
    it added up to a big number.  They asked Burns,
    Krugman and Proctor over 2,100 questions, all in
    all.
         Of those 2,100 questions, only 125 were about Mr. Gamble.  That's 6 percent.  94 percent of their
    case against Reynolds in this case involving
    Mr. Gamble had precisely nothing to do with
    Mr. Gamble.
         Remember this from Dr. Proctor?  He said this
    right at the end of his testimony, answering a
    question from Mr. Shields.  He said:  "Yeah, my
    testimony might be relevant if the jury wants to
    know what happened to millions of other people."
         This case is not about millions of other
    people.  It's not even about one other person.  It's
    only about Mr. Gamble.  And Dr. Proctor, if you'll
    recall, he didn't even know when Mr. Gamble was
    born.
         When you strip away all the noise, you can
    begin to look at whether anything the American
    Tobacco Company or the industry did actually
    prevented Mr. Gamble from quitting when it could
    have mattered, before 1988.  And I want to take up
    what the evidence was on that.
         First of all, Dr. Proctor admitted that there
    was no statement by anyone in the industry in the
    1950s, sixties, or seventies saying that nicotine
    was not addictive, and the 1988 press release was
    never picked up. So then plaintiff showed you statements from
    cigarette company employees and representatives,
    like the Frank Statement, like the statement from
    Philip Morris --
         Can we pull that back up, please.
         -- saying things like the harms aren't proven.
    More research is needed.  The one from Philip Morris
    was that the tobacco companies would remove anything
    bad from smoke.
         What's important about that is that Mr. Gamble
    never once repeated any of those themes.  No one
    came and told you that Mr. Gamble said, no, don't
    worry, the harms aren't proven.  He never said
    something about research being needed, or that the
    companies would remove something from cigarette
    smoke.
         You learned in this case that the plaintiffs
    have access to 13 million documents from the tobacco
    industry, and yet they managed to only find and
    bring you statements that Mrs. Gamble said she never
    saw before, even though she was living with
    Mr. Gamble the whole time.
         So then Mrs. Gamble and her son said that
    Mr. Gamble talked about that the companies wouldn't
    put anything harmful into cigarettes.  And they both said it in exactly the same way.  He thought they
    wouldn't put something in the cigarette smoking --
    in the cigarettes that was harmful.  But they said a
    lot of things, too, that didn't add up, and this was
    one of them.
         Think about this.  If Mr. Gamble really said
    that a tobacco company told him they would never put
    anything harmful in the cigarettes, why couldn't
    they find a single statement from a tobacco company
    that actually said that?  Why couldn't they show you
    that?
         If Mr. Gamble really heard that from a tobacco
    company, why wasn't he shocked in 1997 when he was
    told that he had emphysema from cigarette smoking?
    He should have been floored by that information.
         If he really had no idea that cigarette smoking
    could cause illnesses, he would have been shocked.
    You didn't hear anything about that.
         Just imagine.  You go to the doctor, and you're
    told that you have a debilitating lung disease, and
    that it's caused by something you thought was
    totally safe, like a bottled water.  You would be
    shocked.  You would be angry.  You would want to
    blame the company that made the bottled water and
    didn't tell you it could give you that debilitating disease, and you would be highly upset about it.
         But you didn't hear any evidence in this case
    like that about Mr. Gamble.  He wasn't shocked.  He
    wasn't surprised.  He wasn't angry.  He didn't blame
    a tobacco company.  He didn't file a lawsuit.  He
    didn't even talk about filing a lawsuit.  There's no
    evidence of any of that.
         In fact, this lawsuit is not Mr. Gamble's
    lawsuit, it's Mrs. Gamble's lawsuit.
         Think about all the evidence that I've gone
    over and that you'll take back with you into the
    jury room about all of the information about the
    health risks of cigarette smoking that was not
    hidden from view.
         Mr. Shields spent a lot of time talking about
    what he thinks the tobacco industry concealed.  And
    it kind of makes it sound like this information
    wasn't out there.  It's a little bit like me trying
    to conceal from you the fact that the sky is blue.
    I may never say to you that the sky is blue, but you
    can walk outside and see that the sky is blue, even
    if no one ever tells you that.
         Because this information about cigarette
    smoking shortening life, about it being addictive,
    about it making it harder to quit was out there everywhere he turned, on TV, on the radio, in
    magazines.  It was what people were talking about as
    well.
         And even some of the specific allegations don't
    relate to things where something was successfully
    hidden.
         Can I have the next one, please.
         Remember this?  They talked about this secret
    Plaza Hotel meeting.  And then when I stood up, you
    learned that, well, actually, it was covered in The
    New York Times.
         Then they showed you an article from the 1950s
    about polycyclic hydrocarbons, an internal document
    from Alan Rodgman.  And then we showed you that the
    same month of the same year, the same eight
    polycyclic hydrocarbons were reported on in Reader's
    Digest.
         They showed you documents about nicotine being
    the sine qua non, or the essential ingredient in
    tobacco or in cigarettes.  When I stood up, we
    showed you that that, too, was being reported on in
    the most popular magazine in America.  This
    information was not hidden from the public, and it
    certainly wasn't hidden from Mr. Gamble.
         So, is it true that there were statements on both sides out in the public?  Absolutely.  You've
    seen that.  I showed it to you.
         When I showed you the LIFE magazine article, I
    went back, I didn't cherry pick any part of it.  I
    put it on the Elmo, and I showed you the end of the
    article, where there was a sentence or two from some
    tobacco company representative.  And Dr. Burns
    admitted, yeah, a lot of times where you find these
    responses, they're at the back of the article, and
    it's a paragraph or a sentence or something.
         What they're really asking you to believe is
    that Mr. Gamble somehow believed the company that
    was making the product over what doctors and
    scientists and government officials and reporters
    were saying about smoking risks, as if people of
    Mr. Gamble's generation were somehow naive, but the
    evidence is they weren't naive.
         We talked a few moments ago about what the
    polling data showed.  We also, during the case,
    looked at a Reader's Digest article from 1962, where
    the press was talking about the standard response
    from the industry being more weak and pathetic than
    ever.  Mr. Gamble wasn't naive, and neither was the
    American people.
         Think about it like this.  It's a little bit like if you go to the store to buy an outfit, and
    the person who works in the store who's trying to
    sell you this outfit says to you, that looks great
    on you, you should totally buy that.  It looks great
    on you.
         When you hear that, you don't think to
    yourself, well, they're definitely telling the
    truth, or, they're lying to me; you take it with a
    grain of salt because you understand that the person
    who's saying that to you has an incentive to say
    what they're saying.  And the American people did
    the same thing.  And you've been given no reason to
    believe that Mr. Gamble didn't also do the same
    thing.
         They argued about advertisements, mostly based
    on ads for cigarette products that Mr. Gamble never
    smoked, like Camel or Winston or American Spirit and
    so on.
         They keep mentioning this "more doctors smoke
    Camel."  Mr. Gamble never smoked Camel.
         And, of course, there were no advertisements
    for cigarettes on TV after 1971, and all of the
    print ads after '71 carry the warnings that we
    looked at earlier.
         And we mentioned about how 85 percent of the time, the "particular people" slogan was right there
    on the package.  So you did hear this evidence about
    "particular people."  What was the actual theme of
    those particular people ads?
         Before we hear that, look for this.  The ad of
    the -- the theme of the "particular people"
    advertising campaign had nothing to do with
    cigarettes being safe or healthy.  It was all about
    flavor and taste and how easy -- the smokeability of
    the cigarettes.
         Let's take a look at some of the ads that are
    the basis of their claim for over ten million
    dollars in this case.  Okay.
         (Ad played.)
         MALE SPEAKER 1:  Cigarette?
         MALE SPEAKER 2:  No thanks.  I prefer a Pall
    Mall.  You see, Pall Mall smokers never settle for
    second best.  We're particular about taste.
         MALE SPEAKER 1:  What's so particular about
    Pall Mall's taste?
         MALE SPEAKER 2:  Its natural mildness.  And
    Pall Mall's natural mildness means just one thing,
    smooth, pleasing flavor.
         FEMALE SPEAKER 1:  Cigarette?
         FEMALE SPEAKER 2:  No thanks.  I prefer Pall Mall.  Pall Mall smokers never settle for second
    best.  We're particular about taste.
         FEMALE SPEAKER 1:  What's so particular about
    Pall Mall's taste?
         FEMALE SPEAKER 2:  Its natural mildness.  And
    Pall Mall's natural mildness means just one thing,
    smooth, pleasing flavor.
         MALE SPEAKER 1:  Cigarette?
         MALE SPEAKER 2:  No, thanks, but I prefer a
    Pall Mall.  Pall Mall smokers never settle for
    second best.  We're particular about taste.
         MALE SPEAKER 1:  What's so particular about
    Pall Mall's taste?
         MALE SPEAKER 2:  Its natural mildness.  Pall
    Mall's natural mildness means just one thing,
    smooth, pleasing flavor.
         MALE SPEAKER 1:  Here, have a Pall Mall.
         MALE SPEAKER 2:  Thanks, you bet.
         Be particular, buy Pall Mall famous cigarettes,
    outstanding and they are mild.
         (Ad concluded.)
         MR. WALKER:  Every single one of those ads was
    about taste.  And if Mr. Gamble didn't like the
    taste of the Pall Mall cigarettes he smoked, he
    would have changed to another brand. Folks, believe it or not, ads like the ones I
    just showed are a huge part of their fraud case.
    That's their fraud case.  That's the part of it that
    they can tie to Mr. Gamble is that he heard about
    "particular people," and those are the ads that
    they're talking about.
         You're going to have to decide whether those
    ads are a fraud, whether they warrant an award of 10
    million or more dollars that they are asking for.
         And when you think about that, remember this.
    Mr. Gamble never once said that he took any kind of
    a health message from those ads, and he never said
    that he smoked Pall Mall because of advertising.
         Even Dr. Burns, for all the money that he's
    made, about $20,000 into his testimony in this case,
    he admitted that Mr. Gamble wasn't influenced by
    marketing and was not responsive to tobacco
    advertising.
         Of their big three, who add up to the 9 million
    dollars, Dr. Burns is the only one who actually read
    the depositions.  And the only one of those three
    then that actually read the depositions told you, in
    no uncertain terms, that Mr. Gamble was not
    influenced by marketing and was not responsive to
    advertising. The next issue I want to talk about is this
    whole thing about targeting children, youth
    marketing.  They made a big push about this.  This
    is going to be the best example yet of why you have
    to keep your eye on the ball in this case.
         You have to remember that Burns and Proctor and
    some of these witnesses, they're testifying all over
    the place in lots of other cases in this Engle class
    that you keep hearing about.
         What is the evidence in this case on this
    topic?
         First of all, the evidence is that Mr. Gamble
    started smoking at age 20.  Age 20.  That's what he
    told his doctors repeatedly in a number of different
    ways.
         The first record on which they rely says he
    started smoking since he was a teenager.  And if
    that was the only record that there was, maybe they
    would be on to something.  But right after that, the
    record says 46 years ago, from 2003.  It's not like
    he was rounding, it was about 40 years, or about 50
    years; Mr. Gamble gave a very specific number of
    years, 46 years ago.  And when you do the math, that
    has him starting at age 20.
         And throughout his records, you see these references.  He smoked at age 20; smoked and has
    since age 20; since age 20; and so on and so forth,
    over and over again.
         So Dr. Burns said, well, the one that says
    teenager is somehow more precise than the other ones
    that say age 20, because there was a pulmonologist
    involved in that record.
         Well, one of the other records that talks about
    him starting at age 12 was also a report that he
    gave to a pulmonologist, Dr. Wolfe.
         There's simply no way that you can look at all
    of these medical records and conclude that
    Mr. Gamble started smoking at age 15.  That means
    that these allegations about youth marketing have
    nothing to do with Mr. Gamble.
         But there's more reasons why they have nothing
    to do with Mr. Gamble.  Every single document that
    they showed you -- and I went through them one by
    one -- every single one goes back to a time period
    where either Mr. Gamble wasn't born, like the one
    from 1927, which was ten years before he was even
    born, or it's after he is a grown man, 36 years or
    older.
         Mr. Shields started talking today about this
    Joe Camel campaign in 1990.  He said, well, in 1990, there was an effort to target children.  Okay?
         In 1990, Mr. Gamble was 50 years old.  He was
    over 50.
         Then they say, well, look at the 1994 Surgeon
    General's Report.  It talks about this, too.
         In 1994, Mr. Gamble was 57 years old.
         There's not a single shred of evidence in this
    case that these allegations about targeting people
    who are underage have any application to the years
    when Mr. Gamble was underaged.
         Not that it matters; he didn't start smoking
    until he was 20 years old.
         And lastly, because, frankly, these allegations
    are offensive, we went ahead and took the additional
    step of showing you that they're just not true.
         So setting to one side that they have nothing
    to do with Mr. Gamble, we had to come back and
    actually show you what is actually written about the
    company policy in the documents that they,
    themselves, are relying on.
         "Reynolds' consistent policy is that smoking is
    a matter of free, informed adult choice, which the
    company does not seek to influence."
         "We are presently and, I believe, unfairly
    constrained from directly promoting cigarettes to the youth market."
         "It is not our business to motivate people to
    start smoking, particularly minors."
         "To smoke or not to smoke is a personal
    decision which we do not try to influence."
         And then the other one is the longer one, where
    it says, hey, sometimes people are writing youth in
    these documents without saying what we really mean.
    In order to say what we really mean, you need to say
    adult.
         So what is the answer of the biased paid
    witnesses?  Well, sure, these are internal
    documents, but they must have put that in there to
    impress -- just in case, 40 years later, somebody
    would pay someone like Dr. Burns a bunch of money to
    go digging this stuff up.
         These are internal company documents.  Who were
    they lying to?  They're talking to each other inside
    the company.  This is evidence that the companies
    did not target people who were underage to try to
    get them to smoke cigarettes.
         But regardless of what you think about that, it
    is absolutely the case that those allegations have
    nothing to do with someone who started smoking at
    age 20. And we gave you, as well, evidence about what
    Reynolds' position is on this today, because those
    were serious allegations.  We showed you on the
    website where it says:  "Reynolds and its operating
    companies are guided by the belief that minors
    should never use tobacco products."
         And you heard evidence that Reynolds won't even
    advertise in a magazine unless 85 percent or more of
    its readership are adults.
         These allegations about fraud and conspiracy,
    whether they're based on company statements that
    nobody believed, whether they're based on
    advertisements that had nothing to do with
    Mr. Gamble, or these allegations about youth
    marketing that had nothing to do with Mr. Gamble, do
    not provide a basis for an award of money damages in
    this case.
         On the questions on the verdict form, the
    answer to those questions should be no.
         The next question on the verdict form, number
    5, asks you to state for each party the percentage
    of any fault that was a legal cause of Donald
    Gamble's lung cancer and death that you charge to,
    and it has the two parties.
         Now, I should say this.  If you check no to either of the first questions, you won't even get to
    these questions on the verdict form.  I'm still
    going through them because it's my job to do that,
    and I think it's important that you understand our
    side of the evidence on these issues.  But our
    position is you shouldn't even get to questions 5 or
    6 or the ones that come after this.
         But, as I said, it's my job to talk about them.
    What's the evidence?  This question boils down to
    this.  Who is responsible for the choices that
    mattered to Mr. Gamble?
         Let's look at the choices that we know could
    have made a difference to Mr. Gamble.
         Thank you.  These are the choices that actually
    could have made a difference to Mr. Gamble.
         The choice to light up that Dr. Koop says is
    always yours.
         The choice to seriously try to quit.
         The choice of when to quit.  Remember, he
    didn't even try before 1982.
         The choice of how to quit.  You heard a lot of
    evidence about the things that he didn't try.
         And the choice -- this one's really
    important -- the choice of how hard to quit.
         Those are the choices that mattered for Mr. Gamble, and those choices could not have been
    made by anyone other than Mr. Gamble.
         The American Tobacco Company could not force
    Mr. Gamble to seriously try to quit.  It could not
    force him to decide when or how or how hard or for
    how long to try to quit.  Mr. Gamble is 100 percent
    responsible for those choices.
         And even Dr. Burns.  Mr. Shields said that we
    didn't bring a witness about these issues.  We
    absolutely did.  Our witness on this is Dr. Burns.
    Dr. Burns said every one of these things and more.
    Everyone remains responsible for their own behavior.
    Individuals are responsible for putting the
    cigarette in their mouth.  The individual is the one
    that has to make the step.  Every smoker has the
    choice to try to quit.  It's the smoker's
    responsibility to make the cessation attempt.
         This one's really important.  With enough
    internal and external support, any addiction can be
    broken, but it's up to the individual smoker to make
    the effort to try to stop.
         There's not one of those admissions that came
    from Dr. Burns that would support anything other
    than 100 percent responsibility for Mr. Gamble, in
    particular, for the 25 years that he smoked, in the face of warnings about the risk, without even trying
    to quit.  No one forced him to smoke, and no one
    prevented him from trying to quit.
         And you heard from his son, Donny, Mr. Gamble
    believed in personal responsibility.  He taught his
    children personal responsibility.  And there's no
    evidence in this case that Mr. Gamble ever blamed
    anyone else for the decisions that he made,
    including the decision to smoke, and neither should
    you.
         Now, what I didn't put on that chart are the
    choices that didn't matter to Mr. Gamble, things
    like design.  Mr. Shields talked to you about, well,
    the cigarettes were designed this way or that way.
    You heard evidence about filters and laser holes
    being put into filter tips and reconstituted
    tobacco, additives.
         The bottom line for all of those allegations is
    that the Pall Mall cigarettes that Mr. Gamble smoked
    were no more dangerous and no more addictive than
    any other commercially sold cigarettes.  Their
    witnesses admitted that.
         Those differences would not have made a
    difference to Mr. Gamble.  If he had smoked a
    filtered cigarette instead of an unfiltered, or all of those other changes that they're talking about,
    it would not have made a bit of difference to
    Mr. Gamble.
         And, of course, you heard lots of accusations
    about things that didn't matter to Mr. Gamble, about
    things that happened before he was born, and a lot
    of testimony about things that happened even after
    he passed away.
         We believe and we'll ask you to find when you
    look at the question --
         You have to go back.  No.  Back.  Back.
         -- that the answer to this question on the
    verdict form should be zero percent for Reynolds and
    its predecessor companies, and 100 percent for
    Mr. Gamble, for the choices that actually mattered
    to Mr. Gamble.
         All right.  Can we move forward again?
         All right.  Now, this is an instruction that's
    important to this as well.  Because some of you
    might be thinking, well, sure, Mr. Gamble made those
    decisions, but the company chose to sell cigarettes
    and chose to advertise cigarettes.
         Well, the instruction that you have from the
    Judge is that simply making and selling and
    advertising cigarettes is a lawful activity that cannot be the basis for liability.  You can only
    find liability based on the instructions that the
    Judge gave you, but you can't put down a percentage
    just because the companies, American Tobacco and
    Brown & Williamson, made and sold cigarettes.  That
    was a lawful activity and still is.
         The next question relates to damages, and there
    are a few different lines there.  I'm going to try
    to cover this quickly because you all know by now
    how I feel about this and what we think you should
    do here.  It's no secret.
         I told you in jury selection and during
    openings that we don't think this is a case where
    damages should be awarded.  There are lots of other
    cases out there that you heard Burns and Proctor
    testify in, but this is not a case where damages
    should be awarded.
         I did tell you in opening that you would hear
    evidence about $8,000 in funeral expense and about
    $43,000 in medical expenses.  You heard that
    evidence, of course.  But I need to say this about
    this question about damages.  Two things.
         First, the testimony that you heard about this
    category of damages called support and services was
    truly remarkable.  This was this Gil Spruance that they brought to you.
         They paid a guy almost $200 an hour to come in
    here and tell you that it would be reasonable for
    you to award almost $400,000 for things like paying
    the bills, changing light bulbs, and cutting the
    grass and things of that nature.  $400,000.
         He was talking about, if you want to hire
    somebody to cut your grass, you got to run
    background checks and set up FICA withholdings and
    all that.  What was he talking about?  He admitted
    that he didn't even bother to find out from
    Mrs. Gamble what those services were actually
    costing her, but you can bet it wasn't $400,000.
         That's an astonishing request that ought to
    tell you something about the credibility of their
    entire case.
         And then today, Mr. Shields said to you that
    you should award 10 million dollars in pain and
    suffering damages.  He just pulled that number out
    of thin air.  10 million dollars sounds like a nice
    round number, and that's what he wants you to award.
    There's simply no basis for that, no basis for that
    at all.
         The last question on the verdict form relates
    to punitive damages:  "Under the circumstances of this case, state whether, by clear and convincing
    evidence, punitive damages are warranted against
    Reynolds or its predecessors."
         You only get to this question if you have first
    found for them on the fraud and conspiracy claims,
    which are questions 3 and 4.  So we don't think you
    should get to this question in the first place; but,
    if you do, you need to understand -- even just if
    you're considering it, you need to understand some
    things about how punitive damages work.
         Can we have that slide, please?
         Punitive damages can be awarded only for
    conduct that was a legal cause of Mr. Gamble's
    illness and death.  So if they've made allegations
    about something that happened years after he passed
    away or something about filtered cigarettes that he
    didn't smoke, all of those examples that I gave
    earlier about conduct allegations that don't relate
    to Mr. Gamble, this is not the case to try to award
    punishment for that.
         "Punitive damages can be awarded only to Mrs.
    Gamble."  So any amount that you award, which we
    don't think you should award any, it's going to go
    into Mrs. Gamble's pocket.
         And you should understand that punitive damages are the damages that are paid over and above, in
    addition to, any damages that compensate
    Mrs. Gamble.  Punitive damages are not compensation.
    They are simply extra money.
         I showed you the jury instruction that says
    that you can't punish Reynolds for being in the
    business of selling cigarettes.  You heard evidence
    about how cigarettes are inhalable, and about how
    many people are affected by smoking-related diseases
    every year, but you can't punish Reynolds for those
    things.
         A cigarette that isn't inhalable is not a
    cigarette.  It's a cigar.
         And some of the other allegations that they
    made to try to get to you award punitive damages are
    really just complaints about the fact that Reynolds
    is even in business at all; but, cigarettes are a
    legal product, and it would violate the Court's
    instructions for you to punish R. J. Reynolds just
    for being in the cigarette business.
         And you should know that every document, every
    internal document, every public document that they
    showed you has been public for many, many years, and
    society and the government still have determined
    that it's legal to sell cigarettes. Think about this.  Punitive damages can only be
    awarded to punish and deter conduct that harmed
    Mr. Gamble.  I've already described for you how most
    of the allegations they've made have nothing to do
    with Mr. Gamble, but I want to show you something
    else, too.  Because you heard a lot of evidence on
    this question of whether Reynolds should be
    punished, and you'll see that almost everything that
    you heard does not rise to the level of something
    that should be punished.
         Let me give you some examples.
         Can we pull that up.  All right.
         It's not punishable, reprehensible conduct to
    have the same scientific view as the public health
    community did in the 1950s.
         Can we show the dem that shows them that?  The
    next one.
         Remember this?  They made all of these
    allegations that the American Tobacco Company knew
    something in the 1950s.  This is before anyone sees
    Mr. Gamble smoking, but that the American Tobacco
    Company knew something and lied about it.
         But the only evidence that you saw that
    actually came from the people running the American
    Tobacco Company was this statement here about what Paul Hahn believed, and it was:  "The industry is
    strongly convinced that there is no sound scientific
    basis for the charges that have been made."
         And we showed you that people like Dr. Hess,
    from the American Medical Association; Dr. Heller,
    from the National Cancer Institute; and,
    Dr. Hammond, from the American Cancer Society,
    people who aren't there on behalf of some tobacco
    company, they felt the same way.
         Why is it that Dr. Hess and Dr. Heller and
    Dr. Hammond can honestly hold this view, but at the
    exact same time moment in time, Paul Hahn cannot?
         Their only reason is it's a tobacco company.
    It's a whipping boy.  Of course, they're lying.  Of
    course.
         So then they bring Dr. Proctor to try to show
    you that Paul Hahn knew something he wasn't telling
    people.  What did they bring you?  They brought you
    a letter from some random manager at another company
    called Ecusta Paper.  It wasn't Mr. Hahn's letter.
    It wasn't even sent to Mr. Hahn.  There's no
    evidence at all that Mr. Hahn, the person who signed
    the Frank Statement, didn't believe what he was
    saying.  And you can't punish someone, even a
    corporation, for its opinions. Can we go back, a slide back.
         It's not punishable conduct to fund good
    research and to publish research indicating that
    smoking is addictive and can be harmful to health.
         Can we show to dem as to what was published.
         All right.  In terms of publications, you heard
    evidence that Dr. Rodgman at Reynolds disclosed his
    research into what's in tobacco smoke, including
    hydrocarbons, to the Surgeon General; that the
    Surgeon General thanked the Tobacco Industry
    Research Committee for its contributions.  And we
    actually showed you some of the articles that were
    published on research funded by TIRC, including
    articles concluding that smoking is addictive --
    that was in 1963 -- articles that cigarette smoking
    caused heart disease, harms the lungs and causes
    cancer.
         Funding that kind of research is not punishable
    conduct.  Following the design recommendations of
    the public health community is not punishable
    conduct.  Submitting lists of ingredients to Health
    and Human Services every year since 1986 is not
    punishable conduct.
         Dr. Proctor testified that the companies,
    including the American Tobacco Company, were, in fact, searching for ways to understand what was in
    smoke and to see if they could remove the bad
    elements.  That is not punishable conduct.
         We showed you the evidence about Reynolds
    specifically, how Reynolds spent over a billion
    dollar over ten years trying to develop a Premier
    cigarette that would be -- was hoped would be a
    safer cigarette; how Dr. Russell, a preeminent
    researcher, praised Reynolds for that research, and
    how Reynolds continued that research into its
    Eclipse cigarette.  That is not punishable conduct.
         Companies shouldn't be punished for holding an
    opinion.  They shouldn't be punished for the stupid
    things that some of their employees might write down
    in a document picked out by lawyers.
         I bet that if I talked to any of you for ten or
    15 minutes, I would learn that each of you has or at
    one point in time has had that one co-worker who
    seems to be full of ideas about how everyone else
    should do their job; that one co-worker who seems to
    know everything about things that aren't even in
    their job description, right?  That person who has
    ideas that they think are great ideas, like
    Mr. Shields said this Claude Teague was a
    brainstormer, a creative guy in the company who talked about everything.  He's that guy.
         We've all worked with people who you would
    never want their thoughts or their suggestions to be
    put forward as representative of the company.  And
    we showed you that this Dr. Teague that they keep
    talking about, the first document they showed is one
    he wrote when he was in his early twenties and had
    just been hired.  Some of the other documents where
    he's supposedly making marketing recommendations, he
    wasn't even in marketing.  He didn't run marketing.
    And there's no evidence that he made a presentation
    to the people who were running those departments.
    Reynolds shouldn't be punished for that.
         Reynolds shouldn't be punished for not
    publicizing risks about the health risks of smoking
    that were already being publicized in the press and
    on TV.  We showed you this earlier.  And they
    certainly shouldn't be punished for conduct that had
    no effect on the smoker whose wife is looking to
    receive extra money.
         We ask that you reject all the plaintiff's
    requests for money damages:  The $400,000 for mowing
    the lawn and paying the bills and the other things
    they talked about; the 10 million dollars they want
    you to award for pain and suffering; all of it. At the end of the day, the bottom line key
    facts are the ones I've been talking about since day
    one.  Mr. Gamble knew the risks.  He didn't rely on
    anything the company said or did.  He never really
    tried to quit.  He smoked what he wanted to smoke,
    even when the whole world switched to what was being
    advertised.  And no one forced him to smoke or
    prevented him from trying to quit when it would have
    made a difference to him.
         Maybe Mrs. Gamble would have a stronger case if
    the cigarettes that Mr. Gamble smoked never had
    warning labels on them.  Maybe she'd have a stronger
    case if he switched to filtered cigarettes because
    he saw an ad that said they were safer.  Maybe she'd
    have a stronger case if he saw the Frank Statement
    and relied on that.  Maybe she'd have a stronger
    case if the "particular people" advertising campaign
    said something about cigarettes being healthy or
    safe.  Maybe she'd have a better case if he actually
    put down his cigarettes and tried smoking for
    himself and really meant it.
         But they don't have any evidence of any of
    those things.  The evidence was just the opposite.
    And for those reasons, we're going to ask you to
    come back with a defense verdict. Now, I've tried to fairly summarize the
    evidence that you've heard.  And after I sit down,
    Mr. Shields will have another chance to argue to
    you, and I won't get to respond.  He has that luxury
    because plaintiffs have the burden of proof.  We
    don't have the burden of proof on the liability
    issues in this case.  But it means that if he makes
    a new argument that I haven't addressed, I won't get
    a chance to respond to that.
         But you all know me by now.  You know our case.
    You know our evidence.  And you can probably figure
    out pretty well how I would respond to just about
    anything that Mr. Shields might say after I sit
    down.
         I just want to express our appreciation one
    last time for your patience, for waiting for the
    other side of the story.  I've explained this case
    the best way that I know how, and we are relying on
    you to reach a fair verdict here.
         We're in your hands.  We know you will use your
    common sense.  You will follow the law.  You'll
    stick to the facts that mattered for Mr. Gamble.
    And we hope that you'll come back with a defense
    verdict.  Thank you very much.
         Thank you, Your Honor