         MR. SHIELDS:  All right.  Thank you. As an aside, I should say that if I seem like
    I'm gasping for my breath, I'm still battling a
    cold, and if I'm still contagious, I'll try and stay
    away from you, so that I don't give it to you as
    well.
         We were about to talk about the civil
    conspiracy, but I told you a moment ago that there
    were three elements of what they did:  They targeted
    teenagers; they designed cigarettes to create and
    sustain addiction; and they entered into this
    conspiracy.
         Let me tell you a little bit more about number
    two.  Both Dr. Burns and Dr. Proctor testified about
    them designing and engineering cigarettes to be
    addictive.  I know we like to think of, particularly
    in an unfiltered cigarette like Pall Mall, that it's
    just tobacco rolled up in paper.  It is anything but
    that.  It is a highly engineered product, as
    Dr. Proctor told you.  There are all these design
    specifications for how the product is engineered,
    including the exact amount of nicotine a cigarette
    is supposed to have.
         And why is that included, because there's a
    threshold amount of nicotine necessary to create and
    sustain addiction.  And so cigarettes are engineered, and have been going back long before the
    fifties, to make sure they're addictive in three
    principal ways.
         One, they have to be inhalable.  Unlike chewing
    tobacco or a cigar, unless you inhale a cigarette,
    it is unlikely to be addictive because the whole
    point is, it's inhaling it into your lungs that the
    blood vessels absorb the nicotine and send it to
    your brain, which is what causes the addiction.
         If cigarettes weren't inhalable, people
    wouldn't become addicted to cigarettes.  Well, how
    are they making them inhalable?  They flue cure them
    so that they become more inhalable.  And they put
    all these additives in them to make a very harsh
    smoke that wouldn't be inhalable, inhalable.  And
    they do that so that it will be addictive.
         The second thing they do to engineer them to
    sustain -- to create addiction is that they make
    sure they have a sufficient dose of nicotine.  Now,
    that means selecting and blending the tobaccos that
    have the dose of nicotine that you want; but, above
    and beyond that, it means manipulating the levels of
    nicotine and adding them to make sure that you have
    a sufficient dose of nicotine.
         Now, both Dr. Proctor and Dr. Burns told you about what's called reconstituted tobacco.  What
    that is, you take the stems and the parts of the
    tobacco that are left over that have very little
    nicotine in them, but instead of discarding them,
    you boil them up, you make a sort of paste out of
    them, dry it out so that it becomes a paper, and
    then they spray nicotine levels on it so that they
    get the precise amount of nicotine they want to put
    in the cigarette.  And then they chop up that paper
    into fine little slivers so that it looks like
    tobacco.
         And a substantial percentage of what's in a
    cigarette these days, and going back to the fifties,
    constitutes that reconstituted tobacco is one of the
    many means used to make sure that there's a
    sufficient dose of nicotine in a cigarette to create
    addiction and to sustain addiction.
         And third, and finally, they add chemicals to
    their product to make the nicotine more impactful,
    as a way of trying to make it more addictive.
         Dr. Burns told you, for example, about
    chemicals that interacted with sugars, that, in
    turn, gave more impact to the nicotine going to the
    brain.
         So those are the three ways in which they create and design cigarettes to make them create
    addiction and sustain addiction in existing smokers.
         Let's go back to the conspiracy now.
         The conspiracy starts with the developing of
    scientific evidence that cigarette smoking must
    cause lung cancer.  And Dr. Burns showed you this
    diagram in which he said the interesting thing is
    that when people really started to smoke cigarettes
    in about 1900, you had this rapid increase in
    consumption from World War I and from World War II
    and from massive marketing.  And then, about 20
    years later, this lag time, you have a previously
    unheard of disease, lung cancer, suddenly
    skyrocketing almost parallel to the line of
    increased consumption.
         That information led scientists to say, well,
    maybe there's a relationship between cigarette
    smoking and lung cancer because we didn't have lung
    cancer before we had this increase in smoking.  And
    so they started undertaking population studies,
    studies to see if there was an association between
    smoking and the people that had lung cancer.
         And in 1950, there were four major studies
    linking smoking with lung cancer published in the
    Journal of the American Medical Association and the British Medical Journal and in the journal called
    Cancer Research.
         These four studies were a major breakthrough in
    developing scientific evidence that cigarette
    smoking caused lung cancer.  It led in turn to one
    of the authors -- one of the sets of authors, Ernst
    Wynder and Evarts Graham, to try the next step, and
    that is not only to look at population groups, but
    look at animal studies.
         One of the ways scientists try and determine if
    a substance causes cancer is to do a study on an
    animal, see if it will cause cancer in the animal.
    And then, if it causes cancer in the animal, then
    you might be able to refer it would cause it in a
    person as well, particularly if you have all this
    population data as well.
         And so Ernst Wynder and Croninger did the mouse
    skin study paintings that were published in 1953
    that were able to produce skin cancers on mice that
    were remarkably similar to the kinds of cancers
    being seen in lung cancers.
         The evidence regarding those prior studies was
    known to anyone who was looking at the scientific
    literature.  Most people don't look at the
    scientific literature.  You know, 16-year-old Don Gamble wasn't reading the British Medical Journal or
    the Journal of the American Medical Association, but
    Reynolds was, and the other tobacco companies were.
         And Dr. Claude Teague, who remained with them
    throughout his entire career, wrote this memorandum
    in which he reviewed all the scientific evidence
    that was then available and said the studies tend to
    confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged
    tobacco smoking and cancer of the lung.  That was in
    February of 1953.
         A few years later in 1956, another scientist at
    RJR, Dr. Rodgman, did another analysis of cigarette
    smoke and the evidence, walked his way through it,
    and said cigarette smoke is a major causal effect in
    the presence and increasing incidence of cancer of
    the respiratory system.  That's lung cancer.
         But, most importantly, there was an interview
    done by British American Tobacco Company of the
    various top scientists and executives at all of the
    American tobacco companies in May of 1958.  And the
    British American Tobacco researchers that came
    around went to the American Tobacco Company, the
    then manufacturer of Pall Mall, went to the R. J.
    Reynolds Tobacco Company, went to the other various
    tobacco companies, and said, with one exception, a Dr. Green at Yale who was not affiliated with any of
    them, the individuals whom we believe -- whom we met
    with believe that smoking caused lung cancer.
    That's in 1958.
         And then, years later, Reynolds again has an
    internal memo in which it goes through all of the
    evidence and concludes that the amount of evidence
    accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health
    hazard is overwhelming.
         So it is clear from those documents that they
    looked at the scientific literature, understood what
    the scientific literature was saying, and, in terms
    of their own internal beliefs, as shown by the BAT
    memo, they accepted and believed that cigarette
    smoking caused lung cancer.
         And if you wanted to look particularly at the
    American Tobacco Company, the manufacturer of Pall
    Mall at the time, the American Tobacco Company, in
    the early fifties and throughout the fifties, was
    the leading tobacco company.  It was the leader of
    the conspiracy.
         And the American Tobacco Company knew that it
    caused lung cancer because, one, we have a memo in
    which it tries to muzzle Evarts Graham and Wynder
    from their work.  They were at Sloan Kettering hospital in New York, and the American Tobacco
    Company gave large sums of money to the hospital.
    And this memo is where they met with the head of the
    hospital and talked to him about trying to reign in
    Evarts Graham and Wynder from their work in which
    they were suggesting there was a relationship
    between cigarette smoking and lung cancer.
         You do that only if you know about the work,
    and you know about what's being published.
         And, secondly, they used their economic power,
    as this memo indicates, to get the head of Sloan
    Kettering to go out and issue a statement at a press
    conference that there was no established
    relationship between lung cancer and cigarette
    smoking.
         Secondly, you will see the documents regarding
    the Ecusta paper company.  Now, the Ecusta paper
    company undertook a series of studies back in '53,
    starting in the summer and running into fall, along
    with the American Tobacco Company, and reported the
    results back and forth to the representatives of the
    American Tobacco Company.
         And what they did was the mouse skin study that
    Graham and Wynder were doing publicly.  And they
    also found, as a result of that, that they were able to produce what would appear to be a skin lesion
    that would develop into a cancer.  Yet, despite the
    fact that they, in effect, were replicating what
    Wynder and Graham were doing, the President of the
    American Tobacco Company issued a press release
    alleging that the Wynder and Graham work was wrong,
    that it didn't prove anything, that mice weren't
    men, and, consequently, that we should not give it
    any credence.
         Dr. Robert Proctor told you about this.
    Dr. Proctor, along with Dr. Burns, described what
    the industry knew.
         The example of the Ecusta paper company is seen
    in Document P-562, in which it described the results
    of its study and indicates that the test probably
    would produce an eventual cancer, and that was the
    importance of the work being done.
         And then that leads, in turn, to the meeting at
    the Plaza Hotel.  It is the President of the
    American Tobacco Company, having met with Sloan
    Kettering, and having the Ecusta paper studies that
    showed that it caused the same thing that Wynder and
    Graham were showing on animals, that then calls a
    meeting of the presidents of the American tobacco
    companies.  Reynolds, Philip Morris, all the others called to a meeting at the Plaza Hotel in December
    of 1953.
         And when they got together, their principal
    concern was not the health and safety of their
    customers or what they could do to protect their
    customers, but was how to protect their bottom line
    by a public relations campaign.
         And so they decided to employ the Hill &
    Knowlton public relations company to engage in a
    campaign to convince the public that the scientific
    literature did not support the claims that cigarette
    smoking caused lung cancer.
         And the interesting thing about the documents
    from that meeting is that, internally, they
    acknowledged the very things that they were denying
    publicly.  Here is a document, P-168, from Hill &
    Knowlton in which it describes its interviews with
    the research directors of those tobacco companies,
    in which they, in effect, admit, they understand
    it's addictive, it's a habit they can't break, and
    they also understand the cancer causation issue by
    talking about whether they could produce a
    cancer-free cigarette.
         You don't talk about whether you can produce a
    cancer-free cigarette if you don't think your cigarettes are causing cancer.  That's the bottom
    line.  And so internally, they are admitting the
    very things that they are denying publicly.
         And the first thing they did to deny publicly
    was the issuance of the Frank Statement, in which
    they claimed there was no proof that cigarette
    smoking was one of the causes of lung cancer, and in
    which they undertook the responsibility of saying
    the interest of people's health was a basic
    responsibility of theirs, paramount to every other
    consideration of their business.  Keep that in mind
    as we look at what they did for the next 45 years as
    to what was really paramount for their consideration
    of their business.
         Now, note, this Frank Statement didn't say,
    here's the evidence that it causes lung cancer, but
    we don't believe it; or, we think there are some
    problems with the evidence; or, we think there's
    some scientific question.  It just denied there was
    any evidence to begin with, knowing from their own
    internal documents that they had reviewed the
    evidence, and they thought it was more than
    sufficient to reach that conclusion.
         Now, I want to be clear.  We are not saying
    that Don Gamble saw the Frank Statement.  Don't know whether he did or not.  Lived in Jacksonville at the
    time.  It was published in Jacksonville.  He may
    have seen it, he may have not seen it.  That's not
    the point.
         The point is, this is the beginning of a
    conspiracy that is so vast and so pervasive that
    these kinds of statements literally are everywhere
    for the next 40 to 50 years, so that it would be
    impossible for anyone not to have known that was the
    position that the tobacco companies were taking,
    because they constantly said it.  They said it on
    radio and television and in press releases and in
    statements and in magazines, over and over.  Just
    like their advertising, it was like wallpaper, that
    everybody would have known and seen it over that
    period of time.
         Now, is it likely that someone 40, 50 years
    later could say, I remember seeing this statement on
    such-and-such date, and it was called X?  Of course,
    not.  Memories don't work that way.  But people
    remember the substance, whether they remember the
    specific statement or the specific time period.
         And we're going to see later, from comments
    that Don Gamble made, that he clearly remembered the
    substance of this and the campaign that came and accepted it as true.
         Now, part of what they decided to do at the
    Plaza Hotel was create a couple of front
    organizations.  The first one was TIRC, the Tobacco
    Industry Research Council, later became known as the
    Council for Tobacco Research.  As their own internal
    documents indicate, it was a front organization.  It
    was a shield.  It was a public relations scam that
    they were using, not a legitimate scientific
    organization, which is what they told the public.
         What they did is spent all of this money on
    research of issues other than the fundamental
    question.  And as Dr. Proctor told you, he called it
    distraction science, good science done by reputable
    scientists, it just didn't look at the real issues.
    It looked at all these other issues, which enabled
    them to say, one, it hadn't been proven that
    cigarettes cause cancer.  We have spent 300 million
    dollars, and we haven't been able to prove it.  And,
    two, it enabled them to work with prestigious
    scientists, who then would become less likely to
    make comments about cigarettes if all their research
    is being funded, even on other issues.
         By 1964, any question about whether there was
    scientific doubt should have been resolved.  You were told by Dr. Burns and by Dr. Proctor that in
    1962 President Kennedy created an advisory -- asked
    his Surgeon General to create an advisory committee
    to look into the issue.  Because at that point in
    time, the astronauts smoked, the President of the
    United States smoked, most doctors smoked.
    Everybody smoked.
         So when the issue came up, the Surgeon General
    creates an advisory committee.  It looks at the
    evidence for a couple of years and, even though half
    of the members of the advisory committee were, in
    fact, smokers, concluded that cigarette smoking
    caused lung cancer and emphysema.
         Now, at that point in time, it should have been
    clear to anybody that there was no longer any
    scientific issue to be decided.  The industry then
    had to make a decision, was it going to accept the
    unequivocal, clear scientific evidence and deal
    appropriately with its customers, or was it going to
    continue down the road on its conspiracy of denial
    and concealment, of doubt and reassurance?  It chose
    to do the latter.
         And the first thing it did, as part of doing
    the latter, was send out its emissaries to be on the
    evening news to deny what the Surgeon General had said.
         And you saw that old grainy videotape from 1964
    on CBS Evening News in which one of the Cullmans is
    being interviewed and denies that there's anything
    harmful in cigarettes, disputes the Surgeon
    General's report, and, importantly, asserts that
    reassurance theme that we'll see time and time
    again, that is, if there's anything harmful in
    cigarettes, we'll find it, and we'll take it out.
         Now, what's the significance of that?  That's
    the kind of thing that convinces existing smokers to
    continue to smoke.  An existing smoker says, I'm
    healthy, nothing wrong with me; if there's anything
    wrong with it, they'll find it out, let me know.
    They'll take it out, and I'll be fine.  So I might
    as well continue smoking.
         In fact, that very reassurance theme is set out
    by Hill & Knowlton in the Plaza meeting in
    Plaintiff's Exhibit 168, as one of the things they
    should do.  And you saw it.
         Now, every time one of their emissaries got on
    television, that was one of the things they would
    say, nothing harmful in cigarettes, but if there is,
    we'll take it out, so you might as well go ahead and
    keep smoking.  They said that despite the fact that they already knew what was harmful in cigarettes.
    They had already identified all the carcinogens, and
    they knew you couldn't take them out.  And they knew
    that filters and low tar and everything else wasn't
    going to take out the carcinogens, yet they made
    that statement over and over again.
         Now, another example of it, this time moving
    forward a number of years to the President of RJR on
    Nightline, in which, years later, 1980s, he is still
    denying that there's anything harmful in cigarettes,
    saying it doesn't cause cancer, doesn't cause heart
    disease, doesn't cause emphysema.  He won't even
    admit that it'll stain your teeth.  And he uses that
    old refrain, if there's anything harmful, we'll take
    it out.
         And then you saw part of their denial, doubt
    and reassurance campaign was every time the Surgeon
    General would issue a report, they would go on and
    ridicule the Surgeon General, deny the contents of
    it, claim it was not scientifically justified.
         We gave you one example of Bill Dwyer from the
    Tobacco Institute at a news conference in which he
    is ridiculing the Secretary of Health, Education and
    Welfare, Joseph Califano, for the 1979 Surgeon
    General's report. Above and beyond that, you'll recall Dave Burns
    talking about how they reacted to the 1988 Surgeon
    General's report on addiction.  The 1988 Surgeon
    General's report on addiction was a landmark
    document in which not only did the Surgeon General
    say cigarette smoking was addictive, but said that
    the processes used for addiction were similar to
    cocaine and heroin.  And it had such statements in
    it as in many senses it is easier to quit cocaine
    and heroin than it is to quit cigarettes.
         How did they react to that?  The day before the
    Surgeon General's report is even issued, they called
    a news conference.  And Dave Burns said, I know
    because I was in Washington for the issuance of the
    report, and saw the news conference, and saw it
    being reported on television, and at that news
    conference claimed that all of these tactics were
    improper, that there was no basis for them, and they
    hadn't even read the report because it hadn't been
    issued yet.  But it was part of their campaign of
    denial, of creating doubt, of reassuring smokers to
    continue smoking.
         Went so far as to go into the mid 1980s.  This
    is 1985, when R. J. Reynolds started an advertising
    campaign in major newspapers across the country in which it claimed that there was still an open
    controversy about whether cigarettes caused disease.
    And it ran a whole series of ads in newspapers
    during that time period.
         In addition to issuing those statements, they
    also did some less clear things.  At least people
    knew when Reynolds put out an ad that it was
    Reynolds saying it.  They didn't know when they
    placed an article in True magazine, that at the time
    was the largest selling men's magazine in the
    country, that it was a totally phony article.
         The article claimed that there was still a
    controversy, that there was no proof that cigarettes
    cause cancer.  It failed to reveal that the author
    of the article was a sports writer employed by Hill
    & Knowlton, and that the article was written by Hill
    & Knowlton working with that sports writer.  And of
    the scientists quoted in the article, it also failed
    to reveal that all of them were on the payroll of
    the tobacco industry.
         That article, in turn, was picked up by the
    National Enquirer.  "Cigarette cancer link is bunk."
    This time, although it's literally word for word the
    prior article, a different name is put on it.  This
    doesn't say Stanley Frank; it uses a different name, a name that's wholly made up, and, once again, does
    not reveal that it's placed there by the tobacco
    industry, that it's paid for by the tobacco
    industry, that the scientists quoted in it are on
    the payroll of the tobacco industry.
         Now, a major part of the campaign of denial
    included the claim that filtered cigarettes were
    safer, included the claim that low tar cigarettes
    were safer, and, as Dr. Burns told you, that's not
    true.  The evidence is now in, and it's unequivocal,
    that there's no benefit from a filtered cigarette.
    It does literally nothing.  That there's no benefit
    from a low tar cigarette because smokers compensate
    by smoking more, smoking harder, and drawing it in
    deeper, with the result that they're exposed to just
    as much of the tar as before.  And the reason they
    do that is they're addicted to nicotine, and in
    order to get the nicotine in the low tar cigarette,
    they have to smoke more of it in order to get the
    dosage necessary.
         Reynolds' principal defense is that it was
    known that cigarettes were harmful, therefore Mr.
    Gamble knew they were harmful.  It shows, and we'll
    offer in evidence, magazines and news stories and
    public service announcements about the harms of cigarettes.
         We don't deny that.  That's another straw man
    argument.  Nobody is claiming that Don Gamble did
    not hear or see the claims that cigarettes cause
    lung cancer or other disease.  And showing us a
    textbook from Georgia from years before he was born
    or a magazine article from the late fifties or a
    public service announcement in the seventies misses
    the point.  You know, unless it was being said
    publicly, there would have been no need for the
    conspiracy in the first place.  That's the point.
         It was publicly known.  Nobody denies that.
    And because it was publicly known, they entered into
    this conspiracy to deny and conceal what they really
    knew, and pursued this campaign of doubt and
    reassurance, a campaign that worked on many millions
    of smokers, like Don Gamble.
         They offer some additional evidence, and they
    say, well, this is going to prove he knew that it
    caused cancer.  They showed you that this morning,
    the cancer policy.  Supposedly this shows he knew
    that cigarette smoking would cause lung cancer.
         This policy, as a portion of the deposition
    they read indicates, was a policy that was given to
    all the employees of the City of Jacksonville at the time he worked there.  It has nothing to do with
    smoking.
         Look at it.  There's not a question about
    whether he smokes.  The health portion of it doesn't
    reference smoking.  The payment for it doesn't
    depend on whether you're a smoker or non-smoker.
    It's just a generic cancer policy provided to the
    city employees at the time.
         It offers absolutely no evidence that he
    believed that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer.
    It merely shows that he took advantage of what he
    was offered in a generic policy that, on its face,
    has nothing to do either with smoking or with lung
    cancer.
         Now, finally, they attempt to deal with all of
    this massive evidence by attacking the messengers,
    mainly by attacking Dr. Burns, Dr. Krugman and
    Dr. Proctor.  And they'll talk to you about how much
    they have been paid.
         There's several things to keep in mind with
    that argument.  One, it does not go to the content
    of what those witnesses said.  And the content of
    what they said is affirmed in many of the documents
    you have from numerous scientists and experts in the
    field.  Dr. Proctor's testimony, Dr. Burns' testimony is affirmed by the 2014 Surgeon General's
    report.
         Two, Dr. Burns and Dr. Proctor and Dr. Krugman
    all reached their opinions and conclusions and
    published them into peer reviewed literature long
    before they were ever requested to testify in a
    case.  So you can't claim that their opinions are
    based upon being paid.  They expressed those
    opinions, they published those opinions, before they
    ever were asked to testify, before they were ever
    paid a dime to testify.
         Three, they got started testifying because the
    United States Department of Justice requested them
    to testify, and because the Attorney Generals of
    various states, including the State of Florida,
    requested them to testify.
         Next, much of what they have been paid was for
    the time that they expended working for the
    Department of Justice and for the Attorney Generals
    of the various states.  But even for the additional
    time, they are being paid for time they actually
    expended at what clearly was a reasonable rate for
    the professionals of their time, as evidenced by the
    fact it's the Department of Justice and the Attorney
    Generals that are initially employing them to do that.
         Are you saying that if you get paid for
    spending mass amount of time, so that it amounts to
    a lot of money, that that somehow corrupts the
    opinions that you have published and expressed for
    years before you were ever employed to begin with?
    Not only is that illogical, that's silly.
         And finally, keep in mind when they want to
    talk about the amount of money, that they
    contributed to that money by taking the depositions
    of them over and over and over again, asking them
    the same questions and the same opinions.
         Dr. Burns told you he'd been deposed by the
    tobacco defendants 150 times.  Ask yourselves, why
    did they do that?  Don't think they knew what he was
    going to say after the third time or the fourth
    time?  It's because all that money that they are
    making -- paying him because of the time he's
    expended is then adding to how much he has received,
    and they can come into court and say, look how much
    money he's been paid.  That's another straw man
    argument.
         You have to judge the credibility of
    Dr. Krugman, Dr. Burns and Dr. Proctor based upon
    their written publications before they were ever involved in this litigation and their degree of
    knowledge as expressed in witnesses in this
    courtroom.
         Finally, let's summarize this whole campaign,
    as they themselves summarized it when they wrote,
    "while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and
    executed over the years, it is only fair to say that
    it was not nor intended to be a vehicle for
    victory," and they describe it as creating doubt
    about the health charge.
         Now, it is also true that their internal
    documents show that they knew and understood that
    nicotine was addictive, that they were in the
    business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug
    effective in the release of stress mechanisms.
         There are an extensive number of documents that
    show that while they were denying it publicly,
    internally they were acknowledging it.
         And when they denied it publicly, the ultimate
    denial publicly was the 1994 hearings in Congress,
    in which they stood up like they were in a courtroom
    here, which they weren't, held up their right hand
    and said under oath, nicotine is not addictive, with
    documents in their files that said just the reverse.
         They did that because they understood that they could not make this argument about choice that
    they're making here if a person was addicted.
         All right.  What is it that was fraudulently
    concealed?  And I think this is an important point I
    want to make clear to you.  We are not saying that
    it wasn't known that cigarettes caused lung cancer.
    Of course, it was.  We are not saying that it wasn't
    known that cigarettes weren't addictive.  Of course,
    it was.  The point of the fraudulent concealment
    campaign is not that they were concealing what was
    publicly being said otherwise; what they were
    concealing is what they truly knew and believed
    internally.
         And so what they concealed was that they knew
    that their cigarettes caused cancer and other
    diseases.  What they concealed was that they knew
    that their cigarettes were addictive.  What they
    concealed was that they knew there was no doubt or
    controversy.  What they concealed was that they had
    already identified the harmful substances in smoking
    and knew that they could not be removed.  What they
    concealed was that they, in fact, designed their
    cigarettes to make them addictive.  What they
    concealed was that they targeted teenagers.  And
    they concealed that they knew filters and light cigarettes and low tar didn't work.
         Now, the concealment is truly what they
    believed, not that these things weren't being said
    publicly.  The point is that had they not concealed
    what they truly believed, everything would have been
    different.
         If they would have come out and said, we know
    cigarettes do, in fact, cause cancer, we know
    cigarettes are addictive, we know filters don't do
    any good, the whole climate of everything would have
    changed.  It would have taken away the ability of a
    smoker to rationalize continuing smoking.  It would
    have taken away the possibility that someone like
    Don Gamble would say, I believe what the cigarette
    companies were saying.  That's the whole point of
    the fraudulent concealment and the conspiracy claim.
         So then let's turn to what Don Gamble put this
    reliance on, that is, what impact did the fraudulent
    concealment and conspiracy have on Don Gamble.
         The testimony you have on that is from Jessie,
    in which Jessie Gamble said, he told me over and
    over again that the tobacco companies had said that
    they would put nothing in cigarettes to hurt us or
    nobody else.  He said that cigarettes were not
    harmful to him or anyone else. His son Don confirmed hearing his dad say those
    same things, that the tobacco companies would never
    put anything in cigarettes to harm anyone, and that
    he didn't think they were harmful.
         Now, that's not saying he hadn't heard they
    were.  We're not going to tell you that.  It's not
    saying he hadn't heard that it was being said that
    cigarettes cause lung cancer, that he hadn't heard
    that cigarettes cause various disease; but, he had
    also heard that the tobacco companies denied it, and
    chose to believe the tobacco companies.
         When you say, they wouldn't put anything
    harmful in cigarettes, that is a way of saying, I
    don't think the tobacco companies would be selling
    this if they thought it was harmful.  That's a lay
    person's way of saying, I believe the tobacco
    companies when they say cigarettes aren't harmful.
    That's what reliance means.  It is shown by his
    statements.
         But it's also shown by his actions.  He
    continued to smoke unfiltered cigarettes when other
    people were switching to filter and low tar
    cigarettes on the basis that they were healthier.
    If you don't believe that cigarettes are harmful,
    there's no reason to switch to a filter.  If you don't believe that cigarettes are harmful, there's
    no reason to switch to a low tar cigarette.
         The fact that he stayed with an unfiltered
    cigarette, Pall Mall, for all of those years, is
    further confirmation of his belief that they were
    not harmful to him and his belief in the tobacco
    companies not putting anything harmful in them.
         But -- we understand that there were warnings
    on the package, and you have a right to consider
    what effect those have, but the Federal Trade
    Commission looked at the question of whether those
    warning statements worked, whether they were
    effective.  We'll have those documents.
         They concluded in their first report, P-269,
    that they were ineffective because nobody seemed to
    pay any attention to them.  They concluded years
    later, in their 1981 report, that a large number of
    people did not understand the harms of cigarettes,
    and that the labeling continued to be ineffective.
         Now, the third issue you're going to have to
    decide is comparative fault.  As I said, fault is
    not an all or nothing proposition.  There can be
    more than one party at fault.  They can contribute
    together.  They can both be substantial causes, and
    consequently be allocated between the two. I will concede that under the facts you've
    heard in this case you, as the jury, could conclude
    that Mr. Gamble was at fault in not quitting sooner
    or trying harder.  You could conclude that.  And if
    you do, then what you would do is apply comparative
    fault and determine the percentages between the two.
    That's what comparative fault is for.
         But when you're thinking about comparative
    fault, keep in mind the following.  Don Gamble
    started smoking cigarettes as a teenager, like
    everybody else in his time period, long before there
    were any public warnings, long before the public
    understood there were -- cigarettes could cause lung
    cancer, and he became addicted.
         And over the years, as he continued to smoke
    more and more cigarettes, and heard from the tobacco
    companies that they didn't put anything harmful in
    cigarettes, and if there was anything harmful they
    would take it out, he believed that they were not
    harmful.
         Now, you can say that he shouldn't have
    believed that, but he did.  And compare that conduct
    to their conduct, in which they purposely conceal
    what they really believe; that they spend massive
    amounts of money to convince people to continue smoking; that they target teenagers with their
    product; that they design their product to make them
    addictive, so that they will keep smokers smoking;
    and that they engaged in this massive conspiracy to
    deny the harmful effects of smoking to create doubt
    and to reassure smokers.
         So compare the two.  And we submit that if you
    do, the vast majority of the fault goes over to the
    column of the tobacco companies, R. J. Reynolds as a
    successor to the American Tobacco Company and as a
    successor to Brown & Williams Tobacco Corporation.
    But that's a decision you're going to have to make.
         And when you do, then the next matter you need
    to decide is compensatory damages.  The Court has
    instructed you -- and you'll have those instructions
    -- on what constitutes compensatory damages.  And if
    we boil down that instruction, it's including the
    following elements for the damages of wrongful
    death.
         There are really two claims.  She is bringing
    her individual claim as a surviving spouse, and
    Jessie is also bringing her claim on behalf of the
    estate of Don Gamble, because she's the personal
    representative of the estate.
         Individually, as a surviving spouse, she's entitled to recover for the loss of his support and
    services, for the loss of his companionship and
    protection, and for her mental pain and suffering.
         For the estate, the estate is entitled to
    recover medical expenses and funeral expenses.
         Now, in regard to the economic damages, loss of
    services, you have the evidence from Mr. Spruance.
    He presented you this chart and explained how he
    arrived at these figures of economic damages for
    loss of services between 142,000 and 296,000.  You
    heard that evidence.  It's up to you to evaluate it
    and determine the figure that you think is
    appropriate.
         But you're also going to have to determine, in
    addition to those economic expenses, the
    non-economic:  Loss of protection, pain and
    suffering, loss of guidance, all of the things that
    the surviving spouse is entitled.  And you're
    entitled to consider the period of time in which she
    has been denied that, that is, the period of time in
    which he died prematurely, that he would have been
    around to provide services, protection, and she
    could have avoided the pain and suffering of his
    premature death.
         That is a matter for you, as the jury, and your enlightened conscience to determine the appropriate
    figure.  There's no magic formula.  I wish there
    were.  I wish I could say, here's the formula you
    use to arrive at the figure, but there isn't.  The
    formula is what you believe is appropriate under all
    of these facts and circumstances, and in
    consideration of Jesse's testimony about the impact
    of his premature death on her.  You saw that and how
    she testified.  You'll have to evaluate all of that
    and come up with a reasonable figure.
         I can suggest what we think is a reasonable
    figure for your consideration, but ultimately it's
    your consideration.  I suggest to you that a
    reasonable figure under these circumstances is not
    less than 10 million dollars.
         Given the background, circumstances, and the
    evidence in that case -- in this case, that is a
    reasonable figure for the surviving spouse for all
    of the losses, for her pain and suffering, and for
    what she has had to endure as the result of the
    premature death of her husband.
         Once again, that's a matter for you to
    determine.
         Finally, you're going to have to determine
    whether to award punitive damages.  Punitive damages, as the Court has instructed you, are
    damages designed to punish the defendant for its
    misconduct and to deter similar misconduct in the
    future, not only by this defendant, but by others.
    It is the way that civil courts deal with
    punishment.
         This is not a criminal court.  We can't send
    somebody to jail.  What you can do is award punitive
    damages as a way of punishing them for their
    misconduct and as a way of keeping them from doing
    it in the future and from others doing it.  That's
    the whole point of punitive damages.
         It's not designed to compensate the plaintiff
    because she would have been compensated under her
    compensatory damages.  It's awarded, nonetheless, in
    addition to compensatory damages for the purpose of
    punishment and deterrence.
         And the Court has instructed you on the
    elements to consider.  Let me suggest, in addition
    to the instruction, the facts you should think about
    in deciding whether to award punitive damages.
         One, was it intentional conduct?  Clearly, it
    was intentional conduct.  The evidence is
    overwhelming that it was intentional conduct.
    There's no evidence to the contrary.  The entirety of the evidence is that it was intentional
    misconduct.
         Two, is whether it's a personal injury or
    death, instead of merely economic.  The law thinks
    it's more reprehensible, as do most anybody, to say
    that the impact of what you're doing is to injure
    somebody or to kill somebody, as opposed to merely
    causing them some economic loss.  That's a factor to
    consider in whether to award punitive damages.
         It's also relevant that it was repetitive and
    continuous, not just for a limited period of time,
    but for decades.  And as Dr. Proctor told you, it
    even continues today.
         You're also entitled, and the Court will
    instruct you, to consider the magnitude of the harm.
    The magnitude of the harm, of course, to the Gamble
    family was the loss of Don Gamble, Jesse's husband,
    the father of Don.  But the magnitude and the harm
    as well is the impact on everyone else.
         What did Dr. Burns say to you?  350,000
    Americans -- I'm sorry -- 480,000 Americans die each
    year from smoking-related disease.
         MR. WALKER:  Objection, Your Honor.  Improper
    argument.
         THE COURT:  Sustained. MR. SHIELDS:  I'm sorry?
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         If y'all want to discuss it at sidebar, that's
    fine.
         MR. SHIELDS:  You are entitled to consider
    under the instruction whether to award punitive
    damages based on the totality of the harm, but not
    the amount.
         Now, the totality of the harm here is not just
    a statistic.  It's an outrage.  And the only way
    that our system can effectively deal with it in the
    civil court is by the award of substantial punitive
    damages.  And if we get to that phase, we'll talk
    more about it.  But the first part of that is for
    you to consider in this phase whether to award them
    at all.
         Finally, you should consider the motivation of
    the defendant.  And what was its motivation?
    Selling cigarettes.  Making money.  Greed.  This
    campaign over all those years is the result of one
    simple fact, how much money can we make.  That's the
    bottom line.
         So, ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude.  I
    thank you for your attention.  I talked a long time.
    I know that.  We have a lot of evidence here.  This is an important case.  I wanted to have the full
    benefit of explaining the evidence to you and how it
    fits together.
         We will ask you at the end of the argument to
    come back on a verdict form finding that Don Gamble
    was a member of the class, finding for the plaintiff
    on each of the questions being asked, and indicating
    that it's appropriate and warranted to have punitive
    damages in this case.
         Thank you.


         MR. SHIELDS:  I began the first portion of my
    argument by making a preliminary observation that
    not only was the greater weight of the evidence on
    the issues in the case in favor of the plaintiff, it
    was the only evidence; that the defendants did not
    put on any evidence, they didn't call any addiction
    expert, they didn't put on any evidence to refute
    the claims that were being made.
         The defendant responds by saying, well, we didn't need to call anybody because we
    cross-examined your witnesses.
         The fact is, even with cross-examination of our
    witnesses, they didn't put on any evidence on the
    issues that you have to decide, so that you remain
    the fact that the entire evidence on the issues you
    have to decide came from the plaintiff's experts and
    the plaintiff's testimony.
         And the questions that he refers to deal with
    all kinds of tangential matters that are designed to
    divert your attention from the issues you have to
    decide, what I call straw man arguments.  And we'll
    go to that in a moment.
         But ask yourself this.  Dr. Burns testifies,
    using the standards set out by the Surgeon General's
    report and the American Psychological Association's
    Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, that Don Gamble
    was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes.  No evidence
    to the contrary.  They don't call an addiction
    expert that disagrees.  They don't even ask
    Dr. Burns any questions about that opinion.
         They ask him all kinds of other questions, but
    not during their entire examination of him did they
    ask him about his conclusion that Mr. Gamble was
    addicted to cigarettes.  The only evidence is that Mr. Gamble was addicted.
         Dr. Burns also said, and he continued to smoke
    because of his addiction, which meets the
    instruction of the Court about legal causation.  If
    addiction is the reason you continue to smoke or is
    a reason you continued to smoke -- that is
    significant -- then that establishes legal
    causation, because it is the continuing to smoke
    that caused emphysema and that caused his lung
    cancer.
         Was there any evidence to the contrary?  They
    didn't call an addiction expert that said that he
    didn't continue to smoke because of his addiction.
    They never even asked Dr. Burns about that.
         Instead, they asked a question about whether he
    started to smoke because of advertising, or they
    asked questions on all kinds of other things.  But
    not once in the entire examination was there any
    questioning about whether addiction was the reason
    he continued to smoke.
         Now, understand, all of this discussion about
    he couldn't quit, choice, and so forth is
    interesting, but it doesn't answer the question of
    class membership.  Class membership is, was he
    addicted, did he continue to smoke because of that addiction, so that his addiction is the legal cause
    of the disease he got.  That's the question you're
    going to have to answer.
         The question is, did he choose to smoke.  The
    question isn't, did he try to quit enough.  The
    question isn't all the kinds of things that they
    tried to raise.  The question is whether he met the
    class definition.  That's the question you have to
    ask.
         And the evidence is totally one-sided, nothing
    to the contrary on those issues.
         Similarly, you get to the other issues in the
    case.  Did they engage in a conspiracy to
    fraudulently conceal what they knew?  They tried to
    divert your attention by saying, well, it's already
    known.  It's out there in the public.  That's not
    point.
         The point is they promised, with the Frank
    Statement, that they were going to protect the
    interest of -- the health interest of their
    customers, to the exclusion of their own interest.
    And instead, they made all of these statements over
    the years, not just the affirmative statements on
    Face the Nation and other television programs, but
    the massive amount of advertising, billions of billions of dollars on advertising.  And not once
    did they ever say, oh, by the way, we, in fact, do
    know and believe that it causes lung cancer.  In
    fact, it is addictive.  In fact, it causes these
    diseases.
         Instead, they concealed what they knew.  They
    didn't put it in these image advertisements.  They
    didn't include it in the statements.
         So it's not just a matter of what they went out
    and publicly said.  The fraudulent concealment claim
    is what they didn't say about what they really knew
    and the internal documents showing what they really
    knew.  No evidence to the contrary to that.
         Was there any discussion with Dr. Burns or
    Dr. Proctor or Dr. Krugman by defense counsel of
    whether they disclosed what they really knew?
    Instead, they tried to divert your attention by
    talking about all kinds of other things, but never
    addressing that fundamental issue.
         There's also the question of was there a
    conspiracy.  Of course, that's one of the Engle
    findings.  The documents clearly show they entered
    into an agreement.  It clearly shows what they did
    pursuant to the agreement and all of the components.
    Was there any discussion on cross-examination or otherwise of any of that.
         MR. WALKER:  Objection, Your Honor.  He's
    misstating the questions on the verdict form.
         THE COURT:  Well --
         MR. WALKER:  I could elaborate, but I don't
    want to do it in open court.
         THE COURT:  Objection noted.  The jury has seen
    the verdict form, and I'll go over it with them.  So
    I'll advise the jury to rely on the verdict form
    that's actually used.
         MR. SHIELDS:  There isn't even a question on
    the verdict form about whether they entered into a
    conspiracy to fraudulently conceal because that's
    already been established by the Engle findings, if
    you get to that point.
         The question is the reliance question, the
    causation question.  There was no evidence to the
    contrary on any of those matters.  Instead, they
    cherry-picked around the edges on things that make
    little or no difference, what I call the straw man
    arguments.
         What do I mean by that?  What I mean by that is
    you define the issue different than what it is, you
    set up an argument that really isn't an issue in the
    case, and you knock it down.  It's a straw man you knock down to say, we did such and such, when it
    doesn't address at all what you're going to be
    required to address in answering the questions.
         And here are some good examples of that.  What
    he told you were the key issues, look to see if any
    of those key issues are on the verdict form, whether
    you're ever asked those questions.  You're not,
    because they don't answer the questions on the
    verdict form.
         Take the first one.  He knew.  What does that
    mean, he knew?  Of course, he knew what was being
    said.  Otherwise, in talking about the labels, he
    wouldn't have told his wife that he believed the
    tobacco companies when they said they wouldn't put
    anything harmful in cigarettes.  He wouldn't have
    told his wife that he believed that cigarettes
    weren't harmful.
         That he knew has to be distinguished from what
    he believed.  He knew doesn't answer the question.
    It's what he believed that's relevant.
         Think about it this way.  We've all heard that
    the electromagnetic radiation in cell phones causes
    brain cancer.  How many of you believe that?  Are
    you all still using your cell phones?  Because if
    you did, you wouldn't be using them. That's exactly what smoking was like back in
    the fifties, sixties, seventies, and eighties.  The
    difference between what was being said and what was
    being believed in the face of this massive campaign
    in which they concealed what they knew, in which
    they tried to convince the public that there was
    scientific doubt, in which they tried to reassure
    smokers to continue to smoke.
         Another example, he never really tried to quit.
    Well, I'm going to talk in a moment about the truth
    of that statement and what the evidence really is,
    but there's no question on the verdict form about
    whether he tried to quit.  The question on the
    verdict form is whether he was a member of the
    class.
         To be a member of the class, he had to be
    addicted.  Whether or not you tried to quit doesn't
    change whether you were addicted.  To be a member of
    the class, one of the substantial reasons for
    continuing was the addiction.  Whether or not he
    tried to quit doesn't answer that question.  That is
    a diversion.  It's a straw man issue that doesn't
    answer the question you'll have to answer on the
    verdict form.
         Or take a look at the last one.  No one forced him to smoke.  That's the kind of thing that their
    jury research suggests they ought to say, but it's
    not one of the issues on this verdict form.
         MR. WALKER:  Objection, Your Honor.  It's
    improper argument.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. SHIELDS:  It is not one of the issues on
    the jury form that you're going to have to decide,
    whether he was forced to smoke.  It is not an issue
    to be decided by you whether he was forced to smoke,
    because the issue is whether he was addicted and
    whether that was the reason that he continued to
    smoke.
         The issue is not whether he was forced to
    smoke.  But the fact of the matter is there is
    massive undisputed testimony that what addiction
    means is that you are compelled to seek the next
    dose of nicotine.  That was the very definition used
    by Dr. Burns of what addiction means, and he walked
    through the criteria that showed the meaning of
    that.
         So there are all of these issues and straw man
    arguments that don't really address what you have to
    decide.
         Third important point, even in regard to those issues, the defense has misstated what the evidence
    is.  I can't walk you through all of the
    misstatements we just heard about what the evidence
    is.  I'm going to have to rely upon you and your
    notes to know what the testimony actually was, as
    opposed to what you were told a few moments ago, but
    let me give you some examples of that.
         You were told, for example, that we asserted
    that this Plaza meeting was a secret meeting, and it
    was up to him to show that it wasn't.  That's not
    the testimony.
         The testimony that came out, the first time
    anybody referenced it as a secret meeting was when
    he referenced it on cross.  And Dr. Proctor said,
    well, it was reported as a secret meeting.  And
    then, the next thing you saw was that it was
    reported in The New York Times as a highly secret
    meeting of the presidents of the companies, in which
    they refused to comment.
         Total misstatement of what the testimony was,
    and there are example after example of that.
         He showed you, for example, textbooks from
    early 1940s in Georgia to say this shows that he
    knew.  Well, what did the textbooks say?  Some
    generic information that it wasn't good to smoke. But Mr. Gamble was four years old at the time of
    those textbooks that they showed you.
         I don't really think that he was in school
    reading a health textbook for a 9th grader in 1941.
         Similarly, he talked about, well, the
    newspapers were full of this information,
    anticipating my argument that, in fact, what the
    newspapers did, as Dr. Krugman showed you, is
    because of their desire to always show both sides,
    when they reported a story they always reported the
    tobacco version as well.
         Now, they've put in a lot of newspaper
    articles.  So have we.  We have put into evidence
    the newspaper articles from the Jacksonville papers
    that show what tobacco was saying and what was being
    reported in the newspapers.
         But defense counsel says, well, that's always
    at the end.  That really is lost in the process.
    And the example he referred to, which was the only
    example referenced in the trial, was the LIFE
    magazine article.
         The always at the end is an interesting way of
    stating it.  There's the article.  It's all on one
    page.  The whole last paragraph deals with the
    position of the American Tobacco Company. Well, I suppose that's at the end of the
    article, but it hardly, as suggested, is somehow
    hidden, as opposed to being front and center from
    the very article itself.  And that's true for most
    of the newspaper articles that you'll see in
    evidence.  We won't take the time to go through all
    of those.  You will see that the position of the
    tobacco companies are repeatedly set out in those.
         But the important point, I think, in all of
    this is Don Gamble, Jr.'s testimony.  Dad wasn't
    much of a reader.  He didn't watch a lot of
    television.  He only had a 9th grade education.
    And, most importantly, what Don said was, you know,
    he didn't believe it was harmful, and he wouldn't
    have smoked around us kids if he thought it was
    harmful.
         Maybe that's the best evidence of what he
    really believed, the fact that he smoked around his
    kids, and he wouldn't have done that if he thought
    it was harmful.
         Now, you've heard a lot about warning labels in
    the defense presentation, but keep in mind, there
    have been several consensus reports from the Federal
    Trade Commission and from the experts that have
    analyzed whether those warning labels did any good, and whether people knew and believed the harms of
    cigarettes.
         And rather than believe the assertions of
    counsel and what I say or what Mr. Walker says, you
    might just want to look at what the documents say.
    Read what the Federal Trade Commission report wrote
    in 1967.  Read what the Federal Trade Commission
    report wrote in 1981.  Read what the Surgeon
    General's Reports from 1995 and 2010 and 2014 all
    wrote on these issues, keeping in mind that those
    reports are prepared based on panels of experts
    looking at all of the evidence extensively,
    analyzing it, and dealing then with the issues, not
    by evidence presented in a courtroom.
         You can criticize Dr. Burns.  You can criticize
    Dr. Proctor.  You can criticize Dr. Krugman.  But
    the bottom line is that everything they told you is
    set out in these consensus reports of the experts
    from the National Academy of Sciences, from the
    National Cancer Institute, from the Federal Trade
    Commission, from the United States Surgeon General's
    Reports, which are required by federal law to set
    out the consensus of the scientific opinion.
         And ultimately, I say to you, if you want to
    know the truth of all of this, look at the 2014 Surgeon General's Report, required by federal law to
    set out the consensus of opinion among the experts,
    and read the first chapter, because the first
    chapter of it goes through what the tobacco industry
    said and did from the fifties through the time of
    this report.
         And the interesting thing is, it's literally an
    outline of the evidence we presented in this trial.
    And everything we told you is set out in the Surgeon
    General's Report, with the ultimate conclusion of
    the chapter that the tobacco industry's extensive
    campaign to counteract these forces through
    marketing, public relations, political influence and
    the creation of doubt about the scientific evidence
    on tobacco is now well documented through the
    industry's internal documents.
         The industry used its influence to thwart
    public health action at all levels and fraudulently
    -- that's the term of the Surgeon General --
    fraudulently misled the public on these issues,
    including whether lower yield cigarettes conveyed
    less risk of health than secondhand smoke, whether
    it harmed non-smokers.  Undoubtedly, these actions
    slowed the progress in tobacco control and
    regulation. Read the chapter.  Read the ultimate
    conclusion.  It is exactly what we have been telling
    you for the last week and a half about their
    comment.
         Now, in addition to misstating so much of the
    evidence in that closing argument, I think you need
    to be reminded about their misstatements about
    Dr. Burns as well.
         We saw the quotes that they stuck up from
    Dr. Burns.  And when he asked Dr. Burns about those
    at trial on cross-examination, what Dr. Burns said
    in response was:  That statement is taken out of
    context.  May I explain?
         And counsel would not let him explain.
         And when he quoted him another statement, Dr.
    Burns said:  That statement is taken out of context.
    May I explain?
         And he wouldn't let him explain.
         It's a little disingenuous then to come up in
    closing argument and quote those statements, when
    you refused to give the witness an opportunity to
    explain how they were being taken out of context and
    what they really meant.
         And speaking of taking out of context, we heard
    in their closing argument that Mrs. Gamble quit because smoking made her sick.  It was affecting her
    health.
         What did she really say?  It gave her
    headaches.  And that has an entirely different
    meaning than it was making her sick or affecting her
    health.  Why did he misstate it in the broader
    terms?  To give you the wrong impression about what
    she testified.
         He also told you that Mr. Gamble didn't really
    try to quit.  What was the evidence?  That wasn't
    the evidence.  Mrs. Gamble said and Don Gamble, as
    well, said he tried to quit over and over.  Many,
    many times he tried to quit, starting in the 1980s.
    And in 1985, when they bought their trailer home,
    and when he was diagnosed with emphysema, were
    specific attempts that she remembered, but
    throughout those years she said he made many, many
    attempts to quit, rarely lasting more than a few
    days.  When he did attempt to quit, he had
    withdrawal symptoms, and he relapsed.
         Well, how does that turn into closing argument
    that he never made any real attempt to quit smoking?
    And you walked through all those years.  Probably 30
    minutes of closing argument was, here's what was
    happening at this time, and he didn't try to quit. And that's not the testimony at all.  It just
    misrepresents totally what Jessie Gamble told you
    and what her son Don Gamble told you.
         Let me pull all this together and simply say,
    you all took a lot of notes during the course of
    this, and that's good.  You have the ability then to
    go back and see what the evidence really was and
    what evidence was put in and what was done and what
    was not done.  You don't have to rely on the
    lawyers.
         I could get up here and talk for another hour
    or two about all of the misstatements in their
    closing argument and how they misstated the issues
    in this case.  Ultimately, you're going to have to
    decide what the evidence really was.  You are the
    deciders of the facts.
         But you're deciding the facts in the context of
    what questions are asked on that verdict form.  And
    when you answer the questions on the verdict form,
    what you're going to discover is, one, most of the
    arguments that you just heard don't relate to the
    questions that you have to answer, and mere attempts
    to divert you from answering those questions.
         And, two, if you go back through your notes,
    you're going to discover that it grossly misstated what the evidence was.  And that's not a matter of
    one lawyer saying one thing and the other lawyer
    saying another thing.  You've got your notes, you
    can collectively go back with your recollection and
    deal with specifically what was being said.
         Let me conclude by simply saying this.  This
    case is about addiction.  Don Gamble clearly was
    addicted to cigarettes.  He continued to smoke
    because of that addiction.  That proves class
    membership.  That's the beginning point.
         And ask yourself one simple question.  If there
    was not nicotine in cigarettes, and if he wasn't
    addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, would he
    have continued to smoke?  Undisputed evidence is
    nobody continues to smoke without nicotine.  And if
    you're not addicted, you don't continue for decade
    after decade.
         The answer to that first question is crucial to
    this entire case.  Clearly he's a member of the
    Engle class.  Once you determine that, then the
    Engle findings are binding on you, and they refute
    virtually everything he said in the last 45 minutes
    of his closing argument because you are bound by
    those determinations; not only the evidence in this
    case, but the Court has instructed you that you're bound by those determinations, so that you then move
    on to the question of what impact it would have made
    had they not concealed what they really knew and
    believed.
         Now, the answer to that is simple.  Don Gamble
    is relying on what they said.  He said the tobacco
    company said they wouldn't put anything harmful.
    That is his way of saying they're not harmful, the
    companies don't think they're harmful.  You can't
    say that if the company, in fact, is revealing the
    truth; that they know they're harmful, that they
    know they cause lung cancer, that they know they're
    addictive, and they know there's no scientific
    controversy; that they know there's no question of
    doubt; that all of this reassurance is totally
    untrue; that they know what's harmful in there, and
    they know that it can't be taken out.
         That's what's being concealed.  Mr. Walker
    tries to think -- have you think that what's being
    concealed is that it's being said that these things
    are true.  What's being concealed is what they truly
    believe, because had they revealed what they truly
    believe, in all of that massive advertising, in all
    of those press statements, in all of those
    television appearances, in all of those articles in the magazines and newspapers which they impacted,
    had they truly believed all of that, what would have
    happened?  The culture we have today would have been
    the culture we would have seen back in the 1950s.
         That culture is what would have impacted Don
    Gamble and every other smoker at the time.  It would
    have made it much more difficult to continue
    smoking.  It would have encouraged quitting.  It
    would have provided the cessation efforts and
    abilities for people to effectively try and quit.
    It would have taken away the denial and
    rationalization that addicted smokers needed to
    continue smoking.
         That's what the reliance is.  That's what the
    difference would have made.
         So we think, when you fairly look at what the
    evidence really is, and what the issues you are
    asked to answer on the verdict form, as opposed to
    the false issues that have been put up for you, it
    will be clear that you should return a verdict in
    favor of the plaintiff, and that you worked your way
    through the compensatory damages and punitive
    damages as instructed.
         It's getting close to 6:00, so let me conclude.
    We thank you for your time.  We thank you for your attention.  We appreciate it.  You've put in a lot
    of effort.  We've put in a lot of effort.  And we
    know you're going to go back there and work
    effectively, deliberating together, trying to reach
    a fair and just decision for Jessie Gamble.
         Thank you very much.  Thank you, again.
