MS. GALLAGHER:  Good afternoon, ladies and
gentlemen.  I told you when we started this case, this case
was about Roger Giddens and his decisions; Mr. Giddens, who
made a decision to start smoking when he was an adult,
Mr. Giddens who made the decision to continue smoking
despite knowing the health risks associated with smoking and
Mr. Giddens, who made the decision not to quit until he was
diagnosed with lung cancer.  And now the plaintiff is asking
you to award money for those decisions, and the evidence in
this case simply will not allow you to do so.
Now, Mr. Finch started by talking to you about the
Engle findings and the Engle case.  Well, the Engle jury who 1194 made those Engle findings never heard any evidence at all
about Mr. Giddens.  Those findings don't apply until you say
they do.  You are the ones who decide the evidence in this
case and reach your verdict based on the evidence that you
have heard in this courtroom.  Then you decide whether the
Engle findings apply to this case by your verdict.
Now, I told you at the beginning of this case
there was a lot we didn't know about Mr. Giddens, and I
think after being here for a week, there's still a lot we
don't know about Mr. Giddens.  For example, when exactly
Mr. Giddens started smoking.  You've heard evidence that it
is more probable, it is likely, in fact most of the
evidence, the credible evidence points to the fact that he
started smoking as an adult.  You heard today from
Mr. Watkins, his high school teammate who said he never saw
Mr. Giddens smoking in high school.  He was a four sport
athlete.  Coaches didn't want the athletes smoking.
And then you heard from Mr. Ashley Giddens,
Mr. Giddens' brother, who said I don't know, I can't
remember, I'm guessing, I'm assuming, it's my impression he
may have started at 16, 17, or 18, but he wasn't sure.  The
one thing that Mr. Ashley Giddens could tell you is not an
assumption, not an impression, but the picture that was in
his head of when he first recalls his brother smoking is
when he came home from the Army, when he was 21 years old. 1195 The credible evidence in this case is that Mr. Giddens made
an adult decision to start smoking.  He was old enough to
serve his country and he was old enough to decide if he
wanted to start smoking.
Mr. Giddens made the decision to smoke cigarettes
despite the known risks of cigarettes.  Now, the plaintiff
brought you Dr. Cummings who came in and say, oh, no,
Mr. Giddens didn't understand the risks of smoking and there
were these things the tobacco companies did and one of the
things he pointed to was the Frank Statement.  Remember, the
Frank Statement that the plaintiffs had up here for most of
the trial?  The Frank Statement that you all know, although
Dr. Cummings wasn't aware, didn't appear in the
St. Augustine Record, the one paper that we know Mr. Giddens
read on a regular basis.  It was not a town of over
25,000-dollar -- or 25,000 people.  So here is Dr. Cummings
bringing you the Frank Statement knowing that Mr. Giddens
didn't see it.  Well, why would he do that?  It's because
Dr. Cummings wants to make you think that might have
something to do with this case.  And why would he do that?
Because he's rooting for the plaintiff to win.  He told you
that.  He may not be, in his words, a friend or foe of the
tobacco companies, but he is proud to be the general in the
war against tobacco, and he's proud to be part of the
plaintiff's team. 1196 You'll remember when Mr. Parrett stood up at the
very beginning of this case in opening statement and he
introduced everybody on his team.  And he said -- he
introduced Mr. Giddens, Jr. as the most important person on
the team.  Although any money awarded in this case is
supposed to go to Glenda Giddens, but she can't be the most
important part of the team because she didn't even want to
be on the team.  She wants nothing to do with this lawsuit
and she's the one who has something at stake in this
lawsuit.  But she's not the only one who has a stake in this
lawsuit.  Dr. Cummings does.
Dr. Cummings travels from town to town in Florida,
city to city, county to county, testifying on behalf of
plaintiffs.  He does that for $500 an hour, and although he
can't tell you how much money he's made because he's never
sat down and added it up, he can tell you that he has earned
about a million dollars testifying against tobacco companies
in his war against tobacco.
Now, Dr. Cummings brought you all sorts of
statements, different things that he said the tobacco
companies said or did, like the Frank Statement, that we
know Mr. Giddens didn't see.  We brought you the evidence of
things that Mr. Giddens at least could see because they were
in publications that he was reading.  They were on the news
and you know that he was watching news channels. 1197 For example, in 1964 -- Libby, could we have the
lights dimmed, please?  Thank you.
For example, you've seen this before, in 1964, the
Surgeon General's Report.  You recall this was the big, huge
news story that you're probably tired of us talking about
now, coming out and saying lung cancer -- smoking causes
lung cancer in men.  And here it is, the 1964 Surgeon
General's Report on the front page of the St. Augustine
Record.  Cigarette smoking is cause of cancer, other deadly
disease, the panel reports.  This was the newspaper
Mr. Giddens was reading on a daily basis.  His wife told you
that.
He also read Reader's Digest.  We brought you some
of those Reader's Digests.  My eyes are going; I can't see.
These are Reader's Digests.  They published 39 different
articles on smoking and health between 1924 and 1964, years
before Mr. Giddens was even born.  With things -- with
titles like Cancer By The Carton, I Quit Smoking or Cooper's
last Stand, How Harmful Are Cigarettes.  You will see all
these.  These were the things that were read in today and
you will have the entire articles if you want to look at
them.  But we brought you Reader's Digest because there's
testimony in this case that Mr. Giddens actually read it, so
he could see these things, unlike the statements
Dr. Cummings was putting up that he can't tell you and he 1198 never even tried to link to Mr. Giddens.
Today we showed you some other news articles, and
these are just a sampling of some of the articles -- I'm
sorry, is this in anybody's way?
JUROR:  Yes.
MS. GALLAGHER:  It is?  Sorry.  Is that better?
Sorry.
These are different titles of different articles
that were in the St. Augustine paper during the '50s and the
'60s talking about the dangers of cigarette smoking.  And
these are all in evidence for you to look at.  And the
reason we brought you these is because we know these are
things that Mr. Giddens saw.  These were things that were
telling him that smoking was dangerous, the Reader's Digest
articles that were telling him that smoking was addictive.
These were all things in his world, not in Dr. Cummings'
world.
We also brought you public service announcements.
I'm not going to play those for you again.  You saw some of
those today and we did some with Dr. Cummings.
All right, let's talk about smoking in the news.
That's fine, Juan.  Leave that up.
You heard from various witnesses in this case that
Mr. Giddens watched the news.  He watched the local news and
he watched the national news and you'll recall these 1199 different clips that we played you, Walter Cronkite, See It
Now from the 1950s, and then Harry Reasoner, the one you've
heard this morning, who said it was your decision whether
people would continue to smoke in the face of the Surgeon
General's Report in 1964.  These are the things Mr. Giddens
saw.
We also played PSAs for you, these public service
announcements that you saw from the American Cancer Society,
the one with Ed Asner who we showed you two.  When
Dr. Cummings was testifying, we showed you the one where he
was going to participate in the Great American Smokeout for
the first time, and said it's just one day.  And then today,
you saw the one from a year later where he had been
successful.  Remember, he said I picked -- I didn't smoke
for one day, then I didn't smoke for another day and here I
am a year later, why don't you try it, too.
And Ed Asner was on the Mary Tyler Moore Show.
You heard that Mr. Giddens liked Mary Tyler Moore and you
saw these others, Don't Be A Loser from the movie star on
Perry Mason.  And then Larry Hagman, who also did the one in
the 1980s.  These were things that were on TV, Mr. Giddens
could have seen.  Not as clear that we know he saw all of
these because we know he was a TV watcher, but we don't know
exactly what he was watching but these are things
Mr. Giddens could have seen and we know he saw things in the 1200 newspapers and magazines that he read.
Like 90 percent of the people who were polled in
1984, Mr. Giddens understood there were health risks
associated with smoking and that it could cause lung cancer,
and you don't have to rely just on him reading about it,
seeing it in the newspapers, seeing it in the news, seeing
it in Reader's Digest because you have experiences from his
own life that tell you he was aware of the dangers of
smoking.  Goes back to selling insurance policies to his
brother.  Remember when Ashley Giddens' testimony was read
in and he said, my brother sold me two policies?  Remember,
he made the joke, he must have needed another sale.  He sold
him one policy and he sold him a second policy and Ashley
said I had to -- that he was charged a higher rate.
Remember, Mr. Giddens -- and you can look at the social
security earnings that are in there -- he sold insurance
from 1960 to 1971.  During that period, he sold his brother
these two policies and he had to sell the policies at a
higher rate because his brother was a smoker.  These are the
policies that Mr. Giddens is selling to people.  This is how
he is making his living is selling life insurance policies
and having to sell some of them at a smoker's rate because
of the increased risk of injury and dying early.  Or
smoker's rate, as Dr. Cummings called it, the smoker's
penalty, the higher rate you pay for insurance.  Mr. Giddens 1201 was doing this in the 1960s.  He was clearly aware of the
health risks of smoking.
Then you've heard from Mrs. King who owned the
dealership.  Remember when the dealership went non-smoking?
She told all her employees, this is bad for you, she was
handing out pamphlets, and she specifically told you that
she told Mr. Giddens, smoking is bad for you.  And what was
his reaction?  He shrugged it off, and then instead of
trying to quit, asked to be moved back to the service center
so he could continue to smoke.  That was his reaction in the
face of somebody telling him, you need to quit smoking.
Now, the other thing I told you is that
Mr. Giddens quit smoking with his lung cancer diagnosis.
And I know you've heard different things about that and so I
just want to review the testimony with you.  You heard from
the plaintiff in this case that his father quit smoking in
February of 1995 after his lung cancer diagnosis.  And
although the plaintiff has changed what he said about other
things in this case, he has been consistent on that.
Through the verified worksheet that was read in this
morning, through his deposition testimony, and when he
testified in trial, he was consistent on that one point, is
that his father, he never saw him smoke another cigarette
after his diagnosis in February of 1995.
Mr. Giddens' brother told you the same thing.  And 1202 remember, at this point, Mr. Giddens, Sr. is living with
Vera and Ashley and Mr. Giddens has been diagnosed with lung
cancer and his brother is taking him to his radiation
treatments.  For four weeks after his diagnosis, Mr. Ashley
Giddens is driving his brother back and forth, five days a
week, and he would know if Mr. Giddens was smoking.  He
would see him do it, he would smell it if he was smoking and
then got back in the car with him.  That is the credible
evidence and that is that Mr. Giddens quit smoking at his
cancer diagnosis.
Now, who told you something different?  That was
Vera.  His sister-in-law.  And she thinks that Mr. Giddens
continued to smoke after his diagnosis.  Well, Vera was very
upfront that there's one thing she's not good with and
that's dates.  And in fact, she told you if the plaintiff's
lawyers hadn't told her before her deposition when all this
occurred, she wouldn't have been clear if it was 1996, the
year 2000; she's just not good with dates.  I mean, it's
been 17 years.  It's hard to blame someone for not
remembering things, but I think if you look at what
Mrs. Giddens said, she's a little confused.  Remember, she
said that she thought Mr. Giddens was diagnosed with his
stroke in January.  Remember, she said he smoked after his
diagnosis but after -- but didn't after his stroke because
she thinks his stroke was in January and not July.  That 1203 would fit with him quitting in February of 1995.  And of
course, she remembers emptying ashtrays because when
Mr. Giddens moved in with them, he was still smoking.  He
lived with them for some period of time, was diagnosed with
cancer, and then continued to live with them.  So yes, she
cleaned out ashtrays, but she is just confused about the
dates and that is why her testimony is different, her --
from Mr. Giddens, Jr., and from Ashley Giddens, who both
clearly remember that after his diagnosis, he never smoked
again.
Then you have Dr. Burns.  And I don't know what to
do with Dr. Burns because he has Mr. Giddens smoking in the
nursing home, and you didn't hear anything about that.  We
know that when Mr. Giddens was in the nursing home, he had
profound deficits, and how he's going to be wheeling himself
out of the nursing home, finding cigarettes -- I'm sure
they're not selling them in the nursing home -- and lighting
them up, I don't know what you do with that.  But if you
look at the credible evidence here of the people who were
around at the time, I think it is clear that Mr. Giddens
quit smoking when he was diagnosed with his cancer.
Now, you've heard a lot of different facts and
testimony and Judge Magnuson is about to instruct you on the
law and then it's your job to put those two together when
you deliberate, and you're going to have as much time as you 1204 want to do that.  But I'm going to spend my time here
focusing on a few of the questions instead of trying to go
through the entire verdict sheet with you.  And I want to
focus for a minute on the second question which is -- y'all
have these -- was Roger Giddens, Sr.'s addiction to
cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his death.
And I told you at the beginning when we started this case
that that's really two questions, and one question is was
Mr. Giddens' addiction to nicotine so strong that he was
simply unable to quit smoking in time to avoid his injury.
And the second part of that is did he die of a smoking
related disease.
Now, to answer these questions, you've got to look
at legal cause.
Libby, can I have the ELMO, please?
And you will have this instruction in front of you
when you're deliberating and Mr. Finch read you a part of
this.  And it says wrongful conduct is the legal cause --
and it goes on for a while, but the part I want you to focus
on is, so it can reasonably be said that but for the
wrongful conduct, the injury or damage would not have
occurred.  But for.  And the "but for" is the part I'm
talking about, is that was his addiction so strong that but
for that addiction, he would have quit in time to avoid his
injury? 1205 Now, I want to back up because this legal cause
instruction is in all the questions that you've been asked
to answer by Judge Magnuson in this verdict form.  But let
me back up and talk about the second part of that first, and
that is, did Mr. Giddens die from a smoking related disease.
And let me say, when we're talking about this, the plaintiff
has the burden of proof here and the plaintiff stood up here
and did the scales of justice and said he just had to tip
it.  Well, that's not quite accurate because the plaintiff
has the burden of proof to prove every element of his case
to you.  He doesn't start here and just have to tip over.
He starts down here and has to bring you the evidence all
the way up to prove his case to you.  And as I told you at
the beginning of this case, you can't guess, you can't
speculate, you can't assume, you can't say would have,
should have, could have.  You've got to have evidence to
answer these questions.  And if you get to a question, any
of the questions on this verdict form and you don't think
you have the evidence to answer it, then you cannot rule for
the plaintiff.  You have to put a no there because the
plaintiff, since they are the ones bringing the lawsuit,
have the burden to prove their lawsuit to you.  They have to
provide you those answers.
So let's talk about Mr. Giddens' cause of death.
I told you at the beginning, and it is still true after 1206 sitting here for a week, that nobody knows what caused
Mr. Giddens' death.  Now, plaintiffs brought up the death
certificate.
Juan, would you pull up the death certificate,
please?  Thank you.
And this is the death certificate.  It's in
evidence, and what the death certificate says -- it was
filled out by his attending physician and what the attending
physician put was natural causes.  The attending physician,
who was the one who saw Mr. Giddens in the nursing home, did
not determine a cause of death besides natural causes.
Now, Dr. Burns showed you this part when he was
testifying, natural causes, and then he said the death
certificate also said that Mr. Giddens had died from lung
cancer.  Well, Mr. Burns -- Dr. Burns was not showing you
the whole thing, because if you read the box where it says
lung cancer, what it says is -- this is a different part of
the death certificate and this is the part that Dr. Burns
didn't talk about and didn't show you.  What it says is,
"Other significant conditions contributing to death but not
resulting in the underlying cause given in Part I."  So what
this is saying is the man had lung cancer, but it didn't
result in his death.  Dr. Burns didn't show you that part.
He just said the death certificate says lung cancer.  That's
kind of misleading because that's not what it says. 1207 The attending physician, the doctor who knew
Mr. Giddens when he died, did not say it was lung cancer
that was the cause of death.  He didn't say it was a stroke
that was the cause of death.  He didn't say it was some
combination of those two that was the cause of death.  All
he could say was that it was natural causes, the man who was
there at the time.
But Dr. Burns now can tell you the cause of death?
Dr. Burns, who has joined the plaintiff's team, who suffers
from the same problem as Dr. Cummings, he's an anti-tobacco
advocate.  You took an oath to be fair and impartial in this
case.  The witnesses, particularly the expert witnesses, did
not.
Dr. Burns is on the plaintiff's team following the
same play book.  When he was deposed before trial, he was
asked, can you say in reasonable medical probability what
the cause of Mr. Giddens' death was.  And he couldn't.  You
saw that when -- some of the last questions I asked him
about the medical issues in this case, and I said, can you
say in reasonable medical probability what caused
Mr. Giddens' death.  He said, yeah, I can.  In this
courtroom, in this trial, he's saying it was lung cancer.
But back in his deposition, he said no, I can't.  I think
lung cancer and a stroke may have contributed to it, but I
can't tell you which one is more dominant.  I can't tell you 1208 which one is the cause.
Well, his deposition was given last year.  There
have been no new medical records found, there's been no new
medical discoveries.  It wasn't until he got in this
courtroom that he now says, I know it was lung cancer.  And
why is he doing that?  Because now plaintiff's team has
realized, well maybe stroke really wasn't a part of this.
Maybe the stroke wasn't caused by cigarette smoking, so now
it's got to be lung cancer.  Dr. Cummings -- Dr. Burns has
changed his testimony on that.
So let's talk about the stroke.  Dr. Burns told
you that the greatest risk factor, the biggest cause of all
different kinds of stroke is hypertension, including
hemorrhagic stroke, which is the kind Mr. Giddens had.  That
is the biggest risk factor.  Now, Dr. Burns kind of went
back and forth with this because he wouldn't say that
Mr. Giddens had hypertension or that it was under control.
Remember when I asked him if hypertension was the biggest
risk for having a stroke and he gave me that answer, well
you have to have hypertension for it to be the biggest
cause.  He was very not forthcoming on the whole
hypertension issue.  He kept fighting about, well,
hypertension might be the biggest risk, but you have to have
it.  That's kind of silly, but what we know from looking at
the medical records is that Mr. Giddens had hypertension. 1209 HO is history of.  That's how doctors write, untreated
hypertension and then PMHX is doctor speak for past medical
history.  And in there, it says hypertension, untreated.
And you know that Mr. Giddens had hypertension because Vera
told you that.  She knew.  She said he had hypertension and
Mr. Giddens wasn't treating it.  Ashley told you,
Mr. Giddens didn't go to the doctor.  In order to get
medications to treat hypertension, you've got to go to the
doctor because it's prescription medication.  So we know
that Mr. Giddens had hypertension.  What Dr. Burns told you
is the biggest risk factor from having any kind of stroke,
including the kind of stroke that Mr. Giddens had.
Now, if you left hypertension go untreated, as
Dr. Burns explained, all sorts of bad things can happen
because hypertension builds up the -- attacks the walls of
the arteries and after a certain amount of time, those
arteries can start leaking, and hypertension can cause
kidney damage, heart damage, and damage to the arteries in
the brain -- a stroke, which is exactly what happened here.
But now Dr. Burns comes into this courtroom and
says, okay, that the stroke was caused by smoking and he
used this part of the Surgeon General's Report, the
conclusion -- remember, the evidence, the synthesis of
evidence that there's association of smoking with all major
types of stroke.  But then when you look at it in more 1210 detail, as we did yesterday, the Surgeon General broke it
down to between ischemic and hemorrhagic and then the
Surgeon General got specific and cited studies and what
those said was that ischemic and subarachnoid, those strokes
you are at increased risk for if you smoke, but not the
hemorrhagic, the kind Mr. Giddens had.
Juan, can you pull up the 2004, please?
This is from the 2004 Surgeon General's Report and
it says the meta-analysis reviewed 32 case control and
cohort studies.  Now, meta-analysis is just when they take
all these different studies on a topic, they look at all the
data again and they come to conclusions.  And they said,
there is an increased risk for smoke, but the ischemic, you
have a 1.9 relative risk, which means you're almost twice at
risk, and 2.9 for subarachnoid hemorrhage, this kind of
hemorrhagic stroke.  That means almost three times the risk
if you smoke for getting that kind of stroke.  But for
cerebral hemorrhage, there was no elevation in risk.  That
is this one.  Remember when I went with Dr. Burns and said
what are different names for this kind of hemorrhage?  The
Surgeon General says that there is no increased risk from
smoking for that particular type of stroke.  And the Surgeon
General repeated that in 2010.
The 2010 report please, Juan.
Here again, in the 2010 report, are those exact 1211 same statistics reported again and they even cited to the
exact same study.  Dr. Burns was a reviewer.  Remember, he
told you he was a senior scientific reviewer for both the
2004 and the 2010 report?  He obviously didn't have a
problem with this when it was written in the 2004 report,
the 2010 report.  He didn't ask for that to be taken out.
And this is the specific information about the specific type
of stroke that Mr. Giddens had.  Again, Dr. Burns is not
showing you the whole picture.
Now, let me mention something here because
Mr. Finch talked about the Engle findings and how the Engle
findings said cerebrovascular disease and stroke, that that
was binding on you.  The way that this works is that you
decide whether the Engle findings are binding by your
answers to the first two questions.  And in answering the
first two questions, you have to decide whether Mr. Giddens
suffered from a stroke that was caused by his smoking.  That
is based on the evidence you hear in this case and not on
the Engle findings.  So you have to look at what you heard,
what you didn't hear from Dr. Burns to make the decision as
to whether Mr. Giddens suffered from a smoking related
disease.
Now, why would Dr. Burns change his testimony in
this case?  Why would he say that cigarette smoking was
responsible for this stroke?  Why would he say that lung 1212 cancer was the cause of death?  Well, when you're looking at
that, I want you consider one of the other instructions that
the Judge is going to give you.
Libby, may I have the ELMO, please?
This is one of the instructions you will see.  The
Judge gave us the instructions first so we could use them if
we wanted but he's going to give them to you.  One of the
instructions here, Instruction Number 4, is on expert
witnesses and it tells you different things to consider
about expert witnesses, but what the Judge has instructed
you is when a witness has been or will be paid for reviewing
and testifying concerning the evidence, you may consider the
possibility of bias and should view with caution the
testimony of such a witness where court testimony is given
with regularity and represents a significant portion of the
witness' income.
Now, we don't know how much Dr. Burns has actually
made testifying in litigation or how significant it is to
his income because he can't tell you whether he's made
$2 million doing this, $3 million doing this, or $5 million
doing this.  All he knows is that he has made millions and
millions of dollars testifying against the tobacco companies
in these cases and under the Judge's instructions, you need
to consider that when you are considering the testimony of
Dr. Burns. 1213 So getting back to the medical, what do you know
from the evidence that's been presented in this case?  You
know that in February of 1995, Mr. Giddens was diagnosed
with lung cancer.  You know that Mr. Giddens was responding
well to treatment.  You heard that he was still working
after he was diagnosed with lung cancer.  You heard Vera
Giddens say he was doing okay, and you heard his son, the
plaintiff in this case, saying I didn't ask him to come move
with in with me because he was doing okay.  Well, he was
doing okay until July of 1995 when he had this severe
hemorrhagic stroke.  When Vera Giddens found him, he was
unresponsive, he couldn't move.  And when he got to the
hospital, he had really severe problems.  And I didn't put
these up with Dr. Burns yesterday because we were trying to
get Dr. Burns out of here fairly early.
Juan, could you put up the composite?
And these medical records will be in there for you
and what these show are the different issues that
Mr. Giddens was having when he was in the hospital because
of his stroke.  He was -- had hemiparesis, which is he was
paralyzed on the right side because the bleed was in the
left side of his brain.  He couldn't talk; he couldn't walk.
He had what they call alphabet speech, where people just
can't get anything out.  He had difficulty swallowing.  He
had to have somebody around him when he was eating or 1214 drinking anything so that he wouldn't aspirate, so he
wouldn't get things in his lungs and develop another problem
like pneumonia.  He had severe deficits as a result of his
stroke.  And the result of his stroke was that he had
deficits so severe that he couldn't take care of himself.
And Mr. Finch talked to you about the do not
resuscitate.  The first time a do not resuscitate was ever
discussed about Mr. Giddens was after this stroke.  There
was no conversation about a do not resuscitate when he was
diagnosed with lung cancer.  There was no conversation about
a do not resuscitate when he was treated for his lung
cancer.  The only time it came up as to when the family had
to decide are we going to put a DNR order on Mr. Giddens was
after his stroke.  And there were two options.  He could
have gone home with his son and had 24 hour round the clock
care, or he could go to the nursing home.  And he went into
the nursing home because of his stroke, not because of his
lung cancer.
So getting back to what I said was Question
Number 2, the first part of Question Number 2 was did
Mr. Giddens die of a smoking related disease, and we just
don't know.  We don't know because there are no medical
records from the time he left the hospital in August of 1995
until he died some five months later.  There's no
description by any doctor of what his condition was like 1215 during that time.  There's no description from any of the
family members that testified in this case what his
condition was at the time.  And there was nobody there with
him when he died.
You don't know and the evidence hasn't shown you
what the cause of death of Mr. Giddens was.  It could have
been complications from his first stroke.  It could have
been complications from his lung cancer.  It could have been
a second stroke, because all we know is that when he left
the hospital in August of 1995, nobody is treating his blood
pressure.  There's no indication that he left the hospital
with any blood pressure medication.  In fact, if you look at
the discharge summary, you'll see a medication scratched out
that is for blood pressure.  He may have had another stroke.
He may have died of heart damage.  There is simply no
evidence in this case to tell you what Mr. Giddens died of,
and if you don't know what he died of, then you can't say
that he died from a disease that was caused by smoking.
So the other part of Question Number 2 is whether
addiction was the legal cause of Mr. Giddens' death.  And as
I said, what legal cause means is was Mr. Giddens' addiction
to nicotine so strong that he was simply unable to quit
smoking in time to avoid his lung cancer.  And the answer to
that is yes and because the answer to that is yes,
Mr. Giddens' addiction to nicotine, if you believe he is 1216 addicted, cannot be the legal cause of his death.
Think about Dr. Burns' testimony.  Dr. Burns told
you that if somebody quit smoking 15 years before, then
their risk of -- then it is more probable than not,
reasonable medical probability that they will not get lung
cancer.  So 15 years before Mr. Giddens' diagnosis, if he
had quit smoking in 1980, then based on reasonable medical
probability, he would have never had lung cancer.  If he had
quit back in 1964 when the Surgeon General's Report came
out, it's stronger than reasonable medical probability.  His
risk would have been back down to almost that of a
nonsmoker, and he would not have contracted lung cancer.
So let's look at the efforts Mr. Giddens made to
quit smoking.  Well, you know that there's been no evidence
of any efforts to quit smoking in the 1950s, no evidence of
any efforts to quit in the 1960s or the 1970s.  During that
period, from 1964 to 1979, 30 million people in the United
States quit smoking.  And there is no evidence in this case
as to why Roger Giddens could not have been one of those
30 million during that time period.
Now, you did hear some about Mr. Giddens' quit
attempts and I want to talk to you about those and ask you
the question, how hard was he trying to quit?  You heard
from Mrs. King that she thought there was a time, two times
when he was working at the dealership when he was trying to 1217 quit.  Remember, she said he was less productive, he was
having a bad day, but I want you to think about that because
Mr. Giddens' family doesn't remember him ever trying to quit
before the early 1990s.  So how hard was he really trying?
Was he really going a day without cigarettes?  If he was
irritable and cranky and was having a bad day, don't you
think the family would have noticed and he would have said,
"I'm really irritable and I'm really cranky, bear with me
because I'm trying to quit smoking."  They might not
remember the dates but you would think they would remember
the events.  Unless it is that Mr. Giddens was just trying
to quit for a few hours while he was at the dealership so he
could tell his boss what he knew that she wanted to hear,
that he was trying to quit.
The only other evidence is the quit attempt in the
1990s that the plaintiff described that he said he wasn't
there for.  Now, you heard from Dr. Cummings that the
Surgeon General defines a serious quit attempt and not just
telling somebody you're going to quit, but a serious quit
attempt is 24 hours.  We don't know if the time Sandra King
remembers were even 24 hours.  If Mr. Giddens did quit for a
week in 1990, the early 1990s, then by the time he picked up
another cigarette at the end of that week, all of the
nicotine was out of his body.  The withdrawal symptoms that
Dr. Cummings described as a few uneasy moments would have 1218 been gone.  For whatever reason, he picked up that cigarette
again.
Now, think about it this way.  If you knew
somebody who was unemployed for over 35 years and they said,
you know, during this 35 years, I have filled out three job
applications, would you think that they were looking very
hard for a job?  How hard was Mr. Giddens really trying?
Mr. Giddens didn't give you any -- you heard no
evidence of any outward concrete things he did to quit
smoking.  You know, Dr. Cummings says he tells his people in
his quit smoking classes to throw away your ashtrays, throw
away your lighters, don't have a place to put a cigarette
out, don't have something convenient to light it up with.
Remember, he goes around and has Rocky going on and has
everybody throw their cigarettes away into a trash can so
that you don't have the cigarettes on you.  There is no
evidence here that Mr. Giddens ever threw away his ashtrays.
We heard a lot about the ashtrays.  Never threw those away.
Never threw away his lighters.  In fact, you heard he never
even threw away his cigarettes.  How hard are you trying to
quit if you still have the cigarettes in your pocket?  How
serious is that an attempt to quit smoking?
You know, all the things that Dr. Cummings told
you about this constrained choice, these brain changes, the
brain changes that Dr. Cummings says is permanent, the 1219 nicotine receptors that he says are permanent, that
Dr. Burns says, no, are not permanent, the wallpaper of ads,
all of these things that Dr. Cummings talked about, there
are 60 million people who have had these brain changes, who
have had these constrained choices, who have been exposed to
this same wallpaper, and they have quit.
Now, the plaintiff's lawyer, Mr. Finch, was
telling you that it's a legal cause -- that addiction has to
be a legal cause.  Well it sounds to me like they're saying
Mr. Giddens' failure to quit was also a legal cause.  By
putting the percentage, by saying Mr. Giddens started and he
didn't quit smoking, well in this situation, his addiction
is not a legal cause of his getting lung cancer because you
know he could quit because he did quit.  And if Mr. Giddens
could quit smoking in February of 1995, there is no reason
he could not have quit smoking earlier.  If he had really
tried earlier, if he had tried back in 1964 when Dr. Burns
told you it would have been easier for him to quit, we might
not all be here today.  If he had made a serious attempt to
try to quit smoking, we wouldn't be here.
Plaintiff, on Question 2, has failed to prove to
you that Mr. Giddens died of a smoking related disease and
he has failed to prove to you that Mr. Giddens' addiction
was so strong that he simply could not quit in time to avoid
his lung cancer.  Addiction is not the legal cause of 1220 Mr. Giddens' lung cancer, and for those reasons, you have to
answer Question Number 2 no.
Now, Questions 3 also talks about legal cause and
I'm not going to go back all over that because I've already
talked to you about legal cause, and I want to talk to you
about Questions 4 and 5, which are the fraudulent
concealment questions.  And these are questions that are
basically asking you, did the tobacco companies conceal
information and if they did, was the concealment the legal
cause of Mr. Giddens' death.  And Judge Magnuson will
instruct you that you are not supposed to consider any
evidence of concealment after 1982, and that's that last
question back here on your verdict form, Question Number 8.
So let me talk to you a little bit about these questions.
The plaintiff spent a lot of time showing you
various documents in this case and let's start with where
they left off.  The very last thing they showed you, the
last piece of evidence in the plaintiff's case were these
snippets of the tobacco company, the Philip Morris
executives from Death In The West.  Death In The West, which
the plaintiff knows, Dr. Burns knows, Dr. Cummings knows,
Mr. Giddens never saw.  This documentary that was pieces of
things put together that a court said could not be shown
anywhere that was shown in San Francisco, was not shown in
the state of Florida, they knew that Mr. Giddens didn't see 1221 it, and they showed it to you anyway.  And why are they
doing that?  To make you mad.  To make you mad about the
ridiculous things that these tobacco company executives said
back around 1970 and to distract you from the real issues in
this case, which is what does that have to do with
Mr. Giddens?  The Frank Statement that Dr. Cummings showed
you, what does that have to do with Mr. Giddens?  He never
saw it.
The plaintiff spent time talking to you about
filters and low tar and how this was not something that was
helpful, it was no more healthful.  What does that have to
do with Mr. Giddens?  The only evidence you have is that he
started smoking a filtered cigarette and that when he quit
smoking, he was still smoking a filtered cigarette, that he
never switched from a high tar, high nicotine cigarette to a
low tar, low nicotine cigarette.  He wasn't a switcher.
Remember Dr. Burns talking to you about compensation and
people smoking light cigarettes, the low tar cigarettes or
switching from unfiltered to filtered cigarettes but they
just smoked harder and so they're getting the same amount of
tar?  Doesn't apply to Mr. Giddens.  He always smoked the
filtered cigarette.  He wasn't a switcher.  He didn't switch
from high tar to low tar.  So this whole thing about filters
and compensation and low tar cigarettes, again, what does
that have to do with Mr. Giddens?  Not a thing. 1222 Now, the plaintiff's team spent time reading to
you from Philip Morris and RJR documents and saying that
these documents were secret and this was stuff only the
tobacco companies knew.  Only the tobacco companies knew
that cigarettes were addictive and that cigarettes caused
disease.
Well, from what you saw from Dr. Cummings, from
what I had up there maybe half an hour ago, the popular
press, Reader's Digest, the St. Augustine Record, Harry
Reasoner, See It Now, the PSAs, the American Cancer Society,
Dr. Burns, himself, who said, you know, in 1981, 90 percent,
95 percent of the people have heard that smoking can be bad
for you and 90 percent of them believe it.  In 1975,
Dr. Burns said that more people knew that smoking caused
lung cancer than knew the president of the United States and
somehow, the plaintiff wants you to believe that the tobacco
companies were the only people who knew this information.
Well, that's just not right.  Reader's Digest was reporting
on it back in the '20s before Mr. Giddens was ever born.
Mr. Giddens knew that smoking was bad for him.  He
ignored the Surgeon General's Report.  He ignored the
warnings from his own boss.  He ignored the packages, the
warnings on the cigarettes.  He ignored the public health
community, and now the plaintiff wants you to believe that
had the tobacco companies come out and said, you know what, 1223 cigarette smoking is addictive and it causes lung cancer
that that somehow would have changed any of Mr. Giddens'
smoking decisions.  When he knew and heard of dangers of
smoking, he simply shrugged it off.
Now, one of the things that plaintiff has to prove
on these questions, 4 and 5, if you look at it, it says
whether Mr. Giddens relied to his detriment.  So it's not
only was there concealment, was there a misstatement, but
did Mr. Giddens actually rely on it?  So let's go back
over -- go over what you heard about reliance in this case
because Dr. Cummings never said Mr. Giddens relied on the
Frank Statement.  Dr. Cummings never said Mr. Giddens relied
on any statement of the tobacco companies.  He never told
you that.  He can't even tell you whether Mr. Giddens ever
saw them, so he can't tell you he relied on them.  But he
did tell you that Mr. Giddens relied on two things, and
those two things were ads and the Marlboro Miles program.
Those are the things that Mr. -- that Dr. Cummings
specifically said Mr. Giddens saw and relied on.  And then
Dr. Cummings brought you these ads, most of them from the
late '50s, early '60s and never even tried to connect those
ads to Mr. Giddens.  Instead of trying to connect those ads
to Mr. Giddens, he talked about the wallpaper, how ads were
just everywhere, and that somehow that must have affected
Mr. Giddens. 1224 Now, there are millions of people who saw that
same wallpaper who never started smoking.  Take the
plaintiff, for example.  He came in and told you that he
specifically remembers that when he was 8 years old, he and
his father watched Monday night football and eight years old
for the three months and ten days that there were
advertisements on Monday night football, he remembers seeing
Marlboro ads.  He never started smoking.
40 percent -- Dr. Burns told you that 40 percent
of people in Mr. Giddens' age cohort, 40 percent of the men
never picked up a cigarette, never became smokers.  Remember
those, the graph with all the colors on it?  40 percent of
the people who were exposed to the same wallpaper, all these
same ads, they never started smoking.  And Dr. Burns also
told you that by 1980, over half of those people had quit in
Mr. Giddens' birth cohort.
In Dr. Cummings world, every smoker smokes because
of ads.  There's no room for anything else.  In
Dr. Cummings' world, Mr. Giddens had to start smoking
because of ads which is very convenient in this case since
there's no evidence whatsoever of why Mr. Giddens started
smoking.  We don't know if he started smoking Marlboros
because his parents smoked Marlboros.  We don't know if one
of his Army buddies smoked Marlboros and that's why he
started smoking them.  We just don't know. 1225 In Dr. Cummings' world, there is no room for
anything except ads made you do it.  Ms. Virginia, who was
here on our jury panel before y'all were selected doesn't
fit into Dr. Cummings' model, everybody has to start smoking
because of the ads.
Well, what Ashley Giddens told you was that
Mr. Giddens smoked Marlboros and Winstons.  Remember Ashley
Giddens said, "I can't stand those cigarettes."  He smoked
something completely different.  So here are two people
exposed to that wallpaper smoking completely different
products, and if Dr. Cummings' theory made sense that
everybody started smoking because of ads, A, why wouldn't
everybody be smoking?  B, why wouldn't everybody be smoking
the most popularly advertised cigarette?  If he is true that
people rely on these ads and if Philip Morris was the most
heavily advertised cigarette, then why isn't everybody
smoking a Philip Morris cigarette?  Why isn't everybody
smoking Marlboro?
Now Dr. Cummings -- Juan, can I have the warnings,
please?
Now, Dr. Cummings admitted to you that none of the
ads that the tobacco companies put out, Philip Morris or RJR
put out said that cigarette smoking was safe.  None of the
ads ever said cigarette smoking isn't addictive.  None of
the ads ever said cigarette smoking won't give you lung 1226 cancer.  In fact, what every cigarette pack had, from 1966
on, was some version of one of these warnings.  So the
advertisement, the pack that Dr. Cummings talked about, what
it actually told the smoker was that smoking is dangerous to
your health that's what the packs show.  Thank you, Juan.
Now, Dr. Cummings also told you besides ads that
the specific thing that Mr. Giddens relied on was Marlboro
Miles, the program that started in 1993.  And I want you
to -- when you're back, you'll see the Marlboro Miles
database printout and I want you to look at it and see just
how accurate you think it is.  There are entries on there
that Mr. Giddens redeemed coupons for Benson and Hedges.
There's been no testimony he ever smoked Benson and Hedges.
On there for one year, it says his primary brand was Bucks.
Have you ever seen a Bucks advertisement?  There's a entry
on there that he redeemed a coupon for Virginia Slims.
Remember the cigarette that Dr. Cummings told you was
marketed to women?  There's no testimony that Mr. Giddens
ever smoked Virginia Slims.  So look at that with those
things in mind.
But let's get back to Dr. Cummings saying that
Mr. Giddens relied on Marlboro Miles.  Well, what Marlboro
Miles was, you're familiar now, you clipped off the coupon
off the cigarette pack and when you collected enough of
them, you could get stuff sent back to you.  So what we know 1227 is Mr. Giddens relied on Philip Morris to send him stuff
when he sent in the proofs of purchase.  He got a -- a hat,
a can opener, some shirts, the jacket that you've seen here
today, and what that tells you is Mr. Giddens liked to
redeem coupons to get stuff.  What these questions ask you
about on your verdict form is if Roger Giddens relied on
statements or lack of statements from tobacco companies
about addictiveness and health, that he smoked and relied on
the cigarette companies' statements about addictiveness and
health.  Somehow a jacket has become a statement about
addictiveness and health?  Marlboro Miles doesn't have
anything about sending Mr. Giddens statements about anything
about cigarettes.  What Mr. Giddens did was smoke the most
popular brand of cigarette for a while and it shows that he
liked to get free stuff in the mail.  That is the sum total
of what Dr. Cummings is telling you is the reliance that
Mr. Giddens had on Philip Morris.  That he saw the ads,
which we still don't know whether it had any effect on him
picking his brand, and that from 1993 on, he redeemed proofs
of purchase to get merchandise.  That's not reliance.
And there's another reason Marlboro Miles can't be
any sort of reliance that was the legal cause of
Mr. Giddens' death and that's because by the time
Mr. Giddens started participating in the Marlboro Miles
program, he'd been smoking Marlboros for decades.  It's not 1228 as if he started smoking Marlboro cigarettes because of
Marlboro Miles.  He'd been smoking those since 1959 when
Glenda Giddens met him.  Didn't cause him to smoke those
cigarettes.  
And you also know from Dr. Burns that by 1993, it
is too late for Mr. Giddens to quit.  Remember how he went
through the whole development of cancer?  In 1993, it was
too late for Mr. Giddens to avoid getting lung cancer.  So
Marlboro Miles cannot be the legal cause of Mr. Giddens'
death.
Now, let me talk a little bit about the
Question 6, which is the percentage of responsibility
question.  And when you think about this, I want you to
think about Mr. Giddens' smoking.  Mr. Giddens picked up the
first cigarette.  Dr. Cummings told you it's a learned
behavior, that smokers don't like the first cigarette.  They
have to learn how to smoke.  He made the decision to pick up
the second cigarette, to finish the first pack, to start a
second pack.  No one forced him to smoke those cigarettes
and the plaintiffs have already told you that he is
partially at fault.  Well, I will tell you -- and he
predicted it -- I'm going to tell you that if you get this
far, which I don't think you will, but if you get this far,
I'm asking you to put a hundred percent on Mr. Giddens
because they were his smoking decisions and he is the one 1229 who is responsible for them.  Dr. Burns and Cummings told
you that.  They told you that the smoker has the
responsibility to make the decision to quit.  And as
Dr. Burns said, nobody can light that cigarette for you and
put it in your mouth.  The smoker has to do that and has to
make that decision.
For Question 8, which are the damage --
Question 7, which are the damage questions, all the money
that they're asking to be awarded here goes to Mrs. Giddens;
Mrs. Giddens, who does not want to be on the plaintiff's
team, who does not want anything to do with this lawsuit,
who had no idea that this lawsuit was even filed.
Now, when you're looking at these damages
questions, I want you to think about and contrast what
Mrs. Giddens said versus what the plaintiff said.  For
example, the plaintiff told you that Mrs. Giddens was
totally reliant on Mr. Giddens for support.  What did
Mrs. Giddens tell you?  She paid all her own bills.  That
Mr. Giddens was giving her money for the mortgage on their
house.  Either the plaintiff doesn't have a clear
recollection of what was going on there or he's exaggerating
in an effort to get you to award money.  Think about what he
said about the contact his parents had after they were
separated.  In his deposition, before he got on this trial
team to ask you to award money, you saw it over his head, he 1230 said that he didn't think his parents ever saw each other
once they separated.  Then he comes into this courtroom and
tells you not only that his parents see each other, they
were cordial, they still loved each other, and they were
about to move back in together.
Well, then Mrs. Giddens took the stand, and what
did she tell you?  She hadn't had contact with her husband,
they had lost contact once they separated.  On few occasions
she saw him.  She didn't ask him questions about his life
because she didn't want to pry.  Is that consistent
testimony?
As far as the questions that ask for specific
amounts, all I can say is Mr. Giddens tried to get you to
believe -- Mr. Giddens, Jr. tried to get you to believe that
Mr. Giddens was making $40,000 a year.  It wasn't until
Mr. Heise cross examined him that he said, oh, yeah, I have
no idea what the expenses were.  The 40 is gross; I have no
idea.  All I can tell you is if you get to these questions,
look at the social security earnings reports and let those
be your guides on these issues.
The last question on the verdict form is about
punitive damages and as Mr. Finch told you, that is the
different burden of proof, a much higher burden of proof,
clear and convincing.  And I don't think you'll get to this
question and remember that it is a higher burden of proof 1231 and I think what this has shown, what the evidence has shown
in this case is that the plaintiffs haven't proved by a
preponderance of the evidence that anything Philip Morris or
RJR did or said had any effect on Mr. Giddens' smoking
decisions and they certainly have not proved that by clear
and convincing evidence.
Now, I told you when I stood up almost an hour ago
that this case was about Mr. Giddens and it was about the
plaintiff having to prove his case, and the plaintiff has
failed to prove fundamental issues in this case.  The
plaintiff has failed to prove that Mr. Giddens died of a
smoking related disease.  The plaintiff has failed to prove
that but for Mr. Giddens' addiction, he could have quit in
time to avoid this injury.  The plaintiff has failed to
prove that Mr. Giddens relied on anything the tobacco
companies said or didn't say in making his decisions.  The
evidence just isn't there.
What this case is about is Mr. Giddens, who made
an adult decision to smoke, who decided to continue to smoke
despite the health risks and decided not to quit until he
was diagnosed with cancer.
I'm about to sit down, and unlike Mr. Finch, I
don't get to come back up here.  So as Mr. Finch, after
Mr. Walker talks -- forgetting about Mr. Walker -- when
Mr. Finch gets up here and he's saying things, keep in mind 1232 that we don't get a chance to come back up here, and think,
what would Ms. Gallagher say about this?  This is what I
would -- last thing I'm going to say, is Mr. Giddens had the
legal right to make the decisions he did about his smoking.
He is the person responsible for those decisions.  Philip
Morris and R.J. Reynolds have nothing to do with
Mr. Giddens' smoking decisions.  They didn't affect his
smoking decisions or his smoking behaviors.  Those were
decisions that he made and those decisions should not be
second-guessed in this lawsuit when the plaintiff is asking
you to award money to Mrs. Giddens, who doesn't want it.
Thank you very much for your service here over the
last week and thank you very much for your attention.  We
appreciate it.


MR. WALKER:  Thank you, Your Honor.  Good
afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.  It's a pleasure to be able
to address you again, and I know you all didn't forget about
me even though I was all the way over there.  I guess the
first thing I wanted to do is to remind you of what you
already know about me.  You know that my name is John
Walker.  You know that I'm here on behalf of R.J. Reynolds
Tobacco Company.  You know that I'm going to be brief.  And
you know by now that once you see me on my feet, we're just
about to the end, and that's going to be true now as well. 1233 I've been sitting all the way back there, but even
from over there, I could see that you all have been very
diligent in this case.  You've been model jurors.  You've
been paying attention.  You've been taking notes, and most
importantly, I could see just from the looks on your faces
that you took to heart when the Judge said to keep an open
mind and as you were listening to the evidence.  I could
tell that you were waiting to hear what the responses would
be from the defendants.
You heard a very good summary of the evidence from
the other attorneys that have addressed you.  Before I begin
what little I have to say, I just want to thank you again
for your service.  I want to thank you from me and also from
my client at Reynolds.
I'm not really going to repeat what Ms. Gallagher
has already said.  You know by now from the evidence and
from her summation that Mr. Giddens began smoking as an
adult, knew and understand -- understood the risks of
cigarette smoking the whole time that he smoked, continued
to smoke cigarettes not because he couldn't quit but because
he didn't want to quit.  He wasn't fooled by any tobacco
company or any organization that was representing the
tobacco company.  He didn't make any of his smoking
decisions based on advertisements and when he was ready to
quit, he quit. 1234 And that the evidence in this case is that no one
really knows why he died, what the cause of his death was.
You heard a lot about that already.  I'm not going to go
back through that in the detail that you've already heard
about.
What I do want to do, however -- and this relates
to what you heard from Ms. Gallagher -- is get back to the
plaintiff's burden of proof because the plaintiff has the
burden of proof in this case as to every defendant,
including mine.  And I want to remind you of what I told you
when we first started in opening statements, I guess it was
last week now.  I told you then that the evidence about the
Winston smoking, that's the product that Reynolds makes,
that the evidence that you would hear about Winston smoking
would be vague, that it would be confusing, and that it
would be inconsistent.  And it was exactly that.  And I want
to show you what you heard about the -- about Mr. Giddens'
smoking of my client's products.
May we dim the lights a bit?  Thank you, Madam
Clerk.  I'll come over to this side.
So what did we hear?  We heard from the plaintiff,
himself, that Mr. Giddens smoked Winston.  That was the --
one of the first bits of information that we got.  But we
also heard from Mr. Giddens' wife of 26 years, at least when
they were living together, Glenda Giddens, that she wasn't 1235 sure that he did smoke Winston and then when I reminded her
that she had actually been asked about it before, that her
sworn testimony originally was that Mr. Giddens did not
smoke Winston.
Then you heard in this case that, from
Mr. Giddens' brother, that he actually never saw Mr. Giddens
smoking Winston cigarettes and you heard -- have the next
one, please -- from Dr. Cummings, that was the paid witness
that you heard so much about, that he's not at all sure when
Mr. Giddens smoked Winston cigarettes.  You may remember
that because he testified that there were 28 different types
of Winston cigarettes, that they were modified over the
years and it was -- when it was my turn to stand up and ask
him questions, I said, you said there were 28 different
kinds, which kind did Mr. Giddens smoke.  And he said I
can't tell you because there's no specificity about when he
smoked Winston.
You also heard from one of the plaintiff's own
exhibits about Mr. Giddens possibly smoking Winston in March
of 1992.  That was one of the documents that Ms. Gallagher
described to you.  We can't even be sure it's an accurate
document.  But even if that document, plaintiff's own
exhibit, were accurate, it showed that he was smoking
Winston on March 11th of 1992, but not before.  That was a
different brand.  And not after; that was a different brand. 1236 And then finally, we have the next one -- or not
finally.  You heard from Mr. Giddens' sister-in-law, Vera
Giddens, and she said well, Mr. Giddens' mother smoked
Winston, maybe he was smoking Winston when he was living
with her, when he ran out of his own cigarettes.  And then
early on in the case, I asked the plaintiff pointblank,
isn't it true that you would describe Mr. Giddens' Winston
smoking as occasional and he agreed with me.  This is the
evidence about Winston.  This is the evidence that has my
client and me in this case today.
Now, I want to talk to you about why that's
important, and it's important because you're going to have
to decide whether or not Winston smoking or Mr. Giddens'
smoking of any product made by Reynolds actually made a
difference to Mr. Giddens and one of the people that you
heard about the causation issues from, actually the only
person, was Dr. Burns.  He was here yesterday.  He was the
plaintiff's paid expert who you heard about, the $2 million
and $3 million, he was the gentleman that came all the way
here from San Diego with his arm in a cast and his jacket
was -- I guess it was this arm was in a cast.  His jacket
was falling off because of cast.  The plaintiffs brought him
all that way to talk to you about medical causation, about
what was the cause, according to Dr. Burns, of Mr. Giddens'
injuries and death.  And I want to talk with you about what 1237 Dr. Burns had to say about that.  He didn't say a single
thing about Winston.  He didn't mention Winston.  He didn't
mention Reynolds.  He didn't mention any product made by
Reynolds.  He didn't say that Winston was a legal cause of
lung cancer.  He didn't say Winston was a legal cause of a
stroke.  He didn't say Winston was a legal cause of
Mr. Giddens' death.  He didn't mention it at all.
What are you to believe when the plaintiff that
has the burden of proof in this case pays $500 an hour for
Dr. Burns to come all the way across the country and he
doesn't even say anything about my client's product?  It's
because there is simply no evidence that the Winston smoking
was a legal cause of any injury to Mr. Giddens.  There's
just no evidence of it.  If there were, you'd have heard
about it and you would have heard about it from Dr. Burns.
Now Madam Clerk, may I have the ELMO?
I want to show you why this is important.  What I
have is a copy of the jury instructions similar to what you
heard from Mr. Finch that you all will have at the end of
the case.  These are from the Judge and he's given us a
preview of what the instructions will be.  So I want to show
you why this is important.
All right, up at the beginning -- and I'm going to
get to the verdict form in a moment.  One of the Judge's
instructions will be that an issue for your decision on both 1238 plaintiff's negligence and strict liability claims against
the defendants is -- this is important -- as to each
defendant, whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by that
defendant was a legal cause of Roger Giddens, Sr.'s death.
And then on the page right before that, because some of you
might have been wondering before this case, what on earth is
legal cause, you're going to get an instruction that says
right at the top, legal cause defined.  You won't be able to
miss it.  And it's explained, you'll get from the Judge
about what legal cause is.  The key language is exactly the
language that Ms. Gallagher already showed you.  It's right
in the middle of the paragraph.  But for.  In order to be a
legal cause of injury, the smoking, or whatever it is that
the plaintiff is saying is the legal cause, must produce or
contribute substantially to producing such injury or damages
so it can reasonably be said that but for such wrongful
conduct, the injury or damage would not have occurred.  But
for.  And I just want to circle another couple of key
language, key words, contributes substantially.
I have a feeling that when Mr. Finch stands up,
he's going to read from you -- read to you from the rest of
this and if he does, he's going to read you this part at the
bottom, contributes substantially.  They're the same words.
They all mean "but for".
Now, this is the verdict form that you all have a 1239 copy of.  I'm not going to say a lot about the first page
because Ms. Gallagher has already addressed it and she's
already let you know that your answers on Page 1 should be
no.  I do want to say this, though.  At the bottom of the
page, you're going to be told that if your answer to
Question 2 is no, and it's the same for Question 1, please
do not answer the remaining questions.  Please sign and date
this verdict form and return it to the courtroom.  If you
answer no to either of the first questions, you come to a
screeching halt on the first page and your service will be
completed after you turn in the verdict form.
But because it's my job to talk to you about the
rest of the verdict form, I do want to show you the second
page.  This is the page where you will have to decide
whether cigarettes made either by my client or by Philip
Morris were a legal cause of Mr. Giddens' death.  This is
the question that relates to the instruction that I just
read.  The answer, as you've already heard from
Ms. Gallagher, should be no.  Because I represent Reynolds
and I wanted to check the no box for Reynolds here and we'll
be asking you to check no to Question Number 3 because given
the confusing, inconsistent, and vague evidence in this
case, Dr. Burns' failure even to address this issue, and the
plaintiff's failure to put in evidence on this issue, how
could you or anyone else determine that Mr. Giddens' Winston 1240 smoking was a "but for" cause of his death?  How could
anyone determine that it was even a substantial contributing
cause when we don't even know how much Winston cigarettes he
smoked or for how long he smoked them?
Can we please switch back to the Power Point?
Now, the next thing I want to talk with you about
relates to all of the advertising evidence that you heard.
You were shown some exhibits about Winston ads and the
question that you're going to have to decide, I'm going to
show you in a minute on the verdict form, is whether or not
any of the ads that the plaintiff showed you or Dr. Cummings
showed you or that you heard at all in this trial has
anything at all to do with Mr. Giddens.  Did he rely on
something that he heard or didn't hear from my client or
from Philip Morris?
I want to show you what the evidence was about
whether or not Mr. Giddens relied on something from
Reynolds.  These three bullet points are from the
plaintiff's own testimony in response to my questions on
cross examination.  He told you in no uncertain terms that
Mr. Giddens never mentioned Reynolds, that he never
discussed Reynolds ads with the plaintiff, and that the
plaintiff said he never heard Mr. Giddens ever say that he
relied on anything he got or didn't get from Reynolds.
That's the plaintiff in this case.  The same person who's 1241 come to court asking for an award of money damages told you,
once he was asked, that his father never said he was relying
on Reynolds.  There's simply no proof at all in this case
that Mr. Giddens relied on anything he got or didn't get
from Reynolds.
Now, also at the beginning of the case, I said as
you've heard from Ms. Gallagher that this case is only about
one smoker.  It's only about Roger Giddens, Sr., but I
predicted in a case like this you'd hear a lot of evidence
that really wasn't about Mr. Giddens at all.  I predicted
that you would hear evidence that was really a broad-based
attack on all cigarettes and all cigarette companies and
that some of the experts that you would hear from, like
Dr. Cummings, we talked about him in opening, would bring
you the same generic presentation that he gives every jury
when he's paid to give it and that it wouldn't have anything
to do with Mr. Giddens.  And that's exactly what you saw in
this case.
Can we have the next slide, please?
You should be asking yourself why, in a case about
Roger Giddens, Sr., did the plaintiffs, and specifically
Dr. Cummings, bring you this evidence about the Frank
Statement that there's no evidence Mr. Giddens saw and that
ran on one day in newspapers that Mr. Giddens did not read.
Why did the plaintiff show you the Flintstones?  Remember, I 1242 asked Dr. Cummings about that and he agreed with me that
he's got 600 or so TV ads he had to choose from, that he
read the depositions and he saw that there was no evidence
that Mr. Giddens ever watched the Flintstones but there was
evidence that he looked at other shows.  Nevertheless,
Dr. Cummings brought you the same Flintstone clip that he
uses in every case because it's a generic presentation and
it's not about Roger Giddens.  It never was.  It never has
been, for Dr. Cummings.
Why did they show you all those documents from the
1960s and 1970s about pre-smokers and learning smokers and
people who were just beginning to smoke at a time period
when Roger Giddens, Sr. was in his 30s and had been smoking
for 10 or 15 years by that point?  Why did they bring you
those ads from Winston and Dr. Cummings said they were about
a snowy white filter.  Remember?  And then I pulled them
back and put them on the ELMO and we actually looked at
them.  There was nothing in them about snowy white filter.
They were ads about taste and favor.  There was no health
message there.
Why did he talk about an article from the New York
Times entitled Can We Have An Open Debate About Smoking?
The New York Times?  Mr. Giddens wasn't reading the New York
Times.  He was reading the St. Augustine paper that
Dr. Cummings didn't even look at.  Why did you see the Open 1243 Debate article from the New York Times?  Because that's in
Dr. Cummings' generic presentation and every jury that hears
from Dr. Cummings hears about that article.
Then you saw a snippet -- I don't know, maybe it
was 20 seconds long -- of some congressional testimony from
1994.  That was the one where there were a number of
different tobacco heads in the line and if you blinked you
missed it because it was awfully quick and when the
executives started standing up, the second executive in the
line was the one from my client, Reynolds, and he didn't say
that cigarette smoking was not addictive.  What he started
to say was that cigarette smoking doesn't meet the classic
definition, and he got cut off.  He started to say there's
no intoxication, which all the witnesses have conceded, and
he got cut off and they moved on.  And then when I cross
examined Dr. Cummings, I said Dr. Cummings, you know good
and well that those hearings were a lot longer than that 20
second clip you showed and you know that the Reynolds
executive had a lot more to say than that little clip that
you showed.  He said yeah, he knew that.  Why did you only
see that little clip?  Because that's what's in
Dr. Cummings' generic presentation that every jury that
hears from Dr. Cummings hears regardless, regardless of
whether it fits the facts of the case.
None of this evidence on this screen was about 1244 Mr. Giddens, none of it.  But every question that you have
to answer on the verdict form is about Roger Giddens and at
the end of the day, if plaintiff simply has not proved their
case about Roger Giddens.
So we've just talked about the evidence of
reliance and how this generic evidence doesn't apply to
Mr. Giddens.  I want to go back to the verdict form, if I
might.  Can I have the ELMO once again?
This is one of the instructions that you're going
to get.  Remember, I just said the questions on the verdict
form aren't about the New York Times and all that.  They're
about Roger Giddens.  What is the Judge going to tell you?
The issue for your decision on this claim, this is the next
one, is whether Roger Giddens, Sr. relied to his detriment
on the concealment or omission of material information
concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking
cigarettes, and if so, whether such reliance was a legal
cause of his death.  There's that word again, legal cause,
that we talked about earlier.
A material fact is one that is of such importance
that Roger Giddens, Sr. would not have acted as he did but
for the -- there's that "but for" term again -- but for the
defendants' concealment or omission.
The next claim, and we're going to look at these
together on the verdict form in just a moment, asks the very 1245 same question.  The issue for your decision on this claim is
about Roger Giddens, whether he relied and whether reliance
by Roger Giddens -- I'm sorry, whether reliance was a legal
cause of his death.
We just went over Question Number 3.  Question
Number 4, please state as to each defendant whether Roger
Giddens, Sr. relied to his detriment on the defendants'
concealment or omission of material information concerning
the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes
and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his
death.  I showed you the slide where the plaintiff, himself,
admitted that his own father never said he relied.  Your
answer to Question Number 4 should be no.
Your answer to Question Number 5, same question,
as to each -- similar issues as to each defendant, Roger
Giddens, Sr., did he rely, was there legal causation?  The
answer should be no.
Now, Ms. Gallagher has already talked about some
of the other questions.  Since I'm on this page, I'm just
going to kind of go through till I get to the next one I
want to talk about.  She told you, and I agree, that the
evidence in this case supports a finding of 100 percent
responsibility on the very first line.  The only thing I'm
going to add to that, and I highlighted it to remind me, is
that you should write zero on the second line for Reynolds. 1246 Number 7 is the question about damages that
Ms. Gallagher already discussed with you.  And then you have
Questions 8 and 9 that you will only answer if you answered
yes to two of the questions earlier where we put a no.
The last question on the verdict form relates to
punitive damages and that's what I want to talk about next.
If you answered yes to Questions 4 or 5 as to a defendant,
please state whether you find by clear and convincing
evidence that punitive damages are warranted against that
defendant under the circumstances of this case.  You heard
from Ms. Gallagher that that answer should be a no.  I'm
going to put a no for Reynolds as well, as I believe you
should.
Now, before I leave these instructions, I want to
show you a couple of the instructions about punitive
damages.  I can't make it any bigger without the words going
off the side so I hope this is at least a little bit
legible.  I know it's a long way away.  But punitive
damages, you'll hear from the Judge, are in addition to
compensatory damages.  That means if you get to punitive
damages, and I don't think that you should -- none of us on
this side of the room think you should get anywhere near
this question -- but if you do, you need to understand that
this -- this is money that the plaintiff is asking for over
and above full compensation.  Full compensation; punitive 1247 damages would be on top of that.
Down near the bottom, punitive damages are
warranted if you find that plaintiff has proved by clear and
convincing evidence that -- and the conduct that you're
looking at is conduct causing Roger Giddens, Sr.'s injuries
and death.  And once again, every question on the verdict
form is about Roger Giddens, Sr. and the question of legal
cause.
Last instruction I want to highlight is what is
clear and convincing evidence, because it's going to be
really important, especially when you think about the
evidence we looked at for Winston.  Clear and convincing
evidence is evidence that is more compelling and persuasive.
It is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in
confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief
or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue.
And once again, there has to be a substantial legal cause.
May I have the Power Point again, please?
Now, as I've just shown you, the basics of
punitive damages are what are on this slide.  They can only
be even considered for conduct that legally caused
Mr. Giddens' death.  I said at the outset, and I'll say it
again, if there's any statement that the evidence shows that
Mr. Giddens actually saw or heard or read from a defendant,
from Reynolds, that's fair game.  But the evidence in this 1248 case that relates to Reynolds is not fair game because it
has nothing to do with Mr. Giddens and had no effect on
Mr. Giddens.  Punitive damages, as you heard, are awarded
only to the plaintiff, Mr. Giddens, Jr., on behalf of the
estate and his mother.  And as I -- as we saw in the jury
instructions, punitive damages are in addition to full
compensation.
Now, I've already tried to explain to you that I
don't think you've seen any evidence in this case of
evidence -- I'm sorry, of conduct that actually affected
Mr. Giddens that merits punishment.  But you did hear some
evidence in this case about what kind of company R.J.
Reynolds Tobacco was over the years.  And I said at the
outset that tobacco companies now and for a long, long time
have faced a lot of very harsh criticism about their
business practices, but you have a unique opportunity in
this trial to hear a little bit more about what the real
story is.  And here's some of what you've heard that I will
submit to you is not punishable conduct.
First, you heard that Reynolds and other companies
funded research by Nobel Prize winning scientists.  You
heard that scientists at Reynolds like Dr. Rodgman, he was
the one that Dr. Cummings said was a good scientist,
scientists like Dr. Rodgman and others at Reynolds published
peer reviewed articles.  This is a case about concealment, 1249 according to the plaintiffs.  You've already heard what was
out there in the public and you heard through my cross of
Dr. Cummings that Reynolds was actually doing research and
publishing about it.
Next you heard about the American Tobacco Company.
That's one of the companies that has been merged into R.J.
Reynolds and you heard about the big document, remember
Dr. Cummings was trying to -- I asked him why it was called
a Green Monster and he says because it's green.  Because
it's a monster, it contains over 6,000 articles, abstracts
of articles about smoking and health issues.  It's one of
the documents that the Surgeon General relied on in creating
the 1964 Surgeon General's Report.  You heard evidence that
Reynolds and other companies were thanked by the Surgeon
General for providing that, that literature.
Next, you heard, as I just mentioned, about good
scientists at Reynolds like Dr. Rodgman who were advancing
the science of trying to find out what's in cigarette smoke.
For a long time, no one knew what was in cigarette smoke.
Reynolds' scientists invented a lot of the technology that
was used to answer some of those questions and, as I
mentioned, published about it.
The next one, you heard evidence just yesterday, I
think, that the companies, including Reynolds, actually
reduced tar levels over time.  That was something that the 1250 public health community was asking for and that's something
that the companies were able to do over time.
Next, you heard from Dr. Cummings about the
technology that Reynolds developed to heat and not burn
tobacco in cigarettes and Dr. Cummings called that a
responsible effort on Reynolds' part.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is not punishable
conduct.  It just isn't and the things that they say we
should be punished for, had no effect on Mr. Giddens.
Now, there are a couple of other things that I
think shouldn't be punished, and many of us, anyone who's
ever worked in a company that employed other human beings
has probably worked in a company where there were other
people who have thoughts and ideas and opinions that we
would never want to be representative of the company where
we work.  The fact of the matter is Reynolds should not be
punished for the opinions of some of its employees.  You
heard a lot about Dr. Teague and one of the very first
documents you saw from Dr. Teague was something that he
wrote when he was 25 years old and Dr. Cummings said he was
a couple years out of school.
Companies should not be punished for some of the
stupid things even their more senior employees might have to
say in some documents.  Companies should not be punished for
failing to publicize risks about cigarette smoking that were 1251 already being publicized in the press and in the media, and
I want to be specific in my example about that.
This is just one of a number of examples you heard
about the environment in which Reynolds and the other
companies were making decisions.  Daniel Horn was from the
United States National Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health.
This is what he said in 1968.  You could stand on a rooftop
and shout, "Smoking the dangerous," at the top of your lungs
and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not
already know.  This isn't something that someone in the
government said in 2013 or 2010.  This is 1968.
Now, what you're being asked to do in this case is
to punish Reynolds for not saying something, for not talking
about the health risks of cigarettes, even though the public
health community at the time was saying that you wouldn't be
telling anyone anything they didn't already know.  And
that's especially true for Mr. Giddens, because of all the
evidence you heard in this case that Ms. Gallagher talked
about and I won't review again, that Mr. Giddens, himself,
knew and understood the risks the whole time that he smoked.
For that reason, I'll be asking you to reject the
plaintiff's request for money damages in this case.  I'm
going to be asking you to check no to every question for
Reynolds.  And frankly, it's the same is true for Philip
Morris.  The plaintiff just doesn't have the evidence in 1252 this case to back up their request for money damages.
Now, at the end of the day you're going to begin
your deliberations and maybe I spent a lot of time telling
you what this case isn't about.  In openings I said it's not
about sympathy, it's not about this, it's not about that,
it's not about generic issues.  Just as Ms. Gallagher said,
it's issues about Roger Giddens.  It's about the adult
choice he made to started smoking, the adult choices he made
every single day when he lit a cigarette to continue
smoking, and the adult choice that he made in the '50s,
'60s, '70s and beyond not to quit smoking or even try.
When he got serious about quitting, he quit.  That
is not a basis for awarding money damages to that smoker's
son or even his wife that he was separated from.
For all of those reasons, I'll be asking you to
return a verdict in favor of R.J. Reynolds -- in fact, in
favor of both of the defendants.
I want to say thanks, again, for your patience.  I
have tried as best as I know how to summarize the evidence
and be brief, like I said I would be.  And I'll tell you as
you heard from others that we're in your hands.  We're
asking you to apply the law, not some modern standard or I
think there was a mention of a Biblical standard.  The
standard you apply of the law that you get from Judge
Magnuson, we're comfortable with that.  We're comfortable
PLAINTIFF REBUTTAL CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1253 with you applying that law to these facts.  We're asking for
a verdict in favor of Reynolds.  And with that, I'm going to
go back to my corner.  Thank you.
