Yes, sir.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, in
For 50
THE COURT:
MR. HEIMANN:
a fundamental way, this case is quite extraordinary.
years or more, the defendants in this case denied that
smoking cigarettes was a hazard to health.
smoking caused serious diseases and led to early death.
They denied that
Time and again, they put out the message that the
claims of health hazards had not been proved, that they were
the subject of scientific controversy, that more research
was needed to find the answers, all the while spending
hundreds of millions, in fact, literally billions of dollars
advertising cigarettes to the American public, all to get
people, mostly youngsters, to take up smoking and to keep
smoking, to keep them buying cigarettes, to persuade them
not to quit.
Now, when they're called in to court to account
for their behavior, they blame Ray Gollihue for doing
exactly, exactly what they wished him to do, urged him to
do, spent millions and millions of dollars to get him and
others like him to do, all as if the 50-year campaign of
denial, doubt, and deception had never happened.
When I began talking to you a week or so ago, I
told you at the outset that Ginnie Gollihue accepts that Ray
was responsible for his own behavior, including the fact
that he smoked cigarettes, but he has paid and he has paid V8-98
Now the question is whether these
dearly for that.
defendants, who manufactured and sold the cigarettes to Ray
Gollihue, should be held responsible for their behavior, and
that is now up to you.
Let's start with the first issue in the case that
Was Ray Gollihue addicted to the
you'll be asked to decide:
nicotine in the cigarettes that he smoked?
What I'm showing
you is a portion of the verdict form which you will be given
in the course of your deliberations to answer a series of
questions that will lead to the outcome of the case.
The first question you will be asked is whether
I'm going to focus on
Ray Gollihue's death -- I'm sorry.
the second question:
cigarettes containing nicotine?
Was Ray Gollihue addicted to
You have heard testimony from two prominent
They both
experts on addiction, Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings.
testified that without a shadow of a doubt, Ray Gollihue was
addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes that he smoked.
The defendants, on the other hand, have presented no
evidence, none from any expert, to contest the issue of
addiction.
With all the resources of these defendants --
MS. PARKER:
Objection, Your Honor, pretrial
ruling.
THE COURT:
MR. HEIMANN:
Sustained.
You can be assured that if there was V8-99
any qualified expert on the planet earth who could have said
otherwise on the question of addiction, you would have heard
from them.
MR. DAVIS:
Objection, Your Honor, improper
argument.
THE COURT:
MR. HEIMANN:
Sustained.
If you are not convinced, based on
the testimony that you've heard, that Ray was addicted to
nicotine, there is nothing I can say that would make any
difference.
Let me go to the second question -- third
question, I'm sorry.
cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his death?
Was Ray Gollihue's addiction to
The judge will instruct you on the issue of cause,
and let me say now, during the course of my argument here,
I'm going to be referring from time to time to what the
instructions are to be.
I try to get them right, but if
I'm -- anything I say to you is different from what His
Honor says to you, obviously you'll follow the Court's
instructions.
My understanding is that the judge will instruct
you essentially as follows, that addiction is a legal cause
of death if it directly and in the natural and continuous
sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing
the death so that it can reasonably be said that but for the V8-100 addiction, the death would not have occurred.
But in order to be regarded as a legal cause of
Addiction may
death, addiction needn't be the only cause.
be a legal cause of death even though it operates in
combination with the act of another, some natural cause, or
some other cause, so long as the addiction itself
contributes substantially to producing the death.
Let me see the Cummings demonstrative, please.
You'll recall Dr. Cummings testified on the
subject of addiction and showed you this demonstrative as an
aid to explain to you the role that nicotine addiction plays
in the ultimate disease and death of a smoker.
with the fact that someone addicted to nicotine has
constrained choices, and those constrained choices
contribute substantially to smoking, why the person smokes.
And it's the exposure, of course, to the toxins in
We begin
the cigarettes that a smoker smokes that ultimately
substantially contributes, causes the smoking-related
disease, in Mr. Gollihue's situation, his death.
the natural contributing factor that the Court -- the law is
talking about when it talks about substantial factor in
contributing to an outcome of disease.
This is
Now, the defense undoubtedly, as they have
throughout this trial, will argue to you that Mr. Gollihue
had a choice whether to start smoking and whether to
V8-101
continue smoking once he had started.
They will say that he
continued to smoke because he liked it, because it gave him
pleasure.
Now, as I've argued to you and as you heard from
the experts, the fact that a smoker takes pleasure, derives
pleasure from smoking, is inherently the aspect of
addiction.
snort cocaine because it doesn't give you pleasure.
does.
And in the case of nicotine,
as we know, it alters -- literally alters the brain so that
the brain needs the nicotine in order to function properly.
That is the essence of addiction.
That's the whole point.
One doesn't
It
But even if it were true that that was not a
function of nicotine, the fact that the choice on the part
of Mr. Gollihue may have played a part in the reason he
continued smoking doesn't mean that addiction didn't also
After all, imagine, Mr. Gollihue wasn't really
play a role.
addicted to cigarettes?
Do you really believe he would have
smoked for 40 years, day in and day out, one pack, two packs
a day, just because he liked it, with no consequence, no
effective addiction at all?
You may recall David Burns' testimony.
Dr. Burns
testified, to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, that
Mr. Gollihue was not only addicted but that his addiction
was a contributing cause towards his death.
Let me go back, if I might, to the verdict form. V8-102
Now we get to Question 1:
by a non-BAC form of lung cancer?
Was Ray Gollihue's death caused
So let's talk a little bit about this BAC thing.
The defendants presented the testimony of a Dr. Barsky to
say that Ray's cancer was not caused by smoking.
Instead --
he claims -- it was an extremely rare cancer called BAC with
no known cause.
of the experts you heard from on this question.
Let's stop and take a look at the quality
Let's start with Dr. Aplin, the treating
She had absolutely
You remember her, I'm sure.
oncologist.
no ulterior reason to testify to anything other than the
unvarnished truth.
She told you that she wouldn't even
accept money to appear in court, donating it to charity.
She and her team of doctors in Gainesville, including a
pathologist who examined Ray Gollihue's cancer cells under a
microscope, found that he had adenocarcinoma, not BAC.
And on a second opinion from the medical facility
over in Houston, cancer specialists, the pathological exam
confirmed the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma, not BAC.
Dr. Aplin described in detail for you the three distinct
features of BAC, and Ray, according to Dr. Aplin, had none
of them.
If there had been any indication, any indication
at all to her and her team, of BAC, it would have been
noted, she testified to you, because it would have made a V8-103
And when she was
difference to them, but they found none.
asked by R.J. Reynolds' counsel on cross-examination whether
the tumor that was originally detected on examination of
Mr. Gollihue was located in the periphery or on the edge of
the lung, an absolutely key factor for Dr. Barsky's claim
that we have a BAC cancer rather than the cancer diagnosed
by Dr. Aplin, she said, "Absolutely not."
May I approach, Your Honor?
THE COURT:
MR. HEIMANN:
Yes.
You remember the diagram that
Dr. Aplin drew for you of the lungs and the trachea, and she
pointed out -- or drew for you exactly where that tumor was,
right there, not on the edge, not on the periphery, in the
upper lobe in the center of the lung, and she testified
that's where it was.
And then we have Dr. Barsky, the $2.6 million
As
cigarette industry expert for the past 20-plus years.
his first reason for saying the cancer was BAC, he testified
that according to the medical records, the tumor was in the
periphery of the lung, on the edge, directly contrary to
Dr. Aplin's testimony and what she said the medical records
showed.
She was the doctor who reviewed the x-rays, who saw
in the x-rays where the tumor was.
Barsky never saw that.
Barsky didn't even read Dr. Aplin's testimony that she gave
you here in court before appearing before you to testify. V8-104
MS. PARKER:
Objection, Your Honor, the rule's
invoked.
THE COURT:
MR. HEIMANN:
Overruled.
He was perfectly free to do that, to
inform himself what Dr. Aplin had to say to address her
points, but he didn't do that.
because he had no answers?
examination by RJR's counsel to address the points that
Dr. Aplin had made about why this was not BAC.
He wasn't even asked on
Ask yourself why not.
Is it
Barsky refuses to accept the World Health
Organization's definition of BAC, that it does not involve
the pleura or invade -- excuse me -- the pleura -- that the
cancer does not invade the pleura of the lung, meaning the
lining of the lung, when we know, according to Dr. Aplin and
the medical records, that that's exactly what Ray Gollihue's
cancer did, exactly what the pathology showed.
Really think about it.
Ray Gollihue was a heavy
He gets lung cancer, and
smoker of cigarettes for 40 years.
instead of being caused by smoking, according to Dr. Barsky,
he tells you that it is one of the rarest of all cancers of
the lung.
Remember, that's how Dr. Aplin described it, one
of the rarest forms of cancer of the lung, without any known
cause.
I mean, really, does that make the slightest bit of
sense?
Once you have found on these issues in favor of V8-105 the plaintiff, you will have found that Mr. Gollihue was a
member of what we call the Engle class.
You've heard about
that before, I know.
the Engle case by the jury in that year-long trial.
You must then apply the findings in
As the Court will instruct you, those findings
include (1) smoking causes lung cancer; nicotine in
cigarettes is addictive; RJR and Philip Morris both placed
cigarettes on the market that were defective and
unreasonably dangerous; R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris
concealed and omitted material information not otherwise
known or available, knowing that the material was false or
misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning
the health effects or addicting nature of cigarettes, or
both; that Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds agreed to conceal
or omit information regarding the health effects of
cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention --
the intention -- that smokers and the public rely on that
information to their detriment; that R.J. Reynolds and
Philip Morris sold or supplied cigarettes that were
defective; and finally, that both of those companies were
negligent.
Let's turn to the real issues in the case.
How did the defendants' behavior impact Ray
Gollihue when he started to smoke at the age of 13?
from Lois that she and Ray thought smoking was cool, and
We know
V8-106
that is why she says they started.
did they think it was cool?
But ask yourself, why
First of all, we know that both of these
defendants targeted teenagers in their marketing efforts,
singling them out to get them to start smoking and to start
smoking their brands in the hopes that they would continue
smoking their brands and make a lot of money for the
companies.
Let's take a look at Exhibit 31, for example.
This is a confidential internal memorandum from
R.J. Reynolds entitled Some Thoughts -- need the title --
Some Thoughts About New Brands of Cigarettes for the Youth
Market.
see.
RJR.
Well, let's
This is by Claude Teague, by the way, scientist inside
What do they mean by the youth market?
"At the outset it should be said we are presently,
and I believe unfairly, constrained from directly promoting
cigarettes to the youth market; that is, to those in the
approximately 21-year-old and under group.
If this be so,
there is certainly nothing immoral or unethical about our
company attempting to attract those smokers to our products.
Realistically, if our company is to survive and prosper over
the long term, we must get our share of the youth market."
Let me see Exhibit 58, please.
This is from a presentation in 1975 about V8-107
marketing and how they wanted to increase -- this is RJR
again, Reynolds, increase our young adult franchise.
So
what does that mean?
of the young adult in the cigarette market in 1960.
Now, look what they mean by young adult.
Let's look at the growing importance
The
young adult market, the 14-to-24 age group, represented 21
percent of the population.
market was to these two companies.
That's what the young adult
Exhibit 146.
This was another secret RJR document entitled
Younger Adult Smokers:
what does it say?
replacement smokers."
Strategies and Opportunities.
And
"Younger adults' importance as
Now, what does replacement smokers mean?
they have to replace those who die or quit.
replacement smokers?
two-thirds of male smokers start by age 18.
start after age 24."
You can see right there.
It means
And who are the
"More than
Only 5 percent
And there's -- there's a chart by age, starting at
That's who they were targeting.
age 12 up through age 18.
That's who their replacement -- that's the population from
which their replacement smokers were going to come.
Now, I need you to go back in time with me.
I
need you to understand how things were with smoking when Ray
was growing up and first took it up.
The defendants' V8-108
marketing and advertising of cigarettes in the first half of
80 percent
the 20th century created a culture of smoking.
of the men who were Ray's father's age, by the time Ray was
in elementary school and then a teenager, 80 percent smoked
cigarettes.
You remember that this is from Dr. Burns's
That's what Ray grew up with.
testimony, and he showed you that the cohorts -- meaning
five-year intervals, so the generation of Ray's father were
that first -- or second line -- first line, I guess -- got
up to 80 percent.
would have been his role models.
millions of dollars to portray smoking as manly, glamorous,
and, yes, cool, the thing to do, all for the purpose of
influencing people, teenagers to start smoking and as adults
to keep smoking.
Those
The defendant spent
Let me see 177, please.
This is a report from the Federal Trade
Commission, 1967, about cigarette advertising and its
effects.
"Cigarette advertising reaches virtually all
Americans who can either read or understand the spoken word.
So pervasive is cigarette advertising that it is virtually
impossible" -- impossible -- "for Americans of almost any
age to avoid."
And now we pick up the comment about to what
"As
extent children were exposed to this advertising. V8-109 stated above, youth is also exposed to cigarette
During just one week in 1967, in January, the
advertising.
aforementioned 60 network programs, sponsored in whole or in
part by cigarette products, played before 322 million
viewers who were under 21 years of age.
million viewers aged 2 to 12 and 140 aged 13 to 17."
This wasn't an accident by these companies.
These included 150
They
knew what they were doing.
target to replace the smokers they were losing to death and
to those who managed to quit.
They knew where they had to
Now, of course, Ray never said that he started
smoking because of some particular advertisement that he saw
or because of ads at all for that matter.
But do you doubt
for a second that they didn't play a significant role in why
he started smoking?
influence teenagers, why in the world did these companies
spend millions and millions, literally billions of dollars
advertising to attract them?
If they didn't, if they didn't
And remember, by the way, the time period we're
talking about was a long time before there were any warnings
Ray was born in 1942, at age
on the packages of cigarettes.
13 when it was the mid '50s.
Cigarette warnings didn't come
into play until another decade later.
This is a very different situation from today,
when the real dangers of smoking, the real dangers, are
V8-110 known, well known.
In the early 1950s, science was just
beginning to come out into the public on the hazards of
smoking, and so too was these defendants' campaign of doubt
and deception.
Let me see Burns No. 4, please.
You recall this from the testimony of Dr. Burns, a
graph showing the increase in cigarette consumption over the
20th century.
And you can see, as we've already heard many
times, how it went up from the early part of the century
into the 1950s and reached their peak at about 1953.
And you can see that -- the red line there is
showing reports linking cigarettes to cancer, and there was
a sharp decline.
That's when the mouse painting experiments
came out, Life magazine and so forth, a sharp decline for
the first time, really, except for the depression, in the
history of the United States.
But then beginning in 1955 it started back up
That corresponds almost exactly, almost exactly,
again.
with the campaign of doubt and deception that you heard so
much about in the course of this trial.
And there was Ray
Gollihue swept up in it, right in the middle of it.
So Ray
started to smoke in 1955, and he smoked all through high
school, with that increase in smoking, and became addicted.
These defendants bear responsibility for their
They targeted teenagers.
They targeted the
behavior.
V8-111
They made smoking look cool, glamorous, manly.
young.
created a culture of smoking in this country.
They
Let's turn to the response of those companies to
They got together in New York City.
the scientific findings that were coming out in the
early '50s.
a public relations firm.
of doubt and deception.
quell the fears of smokers, to get them to keep smoking, to
get them to keep buying cigarettes, to keep them from
quitting.
They hired
They agreed to sponsor a campaign
They designed that campaign to
They started out that campaign with what they
called the Frank Statement, the candid, the honest statement
to American smokers, published it in over 400 newspapers,
reached a circulation of something like 50 million people.
They said a number of things in that statement.
I
want to focus on just two of them for purposes of my
argument today.
The first, "We accept an interest in
people's health as a basic responsibility, paramount" --
paramount -- "to every other consideration in our business."
The second, "We always have and always will cooperate
closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public
health."
Well, let's take a look -- Exhibit 86 -- at how
This is that memorandum to
they fulfilled those promises.
the planning committee that was prepared right about the V8-112
Let's see what the
I know you saw
"There is only one
time that the Frank Statement came out.
public relations people saw as their job.
this earlier, but it bears repeating.
problem -- confidence and how to establish it; public
assurance and how to create it -- in a perhaps long interim
when scientific doubts must remain.
And most important, how
to free millions of Americans from the guilty fear that is
going to arise deep in their biological depths, regardless
of any pooh-poohing logic, every time they light a
cigarette."
Now, does that sound to you as if they thought the
health of their customers was paramount to any other aspect
of their business?
Let's see Exhibit 27.
This is a report from a few years later, 1969.
Hadn't changed
Let's see what they thought at that time.
any in all the years from 1953 up to the late '60s.
"Doubt
is our product since it is the best means of competing with
the 'body of fact' that exists in the mind of the general
public.
controversy."
It is also the means of establishing a
Does that sound like they thought that the health
of their customers was their most important, paramount
interest, or does it sound like money was most important to
them? V8-113 And all the time, they knew full well, full well,
It was not news to them.
This is
that smoking caused lung cancer.
This was not in doubt inside the companies.
something they knew and believed.
Let me see Exhibit 158.
You saw this during the course of the trial, I
This is when the folks from the BAT, British
believe.
American Tobacco Company, visited the United States in 1958,
so this is just a few years after that promise that's in the
Frank Statement about how they considered the health of
their consumers of paramount importance.
They visited most of the cigarette companies and
the public relations outfit that they'd set up, the TIRC,
Tobacco Industry Research Committee, and this is what those
who visited from England found out about what the people
over here in these companies believed about lung cancer,
with one exception.
employee, by the way, of any of the companies.
individuals whom we met believed that smoking causes lung
cancer, if by causation we mean any chain of events that
leads finally to lung cancer and which involves smoking as
an indispensable link."
That's Mr. Greene, who wasn't even an
"The
So much for the people's health being a matter of
paramount importance to these companies.
And what about cooperating with the public health
V8-114
authorities?
Did they fulfill that promise?
you just two examples of how they did that.
Let me give
Now, you
This was
Let's look at Exhibit 878.
This is a letter from 1963 from a lawyer
at Brown -- from the folks at Brown & Williamson.
have to understand what was going on at this time.
when the Surgeon General was putting together that first
report, that first major report, on smoking and health.
one of the things that the Surgeon General and the people
working with him did was to ask the cigarette companies to
share with them the results of their internal research about
smoking and health, to assist the Surgeon General in
reaching their conclusions.
And
And this is what this is about.
This lawyer
He says, "I'm of the opinion that any description
says -- he's enclosing the substance of a proposed letter to
the Surgeon General's advisory committee on smoking and
health.
in the letter to the committee of the methods and steps
involved in the various scientific research programs
conducted by Brown & Williamson must necessarily be so vague
and incomplete as to be irksome to the reader."
Sound like they're cooperating with the public
health authorities to you?
Let's take a look at Exhibit 30, from about the
In fact, exactly the same time period,
same time period. V8-115
because it's also having to do with this question of whether
or not they're going to turn over their research to the
Surgeon General.
This has to do with the research that Brown &
And you may remember the documents that
Williamson and BAT, that British American Tobacco Company,
had done into the effects of nicotine and whether or not it
was addictive.
showed that they concluded that nicotine was addictive, and
they were in the business of selling nicotine.
"Finch" -- Finch, who was the president of Brown &
Williamson at the time -- "agrees submission Battelle" --
that's that addiction nicotine research -- "developments to
Surgeon General undesirable, and we agree."
It says,
And they didn't.
with the Surgeon General.
They didn't share that research
Let me say just a few things about these internal
The people who wrote these documents
documents, by the way.
at the time never expected for one second that they would
ever see the light of day outside of their companies.
They
expected they would remain secret and confidential, and it
was only with the developments of history that that didn't
happen.
These documents, for the most part, didn't
become -- weren't discovered until mostly in the late 1990s
and the early part of the 2000s, and that's why they're V8-116
available to us today.
But you can be sure, given the fact
that the people who wrote them never expected them to come
out, that they reflect what the people who were writing them
actually thought at the time and were actually doing at the
time.
How did the campaign of doubt and deception, the
How did it influence him and others like him?
phony controversy, how did it impact people like Ray
Gollihue?
How much did Ray Gollihue know about the hazards of smoking?
What did he believe was true?
due to his addiction?
she's the historian, you'll recall -- everyone knew.
Everyone was completely and fully informed, including Ray,
from the time he was an elementary school student.
Was he in a state of denial
If we listen to Professor Hoffman --
But let's look again at the quality of the experts
Dr. Burns.
who testified in this case about this question.
Dr. Burns has devoted literally his entire career to serving
the public.
He has been either a contributor or reviewer or
editor of every single Surgeon General Report since 1975.
Think about that.
He has been at the forefront, literally
more than probably any other living person, in efforts to
protect the public from the hazards of cigarette smoking.
Dr. Cummings participated in no less than six
Surgeon General reports.
Institutes of Health, the National Cancer Institute, the
His work for the National V8-117 He too has devoted his entire
American Cancer Society.
professional career to issues relating to smoking behavior
and smoking cessation.
He has counseled tens of thousands
of smokers on issues relating to smoking cessation, and he's
compiled and organized the enormous document depository of
the internal documents, some of which we've been looking at.
These witnesses, these people, I should say, these
men, are truly public servants whose mission is nothing more
than to protect the public health, a mission that with them
goes back 30 years or more.
Both of these men devoted the
bulk of their careers to public service before they ever
began testifying in court trials like this one.
From their testimony it is clear that the
combination of the defendants' campaign of doubt and
deception, the never-ending blizzard of advertising selling
the virtues of smoking, and the illusory safety of filters
and low-tar cigarettes, all directed at smokers to keep them
smoking, to keep them from quitting, were successful in
influencing people like Ray and millions of others.
How about Professor Hoffman, on the other hand?
She knew literally nothing about the awareness of Americans
about smoking until one day she was hired by the cigarette
She was literally created as an expert witness
industry.
from whole cloth by the industry.
She's one of the stable
of experts all created by the industry solely for the
V8-118 purpose of coming into court and testifying before juries
like you that everybody knew, from the time of Christopher
Columbus, that cigarettes cause disease and that cigarettes
are addictive.
face of the findings, on multiple occasions, by the federal
agencies who are charged with the responsibility for public
health and welfare.
She says that in the
And she says that.
From the 1981 FTC report that I asked her about,
you may recall, from 1981, "Based upon an analysis of all
the data reviewed in its entirety, staff has concluded that
there appear to be such significant gaps in consumer
knowledge that a substantial portion of the population does
not know how dangerous smoking is or whether the dangers of
smoking apply to them and therefore does not have an
understanding of the health hazards of smoking.
"More specifically, the data suggest that a large
number of consumers do not know what diseases are related to
smoking; a substantial number seriously misunderstand and
underestimate the extent of the increased risk of suffering
these health problems as the result of smoking; many
seriously underestimate or are unaware of the severity of
these health consequences and the increased risk of
premature death from these illnesses; and a significant
number of consumers incorrectly do not believe that these
health consequences have any personal relevance to
themselves."
V8-119
"They're wrong.
Now, you may remember that Professor Hoffman said,
I know better."
Let me show you what Philip Morris internally said
They're wrong.
I'm right.
This is Philip Morris, their
about that 1981 FTC report.
experts, in July of 1981, writing about the FTC staff
report, the one I just showed you.
made of the statements in Chapter 3 of the FTC report."
That's the chapter that I showed you.
read from here, and that's the chapter I read from when
Professor Hoffman was on the witness stand.
"Careful study has been
That's the chapter I
Here's their conclusion.
"The statements made
about consumer knowledge, those we have been able to trace
to their source, and that is almost all of them, are
accurately reported and are based on sound research
techniques provided by reputable research technicians
(suppliers)."
That's what Philip Morris thought about the
accuracy of the information in that report, contrasted with
what a professional witness, created by the industry for the
very purpose of coming in here and clouding your
understanding of the truth, had to say about it.
Ray Gollihue, like so many others, was caught
between the public health message that smoking may be
harmful and the industry's lies, the doubt and deceit, and V8-120 It is impossible to know today exactly how much
the illusion and false promises of filter and low-tar
cigarettes.
Ray really heard or read about the public health message,
but certainly he heard some of it, although it's impossible
to know how much of it that he actually believed.
But it is equally certain, equally certain, that
he was exposed to the campaign of the defendants, that
campaign of lies and deception, and to the false promises of
filter cigarettes and low-tar cigarettes.
And all the while
he struggled, as did so many others, between the two as a
result of his addiction.
again to stop smoking, more often over time as he grew
older, but he was never able to succeed for good, not even
after he was diagnosed with lung cancer.
We do know that he tried and tried
Ask yourself this question:
If the phony
controversy, the campaign of doubt and deception, did not
have profound effects on smokers like Ray, if the false
promises of filter cigarettes and low-tar cigarettes did not
have a profound impact on smokers like Ray Gollihue, did not
affect those would have otherwise have quit like Ray, did
not actually create doubt in the minds of smokers like Ray,
why did they do it and continue it for 50 years?
Spending literally hundreds of millions of dollars in the
process.
Why?
Now let me ask a different question.
How would
V8-121
things have been different without the phony controversy,
without the campaign of doubt, without the false promises of
safety by filter and low-tar cigarettes?
companies had admitted at the beginning what they knew full
well to be true?
What if they had allowed the public health
authorities a free and unobstructed field to get their
message across?
reason for doubt; one message and one message only:
start.
There would have been no room for doubt, no
"Don't
What if these
Quit.
It kills you."
Well, we'll never know.
The defendants and their
co-conspirators prevented us from ever knowing.
know, you know it would have been different.
That's what we'll never know.
But, you
How different?
Let me talk a little bit about Ray Gollihue and
what kind of man he was, what he was like.
You've heard
from his family, from his friends, from those who worked
with him, from those whose job it was to evaluate his
character.
honorable, affable, hardworking.
time of war.
around.
a good father, a good and loving husband.
He was loved.
From all accounts he was honest, responsible,
He served his country in
He was funny, friendly, sociable, fun to be
He was a good brother, a good and faithful friend,
He was respected.
How does that compare to the character of the
executives of these defendants and their creatures who lied V8-122 time and time and time again, who plotted together to
conceal the truths that they knew, to sow doubt and to
deceive people like Ray Gollihue?
For money.
And for what?
For what?
You heard from many of these at trial.
Howard
Cullman, chairman of the board of Philip Morris, industry
spokesman; Joseph Cullman, head of Brown & Williamson and
then at Philip Morris, on the executive committee of the
Tobacco Institute; Helmut Wakeham, head of research at
Philip Morris.
Applesauce will kill you.
Remember that?
James Bolling, vice president at Philip Morris;
Robert Heimann -- trust me, no relation -- president of
American Tobacco, now part of R.J. Reynolds; Edward
Horrigan, once CEO of RJR, cigarettes are not addictive;
James Johnston, CEO of RJR, 1994, cigarettes are not
addictive; William Campbell, CEO of Philip Morris, 1994, he
doesn't know that cigarettes cause cancer.
As fine a man as Ray was, he had one fatal
weakness.
He fell prey to these defendants' plot, to their
deception, to their lies, to the doubts that they planted in
his mind, just as the defendants intended.
Despite his many
attempts, he could not break through the addiction to
nicotine that held him so tightly.
Now, the defendants will argue that no one has
testified that Ray actually read or heard the statements by
V8-123
Would you really expect any person -- any of
the defendants and their agents of doubt.
surprising?
the persons who testified here to be able to recall a
specific advertisement, a specific news article, a specific
television program which carried those statements?
Now, is that
As the Court will instruct you, circumstantial
Couple that with the largest advertising
evidence can be just as persuasive as direct evidence.
Here
we have a wealth of evidence about how pervasive and intense
and longstanding the defendants' public campaign of doubt
and deception was.
campaign the world has ever known.
will argue that Ray was exposed to the message from the
public health authorities -- and we don't deny that he
was -- the circumstantial evidence is equally strong that he
was undoubtedly the recipient of the messages from the
defendants as well.
All right.
Just as the defendants
Let me turn now to the claims, the
legal claims in this case, starting with negligence.
said a moment ago, when I was referring to the Engle
findings, the judge will instruct you that the defendants in
this case have been found to be negligent, and you are to
accept that finding.
As I
The only issue for you to decide is whether that
negligence was a legal cause of Ray Gollihue's death, and
the judge will tell you that negligence is a legal cause if V8-124 it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces
or contributes substantially to producing such death.
Was
it a substantial contributing factor so it can reasonably be
said that but for the negligence, the death would not have
occurred?
But importantly, as I said before, in order to be
regarded as the legal cause of death, it need not be the
Negligence may be a legal cause of death even
only cause.
though it operates in combination with other causes, with
the act of another person, a natural cause, some other
cause.
Now, this is important for one particular reason,
and this is that if you find, as you should, that Ray
Gollihue's own behavior, in beginning to smoke and
continuing to smoke, was, in part, a cause of his death,
that does not excuse these defendants from their
responsibility, for their own negligence which substantially
contributed to Mr. Gollihue's death.
The defendants' conduct is still a legal cause
The question of
because it contributed to that outcome.
Mr. Gollihue's fault -- and this is going to be true for all
of the claims that I'm going to talk with you about -- is to
be considered by you not in connection to whether or not
there was a legal cause, but in connection with comparative
fault, where you will be asked to decide what percentage of
V8-125
the fault for Mr. Gollihue's death he bears and what
percentage they bear.
Now, let's go to the second claim, the claim for
Again, the Court will instruct you that the
defect.
defendants' cigarettes that they sold were defective and
The only issue for you to determine
unreasonably dangerous.
is whether that defect is a legal cause of Gollihue's death,
Mr. Gollihue's death.
was so long as in natural and continuous sequence, the
defect produced or contributed substantially in producing
the death so that it can reasonably be said that but for the
defect in the product, the death would not have occurred.
And, again, you should find that it
The next claim is for fraudulent concealment.
The
Court will instruct you that the defendants did, in fact --
did, in fact -- conceal or omit material information not
otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false
or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact
concerning the health effects and addictive nature of
smoking cigarettes.
The issue for you is to determine whether
Mr. Gollihue relied, to his detriment, on that concealment
or omission of material information.
The Court will tell
you that a material fact is one of such importance that
Mr. Gollihue would not have acted as he did but for the
concealment or omission. V8-126
Now, we don't have Ray here to tell you that he
relied on the defendants' concealment, on their doubt, on
their false images of safe filters and lower tar cigarettes,
and this, of course, applies to all the other claims.
He's
just not here to tell you.
But we don't need that.
His actions speak louder
He continued to buy and smoke
He continued to buy and smoke
than his words ever could.
cigarettes for 40 years.
filtered cigarettes and low-tar cigarettes.
do you need?
in response to the defendants' behavior.
He acted.
What more proof
His conduct confirms that he acted
The last claim is for conspiracy.
Conspiracy, the
Judge will tell you, is an agreement between two or more
entities -- in this case companies -- to do an unlawful act
such as concealing or omitting material information, and
that's a conspiracy.
Each party to a conspiracy is responsible for the
acts or omissions of every other party to the conspiracy so
long as the acts or omissions were in furtherance of that
conspiracy.
deception that we're talking about that was hatched in 1953
at that meeting in New York City and that carried on and on
and on in the last half of the 20th century.
And this is the conspiracy of doubt and
The Court will instruct you that these defendants,
in fact, agreed as part of that conspiracy to conceal V8-127
information or omit information regarding the health effects
of smoking cigarettes or their addictive nature, with the
intention -- with the intention -- that smokers in the
public would rely on that information to their detriment.
And the issue for you, again, is whether Mr. Gollihue
relied, and I say to you the evidence of that is in his
conduct.
In this trial the defendants have literally
accused Ms. Gollihue and her son of asking for an award of
money, as if there was something very wrong with that.
But
whether rightly or wrongly, money damages are all that our
system allows for justice.
It is the only means we have of
doing justice.
I promise this to you, Ginnie Gollihue and
Shane would gladly exchange any amount of money, any sum, to
have Ray Gollihue with them alive today.
We are asking only for those damages which the law
As the judge will
allows in a case for wrongful death.
instruct you, those damages are for Ginnie Gollihue's loss
of Ray Gollihue's companionship and protection and for her
mental pain and suffering as a result of Ray's injuries and
death.
father's companionship, instruction, and guidance, and for
his mental pain and suffering.
Shane too is seeking damages for his loss of his
The law doesn't have any exact standard for fixing
You should award the amounts, if you
the amount of damages. V8-128 find for the plaintiff, that you believe are fair and just.
But in doing so, you should be guided by the life
expectancies of Ginnie, Shane, and of Ray.
There's every reason to believe that if Ray had never
started smoking or if these defendants had not been so
successful with their campaign of doubt and deception in
preventing him from quitting, he would be alive today.
Death at 53.
What is the value of the loss of a husband for 20
This is for you to
or more years or the loss of a father?
This is your decision, yours and yours alone, but I
decide.
would ask that you not award more than $10 million to either
of them.
An award beyond that is too much and would in all
likelihood be taken away anyway.
Follow the instructions the Court gives you.
Base
your verdict on the evidence and those instructions, and
they will lead you to do justice.
But whatever you do on
this question, the amount should be respectful of Virginia
Gollihue and of Shane.
As I said, Ms. Gollihue accepts that Ray was
So when you come to consider this issue of
This means that he -- she
responsible for his own behavior.
acknowledges that he bears some degree of fault for his own
death.
comparative fault that I mentioned a moment ago, you'll
accept that, and you'll be called upon to compare the degree
of his fault to the behavior of these defendants.
V8-129 How do you assess the degree to which Mr. Gollihue
Well, one way of thinking of it is that Mr. Gollihue
You might take
was responsible for his own demise and the degree to which
these defendants are responsible for their own behavior and
its contribution to Mr. Gollihue's addiction and to his
death?
began smoking when he was 13, 13 years old.
into account that at that young and tender age, the
defendants knew perfectly well what they were doing in
marketing cigarettes to teenagers and targeting children as
young as 13.
You also might consider that for the first 11
years that Ray smoked and became addicted, there weren't any
warnings on the cigarette packs, none at all, about the
health hazards of smoking, despite the fact, despite the
fact that these defendants knew perfectly well how deadly
By the time the warnings were first
their product was.
placed on the pack in the middle '60s, Ray Gollihue was
thoroughly addicted, just as the makers of those cigarettes
had intended him to be.
Another consideration, in terms of weighing the
degree of fault here, is the intentionality on the part of
the defendants and what they did.
If this were a criminal
case, I'd be talking to you about premeditation and
deliberation in what they did.
This was no accident.
This campaign, their
V8-130 behavior, was intentional, was deliberate, was designed, had
a purpose, came from the very tops of these companies, and
they did it knowing to a certainty that what they sold was
going to lead to the death of tens of thousands of people.
Compare that to Ray's fault.
Now, let me talk to you a little bit about
The judge will instruct you that in this
punitive damages.
phase of the trial, the one we're in now, if you find for
the plaintiff on one or more of the claims in liability, you
then must determine whether the conduct of these defendants
warrants the award of punitive damages.
The Court will instruct you that punitive damages
are warranted if you find by clear and convincing evidence
that (1) the conduct causing Mr. Gollihue's death was so
gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human
life or of the safety of persons exposed to the effects of
such conduct, or (2) the conduct showed such an entire lack
of care that the defendants must have been consciously
indifferent to the consequences, or (3) the conduct showed
such an entire lack of care that the defendant must have
wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of
the public, and, finally, the conduct showed such reckless
indifference to the rights of others as to be equivalent to
an intentional violation of those rights.
Let's look at the conduct of the defendants and
V8-131 It wasn't a mistake.
And it wasn't just
Once again, the conduct
how it stacks up to those criteria.
that you're dealing with was intentional.
accident.
intentional; it was deliberate, premeditated, planned at the
highest levels of these companies, approved by their boards
of directors, and it directly, directly affected health.
This wasn't just about money.
It wasn't an
MR. DAVIS:
Farm/Williams.
THE COURT:
MR. HEIMANN:
It wasn't about --
Objection, Your Honor, State
Overruled.
This wasn't just about stealing
This was about Ray Gollihue's life and
Could there be any clearer
somebody's money.
death and millions of others.
case for the imposition of punitive damages?
so, but that's up to you.
I don't think
As jurors you bear an awesome responsibility.
You
have taken an oath yourselves to serve faithfully and
honestly as jurors in this case, to do justice to the
parties before you.
Our legal system vests with you the
power to do justice for Mr. -- Ms. Gollihue and for Shane
Gollihue and for Ray.
You and only you have that power.
exercising that power, you also serve as the conscience of
the community in which you live.
In
So the simple truth is this:
If you do not bring
these companies to justice, if you do not hold them
V8-132
accountable for their own behavior and for the damages that
they have done, no one will.
Thank you.


MR. HEIMANN:
Ladies and gentlemen, I have a few more minutes
before you will be instructed by the Court, and I want to
focus my comments on specific matters that were addressed to
you by one or another of the counsel for the defendants.
I
want to first take up once again this question of BAC.
want to focus on Dr. Aplin's testimony with you again.
testified apex means upper.
I
She
May I approach?
THE COURT:
MR. HEIMANN:
Yes, you may.
Just as she showed you in the
Nothing to
diagram, upper part of the lung, nothing.
indicate periphery or edge of the lung, which is key to
whether or not you have a BAC as opposed to an ordinary kind
of carcinoma.
He says
that's important for BAC.
Our expert then focuses on scarring.
Dr. Aplin said scarring is common in all cancers.
There is nothing special about scarring for BAC as opposed to
other cancers.
It's not any more indication of BAC than any
It's common, is the testimony of the doctor.
other cancer.
Blood clots, the third point from Dr. Barsky,
saying common in all cancers, and that's what the treating 194
Finally, there is
doctor told you when he testified.
absolutely nothing -- nothing at all in the medical records
to suggest that the clot, or the tumor, was in the periphery
around the edge.
The treating doctor told you that was the
case.
What Dr. Barsky did say was that the gold standard
for identifying the type of cancer cell that you are dealing
with is pathology, looking at the cells under a microscope on
a slide.
He didn't do that, of course; but the doctors that
saw Mr. Gollihue and the team that diagnosed him did, not
once, but twice, in Gainesville and then again in Texas, and
both times they came back ordinary adenocarcinoma.
apparently -- this is really critical here -- the doctor,
oncologist told you that if there had been any indication in
the pathology, for that matter any other aspect of the
treatment that it was a BAC type of cancer, they would have
seen that.
with the patient, but they didn't.
That would have been important to them in dealing
And
So unless you are prepared to conclude that we are
dealing with a bunch of incompetent boobs at the University
of Florida who were dealing with Mr. Gollihue, who do you
believe?
$2,600,000 expert that comes in here and has been working for
them for 20-some years.
expert, what we call a juke box expert.
The treating physicians and her team or this
This is a bought-and-paid-for 195 Remember what a juke box is?
You put in your money
His tune has been paid for and called
and you call the tune.
for.
You shouldn't give any credit to what he had to say.
Counsel for Reynolds, once again in her closing, as
she did in her opening, said that the best proof of the fact
that Mr. Gollihue was not addicted, was because he quit.
She
says, quit for good in 1994.
She told you that in opening
and told you that again here, and so did the gentleman for
Philip Morris.
We know it's not true.
It's not true.
May I see the medical records, please.
I have
three sets of medical records that I would like to put up
quickly.
No, I want the section where it says when he quit.
This is from Joint Exhibit 1.
Let me
This
This is December.
All right.
make sure we get the date of this.
is a December 31, 1994.
Patient is a previous air traffic controller.
He
previously was a heavy smoker and quit in September.
So two, two and a half months earlier.
The point
here is this is a report from December of '94, couple of
months earlier.
Let me see the next one, please.
Similar -- give me the date of this, the date of
the document.
Are we having a good time?
All right.
Another December '94 report, the
patient was a heavy smoker in the past, quitting recently.
V8 - 196
This is December '94.
earlier.
He quit just a couple of months
And that's true.
That's what the medical records
show, but you listened to the testimony of Melissa --
remember her testimony -- that later he relapsed and she
would wheel him out in the wheelchair so that he could smoke.
And she hid that from Ginny Gollihue.
Not surprising.
But even more apparently, has anybody forgotten
He testified in a deposition.
So these lawyers
Ray, Jr.?
knew before they first stood in front of you what he had
said.
His testimony was read by deposition.
He said that
he caught his father smoking after his diagnosis on several
occasions, and that by April of 1995, he was definitely back
to smoking.
Not as much as before, Ray, Jr. said, but he was
He had relapsed, even though he was then
definitely smoking.
being treated for lung cancer.
Terrible taste.
I remember it.
Why is it no one remembers on this
In fact, if you recall, Ray, Jr. said his father
said that smoking when he was undergoing chemo was really
nasty.
side that testimony?
But they want to ignore
it because they want to say to you, oh, the fact that he was
able to quit for good shows he was able to quit.
Just like
most smokers who want to quit, he did quit, but he relapsed.
I don't want to go back to
You heard Dr. Cummings. 197
That's so typical of an addicted smoker.
He relapsed.
that.
So it is no proof at all, contrary to what you've heard a few
moments ago, that it shows that he was not addicted.
Just to
the contrary.
It confirms the fact that he was addicted.
Counsel tells you about the testimony you heard
from the representative from RJR, the man that makes two and
a half million dollars a year working for RJR.
He testified
that they made efforts to develop a safe -- by which I assume
he meant cancer-free, disease-free -- cigarette and spent a
good bit of money, he said, to try to develop that.
Wouldn't you want to be the first cigarette company
that actually made a cigarette that didn't cause people to
die?
could actually find the way to do that.
Just think how much your profits would zoom if you
But -- but while they were supposedly looking for
Heart
Cancer.
that safe cigarette, what were they selling?
disease.
Now, counsel suggests to you what the witness's
testimony was.
Well, they lowered over time the overall tar
and nicotine content of their cigarettes, as if that's a big
deal.
What did that accomplish?
You heard from Dr. Cummings; exactly nothing,
because no matter how far they lowered it, although they
never lowered the nicotine below the level that would sustain
addiction -- they were very careful not to do that for their 198
mainstream cigarette -- people sill get the same amount of
tar from a low-tar cigarette that they get from a high-tar
cigarette because they compensate.
Let me have Exhibit 81 to start with on this.
Here's a report from RJR.
Giving a cigarette that
delivers less nicotine than heat -- meaning the smoker
desires -- the smoker will subconsciously adjust his puff
volume and frequency so as to obtain and maintain his
per-hour and per-day requirement for nicotine or likely will
change to a brand delivering his desired per-cigarette level
of nicotine.
Let me have 207.
The smoker data collected in this study are in
September '75.
agreement with the results found in other project studies.
The panelists smoked the cigarettes according to the physical
The dilution and lower RTD of Marlboro Lights
properties.
caused the smokers to take larger puffs on that cigarette
than on Marlboro 85s.
the delivery of Marlboro Lights proportionately.
the Marlboro 85 smokers in this study did not achieve any
reduction in smoke intake by smoking a cigarette, Marlboro
Lights, normally considered lower in delivery.
Conversely
the Marlboro Lights smokers did not increase their smoke
intake when they changed to the regular delivery cigarette.
No. 357, do you have that
The larger puffs, in turn, increased
In effect,
Finally, 357, I think. 199 for me?
Sorry.
Page 2, no.
It comes down to the new filter brands vying.
We are running on the fly here.
This
is about filters, says in most cases, however, the smoker of
a filtered cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and
tar as he would have gotten from the regular cigarette.
He
abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on the ground of
reduced health risks.
Reducing the tar and nicotine didn't make the
cigarette any safer, and the industry knew that.
You heard
Dr. Cummings testify, as a matter of fact -- as a matter of
fact, over time, because of the ways in which they changed
the curing of tobacco for the sake of less expense -- it was
a cheaper way to do it -- the cigarettes got deadlier over
time.
Remember, he said they became high in
nicotine-specific nitrosamines -- hard word for me to
pronounce -- that is deadly.
manufactured with lower tar and nicotine actually became
deadlier over time, not safer.
The cigarettes that were being
By the way, on the snippets, it's true, I'm not
That's about a six-page
Please, if you have any doubt in
showing you the entire document.
document I put up there.
your mind about whether or not I have accurately presented to
you the substance of the contents of any of these internal
documents, you will have the full documents available to you.
V8 - 200
Take whatever time you need to read them over and confirm to
yourself that they, in fact, reflect in full what we have
been showing you in pieces, because obviously we can't -- in
a trial where we are required to get things done in an
expedited manner, we can't go through every page of every
document, but you have that opportunity, if you want.
And I
don't have the slightest bit of concern that you're going to
find that they are any different when you read the whole
thing than they were when you just saw the pieces that we
showed you.
We don't say it's impossible to quit.
Once again, in argument, counsel said just because
We don't
We
somebody is addicted doesn't mean they can't quit.
argue with that.
just say it's very difficult, and the evidence shows that
these companies did everything they could in their power to
dissuade people from quitting, both through the statements
they made, through the doubt they tried to create, to the
controversy they asserted existed where none would have
existed otherwise, through the lower tar cigarettes and the
filter cigarettes that they made.
a defense, that's a lawyer's idea.
But this idea of choice as
Let me show you Exhibit 94.
Go to the first page
of this.
This is a memo from September of 1980.
This
happens to be a memo from one person in the Tobacco 201 That was their lobbying and public relations
He talks on the first page -- I
Institute.
organization to another.
won't take the time to review it now.
page about concern that some organization are starting to
assert that cigarettes may be addictive.
He talks on the first
This was during the time period when the Surgeon
General had not yet published the report but concluded that
cigarettes are nicotine addicted.
This is what he said and concludes.
The lawyers remind us, I'm told, that the entire
matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting
attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case.
We can't
defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was
addicted.
This defense of free choice is the lawyer's idea.
What did the people inside the company say?
Let's go to Exhibit 72.
This is a document from 1982 written by somebody in
He writes, Most of those who have
their research department.
Many,
smoked for any significant time would like to stop.
but not most, of those who would like to stop smoking are
able to do so.
They knew internally -- not the lawyers now, but
the people internally -- they knew this was the fact because
Most people
this is what the consequences of addiction are.
can't stop or are unable to stop.
V8 - 202
choice.
One last document, Exhibit 31, when we talk about
This is a document from Claude Teague, I think.
Some thoughts about new brands of cigarettes for
You've seen this document before, and I
the youth market.
think we showed it to you during the course of the trial; but
I want to go right here.
document is talking about the difference between the
presmoker, the learner, and the confirmed, meaning addicted
smoker, in the last column.
This is where the author of the
He says under Psychological Effects under the
section C there, identification with volume persons:
sophisticated, free to choose -- free to choose.
presmoker, there are two pluses there.
choose because they haven't even smoked.
there is three positives.
choose because they are still starting.
The learner is still free to
For the learner,
Yes, they are free to
Daring,
For the
But look at what he says for the confirmed smoker.
Not free to choose.
Minus.
That's what they thought.
That's what they knew inside the company, not what the
lawyers thought.
Now, counsel made specific reference to a document,
a BAT document, they said that had nothing to do with them.
I want to show you that document.
It's
true this is a BAT document, but what they didn't tell you
It's Exhibit 106. 203
was, this is a document that reflects a conference that was
held in which a number of companies that were associated,
affiliated with British American Tobacco attended, including
people from Brown and Williamson, the U.S. company that's now
R.J. Reynolds.
they want to say has nothing to do with them, and I don't
blame them because -- let's go to the last page and see what
we find there.
This is the company -- this is the document
So give them, smokers, what they want.
They seem
to want taste and value, and always remember that while King
James I issued his famous counterblast to tobacco in 1604, it
is nicer from our point of view to remember Oscar Wilde's
words in the picture of Dorian Gray in 1891.
is a perfect type of a perfect pleasure.
it leaves one unsatisfied.
us provide the exquisiteness and hope they, our consumers,
continue to remain unsatisfied.
larger bag to carry the money to the bank.
It is exquisite and
But let
All we would want then is a
The cigarette
What more can one want?
You know, this idea that Ray Gollihue somehow was
exposed to and understood what the health message was from
the public health community but somehow missed altogether the
two defendant tobacco companies' campaign of deceit and doubt
is really extraordinary to me.
It's like saying a man's in a field and in the
morning the sun is shining.
That's the public health 204
But along comes the afternoon, as it does in this
He's still in the
That's the tobacco
message.
state, and a huge thunderstorm comes up.
field and it pours and pours and pours.
company's message.
didn't get wet.
They would have it that somehow Ray
Well, it's clear from the evidence -- and it's
circumstantial evidence on both sides -- that somebody like
Ray Gollihue -- Ray Gollihue -- would have to some extent
been exposed to health risk.
There just isn't any doubt
about that fact.
His wife may not have discussed these things with
him and may not have been fully informed about what he
thought or what he knew, is beside the point.
is true is that he was exposed to the defendants and what
they had to say and what they said and said and said over and
over and over again.
That, too, had an impact on him.
What equally
By the way, there is evidence in this regard that
Mr. Gollihue smoked filtered cigarettes and smoked low-tar
cigarettes.
of it, but that was the testimony.
Objection.
I don't know if any of you took notes
No evidence on the type of
Vantage.
MS. PARKER:
cigarette.
THE COURT:
Ladies and gentlemen, you rely upon your own
Overruled.
recollection of the evidence. 205 MR. HEIMANN:
Yes, this case is about Ray Gollihue,
but it's not just about Ray Gollihue.
It's about what these
companies did to Ray Gollihue and to oh so many others just
You can't, as they would have it, put that aside
like him.
as if it didn't happen.
And
that's really what the case is about.
And it had an impact.
It did.
Yes, Ray Gollihue was responsible for his own
behavior, including the fact that he smoked cigarettes; but
these companies have to be held responsible for their
behavior, too, when they do damage to people like Ray
Gollihue.
You know, they have made a lot about the fact that
Mr. Gollihue was an air traffic controller and had a
considerable amount of responsibility for the safety of
people.
responsibility for the safety of people, too.
They had -- or they could have had similar
Ray did his job.
Think of it this way:
They didn't.
435,000 people a year die
from cigarette smoke.
jumbo jets that Ray Gollihue kept flying in the air as an air
traffic controller.
Think of a jumbo jet, the kind of
MS. PARKER:
THE COURT:
MR. HEIMANN:
Objection.
Overruled to this point.
Improper.
Argumentative.
I'll listen.
How many plane crashes would have
occurred on Ray Gollihue's watch in order to equal the number
V8 - 206
of folks who died each year from cigarette smoking?
THE COURT:
MR. HEIMANN:
closed earlier today.
Objection sustained.
I'll close this afternoon the way I
Our system empowers you, and you alone, to do
justice in these cases.
The simple truth is, if you do not
bring these companies to bear, if you do not bring them to
justice, if you do not bring them to account for their
behavior and for the damage they did to Ray Gollihue and to
his family, no one will.
No one will.