          MR. MCCARTER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Good afternoon.  So we heard you all were
     making coffee, and I hope that's not a
     reflection on how interesting or boring you
     think I'm going to be.  I guess it can't be a
     bad thing.
          First I want to start off by saying thank
     you for being here the last two and a half
     weeks.  You've been a great jury.  You've been
     very attentive to all of us and patient with us
     a lot.  You've had to wait around a lot.  We
     really appreciate it, and that comes from me,
     that comes from Mr. Cruz-Alvarez, and I'm sure
     Mr. Walker as well; although he'll speak to you
     after I'm done.
          I want to thank Mr. Walker too for letting
     me use most of the defense time today, like
     he's done throughout the case; and lastly, you
     know, Frank and I have a lot of people helping
     us in our office and they're behind the scenes and I want to thank them too for the help
     they've given us.
          We've heard from plaintiff's counsel for
     about two hours this morning and it took an
     hour and 58 minutes before they said anything
     about what Mrs. Gore knew about the risks of
     smoking.  They didn't mention it at all early
     on before lunch and Mr. Foote went on almost
     the entire time without mentioning anything
     about what Mrs. Gore knew.
          That's one of the central issues in the
     case, what did she know throughout her life
     about her smoking.  Did she know smoking could
     cause cancer?  Did she know it was bad for her
     health?  Did she know that if she kept smoking
     she could get sick?
          Amazingly, what you heard in those last
     two minutes was that Mrs. Gore didn't know what
     we know today.  That's not this case.  That's
     not what the evidence has been.  You heard from
     Dr. Burns and then from Mr. Gore himself that
     Mrs. Gore knew the entire time she smoked.  She
     learned it when she was growing up, she was
     reminded of it throughout her life.
          She knew that smoking could cause cancer and that if she smoked, she knew she could get
     sick.  That's what the evidence showed in this
     case, overwhelmingly.  There was no evidence to
     the contrary.
          They told you in opening statement she
     didn't know.  "Philip Morris didn't say smoking
     caused cancer in time for Mrs. Gore," that's
     what they said in opening statement.  But what
     you learned throughout this case was that
     Mrs. Gore knew the dangers of smoking her
     entire life, and I'm going to talk in more
     detail about each of those.
          She smoked because she enjoyed it.
     Mrs. Gore did not want to quit smoking.  I'll
     talk about the evidence on that.  Mrs. Gore
     never made a sincere attempt to quit.
          Then they showed you all these tobacco
     company documents, these old documents, but
     they never explained how does that have
     anything to do with Mrs. Gore, documents
     talking about carcinogens?  Well, Mrs. Gore
     knew smoking caused cancer.  She learned about
     that in the 1950s.  She knew there were
     carcinogens in cigarettes.
          Mrs. Gore was not influenced by anything tobacco companies said or did and there's
     absolutely no evidence that anything these
     companies did had any effect on her.
          This is where I ended my opening
     statement, so I'm picking up here in my closing
     argument on where I left off in opening
     statement, because this is what I told you in
     opening statement that the evidence would show,
     that it would show all of this, and that is
     exactly what the evidence did show.  Mrs. Gore
     knew the dangers of smoking her entire life.
          What was the evidence on that?  I can tell
     you one thing.  There was never any evidence
     that she didn't know the dangers of smoking.
     Nobody said that.  The only time you heard that
     was from plaintiff's counsel in opening
     statement and from plaintiff's counsel today.
          Mr. Gore didn't say it and Dr. Burns
     didn't say it.  There's no evidence that
     Mrs. Gore did not know what smoking could do to
     her.  Instead, the evidence was that Mrs. Gore
     was warned about the dangers of smoking from
     her parents when she was growing up.
          Remember her father?  When she was growing
     up in his house he called his own cigarettes "coffin nails" in front of Mrs. Gore in the
     1950s.  He had a smoker's cough and he told her
     don't smoke.  "See what it can do to you?"
          Her parents forbid her from smoking
     growing up.  They had rules against it.  And
     when she was growing up she would see her
     parents -- maybe it was a weekly dinner I think
     Mr. Gore talked about -- and three or four
     times a month, 12 months a year, for the 37
     years Mr. or Mrs. Gore were married her parents
     told her she should quit smoking, that it's bad
     for her health.
          Mrs. Gore was warned about the dangers of
     smoking when she was in high school in the
     1950s.  You remember the charming older
     gentleman, Mr. Siebert, that came in here?  He
     was the one who was reading his testimony out
     loud when he was supposed to read it to
     himself.
          I think everybody agrees he seems like a
     wonderful man and he described for you the film
     they watched in high school that he remembers
     to this very day was put on by the American
     Lung Association showing that black lung -- I
     guess it was a coal miner's lung -- but part of message of the film in the 50s was don't
     smoke.  It can kill you.  It can cause cancer
     in your lungs.
          That's what Mrs. Gore learned in school.
          Then we read to you the testimony of her
     long time high school boyfriend, Jerry Schick.
     Mr. Schick said the same thing.  He said, "We
     had health class in high school and in health
     class we learned that smoking can kill you."
          And when she smoked around him, remember
     what he said?  She smoked one time around him.
     He didn't want her to smoke.  He said, "You
     shouldn't do that, it can kill you," and she
     never smoked around him again.
          Mrs. Gore read the newspaper, she read
     magazines.  She watched television, the news,
     the local and national news, and you heard
     Mr. Gore talk about all the time they saw on
     television talking about the dangers of
     smoking.  You heard about all those times they
     would talk about it together and he would say,
     "See, you ought to quit," and she never said to
     him, "I don't believe it."  She never said,
     "No, no, I don't need to quit.  The tobacco
     companies say it doesn't cause cancer." That wasn't her.  She knew it was bad for
     her health, but she wanted to do it.
          Mrs. Gore subscribed to Readers Digest and
     Life Magazine -- and we brought for you some
     examples of coverage of the risks of smoking
     from those magazines, and of course she saw
     things in newspapers and on television.
          The warnings on the pack.  For the last
     34 years Mrs. Gore smoked there was a warning
     on every pack of cigarettes she smoked.
          Remember Dr. Burns said she smoked 380,000
     packs of cigarettes between 1966 and 2000 or
     380,000 cigarettes, I guess.  That's 380,000
     times she took a cigarette out of a pack that
     had a warning on it, and in 1966 the warnings
     went on the pack and warned her that cigarette
     smoking may be hazardous to her health.
          You heard from Dr. Burns that Philip
     Morris and R.J. Reynolds complied with the law
     in 1966 and they put this warning on every
     package of cigarettes they sold.  So it was on
     every pack Mrs. Gore smoked in that time
     period.
          Mr. Gore testified she believed the
     warnings.  She knew what the warnings were telling her and she never once questioned and
     said "no, no, the warning is wrong."  She
     didn't question it because she knew and she
     believed it.
          Now, in 1970 the warning changed and it
     said, "The Surgeon General has determined that
     cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health."
          Again, Mr. Gore said Mrs. Gore saw the
     warnings, she read the warnings, she understood
     what it was telling her; and Dr. Burns
     testified that Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds
     complied with the law and put this warning on
     every package of cigarettes they sold in the
     U.S. in those 15 years.
          In 1985 the warning changed again, and
     this is when we got the four rotating warnings
     that are still on the packs today.  Again,
     Dr. Burns testified that from 1985 till today
     Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds complied with
     the law and put these warnings on every package
     of cigarettes sold in the U.S.
          Mrs. Gore saw the warnings, she understood
     the warnings, she never questioned the
     warnings, and one of the warnings specifically
     warned her about lung cancer.  That's the disease they claim she got 15 years later in
     2000 and she was specifically warned about it
     in 1985.
          So for the last 34 years she smoked, from
     1966 to the year 2000, there was a warning on
     every single package of cigarettes she smoked.
          Mrs. Gore also had the benefit of warnings
     in the advertisements starting in 1972.  The
     same warnings that were on the packs were
     included in all the advertisements that she
     would have seen for cigarettes.  So from 1972
     to 2000, that 28-year period of time, any
     cigarette advertisement Mrs. Gore saw had a
     warning on it.
          Mrs. Gore also learned of the dangers of
     smoking from her doctors.  You heard this from
     Mr. Gore.  He started to go -- in the 1960s he
     started to go to doctors' appointments,
     checkups, things like that with Mrs. Gore.  I
     think except for OB-GYN he said he went to
     everything, and what he testified is that her
     doctors told her throughout her life that if
     she smoked it could be bad for her health.  It
     could be bad for the health of her unborn child
     when she was pregnant.  They told her if she kept smoking she could get emphysema.  They
     told her if she kept smoking she could get
     cancer.
          Mr. Gore said every time she went to the
     doctor they talked to her about her smoking,
     and later in her life when she went to
     Dr. Bennett or Beckett for the carotid artery
     issue, he told her if she kept smoking she
     could get a stroke or a heart attack.
          Throughout her life she was warned about
     the dangers of smoking from her doctors.
          Of course, Mr. Gore also told her from
     about 1963, when they first met, throughout
     their entire marriage that smoking was bad for
     her health.  He told her repeatedly about it,
     talked to her and urged her to quit smoking.
     There's no question about it.
          Their children also got on her to quit
     smoking.  You heard about their daughter
     Christina when Dr. Burns was here.  You heard
     about the story where she watched something on
     television with her mom in the 1970s talking
     about the dangers of smoking.  Christina said,
     "See, mom, it can give you cancer.  You need to
     quit." And of course Mr. Gore said the kids were
     not telling her anything she did not already
     know.
          Her employers -- Mrs. Gore worked for
     doctors.  She managed a doctors' office of
     30 to 40 doctors.  You heard from Mr. Gore on a
     question that one of you asked, what did her
     doctors say to her about smoking, the ones she
     worked for, and he said he's virtually certain
     they talked to her about the dangers of
     smoking.
          That's her bosses, the people whose office
     she's managing telling her about it.
          You also heard she worked for an insurance
     company, and when she worked for the insurance
     company the insurance companies charged smokers
     higher rates than nonsmokers and they knew that
     because smokers get sick more than nonsmokers.
     So she learned from her insurance boss too.
          Of course you heard the story of her own
     father's lung cancer in 1994 and how the family
     reacted and really urged her to quit smoking.
     Her mother told her if she kept smoking, it was
     going to do the same thing to her as it did to
     her daddy, and how she was putting another nail if her coffin.  That came from Mr. Gore and
     Mrs. Gores's mother both said that to her.
          You know that Mrs. Gore knew the dangers
     of smoking, because you've heard about how
     Mr. and Mrs. Gore handled smoking with their
     own children.  They forbid their children from
     smoking.  When their children were growing up
     they said, "You can't smoke and if you do
     smoke, there's going to be consequences.
     You'll get punished."  They told them smoking
     was bad for their health, the same thing the
     children were telling Mrs. Gore.  They told
     them they could get hooked if they got started
     smoking.
          You also heard about -- one of the things
     the children would say to Mrs. Gore when
     Mrs. Gore would get coughing with that smoker's
     cough, the children would tell her she's
     sucking down one of those cancer sticks.  Her
     own children in her house -- she grew up in a
     house where her father called cigarettes
     "coffin nails" and her children called them
     "cancer sticks."  She knew if she continued
     smoking she could get sick, and not another
     witness said otherwise. This was plaintiff's claim in their
     opening statement.  You heard it again with two
     minutes left in their closing argument today,
     that Mrs. Gore did not know that smoking was
     bad for her health.  That's their claim in this
     case.
          That is their claim in this case, but
     there's absolutely no evidence to support it,
     because this is Mr. Gore's testimony.  These
     aren't the lawyers' words.  This is what
     Mr. Gore said about Mrs. Gore on cross
     examination.
          "Q:  Now, by the time you met Mrs. Gore in
     1963 she knew that smoking was bad for your
     health, correct?
          "A:  Yes.
          "Q:  Mrs. Gore told you she learned when
     she was growing up that smoking was bad for her
     health, correct?
          "A:  That's right.
          "Q:  You and Mrs. Gore knew the entire
     time you were married that smoking was bad for
     your health, correct?
          "A:  Yes.
          "Q:  You knew about the warnings on the packs?
          "A:  Yes.
          "Q:  Mrs. Gore believed what the warnings
     were telling her?
          "A:  Yes.
          "Q:  And she made the decision to continue
     to smoke despite what she knew, correct?
          "A:  Yes."
          That's the evidence.  It's not lawyer
     words.  That's the evidence and that's the
     reality.  Mrs. Gore knew exactly what she was
     doing the entire time she was doing that.
          This is one of the questions you saw in my
     opening statement about what Mr. Gore said
     about what they knew as a family.
          Can we play that, Marie?
          "We were aware as a family that it was a
     bad thing and that we shouldn't be doing it,
     and they even put the warnings on there and we
     still continued to smoke."
          So on this issue of what they're claiming
     Mrs. Gore didn't know what we know today, that
     she didn't know smoking was dangerous, these
     are the only words that you need to be aware
     of, and that's per Mr. Gore. "We were aware as a family that it was a
     bad thing and we shouldn't be doing it.  They
     even put the warnings on there and we still
     continued to smoke."
          Mrs. Gore knew what she was doing and she
     made a choice and a decision to smoke, despite
     knowing it could be bad for her health.
          Second, what the evidence showed is that
     Mrs. Gore smoked because she enjoyed it,
     because she enjoyed smoking.
          Again, those aren't just my words.  That's
     what Mr. Gore testified to.  He said when he
     was here that Mrs. Gore told him over and over
     again, "I enjoy smoking.  That's why I'm
     smoking."
          Here's his testimony:
          "Q:  Mrs. Gore told you many times
     throughout your life together that she enjoyed
     smoking, correct?
          "A:  Yes.
          "Q:  She told you that it calmed her?
          "A:  Yes.
          "Q:  And that it relaxed her, correct?
          "A:  Yes."
          Even Dr. Burns, who's been paid $3 million by lawyers suing tobacco companies, even
     Dr. Burns admitted after the materials he
     reviewed that's what Mrs. Gore told people.
          She said, "I'm an adult.  I'm going to do
     what I want to do and I'm going to smoke and
     yes, I do enjoy it."
          She said that on multiple occasions.
          She didn't say, "I'm going to smoke
     because I'm addicted and I can't quit.  I'm
     going to smoke because I'm hooked and I can't
     help it."  What she said was, "I enjoy smoking.
      Leave me alone.  This is what I want to do and
     I'm going to continue to do it, because that's
     my right to do it.  I'm in charge of my own
     life."
          You also heard from Mr. Gore when he was
     here and Mr. Gore was answering questions about
     this form that she filled out.  This was part
     of the forms that she and Mr. and Mrs. Gore
     would send in to get the free stuff, like the
     chainsaw and the Virginia Slims shirt and the
     Virginia Slims wine glasses.  All that stuff
     that they saved the coupons for and sent them
     in were the result of filling out forms like
     this. This is a form Mrs. Gore filled out and it
     asked her:  "Would you be interested in joining
     a smokers group to help protect your right to
     smoke?"  And she answered it "yes."
          Because Mrs. Gore, she wasn't ashamed of
     her smoking.  She didn't feel like she had been
     fooled or duped or treated unfairly by Philip
     Morris or R.J. Reynolds.  She liked the whole
     smoking experience and she did not want anybody
     to tell her that she couldn't smoke.
          Just look at her behavior.  She's saving
     the coupons to send in to get wine glasses so
     she can drink wine out of a Benson & Hedges
     wine glass.  She's wearing Virginia Slims
     T-shirts around.  She's getting Benson & Hedges
     pasta bowls and countless other items, and you
     saw how proud Mr. Gore still is of the chainsaw
     he got.  He wishes he could get another one.
     He loved those coupons and she loved that
     experience, because it fit with the way she
     viewed her smoking.
          She didn't view herself as a victim, the
     type of person who should file a lawsuit and
     blame the tobacco companies for her health
     problems.  She believed people should have the right to smoke if they wanted to.  That's what
     Mr. Gore was asked and he said "that's right."
          In fact, she believed that the smoker's
     right to choose to smoke is something that
     should be protected.  That's what she said,
     that's what Mr. Gore said.
          "Q:  And that was her feeling, even
     knowing that smoking cigarettes was a risky
     dangerous behavior; is that right, sir?
          "A:  That's right."
          Now, some of us in the room may agree or
     disagree with whether people should have a
     right to smoke or whether smokers' rights
     should be protected.
          We heard Mrs. Gore wanted to be able to
     smoke in restaurants.  It was certainly her
     right to have those beliefs, her own beliefs
     and her own opinions, and it was also her right
     to live her life the way she wanted to live it.
          I said this in opening, but -- I'm
     spending a lot of time talking about her
     choices and decisions, but I'm not meaning to
     criticize her in any way.  She's not the one
     who filed this lawsuit.  She didn't file this
     lawsuit, Mr. Gore filed this lawsuit. Mrs. Gore had the right, as we all do in
     this country, to live our lives the way we want
     to live them, and I'm not being critical at
     all.  We all make different decisions and she
     did what she wanted to do and it was her right
     to do that.
          Now, you also heard testimony from
     Mr. Gore.  See, this whole thing about
     addiction is that their whole story, their
     whole claim is that she wanted to quit smoking.
     She just wanted to quit and wanted to quit.
     She tried and tried and tried.  That's what
     Mr. Gore's attorneys are saying.  But she just
     couldn't do it.
          You heard from Dr. Burns, of course, that
     if you don't want to quit, you're not going to
     quit.  You're only going to quit if you want to
     quit.
          So did Mrs. Gore want to quit smoking?
     Again, look at what Mr. Gore said, not what his
     lawyers are saying.  This is their claim.  She
     wanted to quit, but she just couldn't do it.
     But the evidence was Mrs. Gore did not want to
     quit smoking.
          This is Mr. Gore's testimony, again.  Not his lawyers words, but his words.
          "Q:  The fact is that you believe
     Mrs. Gore really did not want to quit smoking,
     correct?
          "A:  She didn't want to quit."
          That's what the man who loved her and
     knows her better than anyone else said.  He had
     all these conversations with her over the
     years, for the 37 years they were married.
     He's in court testifying under oath and he
     admits she did not want to quit.
          She didn't smoke because she was addicted.
     She smoked because she wanted to smoke and she
     did not want to quit.
          You can also look at her words and what
     she told people when they said "you ought to
     quit smoking, it's bad for your health."
     Again, you never heard from anybody that she
     said,  "I've been trying and trying and I just
     can't quit."  Nobody said that.  She never told
     anybody, "I want to quit, but I'm hooked, I'm
     addicted."
          What she told people was, "Leave me alone.
     It's my decision to smoke.  Mind your own
     business.  It's my business and my life.  I'm going to do what I want to do and you're not
     going to change my mind."  That's what she told
     Mr. Gore and she said similar things to her
     children.
          "I'm old enough to do what I want to do.
     I know it's bad for my health and I don't care.
     I enjoy smoking and it relaxes me."
          This is not a victim.  It's not somebody
     who felt they were treated unfairly by the
     tobacco companies.  These are the words of
     somebody who was in control of their own
     decisions, making decisions for themselves, and
     who ultimately was responsible for the
     decisions she made.
          Now, Dr. Burns came in here, remember, and
     he said -- I think it was that from his review
     of the deposition testimony -- you know, he
     never met Mrs. Gore, right?  He never was her
     doctor.  He never treated her for anything.  He
     never talked to her.  He never even bothered to
     talk to Mr. Gore before he came here to
     testify.
          Instead they paid him tens of thousands of
     dollars to come here from California and
     testify for three days like a mind reader about what was in Mrs. Gore's head.  Dr. Burns came
     in here and he said, "Well, you know, my
     impression from reading everything was that she
     was very strongly and very consistently
     motivated to quit smoking."
          That's what Dr. Burns said.  "She was
     strongly and consistently motivated to quit
     smoking."
          Then you heard -- because Dr. Burns had
     read Dr. Beckett's deposition.  You heard what
     her actual doctor said, not the $3 million guy
     who gets paid to testify in all these cases and
     knows really nothing about Mrs. Gore.  This is
     the guy who treated her.  He cut her neck open
     and scraped up that clogged carotid artery.
          Mr. Gore's and Mrs. Gore's daughter Faith
     used to work at his office.  He knows the
     family.  He treated Mrs. Gore and he said, "I
     remember very clearly she had no motivation to
     stop smoking."  And that's the fact.  That's
     what the evidence shows, is that Mrs. Gore did
     not want to quit smoking.
          So how can anybody say that it was her
     addiction, that she was addicted and that's why
     she smoked, when she never wanted to quit? Because if you don't want to quit -- if
     you don't want to quit and you're enjoying it,
     you're not going to quit, and that was
     Mrs. Gore.  Mrs. Gore never made a sincere
     attempt to quit smoking.  That was the
     evidence.  She didn't try to quit smoking.
          She's pregnant in 1963 with her daughter
     Kelly and her doctors say, "You need to quit
     smoking.  You need to quit smoking because it's
     bad for your health, it's bad for your baby's
     health."
          Mr. Gore says the same thing.  He says,
     "There's no way, there's no way all that
     nicotine can be good for you and the baby."
          I asked Mr. Gore on cross examination, I
     said, "You told her that, the doctors told her
     it, and she didn't even try to quit."
          That's what he said.  "She did not try to
     quit."  It wasn't that she tried and failed.
     She didn't even try.
          Same thing with Faith.  She didn't try to
     quit then, because she did not want to quit.
          You heard about Faith having some health
     problems that the family thought and doctors
     thought were caused by the fact that Mrs. Gore smoked when she was pregnant with Faith, and
     Mr. Gore, when she's pregnant again said, "You
     really need to quit.  Look at what happened to
     Faith."
          Once again she did not even try to quit
     smoking.  It wasn't that she tried and failed.
     Mr. Gore said she didn't even try.  She didn't
     even try.
          She didn't try to quit when she saw all
     the newspaper, magazine, television coverage
     about the dangers of smoking.  She didn't try
     to quit when the warnings went on the packs.
     All those times Mr. Gore urged her to quit
     smoking for 37 years, she didn't try to quit.
     She didn't try to quit when her children urged
     her to quit and she didn't try to quit when her
     doctors urged her to quit.
          If she didn't want to quit, she wasn't
     going to quit.
          Again, this is something that Mr. Gore
     testified to himself, because he had quit
     smoking.  He made up his mind and said "I'm
     going to quit smoking" and he quit.
          I asked him, I said:
          "Q:  You realize from your own experience quitting that to quit you have to do it
     yourself, amen.  Nobody can do it for you?
          "A:  That's right.
          "Q:  That if Mrs. Gore wanted to quit, she
     had to do it herself, correct?
          "A:  That's right.
          "Q:  The person -- if somebody wants to
     quit smoking, they have to make the decision to
     quit, correct, and Mrs. Gore never made that
     decision?
          "A:  No, she didn't."
          Mrs. Gore never made the decision to quit
     smoking and she never made a sincere effort to
     quit.  Mr. Gore testified it was decision he
     couldn't make for her.  Nobody else could make
     it for her.  She had to make it for herself.
          The fact of the matter is Mr. Gore
     couldn't make Mrs. Gore quit smoking.
     Mrs. Gore's children couldn't make her quit
     smoking.  Mrs. Gore's doctors couldn't make her
     quit smoking, and Philip Morris and R.J.
     Reynolds couldn't make her quit smoking.  If
     she wanted to smoke, it was legal for her to do
     so and she was going to smoke.  She was the
     only one who could have quit. Finally, the evidence showed that
     Mrs. Gore was not influenced by anything the
     tobacco companies said or did.  There's no
     evidence -- remember they went through with
     Dr. Burns, they showed videos and tobacco
     company statements and documents, and then when
     I started my cross examination I asked him.  I
     went through every one and said, okay, I called
     out the Plaintiff's exhibit number and said:
          "Dr. Burns, you read all the depositions.
     You looked at all the medical records.  You
     haven't seen any evidence that Mrs. Gore ever
     saw, read or heard that statement."
          I went through every one of them and his
     answer was the same; there is no evidence in
     this case that she ever saw anything Philip
     Morris or R.J. Reynolds was saying about the
     health risks of smoking.  She never saw
     anything.
          She never made her decision, she never
     decided to smoke or not to quit in reliance on
     anything the tobacco companies were saying, and
     the evidence all points in the same direction;
     that Mrs. Gore was in charge of her own life
     and she made her own decisions with full knowledge of the dangers of smoking.  That's
     what the evidence was.
          Now, there was some criticism this morning
     or maybe comments, at least, on the fact that
     we called two witnesses in our case.  We read
     in those two depositions that were fairly
     short, as if somehow we didn't put in evidence.
     I think there was a statement that we put on no
     evidence, for example, related to carotid
     artery stenosis and no evidence relating to
     addiction.
          But you may remember in jury selection I
     talked about this and I said, well, you know,
     we go second and we get to put in evidence
     through their witnesses.  We get to
     cross-examine their witnesses and what their
     witnesses say on our questions, that's our
     evidence, and that's exactly what we did.
          So I want to talk about it because there
     was a mention of it, some of the things you saw
     when we cross-examined their own witnesses, and
     that's our evidence in this case.
          There was no need to call our own
     witnesses to repeat, for example, the fact that
     Mrs. Gore always was aware of the risk of smoking.  Well, Mr. Gore knew that.  We didn't
     need to call our own witnesses to establish
     that she wasn't smoking much when she was
     growing up.  We could read those in by
     deposition.
          So look at some of the things -- this is
     some of what you heard from plaintiff's own
     witnesses.
          When Dr. Burns was here he had to admit
     that the public has known that cigarettes are
     dangerous and addictive for more than a hundred
     years.  Dr. Burns admitted that on cross
     examination.
          You'll see in evidence Florida health
     notes, things published by the Florida
     Department of Health in the early 1900s calling
     cigarettes "coffin nails" and saying cigarettes
     are addictive.
          You know, they showed a document today
     where the scientists in the 1950s mentioned
     that there were carcinogens in smoke, but what
     you heard on the cross examination of Dr. Burns
     is that everybody knew in the 1950s that there
     were carcinogens in smoke.  It wasn't a secret.
     It was published in Readers Digest magazine for anybody to read.  That's what you learned
     through their own witness.
          You also learned from Dr. Burns -- you
     know, we talked about all the publicity, the
     Readers Digest, the Life Magazine, the
     newspapers all pointing out to ordinary folks
     that smoking could cause lung cancer in the
     early 1950s, and I asked him about this Gallup
     poll, this gallop poll in 1954 asking people
     have you heard or read that smoking can cause
     cancer.
          90 percent of Americans -- in 1954
     90 percent of Americans had heard or read that
     smoking could cause cancer.  That's from their
     own witness, Dr. Burns.
          They showed earlier when they were talking
     about carcinogens, and you saw this with
     Dr. Burns, there was a list in 1961 -- that
     Philip Morris scientists had a list of
     carcinogens that had been identified in smoke.
     Did they keep it a secret, no.
          You heard the other half of the story on
     cross examination.  Dr. Burns admitted that
     Philip Morris shared its list of chemicals and
     carcinogens with the Surgeon General before the Surgeon General published the 1964 report.  So
     Philip Morris had the information that they say
     was secret and they gave it to the Surgeon
     General.
          What did the Surgeon General do?  The
     Surgeon General thanked Philip Morris and they
     thanked R.J. Reynolds right in the report for
     their contributions to the report.  That
     information was not kept secret.  But sometimes
     you have to wait for the second half of the
     story.
          You heard from Dr. Farone.  He's the guy
     on that video the first day or two we were
     here, the former Philip Morris employee.  He
     obviously has no love for Philip Morris.  You
     heard he got fired for insubordination and when
     he left he said "you're going to regret it."
     Then he went testifying more than a hundred
     times against Philip Morris.
          But even the bitter guy who got fired and
     said "you're going to regret it" said that
     Philip Morris spent hundreds of millions of
     dollars trying to make cigarettes safer.
          You heard that from Dr. Cook as well, when
     they played his video. You heard from Dr. Farone, their witness,
     that the use of filters on cigarettes does
     reduce the risk of smoking.  He said that the
     tobacco companies, Philip Morris, R.J.
     Reynolds, succeeded in developing filters that
     they put on cigarettes that could reduce tar
     and nicotine levels to virtually nothing, and
     you heard from Dr. Farone that those products
     are still on the market today.
          He mentioned Merit Ultima was one, which I
     think plaintiff's counsel mentioned as well.
          He mentioned that he was asked whether
     additives -- they spent a lot of time talking
     about additives and Dr. Farone, their witness,
     testified that additives do not make cigarettes
     more dangerous and they don't make cigarettes
     more addictive.  That was their witness'
     testimony on cross examination.
          You heard that we've stipulated, both
     sides in this case, that nicotine occurs
     naturally in tobacco and Dr. Farone, their
     witness, they're talking about these companies
     trying to make cigarettes addictive so people
     are hooked.
          Dr. Farone was asked on his cross examination -- I'm going to play the video in
     case you don't remember it -- and he said
     Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds -- he was
     talking about Philip Morris.  Dr. Cook said the
     same about R.J. Reynolds, that they don't add
     nicotine to their cigarettes and they don't
     spike their cigarettes with nicotine.
          So this whole business about the tobacco
     companies trying to add stuff to their products
     to hook people, even the guy who got fired and
     who was bitter and said "you'll regret it" and
     testified a hundred times said this:
          "Q:  Doctor, Philip Morris doesn't add
     nicotine to its cigarettes, does it?
          "A:  Not deliberately.
          "Q:  It doesn't spike cigarettes with
     nicotine, does it?
          "A:  No."
          What did you hear for a half an hour this
     morning?  About Philip Morris deliberately
     doing things to try to make cigarettes more
     addictive, and their own witness -- they bring
     you this video and he's asked on cross
     examination and he says Philip Morris doesn't
     do anything of what they're telling you Philip Morris did.
          Now, I meant to tell you up front what my
     plan was in terms of what I'm talking about and
     I wanted to start with what the evidence -- the
     big picture of the evidence, sort of what I
     talked about in opening statement.  But now I'm
     going to work through the verdict form.
          The way it's going to work is once we're
     finished here you guys will get the case and
     the Judge will give you a verdict form.  It's
     three pages long and it has questions on there
     and you'll do it however you choose to do it.
     But you'll go in there and look at each of the
     questions and you'll deliberate and try to
     figure out can we reach a consensus on this,
     can we agree on the answer.
          So I'm going to walk through each of the
     questions that you're going to be asked to
     agree on unanimously.  I'm going to start with
     the first and I'm going to go in order.
          So the first question is this:  "Was
     Mrs. Gore addicted to cigarettes containing
     nicotine and if so, was her addiction a legal
     cause of her carotid artery stenosis?"
          It's got a lot of different things in this question, so I want to break it up a little bit
     and talk about them individually.
          To prove what they need to prove --
     remember, the plaintiff has the burden of proof
     here.  To prove what they need to prove so you
     can check this "yes", so every one of you can
     agree the answer ought to be yes, they have to
     prove three things; three things.
          The first is that cigarette smoking was a
     legal cause of her carotid artery stenosis.
     That's the first thing, because her addiction
     to cigarettes, if she was addicted, couldn't be
     a cause of it unless the cigarettes were a
     cause.  So that's one thing she has to prove.
          That it wasn't her high cholesterol, it
     wasn't her family history of disease, it wasn't
     her lack of exercise.  It wasn't some other
     risk factor, but that her cigarette was a legal
     cause.
          They also, of course, have to prove that
     she was addicted, that she was addicted to the
     nicotine.  That's the second thing.
          Finally, they have to prove whether her
     addiction was a legal cause of the disease and
     that really gets to, well, why did she smoke? Was she smoking because she was addicted?  Is
     that why she got the disease or was it because
     she wanted to smoke and enjoyed smoking and
     didn't want to quit?
          There were three reasons, three different
     reasons why the answer to that question ought
     to be "no" on the verdict form.
          The first is they did not prove that
     cigarette smoking was the cause of her carotid
     artery disease.  They didn't prove that she was
     addicted and the legal cause of her injuries,
     if she was addicted, it wasn't her addiction.
     The legal cause was her choice and decision to
     smoke.
          So I'm going to go through one by one,
     starting with the first one -- I'm just going
     to get water, sorry.
          So I want to start with this, because if
     you can remember back to about a week and a
     half ago or two weeks ago, whatever it was,
     when the plaintiffs' lawyers talked about this
     issue, they talked about who they were going to
     bring in to prove that cigarette smoking was
     the cause of her carotid artery stenosis, and
     you know what?  They didn't mention Dr. Burns at all.  They mentioned Dr. Beckett --
[#DELETED OBJECTION DIALOGUE#]
          MR. MCCARTER:  You heard from Mr. Corr
     this morning.  He was talking about why they
     didn't call Dr. Beckett, who is the doctor
     who's right here in Vero -- right here in
     Vero -- and he's the one who treated Mrs. Gore
     for carotid artery stenosis and he said, "Well,
     we had Dr. Burns cover it, so we didn't need to
     spend time having her actual doctor come here."
          You never heard from Dr. Beckett.
          So let's look at who they did call, and
     that's Dr. Burns.  Dr. Burns was paid
     more than -- has been paid more than $3 million
     overall for testifying in cases like this and
     just for the four days he was here he was paid
     19 -- more than $19,000, just for the four days
     he was here.  Sunday, when he flew here,
     Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, $19,000.
          He's not an expert in vascular medicine.
          You'll see from the medical records
     Dr. Beckett works at -- he's a vascular surgeon
     here in Vero who treated Mrs. Gore.  Vascular is referring to the arteries, right?  The
     carotid artery is a vascular disease.
          They bring in a lung doctor, Dr. Burns
     from California, to testify about a patient he
     never treated and you heard from Dr. Burns that
     he never bothered to ask Mr. Gore what may be
     the most important risk factor Mrs. Gore had
     for carotid artery stenosis, and that is her
     family history of disease.
          Now, there was a comment this morning that
     we didn't call -- we didn't put on evidence,
     they said, relating to her carotid artery
     disease.
          Remember when Dr. Burns was on the stand
     on direct examination, how much he said about
     her family history of disease?  Zero,
     absolutely nothing.  He didn't mention it at
     all.  You had to get that from us on cross
     examination.  We put that evidence in.
          We put in evidence of her high
     cholesterol, of her lack of exercise.  We put
     in the evidence of the risk factors for carotid
     artery stenosis.  That was all our evidence.
          Here are the risk factors identified by
     the National Institute of Health for this disease Mrs. Gore had, and before I get into
     the risk factors -- carotid artery stenosis,
     it's just a clogging.  It's a clogging of the
     carotid artery.  So some people have coronary
     artery disease, like Mrs. Gore's mother had.
     That's blocking of the arteries that feed or
     come from the heart.
          Carotid artery stenosis is the same issue.
     It's just in the neck instead of down here, and
     you heard from Dr. Burns that they're related,
     because a family history of heart disease is a
     risk factor for carotid artery stenosis.  It's
     the arteries getting blocked.
          So this is 11 different risk factors for
     this disease that Mrs. Gore had:  Unhealthy
     blood cholesterol levels, high blood pressure,
     smoking, insulin resistance, diabetes,
     overweight or obesity, metabolic syndrome, lack
     of physical activity, unhealthy diet, older
     age, and family history.
          Smoking is just one risk factor out of 11.
     There are 10 other risk factors besides
     smoking.
          Remember I showed this to Dr. Burns.  We
     actually had the underlying exhibit.  This is a slide we made from it.  But I pointed to
     Dr. Burns and he agreed, family history of
     atherosclerosis, which is the clogged arteries
     and heart disease are a risk factor.  But he
     said, you know, the fact that it's at the
     bottom of the list signifies that it's really
     not that important, because it's at the bottom.
          There's nothing in that exhibit that's
     marked and in evidence that says these are
     listed in order of importance.  There's nothing
     on that.
          But let's say he's right and let's say
     they are in order of importance.  What's number
     one on the list?  It's not smoking.  Unhealthy
     blood cholesterol levels.  Smoking is two below
     that.  So even if Dr. Burns is right -- and
     there's no evidence that he is right.  I think
     it was just a comment because he ignored the
     family history and he wanted to make it seem
     like it wasn't important.
          But even if he's right, it puts her
     cholesterol at the top of the list, because you
     know from being here that Mrs. Gore had very
     high cholesterol.  She smoked, she had no
     physical activity after the age of 40, and she did have a family history of atherosclerosis
     and heart disease.
          Of those two I want to focus on high
     cholesterol -- or of those four I want to focus
     on two; high cholesterol and family history of
     atherosclerosis and heart disease, because as
     it relates to Mrs. Gore, those are very
     important risk factors.
          What's the evidence of her cholesterol.
     Remember this?  A cholesterol in 1988 of 258.
     This is the normal range, 160 to 200, and she's
     high, which is why they have the "H" there.
          So she has very high cholesterol in 1988.
     She has the first issue with her carotid artery
     in 1992, four years later, and then again in
     1999.
          But we asked Dr. Burns, there's no
     evidence that Mrs. Gore ever went on medication
     or any other treatment to reduce her
     cholesterol.  So there's no evidence that her
     cholesterol wasn't this high the entire time
     she was alive.  She never took any medication
     for it, as far as we can tell.
          There's also another mention of this
     cholesterol -- it's hard to read -- in a report a year later.  It says she was noted to have a
     cholesterol of 258 on her recent blood work.
          258.  200 would be normal.
          What about family history?  As I
     mentioned, when Dr. Burns was on direct
     examination you heard absolutely nothing about
     Mrs. Gore's family history of clogged arteries
     and heart disease.  You also heard nothing
     about it during the plaintiff's closing
     argument, because they treated it like
     Dr. Burns did.  He tried his best to ignore it
     and not to tell you about it.
          He even said something that he knew was
     untrue, because I asked him:  "Did you review
     the materials you were given to determine if
     Mrs. Gore had a family history of heart
     disease?"
          His answer was, "I reviewed the medical
     records to see if it was reported and did not
     see that it was reported."
          Then we showed him this.  I think
     Dr. Burns knew he wasn't telling the truth, and
     the reason I say that is because this was a
     medical record the plaintiff's lawyer had shown
     him the day before for a different purpose and Dr. Burns knew it talked about at the bottom
     family history.
          It talks about the father dying from lung
     cancer.  It says "mother is still living at 79.
     Mother is diabetic and has coronary artery
     disease."  She has clogged arteries, just like
     her daughter.
          Dr. Burns said "Well, well, well, well,
     well, that doesn't count as family history.
     The mom is too old, it doesn't count as family
     history."
          Then we pointed out this.  "Family history
     is positive for heart disease."  Dr. Burns said
     it wasn't in the medical records at all.
     That's why he didn't talk about it, he said.
          It's right there.  You can't miss it.
     "Family history is positive for heart disease."
          We don't know how many of Mrs. Gore's
     family members had problems with her heart,
     because Dr. Burns never talked to Mr. Gore and
     asked him.
          But what Dr. Burns said is that -- what he
     said is he told us from a medical perspective
     that -- when it says "family history" in a
     medical record, what does it mean?  And he said if you have multiple family members, then they
     would qualify it as a family history.
          So the fact that they wrote down she has a
     family history of heart disease means according
     to Dr. Burns that she has multiple family
     members with heart disease, with clogged
     arteries.  We know of two of those family
     members, because we know from the medical
     record and Dr. Burns' testimony that
     Mrs. Gore's mother had heart disease.
          Dr. Burns didn't want to talk about it.
     He said he read about it in the depositions,
     but he didn't rely on it.  He didn't consider
     it in forming his opinions.
          We also heard about Mrs. Gore's sister
     Joyce, who had open heart surgery when she was
     in her 50s.  Mrs. Gore was having her problem
     with her clogged arteries in her 50s.  Her
     sister was having the same issue or similar
     issue.  Again, Dr. Burns didn't say a word
     about this.  He said you had to ask Mr. Gore,
     something he didn't do.
          Both of them were nonsmokers.  Both
     Mrs. Gore's mother and her sister, who had
     these clogged arteries, were nonsmokers.  Why is that important?  It's important because what
     they have to prove to you is that if Mrs. Gore
     had been a non-smoker like her mother and her
     sister, she would not have had clogged
     arteries.
          How can they possibly prove that Mrs. Gore
     wouldn't have had clogged arteries, when her
     mother and her sister had clogged arteries as a
     nonsmoker?  Her sister had her clogged arteries
     the same age Mrs. Gore did.  That's why it's
     important and that's why Dr. Burns didn't talk
     about it.  That's why you heard nothing about
     it this morning.
          So this gets to the real nub of the issue,
     because this is the jury instruction you're
     going to get on what the plaintiff has to prove
     and answer yes to that question one, and as it
     relates to the carotid artery stenosis what
     they have to prove is that but for her
     addiction to cigarettes, but for her cigarette
     smoking -- this is if she didn't smoke -- the
     carotid artery stenosis would not have
     occurred.
          So what they have to prove is that if she
     was like her sister and her mother and didn't smoke, she would not have had the carotid
     artery stenosis.  That's what they have to
     prove.  No smoking, no problems with her
     arteries.  That's their burden.
          Now, counsel this morning said they proved
     this and I'm wondering -- you might want to
     know who said this.  Did Dr. Burns say it?
     Because he was the only one who came in, right?
     He was the only one who came in and testified
     on this.
          Dr. Burns didn't say it.  They didn't
     prove it.
          I actually asked Dr. Burns this exact
     question.  I asked him, I said, "You cannot say
     that but for her cigarette smoking" -- that's
     the exact language in the jury instruction --
     "but for her cigarette smoking she would not
     have developed carotid artery disease?"
          That was my question.  He had to answer
     that question and say, "No, I can offer that
     opinion and I am."  But what he said is -- he
     gave one of those really long answers and he
     said, "For any one individual it is difficult
     to predict with certainty what would happen
     under alternate circumstances.  What I can say is that her cigarette smoking made a
     substantive contribution to the cerebrovascular
     disease she manifested.  It's very difficult
     for a single individual to know what happened
     if you subtract any one thing from her life."
          Not exactly a straight answer, so I asked
     him again.  "The question is no, you cannot
     offer that opinion to the jury, correct?"
          What I'm asking him is can he tell you
     what the plaintiffs need him to tell you to
     satisfy their burden.
          His answer:  "The answer is the one that I
     gave you.
          "Q:  That you can't say -- I'm asking you
     to offer these opinions to a reasonable degree
     of medical scientific certainty.  You cannot do
     that for a single individual and you can't do
     that with respect to Mrs. Gore and her smoking,
     correct?
          "A:  I can't do that for anything in
     relation to Mrs. Gore in terms of removing a
     certain factor and knowing with certainty what
     would have happened."
          He said he could not prove what they have
     to prove.  They have to prove that if she didn't smoke, she would not have had clogged
     arteries, and he said "I cannot offer that
     opinion."
          They have no other evidence.  That's their
     only evidence and it didn't satisfy what they
     had to satisfy.  That's the first reason why
     the answer to question one should be no,
     because they did not prove that cigarette
     smoking was a legal cause of her carotid artery
     stenosis and that the cause wasn't the
     cholesterol or all the other risk factors, like
     family history.
          But they also did not prove that Mrs. Gore
     was addicted to nicotine.  Remember what they
     said, what Dr. Burns and Mr. Gore told you.
     What they said was that Mrs. Gore got addicted.
     By 1963 she was so addicted that no matter how
     hard she tried to quit, she couldn't quit.
          I asked Mr. Gore.  I said, "You're saying
     in 1963 she was addicted, she couldn't quit?"
          That's what their claim is, by 1963 she
     couldn't quit.  She was addicted.  So let's
     look at what the evidence was, and there's some
     questions that I'd ask you to consider.
          The first is, how did Mrs. Gore go from hardly smoking at all before 1963 to being
     hopelessly addicted?
          You may be thinking, what's the evidence
     of how much she smoked before 1963?  Well,
     remember we had Mr. Siebert who was on the
     stand, one of her high school classmates.  He
     dated her a little bit and he said at the end,
     he said, "You know what" -- initially he had
     said she was smoking half a pack a day.  He
     said, "You know, I can't remember.  I have no
     idea how much she was smoking."
          So there's no evidence that she was
     smoking any decent amount in high school.
          And by the way, there's been some mention
     of Mrs. Gore starting smoking at age 14.
     Mr. Siebert testified that she smoked in high
     school.  But remember, he wasn't there the
     first two years of high school, so the earliest
     he could have seen her smoke is when she was 16
     or 17.  But even he couldn't say how much she
     was smoking.
          But we had Mr. Schick's testimony that we
     read.  Mr. Schick was the one who was dating
     her throughout high school and said they would
     go on dates three or four times a week and he saw her smoke that one time the entire time
     they dated.  He said, "You should stop, it will
     kill you," and she never smoked around him
     again.
          So Mrs. Gore is not smoking around her
     high school boyfriend.
          Then we read to you the testimony of
     Mrs. Gore's first husband, Michael Tierney.  He
     was married to her for about two years, until
     about 1961 or 1962, and she said -- he said
     that she never smoked around him.  When the two
     of them were alone -- and they were married --
     she never smoked around him, but she would
     smoke at social events.
          So the evidence in this case is by the
     time she gets divorced from her first husband,
     whenever it was she started smoking, she wasn't
     smoking much at all up until 1961 or 1962.
     That's what the evidence is.
          Then all of a sudden they want you to
     believe she goes from smoking virtually
     nothing, not around her first husband, and a
     year and year half later she's hopelessly
     addicted and can't quit.  That's their claim in
     this case. Another question to consider is how could
     Mr. Gore know that Mrs. Gore couldn't quit
     smoking in the 1960s, when she never tried to
     quit?
          Remember, he said she was addicted when
     she was pregnant with Kelly in 1963 and I asked
     him, "Well, did she try to quit smoking in 1963
     when she was pregnant?
          He said no, she didn't even try.  Same
     thing with the other kids.  In fact, he says he
     doesn't remember her ever trying to quit in the
     1960s.
          So if somebody never tried to quit -- if
     they never tried to quit, how can you say that
     they couldn't quit?  You can only say they
     couldn't quit if they actually tried and
     failed.
          This is the evidence on whether she tried
     to quit around the time she said she couldn't
     quit.
          First husband, Mr. Tierney, didn't recall
     her ever trying to quit smoking, and the
     evidence is that she didn't try to quit when
     she was pregnant in the 1960s or 1970s.  So how
     could anybody say she couldn't quit, when she didn't try?
          There you go.
          "Q:  You don't recall Mrs. Gore trying to
     quit smoking at any time in the 1960s, correct?
          "A:  Not offhand, no."
          So how could anybody say she couldn't quit
     in the 1960s, which is what they're saying,
     when nobody saw her try?
          Finally, how can they prove that Mrs. Gore
     was addicted if she never wanted to quit?
     You've seen the evidence on that.  Mr. Gore
     himself said she never wanted to quit and she
     never made a sincere attempt to quit smoking.
          Doesn't somebody have to try to quit, make
     a sincere quit attempt and fail before you can
     say they're addicted?  She never did that.
          So what is their evidence of addiction?
     Well, they brought in Dr. Burns again on this
     issue and Dr. Burns never talked to her, never
     met her, was never her doctor, never talked to
     Mr. Gore.  You learned that in these cases in
     which he's paid $3 million, every single case
     in which he testifies he tells the jury the
     smoker was addicted and he told you, just like
     every other jury, and I submit you can take that testimony with a grain of salt, because he
     says it every time he comes in paid to testify.
          They showed you this morning there's one
     medical record from Dr. Beckett referring to
     smoking addiction, but he never testified in
     the case, so you never heard what he meant by
     that, what test he used to diagnose her or
     anything like that.  It's just this stray
     reference in the medical records.
          That's all the evidence they had; a guy
     who comes in, gets paid to tell a jury in every
     case that the smoker is addicted and a medical
     record from somebody who never came to testify.
          They have the burden of proof on this
     issue.  I'd submit to you again, Dr. Beckett's
     words say it all about this question; that he
     remembers very clearly that Mrs. Gore had no
     motivation to stop smoking.
          So that's the second reason why the answer
     to question one ought to be "no".
          The third is that the legal cause of
     Mrs. Gore's injuries was her decision to smoke.
     It wasn't any addiction.  It was her choice to
     smoke.
          This issue really gets at even if she was addicted, was her addiction so strong and so
     powerful that she just couldn't quit smoking?
     Is that why she smoked or did she smoke because
     she enjoyed it?
          The evidence is overwhelming in this case
     that she smoked because she enjoyed it and she
     did not want to quit.  The fact is that whether
     Mrs. Gore was addicted or not, she would have
     smoked because that's what she wanted to do and
     she made that clear to everybody who knew her.
          If Mrs. Gore had decided to quit smoking,
     she was the one who had the ability to avoid
     getting sick.  If she had quit smoking in 1963
     when she was pregnant with Kelly, she would not
     have gotten sick from smoking.  If she had quit
     smoking in 1966 when the warnings went on the
     packs, she wouldn't have gotten sick from
     smoking.
          It should say 1972 on the next one, when
     the warnings went on the ads.  If she quit
     then, she wouldn't have gotten sick.
          Dr. Burns had this comment that in 1976 so
     many people knew about the dangers of smoking
     that more people knew smoking was dangerous
     than knew the name of the president.  Then she wouldn't have gotten sick from smoking.  And if
     she had quit when Mr. Gore quit in the early
     '80s, she wouldn't have gotten sick.
          Mrs. Gore was the only one who had the
     power and the ability to quit smoking.  She had
     to do it herself and her decision to smoke for
     as long as she did, that is the legal cause of
     her injuries.
          So those are the three reasons why the
     answer to question one should be no.
          The other questions will be a little
     faster, I promise.  But let me comment on this
     and that is, you don't have to agree with me on
     all three issues for the answer to be no,
     because they have the burden of proof.
          If you agree with me on any one of these
     points, then your answer on question one should
     be no, because they have to prove all three
     things they didn't prove.  So if you think she
     was addicted, but you agree that cigarette
     smoking was not the cause of her carotid artery
     stenosis -- so if you agree with me on one, but
     not the other, it's still no, because they
     didn't prove what they had to prove.
          To check that question yes, as they want you to do, every one of you who deliberates,
     because it has to be unanimous, every one of
     you would have to disbelieve me on every single
     one of these issues.  If you agree on one,
     that's enough for the question to be -- for the
     answer to be no.
          I want to move on to question -- so that's
     the "no" checked.  If you check that no, the
     case is done.  Your deliberations are done.
     Everybody gets to go home.  The case is over.
          The same is true of question two.  If you
     check that no, it's done.  I'd submit the case
     ought to start and end -- your deliberations
     should start and end with question one and end
     with "no".  That ends the case.
          I want to move on the question two.  It
     was:  "Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by
     each defendant a legal cause of lung cancer in
     Mrs. Gore?"
          There's two elements in this.  The first
     is did she have lung cancer?  That is, did the
     cancer start growing in her lungs?  They have
     to prove it started in her lungs.
          The second is, did she smoke enough Philip
     Morris made cigarettes or enough R.J. Reynolds made cigarettes to be a cause of her cancer.
     I'm going to break that up.  On this one there
     are two reasons to answer it no.
          The first is they did not prove her cancer
     started in her lung and that's the one I'm
     going to talk about first.
          Now, I'm going to put up this board you've
     seen.  Let's see if I can focus it a little
     bit.  I know you've heard a lot about this
     issue and -- okay.  So I'm going to circle the
     two that really are the important ones for what
     you're being asked to decide.
          I know not everybody can see it.  What I'm
     doing is I've written "Dr. Burns" with an arrow
     pointing to the pleural based lesion, because
     that's the one he says was where the cancer
     started.
          So there's two abnormalities that are seen
     on the CAT scan, which really are the ones that
     are in focus here.  This is where the debate is
     between the plaintiff and the defense.
          There's this little one.  That's the
     1.2-centimeter nodule or abnormality that's
     purportedly in the lung, and there's this
     pleural based chest wall left rib mass, the big one that Dr. Burns says is where the cancer
     started.
          So remember this from the cross
     examination of Dr. Burns.  The only one that is
     described as being in the lung, the only one is
     the little one.  That's the only one that's
     described as being in the lung.
          For there to be lung cancer the cancer has
     to start in the lung and when it metastasizes
     or spreads -- remember, it doesn't leave the
     lung and go somewhere else -- the original
     cancer stays there, but spreads elsewhere.
          There's no dispute in this case.  Cancer
     just won't just disappear.  If it started in
     the lung, it would have been there on the CAT
     scan.  So if the little one is the one the
     doctors say is in the lung, this other one is
     described in other ways, including at the left
     lung base.  They don't say it's in the lung.
     They say it's at the left lung base or pleural
     based mass, chest wall mass.
          So this is the original CT scan and it
     talks about what Dr. Burns says was the source
     at the left lung base.  It describes it as a
     pleural based mass -- it's cut off there -- and small one that's in the lung is described
     here as in the lung.
          So obviously doctors know how to write
     something is in the lung, right?  It's in that
     segment of the left lower lobe.  That's how
     they describe the little one.
          We didn't have any testimony from
     Mrs. Gore's doctors who treated her for cancer,
     but I would submit to you if you read the
     medical records, they suggest that the doctors
     believed that this little one, the one that was
     described as in the lung, the doctors believe
     that that was the source of the cancer.
          And let me show you medical records so you
     can see how they differentiate between this one
     that was reported to be in the lung and the one
     Dr. Burns says was the source.
          So this is again the record we just looked
     at and they describe the one at the left lung
     base -- that's the Dr. Burns one -- and the
     little one that's in the lung.  So that's the
     only one they say is in the lung, is the little
     one.
          Here's another record from a few days
     later and it refers to a lung mass.  So you have one in the lung and then it calls the
     Dr. Burns one not a lung mass, but a left rib
     lytic bone lesion.  So they're not referring to
     the one that Dr. Burns says was the source of
     it being in the lung.  They say it's a rib
     mass.  They call the Dr. Burns tumor a rib
     mass.  They call the little one in the lung a
     lung mass.
          There you have it again.  There is a
     1.2-centimeter nodule.  That's the little one
     in the left lower lobe.  So the little one is
     in the lung and they refer to an expansile -- a
     bigger rib lesion is noted involving an
     inferior left lateral rib.
          The little one is the one in the lung.
     The Dr. Burns one is not described as being in
     the lung.  It's described as a rib lesion.
          Two days later, expansile lytic lesion in
     the left rib.  That's the Dr. Burns one that
     was called being in the rib, and a left lower
     lung nodule.  That's the little one.
          Then you have another that mentions again
     expansive lytic lesion of the left rib; the
     Dr. Burns one, described as being in the rib,
     left lower lobe nodule, that's the little one in the lung.
          Why do I point that out?  I point that out
     because the implication has been that we're the
     ones criticizing Mrs. Gore's doctors because
     they called it lung cancer and we're saying she
     didn't have lung cancer.  But if what the
     doctors were saying was the little one in the
     lung was the source of the cancer, if that's
     what they're saying in these medical records,
     it's not only us who disagree with the doctors.
     Dr. Burns disagrees with the doctors, because
     he says that's not where it started.
          He's saying the cancer did not start where
     the doctors said it started.  He just has an
     alternative thing, where he says this thing was
     not outside the lung.  I'll get to it in a
     minute.
          But Dr. Burns agrees that this one that
     the doctors are calling in the medical
     records -- the thing they're saying is in the
     lung, Dr. Burns agrees the cancer did not start
     there.
          Here's Dr. Burns' testimony.  He said this
     on direct and I was repeating it, but, "I think
     you told us yesterday that you can't say whether that abnormality was or was not
     cancer."
          So he doesn't even know if it's cancer.
          He says, "I think that 12-millimeter by
     12-millimeter" -- so he's talking about the
     little one in the lung -- "could be old
     scarring or could possibly be within the lung
     metastasis."  That means spreading from
     somewhere else.
          "My own estimation is it's more likely
     it's an old scar, but I can't tell with
     certainty which it is."
          So he can't say that little thing in the
     lung that the doctors say was the source of the
     cancer, he can't say whether that's even cancer
     or not.  That's what Dr. Burns said.
          Then he also said, "You agree with me" --
     this was my question -- "that it is unlikely
     that this small mass in the lung" -- the one
     we've been talking about -- "was where the
     cancer started?"
          Remember, they have to prove it started in
     the lung.  I asked him, "The one thing that's
     being seen in the lung, it's unlikely that's
     where it started?" He says," I believe it's not the primary
     cancer."
          Dr. Burns is saying the one thing that was
     seen in the lung is not where the cancer
     started.  "I believe the larger lesion that is
     eating into the rib is the primary cancer."
          So again, he's saying it's this one, the
     one of the pleural based rib one, not this one.
     Dr. Burns has admitted that the one that's in
     the lung wasn't the source of the cancer.
          You've heard about this, but Dr. Burns
     also testified that if there was cancer in her
     lung, if that's where it started, it would have
     been there five months earlier in November,
     1999.
          You've also heard about the chest X-ray
     that was done November 1999.  This is the
     description.  "Heart size normal, mild hyper
     expansion of the lungs, flattening of the
     diaphragms" -- some words I probably can't
     pronounce very well, but there's no mention of
     anything in her lung and Dr. Burns agreed with
     that.  There's no mention of a tumor in the
     lungs.
          If the cancer started in her lungs, it would have been there when the X-ray was taken.
          You also learned from Dr. Burns that he
     made a mistake when he was reviewing the
     medical records.  You see there was something
     in an April 2000 X-ray called pleural effusion
     and the pleural effusion was -- that they
     thought it was pleural effusion.  They thought
     it was fluid in the lungs.  But it was really
     the cancer.  And when Dr. Burns reviewed the
     medical records, he wrote down that that was
     seen in the November '99 X-ray.
          So he was writing down that the cancer was
     seen in the November '99 X-ray, but on cross
     examination he admitted he was wrong.  There
     was no cancer seen in the November '99 X-ray.
          There was an X-ray a year later, 13
     months -- a year earlier, 13 months earlier, an
     October '98 chest X-ray.  No cancer was seen in
     that.  It has Mrs. Gore's name, October 30th,
     1998.  "Impression:  Normal chest."
          No cancer was seen in her lungs 18 months,
     a year and a half, before it was diagnosed in
     April.  No cancer there.
          Okay.  So let's get to what Dr. Burns was
     saying.  Dr. Burns admits that this thing he says was the start of the cancer was described
     as the chest wall at the base of the left lung,
     pleural based, and there was this mention of
     expansion into the rib.  He admitted it was
     never described as being in the lung.
          Dr. Burns is talking out of both sides of
     his mouth on this, because the issue is it's
     pleural based.  It's pleural based.  Does that
     mean it's inside the lung or outside the lung?
          I asked him that.  I said, "Dr. Burns, the
     pleura, the pleural base, the pleura is outside
     the lung?"
          Because if this thing is outside the lung
     and this thing wasn't where the cancer started,
     then there's no cancer that started in her
     lungs.  He needs this one to be in the lung to
     say the cancer started in the lung.
          In this case -- I'm going to try to block
     this a little bit so it can't get too far ahead
     of me -- but Dr. Burns testimony in this case
     was that -- I asked him:
          "The pleural based -- the pleura is
     outside the lung.  It's not inside the lung,"
     and he said, "The pleura is the surface of the
     lung.  So one side is outside and one side is lung.  So if you have something that's
     lined up on the pleura, on the visceral pleura
     of the lung, it's inside the lung."
          That was his testimony, because he had to
     move that tumor inside the lung.  Well, the
     pleura is inside the lung.
          Then I read testimony that he had given in
     a case called Allen in 2012.  So he comes in
     here, he's paid tens of thousand dollars and he
     tells you under oath that the pleura is inside
     the lung.
          In a different case under oath in 2012,
     two years ago, this is his answer under oath:
          "You are correct in interpreting the
     English language as it applies to this
     statement.  However, as a physician I can tell
     you that the pleura and a pleural lesion is not
     in the lung.  It's outside the lung."
          $3 million can buy you a lot of things,
     but it can't buy you credibility, and it
     doesn't give you the right to try to change
     human anatomy.
          Dr. Burns told you that this is where the
     cancer started, and it was in the lung.  That's
     what he said, because he told you that the pleura is inside the lung, on a question that
     asked the same thing he had testified before.
     He told you it was inside the lung and he told
     somebody else under oath two years ago it's
     outside the lung.  That's what he said under
     oath.
          So the short of this is that the one tumor
     that was in the lung and the doctors thought
     was the source of the lung cancer Dr. Burns
     says may not have been cancer and it likely was
     not the source, and that the one place he says
     was the source -- you know, with this
     testimony, a different case where maybe he had
     a different incentive to tell a different
     story, he admits that's outside the lung.
          Either way, I don't know how you can
     credit his testimony when he said two things
     under oath and says whatever seems to suit the
     people who are paying his bills.
          The last thing I want to talk about on the
     lung cancer is the death certificate, because
     it doesn't say what Dr. Burns and you've been
     hearing from plaintiff's counsel what it says.
     Nobody ever seems to focus on this part of it.
          The first thing is brain metastasis. That's the immediate cause of death.  The
     cancer got into the brain and caused the death.
          What is the brain metastasis due to or a
     consequence of?  So it's sort of like what was
     that caused by.
          "Carcinoma, left lung, non-small cell."
     But it doesn't stop there.  It says what was
     that lung cancer, what was the carcinoma in the
     lung left a consequence of, and it says "bone
     metastasis."  Bone metastasis, meaning
     something that had spread to the lung,
     metastasizing cancer from the bone.
          So even the death certificate doesn't say
     it started with lung cancer or cancer of the
     lung.  It says the cancer in the lung got there
     from the bone.  So it started somewhere else.
          You've seen that a lot of times, but
     nobody has actually explained this last part.
     So even the death certificate, which they keep
     pointing to this line, it doesn't stop there.
     It talks about what that's caused by, where did
     that come from, and it says the cancer in the
     lung came from the bones.  So it had to start
     somewhere other than the lung.
          That, by itself, is reason enough you have to check that second question on the form "no",
     because they didn't prove the cancer started in
     the lung.  Instead the expert they called tried
     to change his testimony from what he had said
     in another case.
          But in addition, in addition they have to
     prove that if she had lung cancer, that she
     smoked enough cigarettes made by Philip Morris
     and R.J. Reynolds, each separately to be a
     cause of that cancer, and they didn't prove
     that either.
          Mr. Gore came here and he never told you
     the brands Mrs. Gore smoked.  If they want you
     to find that Philip Morris cigarettes caused
     her lung cancer, they need to show that she
     smoked Philip Morris cigarettes long enough to
     cause lung cancer.  Mr. Gore never said
     anything about that.
          Christina and Faith came here.  They
     didn't say anything about the brands Mrs. Gore
     smoked.
          Well, we're the defendant in this case.
     If it's Philip Morris, they have to prove she
     smoked enough Philip Morris cigarettes to cause
     the cancer.  The first three people who came here who knew what she smoked didn't say
     anything about it.  Daughter Kelly mentioned
     some brands Mrs. Gore smoked, but she never
     described for how long Mrs. Gore smoked them.
          The only evidence you received as to
     Mrs. Gore of how long she smoked any brand of
     cigarettes was something we put into evidence.
     This was that Smokers Rights document.  This
     asked her:
          "What is your regular brand of cigarettes?
     That is, the brand you smoke most often?"  And
     she said, "Benson & Hedges."
          So she did smoke Benson & Hedges, which
     was made by Philip Morris.  The question is,
     how long did she smoke it for?  Was it enough
     to be a legal cause of her cancer?  That's what
     they have to prove, that she smoked enough of
     our cigarettes to be the legal cause of her
     cancer.
          I should have blown it up, but down here
     she checked "Over five years."
          Okay.  You know plaintiff has the burden
     of proof, so they have the burden to prove to
     you, well, how many more than five years is it?
     Over five years could be five years and one day, could be six, could be seven.  Who knows?
          The only way you can find that she smoked
     enough cigarettes made by Philip Morris to be
     the cause of her cancer is if you assume, if
     you assume something they didn't prove to you.
     That is, that she smoked Benson & Hedges for a
     lot more than five years.
          They have no evidence of that and they
     can't try to prove their case through
     assumptions.  They actually have the burden of
     proving it to you.
          There's no evidence of how many more than
     five years Mrs. Gore smoked Benson & Hedges.
     There's actually no evidence that she smoked
     RJR cigarettes at all.  Mr. Walker, I'm sure,
     will tell you about that.
          The most they have is five years of Benson
     & Hedges, but they had nobody coming in to say
     smoking for five or six years is enough to
     cause cancer.  Nobody said that.
          In fact, what Dr. Burns said is that for
     Mrs. Gore's risk of lung cancer to have
     decreased to the point where you could say she
     wouldn't have gotten lung cancer, she would
     have had to smoke 15 years less than she smoked.  Not five or six years, 15 years.
          So even what may be the simplest thing you
     could possibly prove, which is what cigarettes
     did she smoke and how long did she smoke them,
     even on the easiest thing they didn't give you
     the evidence you would need to find in their
     favor.  So that's yet another reason to check
     this box "no."
          These next questions -- I'm going to go
     through this fairly quickly, because I've
     talked a lot about it.  But on Questions 3
     and 4 they have to prove to you that Mrs. Gore
     relied on a statement by Philip Morris or R.J.
     Reynolds or another tobacco company and it has
     to be after May 5, 1982.
          The reason I'm going to go through this
     quickly is because I talked about this earlier.
     There's no evidence that Mrs. Gore ever even
     heard a statement by Philip Morris or R.J.
     Reynolds or another tobacco company.
          There's no evidence she saw, read, or
     heard any statement by any tobacco company.  If
     you haven't seen or heard anything, you can't
     rely on it.
          Remember I asked Dr. Burns about every statement they put into evidence and he said
     he's aware of no evidence, no evidence that she
     heard or relied on it.
          The fact is that nothing was concealed
     from Mrs. Gore.  She had all the information
     she needed to make her smoking decisions, and
     we've talked about that earlier.
          So for these reasons -- and there's
     certainly no evidence that she relied on
     anything after May 5th, 1982.  So these should
     all be checked "no" as well, if you get this
     far.
          But I submit, your deliberations should
     end on the first question and if they don't,
     they should end on the second question.  But if
     you get to these questions, these should be
     "no" as well.
          On the issue of responsibility, if you
     make it this far, one hundred percent
     responsibility should be given to Mrs. Gore.
     It goes back to what I talked about at the
     beginning, and that is if somebody knows before
     they ever use a product, they know it can cause
     cancer, they know it's bad for them and they
     choose to do it, if they continued to do it with full knowledge of what can happen to them,
     if they enjoy doing it and they don't want to
     stop, how can it not be one hundred percent
     their fault and their responsibility?  How can
     it not be?
          Mrs. Gore made her decisions to smoke and
     not to quit for her own reasons.  She had full
     knowledge.
          What behavior do any of us engage in in
     our lives when we have full knowledge of the
     risks?  What behavior, if something goes bad,
     do we say we're not one hundred percent
     responsible?  If you have the information and
     you make the choice and you enjoy doing it and
     you don't want to stop, it's your
     responsibility.
          So when you get this far in the verdict
     form, 100 percent responsibility should go to
     Mrs. Gore.
          The damages, $7.5 million is an absurd
     amount.  You should know there's no claim here
     for anything like medical damages or funeral
     bills or anything like that.  They're asking
     for seven and a half million dollars for pain
     and suffering.  It's an absurd amount.  If you get this far the answer should be zero.
          Finally, on this question of punitive
     damages, it's a higher standard here for
     punitive damages.  You should check this one
     no.  What they want you to do is -- you only
     get to this question if you find liability and
     you award damages money to Mr. Gore.
          What they want you to do then is come back
     for more days of trial and more witnesses so
     they can come back and then ask you for even
     more money.  That's what this question is
     about, to award Mr. Gore even more money than
     the seven and a half million dollars that
     they're asking for already, and you should tell
     them no.
          There's a higher standard that applies
     here, clear and convincing evidence.  This is
     in the jury instructions, but it's a much
     higher standard and here there hasn't been any
     evidence of anything that would justify
     liability or any money to be paid to Mr. Gore,
     and there certainly is not clear and convincing
     evidence of anything.
          So on this one your answer should be no as
     well. Three things to remember -- I'm almost
     done, just a few more minutes.  Mrs. Gore never
     blamed the tobacco companies for her smoking or
     her cancer.  She never told anybody that she
     felt like she was mistreated or treated
     unfairly by Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds, and
     the fact is that Mrs. Gore lived her life the
     way she wanted to live it.
          This case ultimately boils down to
     questions of choice and personal responsibility
     and knowledge, and whether somebody who knows
     what they're doing, has all the knowledge she
     needs, enjoys what she's doing and doesn't want
     to stop, whether her husband then can require
     Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds to pay him
     money for the choices that his wife made in her
     life.
          I'd submit that the answer to the
     questions in this case can be answered not best
     by me, but by Mr. Gore himself and by what you
     saw in my opening statement and by what he said
     before this trial started about his wife's
     smoking and about her responsibility.
          Can you play that please, Marie.
          "Q:  Now, you said that you recall Mrs. Gore having a smoker's cough from sometime
     when you were in the service, all the way
     through the rest of her life, right?
          "A:  Yeah.
          "Q:  Did you ever encourage her to go to a
     doctor to get that cough checked out?
          "A:  Yeah.  Every time she'd have a
     physical the doctor told her to quit smoking.
     Several doctors told her to quit smoking.
     Every doctor you go to tells you to quit
     smoking.
          "Q:  Do you recall the first time a doctor
     told Mrs. Gore to quit smoking?
          "A:  No, I don't recall.  I know they all
     did.  Especially the pulmonary doctor, Maholtz.
          "Q:  When you first heard your wife had
     the smoker's cough sometime when you were in
     the service, did you say anything to her about
     her cough?
          "A:  Oh, yeah.  We discussed it in the
     morning.
          "Q:  What would you say to her?
          "A:  'You got it again.  It ain't getting
     any better, honey.'
          "Q:  Did Mrs. Gore understand that her cough was due to her smoking?
          "A:  Oh, yeah, sure.
          "Q:  Did she say anything along those
     lines?
          "A:  'Mind your own business.'
          "Q:  Did she ever get any treatment for
     her smoker's cough, that you're aware of?
          "A:  No.  As she went during the day, if
     she had the cough and all that, the cough would
     level out, you know.
          "I had one too.  I smoked.  You see, I
     can't breathe, you know.  I've got, you know,
     emphysema.  If I didn't give up smoking, I'd be
     dead today.  I'd be right there with her.  I
     can't walk any distance whatever because of
     what smoking did to me, but I was smart enough
     to quit.
          "Q:  And Mrs. Gore never quit?
          "A:  No.
          "Q:  Do you know whether any of the
     doctors your wife ever worked for encouraged
     her to quit smoking?
          "A:  I know every doctor she went to told
     her to quit smoking.  She'd come home in a bad
     mood. "Q:  What would she say?
          "A:  She didn't have to say it.  The way
     she acted, you know.
          "Q:  Did she tell you --
          "A:  Short answers.  You know, just like I
     smack my momma.  She just -- I mean, she could
     go off.
          "Q:  What would she say when she would go
     off?
          "A:  Well, she just tell me that it was
     none of my business and she was going to do
     what she was gonna do and I wasn't going to
     change her mind.
          "That's right, you can't change anybody's
     mind.  I mean, you can talk till you're blue in
     the face, but they have to -- you know, they
     have to be responsible for their actions.
          "Q:  Sure.  Did your wife ever express
     surprise when the doctor told her to quit
     smoking for health reasons?
          "A:  No.
          "Q:  Have you ever heard the term 'coffin
     nail'?
          "A:  Coffin nail, oh, yeah.
          "Q:  Did you ever heard Mrs. Gore used that term?
          "A:  Yeah, because her daddy would say
     'you're gonna put another nail in your coffin.'
          "Q:  Is that a term you also used with
     her?
          "A:  Oh, yeah, uh-huh.
          "Q:  Did you ever hear cigarettes referred
     to as 'cancer sticks'?
          "A:  Oh, sure.
          "Q:  Is that a term that you --
          "A:  Used all the time.
          "Q:  Did Mrs. Gore use that term?
          "A:  Yeah.  She get the coughing and all
     that, one of my kids would say it, you know.
     'Sucking on them cancer sticks.'
          "Q:  How would Mrs. Gore respond with
     comments like that?
          "A:  If she was in a good mood, she just
     slough it off.  But if she was a little antsy,
     she -- 'what business is it of yours,' you
     know.
          "Q:  Did Mrs. Gore ever ask what the term
     'cancer stick' meant?
          "A:  No, she knew what it meant.
          "Q:  And when your kids were telling you and Mrs. Gore to quit smoking in this early
     1980s, I guess period, before you did quit, how
     did she react?
          "A:  She didn't care.
          "Q:  Did she say anything back to your
     children?
          "A:  Yes, she said that it relaxed her.
     It relaxed her all right.
          "Q:  Did you ever suggest to Mrs. Gore
     that the two of you have some sort of bet to
     see who could quit smoking?
          "A:  No, no, we never had a bet.  I knew
     she'd lose.  She wouldn't last five minutes.
     She really didn't want to, that's the thing.  I
     don't think she really -- she never told me
     that.  The mindset or however you say it, 'my
     way or the highway.'
          "Q:  And during that 15-year period did
     you ever ask Mrs. Gore to stop smoking around
     you, since you had quit?
          "A:  I didn't ask her to stop smoking.  I
     knew she was going to smoke.  I just -- you
     know, I just made up my mind that I was going
     to do it for me.  You know, no matter what she
     did, it didn't bother me.  I got to the point where if she wanted to kill herself, let her do
     it.
          "Q:  Was her decision -- was whether or
     not to continue smoking something up to your
     wife?  Was it her decision?
          "A:  Yeah.
          "Q:  And your decision to quit smoking for
     15 years, that was your decision?
          "A:  Yeah.  You can't make somebody do
     something, you know.  You can lead them to the
     water, but you can't make them drink.
          "Q:  You mentioned that you got to the
     point in your life that you started thinking if
     she wanted to kill herself, let her do it,
     correct?
          "A:  Well, I probably shouldn't have used
     that term.  I just decided that her life is her
     life and you can change -- I grew up, you can't
     change people's mind by sitting there and
     giving an argument.  People have a right to be
     individuals.  People have the right to have
     their own life and if that's what she chose to
     do -- I came to the realization that all the
     talking in the world, put her in rehab or
     something like that, she'd hold it against me. I just said that she has a right to her own
     life.
          "Q:  You came to appreciate over time that
     Mrs. Gore had the right to make her own
     decisions in her life, correct?
          "A:  Yes.
          "Q:  And one of those decisions was
     whether or not to smoke cigarettes, correct?
          "A:  Exactly.  I quit and that was -- at
     that time that was my decision."
          Now, Mr. Gore's lawyers said in opening
     statement that he wasn't a good communicator.
     I think we've seen in this trial he was one of
     the best, probably the best communicator we had
     in here.
          Mr. Gore seems like a good man and by all
     accounts he's a good father to his kids, he was
     a good husband to Mrs. Gore, and he's a good
     husband to his new wife.  But the fact of the
     matter is in this case they're asking for
     Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds to pay for the
     choices and decisions Mrs. Gore made and they
     have not given you the evidence and the proof
     that they made to satisfy the burden of proof.
          These are all the reasons I've already talked about.  You've already seen these on the
     slide.  These are all the reasons they didn't
     meet their burden of proof, and there are many,
     many of them.
          I appreciate your patience here -- I've
     been longer than I expected to be -- and your
     attention throughout the trial and when you go
     back to deliberate, I'd ask you on behalf of my
     client, Philip Morris, and on behalf of
     Mr. Walker's client, R.J. Reynolds, to enter a
     defense verdict and check that first box "no"
     or the other boxes "no".
          Now, one more thing and that is when I'm
     done Mr. Walker is going to go and then the
     plaintiff gets what they call a rebuttal.  So
     they're even going to get more time to talk to
     you.  I won't have a chance to respond to it.
          You've seen throughout the trial what
     happens when you hear the second half of the
     story, and when they're saying things I'd ask
     you to think whether there are responses to
     those things; to think on your own is what
     they're saying right, is that consistent with
     the evidence.  Is there a response that I'm not
     going to hear because I don't get to respond this time.
          But you'll get to respond with your just
     verdict and I ask you to return a defense
     verdict for my client and Mr. Walker's client.
          Thank you very much.


          All right.  Mr. Walker, you may proceed. MR. WALKER:  Thank you, Judge.
          Good afternoon, everyone.
          THE JURY:  Good afternoon.
          MR. WALKER:  I haven't really been able to
     talk you to all for quite some time, and once
     again I have the misfortune of going third and
     late in the afternoon, but at least it's kind
     of the luxury of also being brief, because you
     heard much of the information already.
          So what I wanted to do is spend some time
     highlighting some of the additional points that
     you haven't heard much about yet and I'm going
     to do that by working my way through the
     verdict form that you're going to have to fill
     out when you go back for your deliberations.
          Everything that you've done in this case,
     everything that you've heard, everything that
     you've seen, everything that we've said is all
     building up to this point in time where you all
     will get together and decide how to fill out
     that verdict form.  So I want to make sure that
     you have my perspective and the perspective of
     Reynolds in terms of how we think you should
     fill out that verdict form.
          The first thing I wanted to do is show you very first question, and this is a question
     that Mr. McCarter spent quite a bit of time on
     with you, so I'm not going to go over all of
     that.  But I do want to say two things
     about it, because as he said, if and once you
     check no to this question, your job is finished
     with respect to this verdict form.
          The two things I wanted to highlight for
     you are first, that I've put the words "Gloria
     Gore" in red, and you're going to see that when
     we move through the verdict form -- because for
     every question on the verdict form I've put in
     red Mrs. Gore's name to remind you and to
     remind me what I need to say; that every
     question, every issue you have to decide in
     this case is about only one smoker, and that
     one smoker is Mrs. Gore.
          You're going to hear a lot of information
     when I sit down and plaintiff's counsel starts
     again, and the key question that you're going
     to have to ask as it relates to this verdict
     form is the same one that Mr. McCarter and I
     both talked to you about in openings; what does
     this information that you're hearing have to do
     with Mrs. Gore?  Is it going to help you answer these questions about Mrs. Gore.
          Mr. McCarter also told you three reasons
     why you should check "no" to this question.
     The plaintiff didn't prove that cigarette
     smoking was a legal cause of her carotid artery
     stenosis.  They didn't prove addiction and they
     didn't prove she smoked because of the
     addiction, as opposed to her choice to smoke,
     and the one additional point I wanted to make
     about that is to respond to something that the
     plaintiff said about that last point.
          It's easy to think when we're talking
     about addiction that once you start smoking
     cigarettes and even if you become addicted,
     that you're strapped into this device and
     you're on an inevitable journey to smoking
     enough cigarettes where you're at risk for
     disease.  But that's not really the case.
     That's not what the evidence showed you.
          The evidence showed you that between
     cigarette smoking, addiction, nicotine, all of
     the things you heard about in this trial and
     smoking enough cigarettes to be at a higher
     risk for disease, there's a person.  There's an
     individual in between those two things. In this case it's Gloria Gore.  If it's
     another smoker, that smoker is in between there
     and that smoker is the only person who decides
     whether nicotine, cigarette smoking, even
     addiction leads to enough smoking to have an
     increased risk for disease.
          What is it that's different about
     Mrs. Gore compared to the 50 or 60 million
     Americans who have quit smoking?  Why is it
     that there are more former smokers in this
     country than there are current smokers?
     Because those people who made the choice to
     quit, that individual in the middle, is who
     decides that.
          Is that going to be somebody that doesn't
     want to smoke any more and is ready to do what
     it takes to quit smoking or is that person in
     the middle going to be somebody who enjoys
     smoking, isn't interested in quitting, and
     never make a sincere effort to quit smoking?
          We hope that you'll see and have seen in
     this case that Mrs. Gore is the latter.  She
     continued to smoke because she was never ready
     to quit and she enjoyed it.
          Can I have the next slide, please. All right.  This is the second question on
     the verdict form, and your answer to this one
     should be "no" for all the reasons that
     Mr. McCarter has already talked to you about.
          As kind of a nod to him and his client and
     everything he's already talked about, I've
     taken the liberty of filling in a "no" for
     Philip Morris there, but there are a couple of
     issues that I want to address, because this is
     the first question on the verdict form that
     addresses my client Reynolds specifically.
          There's a line there where you're going to
     have to answer a separate question about R.J.
     Reynolds Tobacco Company and that gives me an
     opportunity to talk to you about where, if at
     all, Reynolds fits into this case.
          Just like I told you in the beginning, you
     know where I fit in.  Over there, sitting where
     Jessica is sitting there -- she's going to be
     helping me, wave hi -- that's where I've been
     sitting this whole trial and just like I told
     you I would, I went third most of the time, if
     I asked anything at all.  Sometimes I didn't
     even ask any questions, and I told you in
     opening that the reason for that was going to be because this case is about Gloria Gore and
     you weren't going to see any evidence that she
     smoked my client's products, Reynolds'
     products, for very long.  At most a few years
     that Mr. Corr told you they would try to prove.
          But then when we got into the case, as it
     turned out, you actually heard testimony from
     seven different people who knew Mrs. Gore.
          Can I have the next slide, please.
          Here they are.  Robert Gore, Mary Faith
     Shepherd, Kelly Welton, Christina Savage,
     Willard Siebert, Jerry Schick, Michael Tierney,
     those are the seven witnesses that you heard
     over the last week and a half who actually knew
     Mrs. Gore.
          Five of those witnesses you heard from
     live.  They actually came up, took an oath and
     sat in that chair and answered questions about
     what they knew about Mrs. Gore.  But not a
     single one of those people who actually knew
     her, not one told you anything about how much
     or how long Mrs. Gore smoked Reynolds'
     products.  They weren't even asked.
     Plaintiff's counsel didn't even ask them that
     question. The only witness that you actually heard
     from who said anything about that, and when I
     sit down they're going to tell you, "Oh,
     Dr. Burns talked to you about the Reynolds
     smoking."  It was Dr. Burns.  He's also the
     only witness on this list who has "paid" next
     to his name.
          Mr. McCarter was actually being charitable
     about Dr. Burns, I think, because although it's
     true he's the $3 million man who's earned
     $3 million over this time period, it's also
     true that he made a half a million dollars just
     last year talking to jurors just like you.
          It's true that he made almost $20,000 last
     week talking to you in this case, but he's
     already -- we're not even in September yet.
     He's already up to $300,000 this year
     testifying for plaintiffs like Mr. Gore, and he
     is the only person who came to you and said
     anything to you at all about how long or how
     much Reynolds smoking there was; even though he
     didn't know her, he never talked to Mr. Gore,
     and he never even told you where he got his
     information from.  He didn't even tell you who
     it was that told him how much the Reynolds smoking was.
          That is not reliable, credible evidence
     about the Reynolds smoking.
          Even if somebody other than Dr. Burns had
     come in and said what plaintiff's counsel said
     they were going to say, that there were a few
     years of Reynolds smoking, it still wouldn't be
     enough; because as Mr. McCarter touched on, the
     key issue that you'll have to answer for this
     second question -- can I have the next slide --
     is the causation question.
          "Smoking a defendant's cigarettes was a
     legal cause of injury if smoking that
     defendant's cigarettes directly and in natural
     and continuous sequence produced or contributed
     substantially to producing such injury, so that
     it can reasonably be said that but for smoking
     that defendant's cigarettes, the injury would
     not have occurred."
          Now, that's a mouthful, so I highlighted
     the key parts in red.
          Have you heard anything in this case that
     will allow you to decide whether Mrs. Gore's
     smoking of Reynolds' products contributed
     substantially to producing an injury in her? Have you heard anything in this trial to
     find that but for smoking Reynolds' cigarettes,
     the injury would not have occurred?
          You didn't, because Dr. Burns wouldn't say
     that.  When he was in here the plaintiff's
     lawyers asked him the question -- sometimes you
     hear a question, it sounds a little funny and
     you ask why is a lawyer asking a question that
     way.  Because they're trying to line up with
     this instruction that they knew you were going
     to get.
          Dr. Burns was asked specifically is it
     true, did every brand that Mrs. Gore smoked
     contribute substantially -- substantially to
     her getting an injury?
          He didn't say yes.  The best Dr. Burns
     could do was to say "well, every cigarette
     contributes."  Well, how much?  "Well, it
     contributes in proportion to how much of the
     brand she smoked"; which nobody talked about
     but Dr. Burns.
          Now, think about that for one second.
     This Dr. Burns that's been paid all this money,
     came all this way from California, was on the
     stand for as long as he was, is clearly biased against the defendants in this case.  Even
     Dr. Burns was not willing to say that Mrs. Gore
     smoked enough Reynolds' products for it to have
     contributed substantially, let alone to have
     been a "but for" cause of her injuries.
          All right.  Let's have the next
     question -- the next slide.
          So that's why in addition to all the
     reasons that Mr. McCarter talked about, when it
     comes to that line on the verdict form about
     Reynolds, the answer that you should check is
     "no".  The plaintiff simply never proved that
     Mrs. Gore smoked enough Reynolds cigarettes for
     it to have made a difference to her.  And she's
     the only smoker.  That's why I have it in red
     again, she's the only smoker at issue in this
     case.
          Can I have the next one, please.
          These are the next two questions.  These
     are numbers three and four and these two
     questions are the ones that relate to their
     fraud case.  I'm going to try to take them
     together to do this a little bit more
     efficiently, and I want to point out a few more
     things in red.  They're still about Mrs. Gore. You're not going to hear much about
     Mrs. Gore relying on statements or omissions
     after I sit down, but that's what this question
     is about.
          So what -- and Mr. McCarter has already
     shown you all of the different ways that we
     know that Mrs. Gore knew.  If I started through
     that again, we'd be here at least another half
     hour to an hour with all the different ways we
     know that Mrs. Gore knew the risks and didn't
     rely on something that came from a Tobacco
     Company.
          But what are the allegations of fraud and
     what do they have to do with RJR, if anything?
     One of the things that the plaintiffs lawyers
     talked about was filters and menthol.
          Can I have the next slide, please.
          What do we know about filters?  Well, they
     said we knew something about filters that we
     didn't tell the Surgeon General, that we didn't
     tell other people, and that somehow is fraud.
     This is what the evidence was on filters; that
     the public health community advocated filters,
     that there were actual studies that showed that
     filtered cigarettes were safer than unfiltered cigarettes if you were going to continue to
     smoke.
          Dr. Farone, the first witness they called,
     that long video that afternoon when the lights
     were dim and we were all trying to struggle to
     pay attention, Dr. Farone said that filtered
     cigarettes can reduce smoking risk.  This is
     their witness.  He said that smokers who choose
     not to quit should smoke filtered cigarettes.
          Now, the plaintiffs' lawyers are saying
     this is a fraud.  Their own witness that they
     called said all of these things.
          Now, the plaintiffs lawyers say well, you
     don't get the benefit from filtered cigarettes,
     because some people smoke filtered cigarettes
     differently, and there was kind of an example
     of what Mr. Gore did, how Mr. Gore said he felt
     about filtered cigarettes.
          But there hasn't been any testimony by
     anybody that Mrs. Gore smoked filtered
     cigarettes for longer or puffed on them harder
     or changed the way she smoked filtered
     cigarettes.  There was no evidence of that at
     all.
          More importantly, this is the fraud case. More important than everything else on that
     slide is the fact that Mrs. Gore knew that
     smoking filtered cigarettes was not safe.
     Every warning that she received about the risks
     of cigarette smoking, whether it came from her
     family, her friends, her doctors, on the
     packages, those warnings were all about
     filtered cigarettes, because that's what she
     was smoking.
          When people told her she should quit
     smoking, that it was bad for her, she knew that
     applied to filtered cigarettes, because that's
     what she was smoking.
          She never told -- all of those warnings
     could not possibly have led her to believe that
     filtered cigarettes were safe.
          Now, Mr. Gore, Mr. Gore came in and said
     once or twice, well, Mrs. Gore saw some ads
     about filters and those ads told her that
     filters made smoking safe.
          I wrote it down.  Today I forget whether
     it was Mr. Foote or Mr. Corr, they said that
     Mrs. Gore believed that filters aren't going to
     kill you; that they saw ads -- she saw ads that
     said filters aren't going to kill you, that she saw ads that said it's okay, these are safe.
          Now, remember, they're asking you for
     $7.5 million and a lot of it is based on their
     fraud case.  So wouldn't you think they'd come
     in and show you the ad?  They'd show you the ad
     that actually said in it smoke filters, they're
     not safe.  Smoke filters, they're not gonna
     kill you.  Smoke filters, they're okay to
     smoke.
          Search your memories, did they show you a
     single ad that said that?  They didn't.  They
     certainly didn't show you one for my product,
     that my company made, or Mr. McCarter's.
          Here's an example of what they actually
     showed you.  Can I have the next one, please.
          Remember this?  They showed you this silly
     commercial with the penguin in it and the ice
     and there was a stream and some water it in and
     it said something about snow fresh.  Where is
     the ad that said smoking filters was safe?
     There isn't one.
          Not only is there no ad that says that,
     there's no evidence in this case that Mrs. Gore
     saw this ad or any one like it.  There's no
     evidence that this ad was even aired before or during the time that she was smoking Kool
     cigarettes.  This ad -- these allegations about
     filters simply have nothing to do with
     Mrs. Gore.
          All right.  Today you heard some
     allegations about executives going on the air
     waves and making statements to the public.
     You've seen that during the case, you heard
     something about it today.
          The idea is that maybe they will
     eventually concede, as we well know, that
     Mrs. Gore knew the risks; that she was getting
     warned about the health risks of cigarette
     smoking on the one hand all the time.  The
     whole time that we have testimony about her she
     was warned.  She knew she made a willing
     choice.
          But they say well, she also heard
     statements from executives, the tobacco
     executives going on TV, and the companies
     wanted those executives to be trusted.  And
     there's the idea that somehow Mrs. Gore, even
     though she knew cigarette smoking was bad for
     her health, that she somehow believed
     statements that no one can prove that she saw from tobacco executives.
          What's this really about?  Sometimes when
     we're talking about people of a different
     generation, people born in the '30s, the '40s,
     even the '50s, there's a tendency to think back
     then nobody knew anything.  We're so smart
     today, but an older generation was naive and
     was willing to believe any tobacco executives
     that got on the air.  That's what these
     allegations boil down to.
          The problem is when Dr. Burns was here I
     asked him.  I said, "Now, Dr. Burns, you've
     seen polling data from the 1950s all way up
     through the 1970s, all the way up to 1980,
     where the Roper organization" -- and he agreed
     with me it's a well respected polling
     organization -- "actually went out and tried to
     study do the American people really view these
     statements that they were showing you as being
     credible or reliable.  Are they listening to
     these statements that you were shown in this
     case?"
          And the answer was no.
          Dr. Burns agreed with me -- can I have the
     next slide, please -- this one is from 1959. They say that Mrs. Gore was right in the heart
     of the conspiracy.  So is this poll.  This poll
     was in the middle of the alleged conspiracy.
     Which organization would you believe?
          Remember in openings they said oh, there's
     an issue of being aware and believing -- this
     is a belief poll.  "Which organization would
     you believe if they said there was no
     connection between smoking and lung cancer?"
          Three percent referenced the tobacco
     industry, 97 percent did not.
          Can I have the next one, please.
          Then he said, "Well, you can't look at
     that three percent number, because you're not
     looking at smokers.  Addicted smokers, they
     look at things differently."
          Okay, let's look at a poll of smokers.
          "Which organization is the most reliable
     source of information on smoking and health?"
          These are the numbers that represent the
     response of cigarette smokers.  This one is
     from 1970.  What percentage of people said they
     thought that tobacco companies were the
     reliable source of information on smoking and
     health?  Four percent. We went through this.  I said what about
     1972?  Can I have the next one, please.
     Five percent.  Let's look at 74, four percent.
     '76, five percent.  '78, four percent.
          Do we have 1990?
          1980, this one is just not about smokers.
     This is back to the American public, still at
     three percent.
          Three percent in 1959.  All these
     statements, all these press releases that they
     showed you, all these years later,
     three percent.
          This idea that the tobacco companies were
     setting public opinion with statements on the
     airway is just not true and it's not borne out
     in the evidence.
          So that's 1980.  What happens in 1981?
     Can I have the next one, please.
          Dr. Burns says -- not now, at the time
     before he made all this money Dr. Burns said,
     "95 percent of people are not just aware,
     thoroughly aware of the health dangers of
     smoking."
          1980 -- I'm sorry, three percent on that
     other one.  1981, different figure, 95 percent of people thoroughly aware of the dangers of
     smoking.
          You got an instruction and you'll hear it
     again, you have to decide the greater weight of
     the evidence, what's more likely.  Is it more
     likely that Mrs. Gore, with all the warnings
     from all the different sources you heard about
     with Mr. McCarter, is it more likely that she
     was part of that three, four, or five percent
     on those other slides or that she was part of
     the 95 percent who was thoroughly aware of the
     health dangers of smoking?
          She clearly was aware.
          Let's go back one just for one second.
     Before we go to the next one, remember that
     date that Dr. Burns said this, 1981.  It's
     going to be real important and you'll see why
     as soon as we flip to the next one.  Let's flip
     to the next one.
          Why is it important that 95 percent of
     people were aware in 1981?  Because you can
     only answer these questions based on what was
     known, said, or concealed after May 5, 1982.
          Who could have been defrauded after
     May 5th, 1982, when their own highly paid witness is admitting in 1981 that everybody
     knew?
          I've already taken the liberty of checking
     "no" to the Philip Morris boxes for all the
     reasons Mr. McCarter mentioned, but these are
     additional reasons why you should check "no"
     both for Philip Morris and for Reynolds.
          Now, all of this failure to connect up
     their proof to Mrs. Gore, their proof to
     Reynolds, that's the reason why you should
     check "no" to all of these other questions
     we've gone through.
          Can I have the next one, please.
          It's also the reason -- and I'm not going
     to belabor these, because it's already been
     covered -- it's also the reason why
     Mr. McCarter was exactly right when he said
     that both for Philip Morris and for Reynolds it
     should be zero percent on number five, if you
     even get there, and why we believe for number
     six that no damages should be awarded in this
     case.  No damages.
          Now, one of the first things that we
     talked about in this case, as I mentioned, is
     this case is only about Mrs. Gore, and in a case like this one -- and this one was no
     different -- usually what happens is the
     plaintiffs come in and they show you all this
     evidence that really doesn't have anything to
     do with Mrs. Gore.
          What it ends up being is not a case about
     Mrs. Gore from their perspective, but an attack
     on all cigarettes and all cigarette companies,
     whether it has anything to do with Mrs. Gore or
     not, and that's what happened here.
          Some of the documents -- and I'm going to
     show you some of the ones they showed you --
     some of the documents weren't shown to you,
     because they didn't have anything to do with
     Mrs. Gore.  They were made to make you feel
     angry, get you upset, and stop you from reading
     what's in red in all of these verdict form
     questions, which is Mrs. Gore.
          Now, before I get into these documents I
     want to point something out to you that you may
     or may not have noticed.  I'm using Power
     Point, we're all using Power Point, but when
     plaintiff's counsel started showing you those
     documents those -- what they called secret
     documents, the document pops up on the screen. There's a call-out.  They're like zoomed in on
     two or three words or lines that they really
     wanted you to see.  Everything behind that was
     blurred out or grayed out or blackened out that
     you couldn't see.  Why is that important?
          Because what you saw of their case about
     conduct against Reynolds and Philip Morris is
     nothing but snippets of cherry-picked documents
     that they've strung together to make you angry
     at us.
          I could walk out of the doors of this
     courtroom right now, pick a random person on
     the street, but a good lawyer in a room for a
     week with everything that person has ever said
     or thought about doing, and that lawyer can
     make it look like that's a horrible person.
     That's what's happening with these documents
     we're about to look at.
          I'm going to give you a couple of really
     good examples.
          Remember this case is about Gloria Gore
     and I said that their case wasn't even about
     her.  Ask yourselves why are they trying to
     accuse Reynolds of marketing to teenagers in
     the 1970s and 1980s, when Mrs. Gore was in her 30s and 40s?  Because they want to get you
     angry.  They don't want you focused on the
     evidence that's relevant to this case.
          The fact of the matter is there is zero
     evidence that Mrs. Gore started smoking because
     of advertising.  All you have ever heard about
     why she started smoking is that she was with
     her friends who smoked, not that she started
     because of any ad.
          So then they showed you this document.
     This is the one about Teague.  They said you'd
     hear a lot about Teague.  This is one of the
     ones they showed you with the call-outs and the
     blurred-out information in the back.  It's
     called "Some Thoughts About New Brands of
     Cigarettes For the Youth Market."  It's from
     1973, I think it is.
          Can we have the next one.  Better yet,
     take that down.  Can I have the Elmo?  Would
     you help me out, please?
          What happens if you move past the
     call-outs and the snippets and you actually
     look into the document, the parts they didn't
     choose to call out?  What are you going to see?
          This is the document they said proves that Reynolds and other companies were trying to get
     young people to start smoking.  This is the
     same document.  What did you not see in this
     document, because they didn't show it to you?
          This is Claude Teague in 1973 -- can you
     move it a little bit over -- "we should not in
     any way influence nonsmokers to start smoking."
          Wouldn't you have liked to have known that
     that was in this document that they say is all
     about Reynolds going after young people to make
     them start smoking?
          It's not true, and what's more important
     than that is that Mrs. Gore was 33 years old
     and already smoking at the time of this
     document that has to do with people who aren't
     smoking and that they say is about young
     people.
          Then when Dr. Burns was here I said,
     "Well, Dr. Burns, you showed this Teague
     document.  Isn't it true that there was never
     any follow-up on this document?"
          He quarreled about like he does and at the
     end he came back to me on redirect and he said,
     "Well, there was no follow-up on this document,
     but at some point down the road there was a Camel campaign and it was really successful
     with adolescent males."
          Well, Mrs. Gore, it may not surprise you
     to know, was never an adolescent male and she
     never smoked Camels.  Why are we talking about
     this?  What does this have to do with
     Mrs. Gore?  Not a thing.
          Let's try another one.  This document is
     the other document they showed you just today.
     This is the one from 1984, written by somebody
     named Diane Burroughs.  "Younger Adult
     Smokers."  Again, lots of call-outs, zooming in
     on different parts of it.  You can't see what's
     behind it.
          Let's take a look at what you didn't see.
          Right in the introduction, this is the
     exact same document you were shown -- turn it
     down, please -- right in the introduction, the
     first sentence of the introduction of this
     document.  "RJR's consistent policy is that
     smoking is a matter of free, informed adult
     choice, which the company does not seek to
     influence."
          Wouldn't you liked to have seen that part
     of this document in thinking about whether Reynolds is out there trying to get young
     people to smoke?
          Then there were references to this
     document being all about younger adults, and
     they say that means young people like underaged
     smokers.
          Wouldn't you have liked to have known that
     in the purpose, first page?  "This report is
     intended to provide additional learning on
     younger adult smokers."  Guess what, younger
     adult smokers is defined in the document to be
     18 to 24.
          Now, this document from 1984, by this time
     Mrs. Gore is 45 years old.  This document has
     nothing to do with her.
          But in case anyone cares, if this document
     bothers you before you saw this, you should
     know -- and you could do your own count if you
     wanted to -- there are almost 200 references in
     this one document defining younger adult
     smokers as 18 to 24.  Those are adults, people
     who have the right in America to choose to
     smoke cigarettes if they want to.  It's legal.
     It's a lawful activity.
          You'll see in the instructions, it is a lawful activity for Reynolds or any other
     company to sell and to market cigarettes to
     adults, and that's what this document is about
     and only that.
          Now, let's go to -- I guess we should go
     back to the Power Point, thank you, and the
     next slide.  Thank you.
          Now, there's going to be a question on the
     verdict form that relates to punitive damages
     and like Mr. McCarter, I don't think you should
     get to that.  It's all the way in the back.
     There's so many reasons why on all the prior
     questions that you should render a defense
     verdict, but if you do and because it's my job
     to, I'm just going to address it briefly.
          These are the basics about punitive
     damages.  First of all, no plaintiff, not even
     Mr. Gore or anyone else, has a right to
     punitive damages and they're only available for
     conduct that legally caused Mrs. Gore's death.
          There's a higher standard for this.
     Mr. McCarter mentioned it's clear and
     convincing.  That is actually the highest
     standard of proof in civil cases.  That
     requires evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that
     it produces a firm belief or conviction without
     hesitation in the matter at issue, without
     hesitation.
          Punitive damages will be paid only to the
     plaintiff in this case.  It's not compensation.
     It's not to make Mr. Gore whole for anything.
     By definition, punitive damages is more money.
     Their request to go to a second phase for
     punitive damages is a request for more money
     over and above any compensation in the case.
          Punitive damages are only available to
     punish and deter.  But to punish and deter the
     kind of conduct that caused Mrs. Gore's death,
     well, you haven't seen any evidence of that.
     Mr. and McCarter and I both have talked about
     that.  Most of the conduct you've heard about
     in this case or a lot of it isn't punishable at
     all.
          Can I have the next slide, please.
          Reynolds should not be punished for
     funding research by Nobel Prize-winning
     scientists.  These are some of the scientists
     that Dr. Burns said were excellent scientists
     and then back on redirect one of the plaintiff's lawyers came up and they had a
     newspaper article and they said, "See, see,
     isn't this one of those articles that they were
     putting out because of this research?"  And
     Dr. Burns said no, it was legitimate research.
     It was legitimate research that was being done.
          Reynolds shouldn't be punished for
     publishing on the composition of smoke.  When
     you hear what's in smoke, a lot of the reason
     we know that is because Reynolds and its
     scientists invented the technology that allows
     us to know what's in smoke and they published
     on it.
          Reynolds shouldn't be punished for
     contributing so much to the Surgeon General
     that they were thanked in the report.  Reynolds
     shouldn't be punished, nor should Philip
     Morris, for working with the Tobacco Working
     Group for 10 years to create a safer cigarette.
          That was the organization that was put
     together with people from the National Cancer
     Institute and scientists at Reynolds and Philip
     Morris to try to figure out what can we do to
     make a safer cigarette.  10 years.  No one
     should be punished for that. This document that's in evidence, this is
     AS-173 -- maybe we can have the Elmo a
     second -- this is one of the documents that
     relates to Reynolds, that's right before
     Reynolds' scientists were participating in the
     Reynolds working group.  It's December 23rd,
     1968 to Murray Senkus, which is one of the
     research and design people you heard about in
     the case.
          Look at what the directive was.  "Areas of
     special emphasis.  In cooperation with others,
     you should push the work concerning tobacco and
     health.  You should prepare a plan to foster
     any relationship with government personnel in
     the quest for mutual understanding of facts,
     ultimately to gain their cooperation and proper
     research of the subject."
          This is a Reynolds document to the head of
     research and design of Reynolds in 1968.
          "If there is a safer cigarette, let's
     continue and increase our efforts in this
     program.  Please prepare a plan to carry it
     out."
          That's immediately before the Reynolds
     scientists were working with the government on Tobacco Working Group.
          If we can go back to the Power Point.
          Lastly, Reynolds should not be punished
     for spending a billion dollars trying to
     develop heat, not burning technology, to try to
     develop a safer cigarette; apart from the
     government, apart from working with others.
     This is money that Reynolds spent on its own
     trying to come up with a safer cigarette to
     market to consumers.
          This conduct does not warrant punishment
     and I do not think you should get to that
     question, if you do, the only correct answer
     based on the evidence -- can we have the next
     slide -- is to check "no" for both companies.
          Now, I told you I'd be brief, so I'm going
     to try to do that.  Maybe some of you think
     it's too late, but I'm wrapping it up now.
          I just wanted you to remember some of the
     important things that I highlighted for you in
     opening and a lot of it, just like Mr. McCarter
     did, a lot of it comes right back to what
     Mr. Gore himself has said and what we now know,
     because the evidence has come in, that
     Mrs. Gore believed, and that's that whether or not to continue smoking is a personal
     individual decision that only the smoker can
     make.  Nobody can make that decision for you.
          When it comes to quitting smoking, simply
     believing the risks is not the same as wanting
     to quit.  Today, just like it was back then,
     there are people who know the risks full well,
     but who nevertheless make a personal individual
     decision to smoke cigarettes and not to try to
     quit.
          Mr. Gore told you all of that.
          All people, including and especially
     cigarette smokers, have the right to make
     decisions in their own life, to choose whether
     they want to be a smoker, a nonsmoker, or a
     former smoker.
          Mr. Gore told you that and we saw in
     Mrs. Gore's own handwriting from the Right to
     Smoke document from Mr. McCarter that she
     believed that as well, and when I asked
     Mr. Gore whether she believed that, he agreed
     with me.
          But finally, with that right to make those
     choices comes responsibility and that's why we
     think it has to be a hundred percent, if you get to that question about Mrs. Gore's
     responsibility, because only she could have
     changed the course of her smoking history.  She
     was that person in the middle and she alone
     could decide whether to try to quit smoking,
     how hard to try to quit smoking, what to do to
     try to quit smoking, who to ask for help to
     quit smoking, whether she wanted to quit for
     her own reasons or not.
          Those decisions were made 100 percent by
     Mrs. Gore and not by Reynolds, not by Philip
     Morris.  Mrs. Gore was a willing smoker who
     smoked because she didn't want to quit.
          Now, before I finish, I'll do last what
     some of the other lawyers did first and that's
     simply to thank you for your time, for your
     attention, and frankly for your patience with
     all of us.  I have explained how I think
     Reynolds fits in or doesn't fit in this case
     the best way I know how and I've tried to
     explain to you the reasons why on top of
     everything you heard from Mr. McCarter, I
     believe the evidence in this case justifies a
     verdict in favor of Reynolds.  Frankly, both
     defendants. At this point when I sit down plaintiff's
     counsel will have another chance to talk to you
     and I won't get to come back to you.  I'd just
     ask you to think -- you've heard us all -- what
     would Mr. McCarter or I say in response to what
     you're going to hear from plaintiff's counsel.
          You know it's going to be what does this
     have to do with Mrs. Gore.  You know it's going
     to be I want to see the whole document.  What
     are you not showing me?  You know it's going to
     be she wanted to smoke and that's why she
     didn't quit.
          We're asking you for a defense verdict,
     and I appreciate all of your time and
     attention.  Thank you.