MR. MCCARTER:  Thank you, Your Honor.  All
right.  Thank you.
First, thanks for being here the last two
and a half weeks.  We really appreciate it.
That's how I want to start off, because you've
been made a great effort paying attention and
listening to both sides and being patient.  
So I hope you have a couple more hours of
patience in you.  We're not going to take as much
time as Mr. Foote did, but we're going to take
some of your time out.
Let me also thank Mr. Geise for giving me
most of the time to talk on the defense side and
Jenn Buso back there, who helped put together 3486
some of the slides I'm using today in my closing
argument.
So the last time I talked directly to you I
said I'm going to start with what I would submit
to you are the five most important facts in my
case when I do my closing argument.  This is
where I ended my opening, and I told you that the
evidence would prove each of these facts even
though we don't have the burden of proof.  
But what you saw is that the evidence did
prove this.  You saw that Mrs. Gore knew the
entire time she smoked that smoking was bad for
her health, and I'll go through in detail as we
go through this.
Mrs. Gore enjoyed smoking.  She did not want
to quit smoking.  She believed that she should
have the right to smoke cigarettes.  Remember,
she said that on the form she sent to Philip
Morris, and Mrs. Gore never blamed Philip Morris
or R.J. Reynolds for her smoking.
I want to pause there for a second, because
there is no evidence that Mrs. Gore was anything
other than a wonderful person.  There's no
dispute about that.  She didn't file this
lawsuit.  She never told anybody she blamed 3487
Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds for her smoking.
When she got carotid artery disease in 1992
she never told anybody, "I blame the tobacco
companies for it."  She never told anybody to go
out and sue the tobacco companies.
When she got cancer in 2000 she never told
anybody, "I blame the tobacco companies for my
smoking and my cancer."  She never told anybody,
"Go out and sue the tobacco companies after I
pass away."
Mr. Gore is the one who filed this lawsuit.
This is Mr. Gore's lawsuit.  I'm going to talk
more about Mr. Gore later, because you saw his
testimony, but keep in mind, please, he filed
this lawsuit, not Mrs. Gore.
Now, I want to start -- I mentioned this
early in opening and there's only one person in
this courtroom who keeps saying Mrs. Gore started
smoking at age 14.  Mr. Gore blurted it out in an
answer when he was testifying and the Judge
struck it, because Mr. Gore didn't know Mrs. Gore
when she was 14 or when she was in high school.
The only person who keeps repeating that
Mrs. Gore started smoking at age 14 is Mr. Foote.
He said it in opening.  There's no evidence that 3488
she started when she was 14.
This is the evidence from the medical
records that we went through when Dr. Burns was
here, and they give different dates.  Maybe
that's because when Mrs. Gore says she started at
age 17, maybe that's when she had her first
cigarette and maybe she didn't become a regular
smoker until she was in her 20s, early 20s.  But
whatever it is, whatever it is, Mrs. Gore did not
start smoking at age 14.
The reason why that's so important is
because they want you to believe she started at
age 14 and knew nothing about the dangers of
smoking when she started.  If she started smoking
at one of these later ages, you know that she
learned by then that smoking could cause cancer
and be bad for her health.
I'll go through some of this in more detail,
but you know from the testimony that when
Mrs. Gore was growing up she learned from her
parents, she learned from her teachers, she
learned from her boyfriend, she learned from all
sorts of sources that smoking was bad for her
health.  And again, I'll go through this in more
detail.   3489
You know from the evidence in this case that
Mrs. Gore continued to get those messages from
all of her doctors, from her husband, her
parents, her children, the warnings on the pack,
the media, and her father's death from lung
cancer in 1994.
Mrs. Gore knew her entire life that she
smoked.  She knew it was bad for her health.
That's what the evidence is from their own
witnesses.  They admitted it on
cross-examination.
Mrs. Gore also enjoyed smoking.  Remember I
asked Mr. Gore this, I asked Dr. Burns.  But
Mrs. Gore told everybody who talked to her about
her smoking that she understands it's bad for her
health, but she's willing to take the risk
because she enjoys it and it relaxes her.
Mr. Gore said that.  He said she said that
to the kids, and you heard that from Dr. Burns,
who reviewed all the testimony in the case.
There's absolutely no dispute the evidence points
in the same direction, Mrs. Gore enjoyed smoking.
Mrs. Gore also did not want to quit smoking.
Those are not my words.  Those are the words of
Mr. Gore when he was here and he testified.  You 3490
heard he had said that under oath in August.  He
testified that Mrs. Gore did not want to quit
smoking, and yesterday we played a portion of his
deposition where he said the same thing and I
want to play that again if we can, Jenn.
"Q:  "Did you ever suggest to Mrs. Gore that
the two of you had some sort of bet to see who
could quit smoking?
"A:  No, we never had that.  I knew she'd
lose.  She wouldn't last five minutes.  She
really didn't want to.  I mean, that's just the
feeling I had.  I don't think she really -- she
never told me that.  Her mindset or however you
say it, 'my way or the highway.'"
Mrs. Gore's doctors who talked to her about
her smoking said the same thing.  You heard
Dr. Beckett when he was here.  Remember, he's the
doctor who's also the family friend.  He
testified he remembers very clearly that
Mrs. Gore had no motivation to stop smoking.
You heard when we read Dr. Scott's
testimony, she talked to Mrs. Gore about her
smoking and Dr. Scott testified Mrs. Gore did not
make any effort to quit.  She did not want to
quit. 3491
That's the evidence from Mr. Gore,
Dr. Beckett, and Dr. Scott.  Nobody told you
otherwise.
In fact, the kids told you.  The daughter
said, "We never saw her try to quit smoking."
They said they heard maybe she tried hypnosis,
but they never observed her their entire lives
growing up in the house, they never saw their
mother try to quit smoking once.
Fourth, I mentioned this, Mrs. Gore believed
that she should have the right to smoke
cigarettes.
You've seen this before, but this is the
document that Mrs. Gore filled out.  Remember,
Mr. Gore said this is Mrs. Gore's signature and
handwriting, and here on the bottom she's asked,
"Would you be interested in joining a smokers
group to help protect your right to smoke?"  Her
answer was "yes".
Now, not everybody feels that way, of
course.  People who don't smoke often don't enjoy
being around others who do.  People who don't
smoke don't want to be in a restaurant or bar
where they're smoking.  But Mrs. Gore was not a
person who held that belief.  She believed she 3492
should have the right to make the choice to smoke
wherever she wanted to smoke, and it was her
right to have that mindset and to have that
opinion.  
But it tells you a lot about who she was.
She wasn't somebody who was ashamed of her
smoking.  She wasn't somebody who viewed herself
as a victim to the tobacco companies.  She viewed
herself as in charge of her own decisions in life
and as the person who's responsible for those
decisions.
Finally, I mentioned this before, but again,
Mrs. Gore never blamed the tobacco companies.
She never said to her husband, "Sue them.  Sue
them if I get sick.  Sue them if I pass away."
She never said anything like that.
So that's sort of the overview of the case.
I wanted to start there, because I ended there on
my opening, and I'm going to put this down now
and what I'm going to do is I'm going to work
through the verdict form, which really is going
to be your job, right?  
You're going to get those questions, you're
going to bring the list of questions to the jury
deliberation room, you're going to deliberate on 3493
them and answer them.
So I want to go through the evidence on
every one of the questions you're going to be
asked to answer at the end of the case and I'm
going to start, of course, with the first one:
"Was Gloria Gore addicted to cigarettes
containing nicotine and if so, was her addiction
a legal cause of her carotid artery stenosis?"
You may remember in opening I mentioned this
is what we call a compound question.  It really
has two questions in one.  They have the burden
of proof.  They have to prove both parts of the
question to your satisfaction.
I'd ask you to look at -- be sure to look at
both parts of the question, because they have to
prove not only that Mrs. Gore was addicted to
cigarettes containing nicotine, but they also
have to prove that her addiction was a legal
cause of her carotid artery disease.
What I will do is I'm gong to break this
first question into the two parts.  I'm going to
walk through the first part first and then we'll
get to the second part and the evidence on
carotid artery disease.
So what is the evidence relating to nicotine 3494
addiction?
Well, you heard from Dr. Burns that
55 million Americans have quit smoking.  You
heard there are more former smokers in the U.S.
today in 2015 than there are current smokers,
which means if you took anybody who ever smoked
in this country, the majority of people who have
ever smoked have quit; and you learned from
everybody who testified that even addicted
smokers can quit.
Dr. Burns testified that anybody can quit
smoking if they're motivated and Dr. Beckett told
you the same thing.  Finally, you heard that
Mrs. Gore at most made one quit attempt in her 40
years of smoking.
Remember when Dr. Burns was here, he
testified that to qualify as a quit attempt you
actually have to stop smoking for 24 hours, so
one day, with the intention of quitting for good.
In all the materials he looked through relating
to the 40 years of Mrs. Gore smoking, he could
say at most there was only one quit attempt where
she stopped for 24 hours, and even then he said,
"I'm not sure.  I think I recall," but at most
it's one in 40 years. 3495
You remember Mrs. Gore was told by her
physicians in 1963, when she was pregnant, the
doctors and Mr. Gore told her, "You should quit
smoking.  It's bad for your health.  It's bad for
the baby's health."  She didn't even try to quit
smoking then.  That's what Mr. Gore said, she did
not even try to quit.  Set aside whether she
would have been successful if she tried.  She did
not even try.
In 1967 she was pregnant with her daughter
Faith.  Same thing, the doctors and Mr. Gore
said, "You should quit smoking.  It's bad for
your health and the baby's health."  Mrs. Gore
did not even try to quit.
Mr. Gore does not remember Mrs. Gore ever
trying to quit in the entire decade of the 1960s.
He knew her from 1962 to 1970.  She never tried
to quit that entire decade.
Her first husband, who testified yesterday
by deposition, also did not recall Mrs. Gore ever
trying to quit.
You go to 1972, when their son Robby is
born, same thing, except there's more urgency
placed on Mrs. Gore to quit this time because
their daughter Faith was born with some problems 3496
caused by smoking.
So Mr. Gore and the doctors told Mrs. Gore
in 1972, "You got to quit.  We don't want the
same thing to happen to Robby that happened to
Faith."  And again, Mrs. Gore did not even try to
quit smoking.
Mr. Gore testified that if you look at the
entire decade of the 1970s, Mrs. Gore did not try
to quit smoking.  Same thing for the 1980s.
So I'd submit to you without evidence that
Mrs. Gore ever made a sincere attempt to quit
smoking, how could anybody say that she was
addicted?
But now I want to talk about the evidence
they brought you as to whether Mrs. Gore was
addicted to nicotine and whether they satisfied
their burden of proof on this issue.
What you're going to see in the evidence
when we go through it is what plaintiff proved
was physical dependence on the part of Mrs. Gore,
that she had cravings and jitters and withdrawal
symptoms.  But they never actually used -- none
of their witnesses used and they never showed you
the criteria that somebody is actually supposed
to use to diagnose addiction, and none of their 3497
witnesses applied that criteria.
This is a slide that Dr. Burns showed --
they showed when Dr. Burns was here, and this is
the only definition of addiction that's in
evidence.  And there's no dispute here as to
whether this is proper or not, but note where the
definition comes from.  It comes from the
National Institute of Drug Abuse, "Drugs, Brains
and Behavior."
You heard evidence that the National
Institute of Drug Abuse is the official federal
government agency in charge of substance abuse
and addictions.
So Dr. Burns brought you this definition of
addiction, which everybody is using in this case,
but he never told you whether he applied the
criteria this organization points to in actually
diagnosing Mrs. Gore as addicted, and you
remember on cross examination we showed him the
media guide that the National Institute of Drug
Abuse -- NIDA -- that NIDA put out.  We showed it
to Dr. Burns.  And the NIDA guide -- we read this
to Dr. Burns, and the NIDA guide draws a
distinction between addiction and physical
dependence. 3498
Remember, Dr. Burns at first would not admit
that there was a difference between physical
dependence and addiction, so I read this to him
and then he agreed there was.
This is from the organization that their own
expert relies on and it says, "Physical
dependence is not equivalent to dependence or
addiction and may occur with a regular daily or
almost daily use of any substance," and when the
substance is taken away, you with have withdrawal
symptoms that can include cravings and jitters,
the types of things they said Mrs. Gore had.
MR. FOOTE:  Objection, Judge.
THE COURT:  Can you approach?
(Whereupon counsel for the respective 
parties approached the bench and the following 
proceedings were had outside the presence of the 
jury:) 
MR. FOOTE:  That's not in evidence.
MR. MCCARTER:  It's not, but I read it to
Dr. Burns and he answered that that's what it
says.  
THE COURT:  Well, you can't show it.
MR. MCCARTER:  No, it's not -- it's just a
demonstrative.  It's not the actual guide. 3499
THE COURT:  Okay.  Hold on, don't go away.
That juror that you guys keep saying is sleeping,
she is not.  Her eyes look closed.  You need to
look at her.
MR. MCCARTER:  But I'm not showing anything
that's not in evidence.  I'm summarizing what
Dr. Burns said.
THE COURT:  Okay, overruled.
(Whereupon the following proceedings were 
had within the presence of the jury:) 
MR. MCCARTER:  So you heard Dr. Burns say
that this organization, NIDA, does in fact
differentiate between physical dependence and
addiction.
The only evidence that the plaintiff offered
as to what they call addiction is that Mrs. Gore
had physical dependence, that she had cravings,
withdrawal effects, and Mr. Gore used the term
she got jittery or had the jitters.  
But then Dr. Burns admitted after we showed
him the guide from NIDA, he admitted physical
dependence is one component of addiction, but it
is not synonymous with addiction.  It's not the
same thing.  Proving that she had cravings or
physical dependence does not prove she had 3500
addiction.
In fact, you heard Dr. Burns say this, that
the National Institute on Drug Abuse said drug
dependence and addiction refers to substance
abuse disorders which may include physical
dependence, but must also meet additional
criteria.
Now, you may remember this part of the cross
examination, because this is where Dr. Burns
started to get very nonresponsive and not
answering questions.  Simple questions were asked
as to whether he applied the criteria that's in
that book he was shown, and he wouldn't answer
the question.  I had to ask it four or five
times, but finally he admitted that he did not
apply those criteria.
What you heard was that the NIDA, the
organization whose definition of addiction he
showed you, that NIDA points to the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual on Mental Disorders, the
DSM, as a basis for diagnosing addiction and
substance abuse.
Dr. Burns admitted that, that they point to
the DSM, and that the DSM actually has
11 different criteria that have to be used to 3501
diagnose addiction.  Those are the additional
criteria to get from physical dependence to
addiction.
You also heard, because we asked this of
Dr. Burns and Dr. Beckett and we asked it of our
own witness, Dr. Scott, in the deposition, no
witness in this case and certainly none of their
witnesses ever applied those criteria to
Mrs. Gore.  So on this question of addiction we
all have to set aside whatever preconceived
notions we have about what addiction is and who
might be addicted and who's not and decide it
based on the evidence.
The evidence in this case is that their own
witnesses did not follow the criteria that
they're supposed to use to diagnose addiction.
They did not meet their burden of proof.  Their
burden of proof required them to go through those
criteria, explain them to you, and tell you how
and why Mrs. Gore met them.
They didn't even tell you what the criteria
were, much less have anybody go through them and
diagnose Mrs. Gore as addicted based on those
criteria.
What criteria did plaintiffs' witnesses use? 3502
Well, Dr. Burns actually never explained what
methodology he used to diagnose somebody as
addicted.  He didn't identify any criteria.
In fact, the only thing you learned about
Dr. Burns is if somebody writes him a check for
$4,800 a day, he always comes into court and says
the person's addicted.  That's the only criteria,
is Dr. Burns always says somebody is addicted as
long as he's being paid to testify.
Dr. Beckett did describe his criteria.  He
said, "If I counsel somebody repeatedly to quit
smoking and I see them over and over again and
say the same thing and they don't quit, I write
down smoking addiction."
That's not -- there's no evidence that
that's the criteria that's supposed to be used
under the DSM or under the diagnostic criteria
listed by NIDA, those 11 criteria.  In fact,
Dr. Beckett testified that he would call somebody
addicted to smoking even if they don't want to
quit, even if they never tried to quit.
Finally there's Dr. Scott and she testified
in testimony we brought you that she believes
Mrs. Gore was addicted, but that she did not
actually diagnose Mrs. Gore as addicted. 3503
You're going to see -- I'm going to show a
lot of excerpts from Dr. Scott's testimony today
and part of the reason is that when it's read in
like that, it's not necessarily as memorable or
as noticeable as if you have a live witness on
the stand.  So I apologize in advance for maybe
showing you too much from her testimony.  
But this is the first thing I want to show
you, is that she admitted she made no effort to
try to evaluate Mrs. Gore to make a determination
under the diagnostic standards for nicotine
addiction to even diagnose her.  
"So it's fair to conclude that you never did
diagnose Mrs. Gore with nicotine addiction,
correct?  And she said, "That's correct, yeah, I
don't get into that."
So that's the sum and substance of the
evidence as to whether Mrs. Gore was addicted to
cigarettes containing nicotine; testimony from
their own witnesses admitting that they did not
apply the criteria that you have to apply under
the DSM, the 11 criteria, to diagnose somebody as
addicted.  All they proved was that Mrs. Gore had
physical dependence, but their own expert,
Dr. Burns, and the organization he relied upon 3504
made clear that physical dependence is not
addiction.
So on the first part of that question, was
Gloria Gore addicted to cigarettes containing
nicotine, they did not meet their burden of
proof.  They did not do what they needed to do to
prove that she was addicted.
So let me now transition to the second half
of that first question.  "If she was addicted,
was her addiction a legal cause of her carotid
artery stenosis?"  
So now we're going to talk about the medical
history, the family history, the high cholesterol
and all the other risk factors she had for
carotid artery disease besides smoking.
This is one of the jury instructions, and
Mr. Foote showed it, but this is the instruction
that essentially says addiction need not be the
only cause.  So addiction need not be the only
cause of her carotid artery stenosis.  There can
be other causes as well.  That's sort of a
summary, quick summary of what this says, but I
want to show you the important instruction which
is there; that they have to prove that but for
the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, 3505
the carotid artery stenosis would not have
occurred.  That's what they have to prove.
So even if there are other causes, they have
to prove that if she had not been addicted, she
would not have had carotid artery disease; that
no addiction, no carotid artery disease.  And now
I want to talk about what the evidence is on
that.
The first thing -- this came from Dr. Burns,
and I would submit to you that this is the most
important piece of evidence on this issue,
because addiction could not have caused
Mrs. Gore's carotid artery disease unless her
smoking caused it, right?  Because their theory
is that she was addicted and she smoked and the
smoking caused it.  So first they have to prove
to you that her carotid artery disease was caused
by smoking, not caused by other things.
Remember Dr.~Burns towards the end of my
cross examination of him, he admitted that only
10 percent of all carotid artery disease is
caused by smoking and 90 percent is not.  What
did they do to convince you, to prove that
Mrs. Gore was part of the 10 percent and not part
of the 90 percent that's not caused by smoking? 3506
That's a pretty big burden to meet to shift
somebody.  Only one out of ten carotid artery
diseases is caused by smoking.  Only one out of
ten.  Nine out of ten is not.  They have to prove
more likely than not that hers was caused by
smoking.  That means they have to prove more
likely than not that she was part of the
10 percent and not part of the 90 percent.  
What kind of evidence did they offer that
could shift her from the majority of people, the
90 percent, into this 10 percent category?  They
never even came close to doing that.  They never
explained how Mrs. Gore is so unique that she
falls in the 10 percent where it's caused by
smoking and not the 90 percent that's not.
In fact, what you saw in the evidence is
that Mrs. Gore had a host of other risk factors
for carotid artery disease, not just cigarette
smoking, and because of that even Dr. Burns
admitted -- even Dr. Burns, who got paid
$3.5 million testifying in all these cases, even
he admitted he could not say that if Mrs. Gore
had not smoked, she would not have gotten the
disease.
Here's his testimony.  I asked him -- this 3507
is his testimony on the 10 percent.  So this
comes from Dr. Burns.  He's the source of this,
and even Dr. Burns with all the money he's been
paid agrees 90 percent of carotid artery disease
is not caused by smoking.
Again I ask you, what evidence did they
offer that puts Mrs. Gore in the extreme
minority, the 10 percent and not in the
90 percent?
This is what I was talking about.  I asked
Dr. Burns -- remember, they have to prove that
but for the addiction, if she had not been
addicted she would not have gotten carotid artery
disease.
I asked him about smoking.  I said, "Given
that Mrs. Gore had multiple risk factors" --
which we're going to talk about in a minute --
"given that she had multiple risk factors for
carotid artery disease, you cannot tell this jury
that but for Mrs. Gore's smoking she would not
have developed carotid artery disease, correct?"
And he said, "I can tell the jury that her
smoking doubled her risk of vascular disease, but
I can't tell the jury that she would not have
developed it at some point in her life had she 3508
not smoked."
That is their expert that they paid nearly
$5,000 a day and he says they cannot prove what
they need to prove on this issue; and the reason
he said that is because Mrs. Gore had all these
other risk factors.
Cigarette smoking was one, but it wasn't her
only one.  She had high cholesterol.  Remember
the 258 milligrams per deciliter?  Dr. Burns said
she had hypertension.  He reviewed all the
medical records.  Dr. Beckett said she did not,
but he only reviewed his own records.  Dr. Burns
testified she had lack of exercise and of course,
you know very well that she had a family history
of atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease.
When you weren't here, one of the times we
were taking up time and you were forced to sit
around we admitted into evidence those death
certificates from her relatives.  I appreciate
you haven't seen a copy of them yet, so I want to
show them to you now, because it goes to this
last factor, the family history of
atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease.
First, remember this medical record.  You
have seen this.  Remember Dr. Burns said, "No, I 3509
didn't see any evidence in the medical records of
a family history of heart disease."  And then we
showed him this and it says the mother is
diabetic and has coronary artery disease.  Family
history is positive for hypertension, diabetes
and heart disease.  So Mrs. Gore's own medical
records say she has a family history of heart
disease.  
And this is her mother's death certificate,
Helen Christina Howard.  These are in evidence.
Acute myocardial infarction was her cause of
death, that's a heart attack, and it was caused
by ischemic heart disease, end stage cardiac
disease.
This is confirming what you've seen already
in medical records, that her mother had heart
disease.  
Her mother, by the way, was a nonsmoker.
Cigarette smoking obviously did not cause her
mother's artery disease, but they want you to
believe that cigarette smoking was responsible
for Mrs. Gore's artery disease.  
And you remember coronary artery disease and
carotid artery disease are both the same disease
process.  It's both atherosclerosis clogging the 3510
arteries, just happens to happen in different
locations.  It's the same disease process with
the same risk factors.
Mrs. Gore's mother was not a smoker and she
had coronary artery disease.
This is Mrs. Gore's sister, Helen Joyce
Ogren.  Coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular
vascular accident, diabetes, and hypertension.
She was a nonsmoker.  And you heard the evidence
that Mrs. Gore cared for Joyce, helped her out
when Joyce had her heart attack or heart surgery
in the 1990s.
So Mrs. Gore's sister, a nonsmoker, got --
had artery problems with her coronary arteries
around the same age that Mrs. Gore had problems
with her carotid arteries.  Smoking wasn't the
cause of Joyce's clogged artery because she was
not a cigarette smoker.
Then there are the two uncles.  This is the
uncle, Roy Crocker.  It's hard to read.  He had a
heart attack and it was caused by coronary
disease, and it says he had had coronary artery
disease for years.  This is the uncle.  We don't
know whether he was a smoker or not.  There just
isn't evidence one way or another. 3511
Uncle Albert, cardiac arrest, coronary
artery disease.  We don't know whether he was a
smoker or not.  There's just no evidence one way
or the other.
So to sum up Mrs. Gore's family history of
atherosclerosis, what you see is that her mother,
a nonsmoker, had it.  Her sister, a nonsmoker,
had it.  She had two uncles, we don't know their
smoking status, they both had it, and Mrs. Gore
had carotid artery disease.
The point here is that cigarette smoking has
nothing to do with it, because it runs in her
family whether you're a smoker or not.  Her
nonsmoking sister had the artery disease the same
time Mrs. Gore did and the sister's wasn't caused
by smoking.  There's no reason to think that
Mrs. Gore's was either; that she was somehow part
of the 10 percent and not part of the 90 percent.
Now I want to talk about Dr. Beckett.
Dr. Beckett was here on Friday afternoon and
cross examination of him got spirited at times,
and you learned toward the end that it turns out
he's a family friend.  Dr. Scott wasn't -- isn't
a family friend.  There's no evidence that she
socialized or employed any of the Gore family 3512
members.  
But Dr. Beckett, Mr. Gore's daughter Faith
used to work for him and Mr. Gore's granddaughter
either currently works for him or also used to
work for him, and Dr. Beckett acknowledged he's
gone to social events at the Gore house for
Mr. Gore's grandchildren.
So Dr. Beckett is somebody who's a family
friend, but even he admitted Mrs. Gore's family
history of heart disease was significant and
important.
I want to pause here because I want to go
over how things played out when we crossed him.
Because remember I showed Dr. Beckett -- or maybe
you don't remember, but I showed him the medical
record relating to Mrs. Gore's mother, who had
diabetes and coronary artery disease, and he
said -- he acknowledged that's important and it's
significant, because it shows a family history of
heart disease.
Then what he said was, "But it's only one
relative.  It's only one relative, so it really
doesn't tell us that much."  And I asked him, I
said, "Well, have you seen the death
certificates?"   3513
Remember, they didn't give Dr. Burns the
death certificates.  They didn't give Dr. Beckett
the death certificates either.  You're entitled
to ask yourself why didn't they give that
information to their witnesses?  Why didn't they
give them information showing a family history of
heart disease?
In any event, when I showed Dr. Beckett the
death certificates of the sister -- remember he
said the mother, she's got diabetes and coronary
artery disease, and that's significant, but it's
only one.  I showed him the sister's death
certificate to show it's not one, it's at least
two, and he said, "Well, you know, she had
coronary disease, but she had diabetes, so it's
not significant."
So when we showed the mother -- the medical
record on the mother, the mother had diabetes and
coronary artery disease, the same as Joyce, he
acknowledged it was significant, but it was only
one relative.  As soon as we showed him a second,
he said it doesn't count any more because she had
diabetes.
Then we showed him the other two, the two
uncles had coronary artery disease and 3514
Dr. Beckett continued to fight and say oh, it
wasn't important at all.
Then we showed Dr. Beckett that article from
the magazine published by the American Heart
Association and the American Stroke Association.
We showed him the article and then he said,
"Well, you know, it's not really fair.  You're
showing me an article I haven't read before I
came here to testify.  I haven't reviewed this
study.  I need to review it more before I could
answer questions," and he constantly said things
like that.
But ask yourselves whose job is it to keep
up on the literature?  If he's coming here as an
expert to testify on the cause of Mrs. Gore's
coronary artery disease, isn't it his job
actually to review the studies and to review the
literature?  
This was one of the -- this is a recent
study from 2014 and Dr. Beckett, what you
learned, hadn't done the research to learn how
important a family history of heart disease is,
and when I showed him and directed him to what
the study found, he did admit -- he admitted that
Mrs. Gore's family history more than doubled her 3515
risk of carotid artery disease.
He talked about the odds ratio of 2.65,
which means it more than doubled the risk, and he
also acknowledged that study found that what's
important in terms of if you have a parent with
coronary artery disease, the parent whose risk --
or who's having it is more important is the
mother.
If you have a mother who has coronary artery
disease, it makes you more likely to have carotid
artery disease than if your father had it, and
even more important than a parent is a sibling.
A sibling with coronary artery disease makes it
even more likely that you're going to develop
carotid artery disease.  And what's even more
important than that is if you have a mother and
sister together, which Mrs. Gore did, not to
mention her two uncles.
So that was Dr. Beckett.  And Dr. Beckett,
they showed you earlier, testified that he
thought smoking was the cause of her carotid
artery disease, but he never told you what's
important; which is that he never said that
addiction was the cause of her carotid artery
disease, and that's ultimately what they have to 3516
prove.
In fact, I asked him some questions on this
and he admitted that if Mrs. Gore had quit
smoking in the 1990s or even 1990, if she had
quit smoking then, she still would have developed
carotid artery disease.  She still would have
developed it.  
I want to focus on that for a minute,
because that, I would submit to you, is at the
core of this question whether Mrs. Gore's
addiction, not her smoking, whether her addiction
caused her carotid artery disease.  Because
that's the question you're being asked to answer.
Their theory is that Mrs. Gore was addicted
and because she was addicted, she could not quit
smoking when she wanted to quit smoking, and that
because she could not quit smoking when she
wanted to, she went on to develop carotid artery
disease.
This is why we spent so much time with the
witnesses, trying to figure out when it was that
Mrs. Gore actually tried to quit smoking, because
the question is did she want to quit smoking.
Did she try to quit smoking at a point in time
where she could have avoided getting the carotid 3517
artery disease, and that's why I asked Dr. Burns
and Mr. Gore about when it was that we have
evidence of Mrs. Gore trying to quit smoking.
You remember the only two quit attempts
anybody could put a date on was the use of the
patch sometime in the 1990s and Zyban in 1999.
Nobody could say, not Dr. Burns, not Mr. Gore,
that Mrs. Gore ever tried to quit smoking before
the 1990s.
The point here is that even if Mrs. Gore was
addicted, addiction did not cause her to get
carotid artery disease, because she never tried
to quit smoking until she already had carotid
artery disease.  So even if she had been
successful in quitting when she wanted to, when
she used the patch or when she used the Zyban,
she already had carotid artery disease.
The addiction, if she was addicted, never
prevented her from quitting at a time when she
would have avoided the disease, because she never
tried to quit until after she got the disease.
So let's assume Mrs. Gore was not addicted
at all.  Let's assume she was not addicted at all
and she would have quit successfully the first
time she tried. 3518
If she had done that, would she have avoided
carotid artery disease?  That is the question,
the second half of that first question.  If she
had quit when she first tried to quit, would she
have avoided getting the disease?  
The answer is no, because she already had
the disease by the time she first tried to quit.
By the time she used the patch, that was the mid
1990s, she already had carotid artery disease.
So her inability to quit when she was on the
patch didn't cause the disease, because she
already had it.
When she used Zyban in 1999, she'd already
had carotid artery disease for seven years.  If
she had been successful with Zyban she still
would have gotten carotid artery disease, because
she already had it.
So if you look at the evidence in this case,
there's no evidence of Mrs. Gore trying to quit
before she got carotid artery disease.
Therefore, her addiction or failure to quit is
not a cause of the carotid artery disease.  She
would have gotten it either way.
Now, let me sum up on this, because I'm
coming back to what I'd submit is the single most 3519
important piece of evidence on this.  That is the
90 percent/10 percent, and I want to emphasize
this because if you're trying to figure out
what's more likely than not, the 90 percent is
much more likely than the 10 percent.
They have to offer you some evidence that
could convince you that Mrs. Gore was part of the
10 percent, not part of the 90 percent, and given
all of her other risk factors -- the
hypertension, high cholesterol, lack of exercise,
and that overwhelming family history which
more than doubled her risk -- they have not
proven in any way that Mrs. Gore's carotid artery
disease was caused by her smoking or her
addiction.
For that reason, on this question one I'd
submit the correct answer based on the evidence
is "no".  Plaintiff has the burden of proving
that she was addicted and that her addiction
caused her disease, and they proved neither of
them.  They proved neither of what they had to
prove.
If you answer this question "no", the case
is over.  It's all done.  The case is over.  I'd
submit "no" is the correct answer. 3520
If you answer it "yes", your work is only
getting started, because there's a lot more that
plaintiff has to prove to get that seven and a
half million dollars or whatever it is they're
asking for.
The second thing they have to prove is
that -- the question going to be posed to you is
was smoking cigarettes manufactured by each
defendant a legal cause of lung cancer in Gloria
Gore.  That's the question you're going to be
asked to answer, separately for Philip Morris and
separately for R.J. Reynolds.
Mr. Geise is going to have an additional
argument for you on this for his client, R.J.
Reynolds.  The one I'm going to make here applies
to both of us.
Now, you know from opening statements and
seeing the evidence that the dispute here is
whether Mrs. Gore had lung cancer, whether
Mrs. Gore's cancer started in her lungs.  That's
the dispute in this.  If she did not have lung
cancer, then of course our cigarettes did not
cause her to have lung cancer.
So the dispute, the fact that's going to be
at issue for you on this question is did 3521
Mrs. Gore's cancer start in her lungs.  Did they
prove that her cancer started in her lungs, did
they prove that she had lung cancer.
So let me talk about the evidence on that.
You probably remember this from opening or
Dr. Burns, but really it comes down to these two
abnormalities seen in the CAT scan; whether
either of those was the beginning of the cancer
and whether they are located in spots that were
seen are located in Mrs. Gore's lung.
But let me first talk about the other ones,
because it's common sense and you heard from
Dr. Burns, the brain, right arm, sternum, the
right adrenal, the vertebrae, the ilium, left
rib, left adrenal, and the hilar lymph nodes,
everybody testified and said those are not in the
lung.
So what they have to show is they have to
show -- for the cancer to have started in the
lung they have to show that there was cancer in
the lung, right?  Because if cancer started in
the lung, it's still there, according to
Dr. Burns, even if it spreads elsewhere.  So they
have to show you that there was cancer in the
lung and second, that that's where the cancer 3522
started.
These are the two important ones, because
those are the only sites.  This one was in the
lung, this small one, the 12-millimeter by
12-millimeter.  That one was seen in the lung, so
I'm going to talk about that.  I'm going to talk
about that one second.  
Then you have the larger tumor that was
observed in the pleura.  Remember, the pleura is
outside the lung and the chest wall, which is
outside the lung.  But that's the one Dr. Burns
says, he says it was in the lung and he says
that's where the cancer started.
So I'm going to start with what Dr. Burns
says is where the cancer started and then I'll
talk about the other one, the smaller one that
was actually in the lung.
Before I do, though, I do want to say a word
about the witnesses you got on this.  So
Mrs. Gore's oncologist was Dr. Scott, right, and
you heard yesterday when we read Dr. Scott's
deposition that Mr. Gore's lawyers actually
contacted Dr. Scott twice; once in November 2012
and once, I think, in December of 2014.  So just
a few months ago. 3523
They sent her medical records in
November 2012 and had a 12-minute phone call with
her and they sent her -- and they contacted her
again in December just a few months ago.
They contacted and talked to Mrs. Gore's
doctor who treated her for her cancer.  They
talked to her about it twice and did not call her
as a witness either live or by deposition.  They
talked to the woman who saw Mrs. Gore's cancer,
saw Mrs. Gore, saw these scans, treated her for
cancer, and they did not call her as a witness.
Ask yourselves why?  Why did they not bring
you the testimony from Dr. Scott, the doctor who
treated Mrs. Gore?  She's not a family friend
like Dr. Beckett, and you heard she said she
didn't want to come to trial to testify because
she sees patients.  But she was happy to have her
deposition read in, which we did.  Why didn't
they bring that evidence to you?
They didn't bring the evidence to you
because it totally blows up their claim that
Mrs. Gore had lung cancer.  
I'm going to show you Dr. Scott's testimony.
Instead of bringing in Dr. Scott, who they talked
to twice and sent medical records, they bring you 3524
a guy from California who was never Mrs. Gore's
doctor, who never treated her, he's never
practiced medicine in Florida, and who flies
around getting paid $3.5 million to testify in
these cases.  They brought a guy from California
here and paid him $5,000 a day instead of reading
in the deposition of the woman who treated Dr. --
treated Mrs. Gore for cancer.
They did that because they knew Dr. Scott
was not going to say what they needed her to say
and Dr. Burns would say anything they were paying
him to say or that they wanted him to say.
That's why they brought in Dr. Burns and not
Dr. Scott.
MR. FOOTE:  Objection, Judge.
THE COURT:  Sustained.
MR. MCCARTER:  We brought Dr. Scott's
testimony to you and we read it yesterday, and
what you heard -- and I'll show you the
testimony -- you heard Dr. Scott say, "We can't
tell whether it was lung cancer or not.  We never
actually made a final diagnosis.  It didn't
matter to us when we were treating Mrs. Gore,
because her cancer spread everywhere.  So we
never investigated where it started and no, I 3525
cannot say it was lung cancer.  I cannot say it
started in the lung."
So I got a little sidetracked, but let me go
back to the two potential sites where the cancer
may have started or maybe not.
So this is the medical record that you've
seen a lot and what I've done is I've excerpted
the writing.  This is the CT scan report relating
to -- up here is the big one where Dr. Burns says
the cancer started, and then below here is the
12-by-12 millimeter.  
When you read this notice, that the doctor
only describes one of them as actually being in
the lung.  The only one in the lung is the small
one, the 12-by-12 millimeter, which he describes
it in the left lower lobe.  That's the one
described in the lung.
The other one is described as a chest wall
mass located not in the lung, located at the left
lung base.  So it's describing geographically
where it is, but it's not in the lung.  It's at
the left lung base, and it says it appears to be
a pleural-based mass and then it talks about
going into the rib.
So you have only one of these abnormalities 3526
that's reported in the lung and that's the one
I'm going to talk about next, the smaller one.
So let's talk about the bigger one where
they say the cancer started and Dr. Burns tried
to say it was in the lung.  Again, to be lung
cancer there has to be cancer in the lung, not
outside the lung, and it must have started there.
Remember when we cross examined Dr. Burns
and he admitted -- well, you heard his testimony
read, because he wouldn't admit it here.  We had
to read his testimony under oath in a different
case.  But Dr. Burns testified in that testimony
that the pleura -- remember this is a
pleural-based mass.  The pleura and a pleural
lesion are outside the lung, not inside the lung.
What that means is that the cancer that
Dr. Burns says was the beginning of the cancer
was not observed in the lung.  It was observed
outside the lung.  If it's outside the lung, it's
not lung cancer.  It means it's spread from
somewhere else.  So the cancer they're pointing
to, that they say was the cause of the cancer,
was not in the lung.  Not in the lung, not lung
cancer.
Dr. Scott confirmed that the pleura is 3527
outside the lung.  She described the tumor as
being in the chest wall, which is outside the
lung, not inside the lung, and she said she can't
say that the cancer started there.
This is Dr. Scott's testimony which we read
yesterday:
"Q:  It's not capable of being said that you
know that the cancer started in the lung and grew
out to the chest wall; is that fair?
"A:  Not on this chest wall mass, you know.
You know, we just -- this was not biopsied,
because she had a rib lesion that was easy to
biopsy.  So, you know, we don't really know did
it start in the lung, grow through the lung,
through the pleura into the chest area, you know.
"Q:  You don't know if that happened?
"A:  Right."
She is saying that you can't tell, you can't
say the cancer started where Dr. Burns says it
start, and you can't even say it's in the lung.
Here's there's another question:  "If it was
truly an exclusive chest wall mass, that would be
outside of the lung?
"Right."  She's agreeing.
They went through the pathology report with 3528
her and asked the question:  "And by the
description in the pathology report, it's still
not telling you that that mass was actually in
the lung?"
She answers, "That's correct."
So Dr. Scott, the doctor who treated
Mrs. Gore for her cancer, says no, no, you can't
say this is in the lung, like Dr. Burns was
trying to say.  There's no evidence it was in the
lung.  It's in the chest wall, it's in the
pleura, which are outside of the lung.
So at this point in the testimony they had
gone through that section I just showed of the
medical record and said:  "So up to the point
where we talk about the destruction of the rib
and the oblong chest wall mass, there's no
description up to that point of anything in the
lung, correct?"
She said, "Correct."  That chest wall mass,
there's no evidence it was in the lung.
So let me now turn to the other one, okay.
So Dr. Burns admitted -- just to summarize,
Dr. Burns admitted that this one, he says, was
the source of the cancer.  It's in the pleura.
He admitted the pleura is outside the lung. 3529
Dr. Scott said the pleura is outside the
lung and Dr. Scott said there was no way to say
that that was in the lung or even the start of
the cancer.  That's Mrs. Gore's own treating
oncologist.
So let's talk about the only thing that was
seen inside Mrs. Gore's lung, in the lung.  This
is the only thing that could be the start of lung
cancer, this one, because it's the only thing in
the lung.
Now, you may remember Dr. Burns said, "I
don't even know that this is cancer.  It's so
small it may not be cancer and in fact, it's so
small it's not the source of the cancer.  It's
not where the cancer started."  So I want to go
through that.
So this is the only thing that's seen in the
lung, the only thing in the lung; very small,
12-millimeter by 12-millimeter.  Dr. Burns
admitted it may or may not be cancerous.  He
didn't know.  Of course it has to be cancerous if
it's lung cancer, but he can't say that it is,
and he said it's so small it cannot be where the
cancer started.
So their own witness is admitting that the 3530
one thing seen inside the lung is not where the
cancer started.
Dr. Scott said she agreed it may or may not
be cancerous, but she says, "I can't say that it
is cancerous because it was never biopsied," and
she also could not say the cancer started there.
Let me show you some more of her testimony.
Here it's describing the small -- the 12-by-12
millimeter.
It says, "In the left lower lobe that's a
description, that's an example of a description
of a nodule in the lung?"  
She says, "In the lung, right."  She's
agreeing this is the only thing -- this is the
one that's in the lung.  
"And that was never sampled, meaning it was
never biopsied?"  And she says, "No."
"It was never sampled by pathology, so we
don't know what it was, correct?"
"A:  Right."  
Meaning nobody could even say that that was
even cancer, much less that it was the source of
the cancer that spread across Mrs. Gore's body.
Then you heard a lot about this yesterday,
this reference to primary site.  Primary site 3531
means where the cancer started.  
And she was asked:  "Would you agree with me
that even though you know it's a possibility" --
in other words, it's a possibility that the small
thing in the lung started the cancer -- "you
believe it's unlikely to be the primary site in
this case?  It's unlikely to be where the cancer
started?"
She said, "We don't know, you know."
"We don't know" is a defense verdict,
because they have the burden of proof.  They have
to prove it started in the lung.  "We don't know"
is a defense verdict.
"Q:  There's no way to know?
"A:  There's no way to know.  It wasn't
biopsied."
They have the burden of proof.  This is what
Mrs. Gore's treating doctor for her cancer said,
not somebody paid three and a half million
dollars.
"Q:  It wasn't biopsied and you say it's
unlikely that that would be a primary site,
meaning the source for Mrs. Gore's cancer,
correct?
"A:  Yeah, we don't have a primary site.  We 3532
don't have a primary site.  We only have
metastatic disease and this could be a metastasis
too."  
Meaning even if this is cancer, it could
have come from somewhere else where the cancer
started.
"Q:  So in looking at all the information,
you would say this is a case where we really
don't know what the primary site of the cancer
was" -- in other words, where the cancer
started -- "is that fair?
"A:  Yes."
Mrs. Gore's treating doctor for her cancer.
I said I had a lot of these.  I'm sorry if
it's getting redundant, but I want to make the
point.
"Q:  Now, if you're looking at the different
explanations for that 1.2-centimeter nodule, if
it is cancer, could it be cancer that spread to
the lung from some other site in the body?
"A:  Of course.
"Q:  And would you agree with me that the
lungs are the most common site for cancers to
metastasize to from other portions of the body?"
In other words, say if it is cancer, which 3533
nobody can say because it was not biopsied, is it
the source or could it have gotten there from
somewhere else as part of the cancer spreading,
and she said, yes, of course it could have,
because it's by bloodstream to the lung, and you
heard her testimony that cancer that starts
elsewhere often spreads to the lung because blood
comes to and from the lung to get oxygenated.
So the lung is one of the most likely
sources for a cancer that started somewhere else
to spread.
Now, I want to talk about Mrs. Gore's
doctors and what they said in the medical
records, because they've shown you these medical
records that talk about lung cancer or
bronchogenic carcinoma, which is the same thing
as lung cancer.  
You may be wondering, well, why are they
writing down lung cancer if they don't know where
it started?  And Dr. Scott helped us on that as
well.  
But first look at the terms that are used in
the medical records, because Dr. Scott said they
never made a final diagnosis of what the
cancer -- where it started, what kind of cancer. 3534
It was a working diagnosis, just to put something
down so they could treat Mrs. Gore and it didn't
matter to her treatment where it started.
They said suggestive, not that it was, not
that they did a final conclusion.  They called it
suggestive of lung cancer or consistent with lung
cancer.  Consistent with a lung primary,
consistent with carcinoma in the left lung.
But we asked Dr. Scott, well, what did they
mean when they write down things like that?
Again, she doesn't have a dog in this fight.
She's not being paid by anybody.  She's not a
family friend of anybody.  Her only interest is
to tell the truth.
And what she said, she said, well, when the
pathologist wrote down that it was suggestive of
bronchogenic carcinoma, that was just an idea as
to what might explain Mrs. Gore's symptoms and
where she got the cancer.
Dr. Scott called it a provisional diagnosis
or a working diagnosis, and she said that to the
doctors it was irrelevant where the cancer
started and it was not important to find the
primary tumor, because Mrs. Gore was in such bad
shape that it really didn't matter at all. 3535
So they never -- you heard from Dr. Scott,
the doctors actually never went in.  There's no
autopsy.  They never did anything to try to
figure out did it actually start in the lung or
did it start somewhere else.  They never did
that.
This is Dr. Scott's testimony from yesterday
as well and this is after the CT scans, the bone
scans, everything else, and talking about what
they're writing down as a possible explanation,
not a final diagnosis.
"By this point in time, including the CT
scan of the thorax, we don't have any actual
information pointing to a cancer in the lung,
correct?"  
And Dr. Scott said "Correct."
So all the evidence Dr. Scott is looking at
in the medical records, the doctor who treated
Mrs. Gore for her cancer says we don't have any
actual information pointing to a cancer in the
lung.  If there's no actual information pointing
to a cancer in the lung, then there's no proof
that Mrs. Gore actually had lung cancer and they
certainly have not met their burden of proof.
I have more of these, but this is just 3536
Dr. Scott explaining more that this was a cancer,
unknown primary.  They didn't know where it
started.  Again, more of the same.
At the bottom here, "You can say it's
consistent with lung cancer" -- which is what
they said in the records -- "but that's not
saying you have sufficient evidence to say it was
lung cancer?"
"A:  Right, right.  Correct, correct."
Mrs. Gore's own doctor could not say, would
not say it was lung cancer.
They showed you in their closing a little
snippet from Dr. Scott's testimony where she said
at the time, "At the time we believed it was lung
cancer.  At the time I believed it was lung
cancer."  
If you think back to when the questioning
was done, all of the plaintiff's counsel's
questions to Dr. Scott asked her what she thought
at the time.  They didn't ask her looking back on
all the evidence, having the benefit of hindsight
and looking at the full record, what's your
opinion?  We did that and she said, "My opinion
is I can't say it's lung cancer."
They asked her what she thought at the time 3537
and she said, "Well, at the time I thought it was
lung cancer," but she admitted they never tried
to figure out whether it was lung cancer or not.
They get a chance to get up afterwards after
I do and I'd ask you to look very closely if they
put up more testimony from Dr. Scott.  Look at
how they asked the question, because it's all
going to be at the time what did you think, not
what do you think today with the benefit of
looking back at all the records.
So just to sum this up, Dr. Burns admitted
that the one thing that was seen in the lung,
that 12-by-12 millimeter mass or abnormality, was
not where the cancer started.  Mrs. Gore's
doctors never sought to determine where the
cancer started and Dr. Scott -- no dog in the
fight -- testified it's not possible to say
Mrs. Gore had lung cancer or that the cancer
started in her lung.  That's the evidence in this
case.
Now, I would submit to you that this is the
most important medical record on this issue and
here's why.  Because you'll see it's dated up
here -- you'll have it in evidence, but the date
there is toward the end of May.  Remember, 3538
Mrs. Gore was diagnosed with cancer in April,
early April of 2000.  She passed away in June of
2000.  This record is filled out toward the end
of the process, with the benefit of all the
information the doctors had at the time.
It's hard to see.  This is the record where
Dr. Scott was describing that what they do,
they're part of this American Joint Commission on
Cancer.  The hospital and the doctors work with
this commission and what they do is when they
have cancer, they have to fill out a form that
they send back to this Commission on Cancer.
They have to fill out the form designating, if
they can, where the cancer started, what type of
cancer it is, so that the government can put
together statistics on the cause of cancer deaths
in the country.
Dr. Maholtz filled this form out and what
this says up here -- I know it's hard to read --
it says "primary tumor."  This is the spot, if
the doctor knew where the cancer started, this is
where the doctor would write it.
What did Dr. Maholtz do?  Did she write
lung, no.  Did she say bronchogenic carcinoma,
no.  She put a big "X" there.  And Dr. Scott said 3539
she put a big "X" there, what that means is it
means they don't know where the cancer started.
That's why you put an "X" there.
So this is late in the process, after all
the available medical evidence the doctors had.
They fill out the form they're required to fill
out for the government and they put a big "X"
where the primary site is.
That means that in 2000, when the government
tallied up lung cancer deaths, when they tallied
up all these forms and counted how many lung
cancer deaths occurred in the United States,
Mrs. Gore was not included as a lung cancer death
in 2000.  That's the purpose of this form, and
Mrs. Gore was not included as a lung cancer
death.  She was not included because nobody could
say she had lung cancer.
If she's not included as a lung cancer death
on this reporting, they haven't proven that she
was a lung cancer death in this case, where
they're asking for millions and millions of
dollars.
This is what Dr. Scott said about that form:
"Q:  This means on the face of it, this
means that Dr. Maholtz didn't know what the 3540
primary location was?
"A:  Correct, yes.
"Q:  Your interpretation of Dr. Maholtz
putting that big "X" there is that Dr. Maholtz
did not have information to point to the primary
site for this tumor in Mrs. Gore?
"A:  That's correct."
The only person who told you in this case
that Mrs. Gore had lung cancer is Dr. Burns, who
never treated her, never saw her, never reviewed
any of those CAT scans, is getting paid money to
come here, like he does in every other case.
We brought you Mrs. Gore's actual doctor and
she told you "we can't say it was lung cancer."
They have not met their burden of proof on this
issue.
You get this far in the question -- if you
get this far on the verdict form, the answer
should be "no".  This is another one where if
your answer is "no", the case is over, it's done.
Everybody goes home.
If you answer "yes", you go on to the next
question, which is this one.
Now, this is question three and I really
want to pause here, because I want to show you 3541
something.  You've seen this question.  But you
know, when Mr. Foote was talking about it he was
pointing you down here about concealing or
admitting material information and the argument
he made was, well, Mrs. Gore didn't know
everything the tobacco companies knew and so she
relied on that stuff and you should check it
"yes".
But what Mr. Foote never actually pointed
out to you is how this question actually starts
off, which is very important, as you'll see based
on the evidence.
The question doesn't ask about whether
information was just concealed or omitted from
Mrs. Gore.  It says, "Please state as to each
defendant whether Mrs. Gore reasonably relied to
her detriment on a statement or misinformation
made by each defendant after May 5, 1982."
It's not whether Mrs. Gore -- there was
information one of these companies had that
Mrs. Gore didn't know.  It's whether she relied
on a statement that one of the companies made or
misinformation put out by the companies after
that date.
Why is that so important?  Why did they not 3542
talk about that part of this question?  It's so
important, because when you go back and look at
the evidence, you can look through every box in
there and you won't find a single statement in
evidence by either of these companies after
May 5, 1982.  There simply are none.
You can look through every evidence box till
you're blue in the face, they did not put into
evidence any statement that Philip Morris or R.J.
Reynolds made after that date.  There's nothing.
There's nothing.  That's why, you know, they
played that clip of Heimann, the guy on the
deposition from 1986, and Mr. Foote said was
shown on national television.
He said it was shown on national television
because he was hoping maybe that would be a
statement made after 1982.  Then we corrected him
and objected and he said, no, it wasn't shown on
national television.  It was a deposition.
They have to actually show that these
companies made a statement that Mrs. Gore could
have seen or heard or relied upon after that
date, and there's actually no statements.  You
can look through every piece of evidence and they
haven't put anything in. 3543
So I got ahead of myself.  I did want to
talk about what the elements are in this, and one
thing is the statement, that they have to prove
there was a statement made after that date.  They
have to prove that Mrs. Gore relied upon the
statement or misinformation.  So she has to have
heard or seen it and believed it and done
something based on it.
Of course, there's nothing in evidence that
meets the first criteria, so there's nothing she
could have relied on.  And to her detriment, I'm
going to talk about that last.  So no statements,
okay.
So what statements are in evidence?  Okay,
let's go through every one of them.
You know, you heard so much in this case
about advertising and Mr. Foote went to the
trouble of writing down the big number that was
spent on advertising, and Mr. Gore talked about
television advertising Mrs. Gore supposedly saw
in 1990s and it talked about all this advertising
for low tar or light or filtered cigarettes.
There's four ads that are in evidence, four
ads.  The television commercial in 1949 for
Camel, it's before 1982.  The television 3544
commercial for Winston, in 1960.  The "I Love
Lucy", from 1952 or 1951.  And there was another
Philip Morris brand ad, television ad in the
1950s.  That's all the advertising they put into
evidence.
Mrs. Gore never smoked any of those brands.
None of those brands were low tar or light
cigarettes or ultralight cigarettes, which they
say the whole fraud is about.  She never smoked
any of them.
This may have even been a time when she
didn't have a television, according to Mr. Gore.
There's no evidence that Mrs. Gore saw any of
those ads and she certainly was not influenced by
them to smoke a brand.
So what other statements or misinformation
is in evidence?  Remember, it has to be something
that went out publicly, because it has to be
something that Mrs. Gore could have heard or seen
or relied upon.
So what else?  Well, you have that speech to
the Vending Machine Association in 1954 in 
St. Simon, Georgia, when Mrs. Gore was a
14-year-old girl.  Dr. Proctor said, well,
there's no evidence that 14-year-old girls from 3545
Vero Beach were there.  She didn't see that.
The Frank Statement in 1954, which there's
no evidence it was published in a Vero Beach
newspaper.  There was that newspaper article they
showed from the Greensboro, North Carolina Daily
News, at a time when Mrs. Gore was not living in
Greensboro.  She was living here.
They had the "See It Now" interview in 1955.
That was on CBS.  There's no evidence Mrs. Gore
saw that.
The clip they showed you earlier from 1964,
the Howard Cullman clip, no evidence Mrs. Gore
saw that.  "Face the Nation", where the Philip
Morris executive makes the inappropriate comment
about women preferring smaller babies, there's no
evidence Mrs. Gore saw that.  As inappropriate as
that may be, they're showing it to try to make
you mad, because there's no evidence that
Mrs. Gore was influenced by it at all.
They had a New York Times article from 1967.
No evidence Mrs. Gore was reading the New York
times in 1967.  And they have a New York Times
article in 1969.
What do all these have in common besides the
fact that there's no evidence Mrs. Gore saw or 3546
heard them?  They're all before May 5, 1982,
every single one of them.  There is no piece of
evidence of any statement by these defendants
during the time period they have to prove we made
a statement that she relied upon.  There's just
absolutely nothing.  There's nothing.
All you have is Dr. Proctor's testimony that
the companies were denying that smoking was
addictive and denying that smoking caused cancer,
but they actually haven't put into evidence any
statement like that after May 5, 1982.  There's
just nothing.
So then the plaintiff says -- I think their
theory seems to be, well, Mrs. Gore relied on
advertising for low tar, filtered, ultralight
cigarettes, and that's what she relied upon and
that's the basis they're arguing why you should
check this "yes."
First of all, there's no evidence again
after that May 5 date as to any marketing
advertising a filter or low tar light cigarettes.
So they haven't proven what they need to prove
even on that.
But even more so, they actually did not put
into evidence any advertisements of filtered -- I 3547
guess the Winston ad, the television add in 1960,
that's a filter cigarette, doesn't say anything
about filters.  They didn't put in evidence of
any advertising of low tar, light or filtered
cigarettes other than the 1960 television
commercial that Mrs. Gore, there's no evidence
she saw it.
So their whole theory of this case is that
the tobacco companies were advertising these
cigarettes, low tar filtered lights, as being
safer and Mrs. Gore was being duped by it.
If Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds were
really advertising those cigarettes as safer and
Mrs. Gore was duped by it, don't you think they
would have put at least one of those ads into
evidence?  
They put nothing into evidence on this.
They showed you a Benson & Hedges Lights, that
black and white one earlier.  That was actually
not an ad that was shown to have run in any
magazine.  That was I think being tested at the
time in the test market and it was part of an
internal company document.
If Mrs. Gore really and truly was misled by
tobacco advertising, they would have put the ads 3548
into evidence.  There is nothing.  Again, you can
look through all the boxes they bring back there,
all the binders, whatever they bring back there.
Look as long as you like, you're not going to
find a single ad that says light cigarettes or
filters or ultralights are safer.
The reason why is because their own expert,
Dr. Proctor, admitted when we cross examined him,
he admitted that Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds
never marketed filtered cigarettes, low tar
cigarettes, light cigarettes or ultralights as
safer.  They never did it.  He says they never
did it because they had an agreement not to do
it.  Say he's right, but the important thing is
they didn't do it.  They didn't advertise those
cigarettes as safer and they can't show you any
ads where they did, and it's their burden of
proof.
On this filter issue, it's important to keep
in mind what we talked about with Dr. Burns and
Dr. Proctor, and that is that there were dozens
and dozens and dozens of studies done over the
years comparing smokers of filtered cigarettes to
smokers of unfiltered cigarettes, and all of
those studies show that filters did reduce the 3549
risk of lung cancer in some cases by as much as
40 percent.
There's epidemiology published through this
time from 1968 to 2000 all pointing to filtered
cigarettes as reducing the risk of lung cancer.
I'm going to talk about this more in a
minute.  But their claim is that these companies
had secret information about low tar, light and
filtered cigarettes, and what you're going to see
is that's not true either.
Finally, you know, Mr. Foote said this
morning that ultralight cigarettes are not any
safer than other cigarettes, and that's the type
of cigarette that Mrs. Gore smoked from the late
1980s until her death.  Mr. Foote said ultralight
cigarettes are not safer, but his witness,
Dr. Proctor, said when I cross examined him -- he
said, yes, ultralight cigarettes are safer,
because it's too hard to compensate and get as
much tar and nicotine from the ultralight
cigarette.  It's just too hard to do it, and that
they do reduce the risk of lung cancer.
Mr. Foote is the only person who said that
ultralights are not safer.  His own witness,
Dr. Proctor, said they are. 3550
So let me talk about their claim that we
supposedly concealed information for people on
low tar and light cigarettes.  I'd submit to you
this is completely irrelevant, because they have
to show that there was some statement after
May 1982 that Mrs. Gore relied upon, which they
haven't.  But since they went down this path,
let's talk about what they talk about.
This is one of their exhibits, and what they
showed was:  "As we know, all too often the
smoker who switches to a hi-fi cigarette winds up
smoking more units in order to provide himself
with the same delivery he had before."
In other words, that some people when they
switch from a higher tar and nicotine to a lower
tar and nicotine, smoke more cigarettes and
thereby defeat the lower tar.
Remember, I asked Dr. Proctor about this
exact thing and Dr. Proctor said that was well
known.  That was well known.  The Surgeon General
talked about it in 1964 and that it's common
sense.  Yes, if you switch from a high anything,
a high alcohol beer to a low alcohol beer and you
drink more beer, you're going to cut -- you're
going to cut into or eliminate the reduction in 3551
alcohol per beer.
If you go from smoking 20 cigarettes to
smoking 30 low tar cigarettes, yes, you're going
to undermine the reduction in tar because you're
smoking more cigarettes.
They want to make this seem like it's some
secret, but their own expert said it's common
sense and everybody knew it.
Here's the other Philip Morris document that
they've shown you a few times and I've shown you
a different part.  This is supposed to be the big
secret that Philip Morris had that they didn't
share with anybody.  This is the nine-person
study that we talked about with Dr. Proctor.
Nine people; five Marlboro red smokers, four
Marlboro Lights smokers.  In the study they
forced them to switch cigarettes.
This is the part that plaintiff's counsel
showed you, without showing you the rest of the
document.  It says:  "In effect, the Marlboro 85
smokers in this study did not achieve any
reduction in smoke intake by smoking a cigarette,
Marlboro Lights, normally considered lower in
delivery."
What you're about to see -- this is an 3552
example of what is going on with a lot of these
documents, where they're going from page one to
page 18 to page 35 and showing you little
snippets, but not the rest.  You saw this when
Dr. Proctor testified.  
But yeah, when the five people were forced
to switch as part of the study to lower tar
cigarettes, they smoked -- they took bigger
puffs, they took faster puffs.  They smoked more
of the cigarette to get the same nicotine they
were getting before.
So these were not people who were switching
to the light cigarette for the benefit of health.
They weren't doing that.  They were just doing
that as part of the study.
What the document talks about is that the
people who switched on their own before the
study, the people who were smoking Marlboro
Lights cigarettes, actually did get less tar that
the Marlboro red smokers.  These weren't people
who were forced to switch as part of the study.
These people voluntarily chose Marlboro Lights.
It says the Marlboro 85 cigarettes were
smoked and it has the TPM -- remember total
particulate matter -- delivery was 24.7.  So 3553
they're getting 24.7 milligrams of tar, the
Marlboro red smokers.  Marlboro Lights, on the
other hand, delivered 19.6 milligrams TPM.
So even in this big secret study that they
point to of nine people, this is what they point
to.  Even in this the Marlboro Lights smokers
were getting less tar and nicotine than Marlboro
red.  And this is the type of thing when you do
look through the documents, you're going to see
things taken out of context all the time.
What they're doing when they present the
document to you is they show you one document
from one company from 1953, jump forward 20 years
to what a different company was saying, jump
backwards 10 years to what another company was
saying, to give an impression of this story they
want to tell.  But when you actually look at the
details, what you see is you see in the details
there were no secrets that the Marlboro Lights
smokers were getting less than the Marlboro red
smokers.
In case any of this matters at this point,
because there is no evidence of a statement made
after 1982, what you saw is the idea that people
may change the way they smoke their low tar 3554
cigarettes and get the same amount of tar, and
some people may do that.  That was no secret.  
It was published in 1976 in Consumer
Reports.  You have, "Less Tar and Nicotine" at
the top, "is that good?"  I went through that
with Dr. Proctor.  This is just for lay people,
written in terms that ordinary folks can
understand, and Dr. Proctor said this is a good
example of the information that was out there,
but it appeared in many other places.
So there were no secrets on this, and what
the plaintiffs are showing you is not
representative of what's actually in these
documents.
Last point on this is Mrs. Gore, not only
does there have to be a statement -- which they
haven't proven -- not only do they have to prove
that Mrs. Gore relied and heard the statement --
which they haven't done -- she actually has to
have relied to her detriment, and what that means
is that Mrs. Gore, based on whatever statement is
not in evidence, that Mrs. Gore made some
decision that if she had made a different
decision, she would not have gotten sick from
smoking. 3555
In other words, they have to prove to you
that she relied on something these companies said
and decided to keep smoking instead of quitting.
They claim -- I guess their claim is that
Mrs. Gore somehow, if she had not switched to
filtered cigarettes, was going to quit smoking.
Of course that's not true, because Mrs. Gore
never switched to filtered cigarettes.  She
always smoked filtered cigarettes.  And there's
no evidence that Mrs. Gore, when she switched to
light or ultralight cigarettes, if she hadn't
switched, was going to quit.
So even if Mrs. Gore saw advertising and
decided to choose her brand of cigarettes based
on the advertising -- which again, hasn't been
proven -- she was still going to smoke no matter
what and still would have wound up in the same
position.  So she never relied to her detriment
on anything, even to stuff they claim.  There's
no evidence she was going to quit smoking if she
hadn't smoked those other kinds of cigarettes.
So this summarizes what I've been talking
about and that is, the answer to this question is
"no" for a variety of reasons, but the simplest
one is that there's just no evidence of any 3556
statement after that date that Mrs. Gore heard or
relied upon.  So I'd ask that you check "no" on
both of those for both defendants.
Verdict form question four is very similar.
Again, Mr. Foote didn't mention this, but it
requires proof that Mrs. Gore reasonably relied
to her detriment on a statement or misinformation
after that May 1982 date.  For the same reasons I
just talked about, there's just no evidence of
that, of any statements, much less reliance.
There's no evidence she relied on anything
these companies said at any time, much less after
May 1982.  Again, their theory is that Mrs. Gore
relied in smoking ultralight, light, and filtered
cigarettes.  This is that so-called conspiracy
claim, and Dr. Proctor admitted that the
marketing of filtered and low tar and ultralight
cigarettes was not part of any conspiracy or
agreement.
So that's just an extra reason, along with
the whole list I gave you on that other question,
an extra reason why this one should be "no" as
well.
This is the question on allocating
responsibility, and I'm going to go through the 3557
evidence on this.  This asked you -- and again,
you only get to this question -- you don't get
here if you answer the first one "no".  You don't
get here if you answer the second one "no".  It's
only if you answer those "yes".
If you make it this far, here's what I'd ask
you to consider in terms of responsibility.
You'll see I'm going to ask you to give
Mrs. Gore, if you get that far, 100 percent of
the responsibility, and here's why.  Because
Mrs. Gore knew the entire time she smoked, she
knew the dangers of smoking.  She knew that if
she smoked, she could get cancer.
Mrs. Gore enjoyed smoking and did not want
to quit smoking.  She didn't try to quit until
after she got sick.
Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds, to have some
fault, we have to have done something that
actually had some impact on Mrs. Gore, and
there's no evidence that Mrs. Gore was ever
influenced in any of her smoking decisions by
anything R.J. Reynolds or Philip Morris was
saying or doing.
Again, Mrs. Gore never viewed it.  There's
no evidence that she viewed Philip Morris or R.J. 3558
Reynolds as having some responsibility for her
smoking.
I went through these slides earlier.  You've
already seen this evidence of what Mrs. Gore knew
and when she knew it.  But I'd submit to you on
this question of responsibility, everything you
need to know comes from Mr. Gore himself in his
deposition and his comments on who bore
responsibility for Mrs. Gore's choices and
decisions she made in life.
"Q:  Do you know whether any of the doctors
your wife ever worked for encouraged her to quit
smoking?
"A:  I know every doctor she went to told
her to quit smoking.  She'd come home in a bad
mood.
"Q:  What would she say?
"A:  Didn't have to say it; the way she
acted, you know.
"Q:  Did she tell you the doctors had --
"A:  Quick short answers, you know.  Just
like I smacked my momma.  You know, she just -- I
mean, she'd just go off.
"Q:  What would she say when she would go
off? 3559
"A:  Well, she'd just tell me that that was
none of my business and she was going to do what
she was going to do and I wasn't going to change
her mind.  
"And that's right, you can't change
anybody's mind.  I mean, you can talk till you're
blue in the face, but they have to -- you know,
they have to be responsible for their actions.
"Q:  And during that 15-year period did you
ever ask Mrs. Gore to stop smoking around you,
since you had quit?
"A:  I didn't ask her to stop smoking.  I
knew she was going to smoke.  I just know I just
made up my mind that I was going to do it for me,
and you know, no matter what she did.
"It didn't bother me.  I got to the point
where if she wanted to kill herself, let her do
it.
"Q:  Was her decision -- was whether or not
to continue smoking something that was up to your
wife, it was her decision?
"A:  Yeah.
"Q:  And your decision to quit smoking for
15 years, that was your decision?
"A:  Yeah.  You can't make somebody do 3560
something, you know.  You can lead them to the
water, but you can't make them drink.
"Q:  You mentioned that you got to the point
in your life that you started thinking if she
wanted to kill herself, let her do it, correct?
"A:  Well, I probably shouldn't have used
that term.  I just decided that her life is her
life and you can't change -- I grew up, you can't
change people's minds by sitting there and giving
an argument.
"People have a right to be individuals.
People have the right to have their own life, and
if that was what she chose to do, I came to the
realization that all the talking in the world --
if I put her in the rehab or something like that,
she'd hold it against me.  I just said that she
has a right to her own life.
"Q:  You came to appreciate over time that
Mrs. Gore had the right to make her own decisions
in her life, correct?
"A:  Yes.
"Q:  And one of those decisions was whether
or not to smoke cigarettes, correct?
"A:  Exactly.  I quit, that was -- at that
time that was my decision." 3561
As Mr. Gore himself testified, Mrs. Gore,
she had the information she needed to make her
choices that she made, and she made the choices
and lived her life the way she wanted to live.  
I'd ask you to think of this.  In what other
setting when somebody knows what they need to
know about a behavior they engage in and they
make a choice to engage in that behavior and the
behavior has consequences, good or bad, in what
other setting do we say the person is not
100 percent responsible for the choices and
decisions they make in life?
We all have the freedom to make choices.
With that freedom comes responsibility, and
Mrs. Gore made the decision she made.  She
smoked, that's what she wanted to do.  I'm not
being critical in any way.  She enjoyed it, did
not want to quit and did not try to quit.
For that, if you make it this far in the
verdict form, I ask that you put down 100 percent
responsibility on Mrs. Gore.  If you do that,
this is another spot where the case is over.
It's done.  It's a defense verdict.
Now we get to the amount of damages, and
they're talking about seven and a half million 3562
dollars.  I'd like to just a second point out
that there's no claim, there's no evidence in
this case, they're not seeking medical bills for
Mrs. Gore for her cancer or the carotid artery
disease.  They're not asking for money for
medical bills or economic damages.  They want all
this money for pain and suffering.
So let me see if I can put this in context,
because we might read newspapers and see a lot of
big numbers out there.
They're asking for, if you round up,
$8 million.  If you had a job and you earned
$50,000 a year, it would take you 20 years to get
just $1 million.  If you worked for 40 years at
$50 million -- or $50,000 a year, it would take
you 40 years to make $2 million.
To make the money they're asking you to
award, you would have to take your own earnings,
your father or mother's earnings at that amount,
your grandfather or grandmother's earnings at
that amount, and your great-grandfather or
great-grandmother's earnings at that amount to
total up 160 years of working at $50,000 a year
to make the money they're asking you to award.
I'd submit to you they're asking for an 3563
absurd amount of money in this case, an absurd
amount of money, and that the real award in this
case, if you get that far, should be zero; that
you should not award Mr. Gore any money.
And when you're considering all the issues
in this case, they said, well, Mr. Gore, you
don't look at his fault.  But you can look at his
truthfulness and you can weigh his truthfulness
on every issue in this case, including damages,
and I want to go through some of the things
Mr. Gore told you and told us, and what you saw
were simply not true.  
What you see is that Mr. Gore is somebody
who's willing to say anything if he wants
something from somebody else.  If he wants free
wine glasses from Philip Morris, he said he's
willing to sign and say he's a smoker when he's
not.  If he wants a chainsaw, he says he wasn't a
smoker, but he's willing to say he was.  
He's asking for $8 million, which I'm sure
he wants a lot, and he told you a lot of things
that you know are not true.
The first was this story that you heard on
direct and he kept at it on cross-examination for
a little bit, about Mrs. Gore believing her 3564
ultralight cigarettes were safe around the time
her father died because of television advertising
she was seeing for ultralight cigarettes.
Mr. Gore kept telling that story until we
showed the stipulation, which showed there was no
television advertising for ultralights or any
other cigarettes in the 1990s or '80s or 1970s.
They were off the air.  And Mr. Gore admitted --
when I asked him, he admitted the story he told
on direct about this advertising in the 1990s.
He admitted it was not true.
One of you picked up on this.  Mr. Gore, as
part of the story of how he was suffering after
his wife's death, said he had never had problems
with alcohol, and one of you picked up the fact
that the medical records said that he had had
problems with alcohol before.  
Again, it's not a big issue in the case, but
what it shows you is that when Mr. Gore wants
something, he'll say whatever he thinks will
benefit him, even if it's right there out in the
open that it's not true from his own medical
records.
When I cross examined Mr. Gore, he said
Mrs. Gore did not believe the warnings on her 3565
packs, and then I showed him what he said under
oath in August where he said she always believed
the warnings on her packs.
He said Mrs. Gore saw advertisements for
light cigarettes in the 1960s, and it was pointed
out, first of all, that he said he didn't have a
television in the 1960s and then it was pointed
out to him that light cigarettes had not been
invented in the 1960s.
He said Mrs. Gore thought her cigarettes
were safe and then on cross-examination admitted
that she knew her cigarettes were hurting her.  
You also heard from Dr. Burns that Mrs. Gore
never told her doctors that, "Oh, I don't need to
quit smoking.  I'm smoking these light
cigarettes.  They're safe."  And none of the
children heard their mother say, "I think light
cigarettes are safe or ultralights are safe."
She knew they could cause cancer, because that's
what the warnings said on the pack.
I showed the Readers Digest article from
1964 to Dr. Proctor and Dr. Burns, and then
Mr. Gore comes in and says, "Oh, we didn't have a
subscription back then.  She wouldn't have seen
it."  Then what you learned is in August under 3566
oath he testified they had a subscription to
Readers Digest the entire time they were married,
including 1964.
Mr. Gore said Mrs. Gore did not know that
smoking was bad for her health when they first
met, and then on cross examination you heard in
August he testified under oath that Mrs. Gore
knew the dangers of smoking ever since he met her
back in 1962 or 1963.  
He said when he was here, he said
Mrs. Gore's doctors didn't talk to her about the
dangers of smoking in the 1960s.  Then you
learned that in August under oath he said
Mrs. Gore's doctors did talk to her about her
smoking in the 1960s.
Same thing about when she was pregnant in
1963.  He denied that the doctors talked to her
in 1963.  Then you learned under oath in August
he had said the doctors did talk to her in 1963.
I want to pause on this one, because this in
many ways is the least significant issue in this
case, right, because Mr. Gore is not the
cigarette smoker in this case.  So whether or not
he started smoking again after Mrs. Gore passed
away really is of no significance, except this 3567
tells you all you need to know about whether
Mr. Gore's testimony can be trusted, and here's
why.
Because Mr. Gore told this story along with
he starting drinking after Mrs. Gore died saying
he never had any alcohol problems, he said, and
"I was so upset I went back to smoking
cigarettes.  I had quit for 15 years and never
smoked a single cigarette until my wife passed
away."
What you learned when we cross examined
him -- and I'm going to show you some of the
documents -- is that Mr. Gore was smoking
cigarettes before she passed away.  
For example, this was a form he sent in to
Philip Morris, January 13th, 1999.  He admitted
it's his signature down here.  We typed that up,
it's hard to read.  His wife's alive and he
certifies with his signature that he is a smoker
21 years of age or older.
Mr. Gore said, "Well, I just filled this out
because I wanted free stuff."  If mr. Gore is
willing to lie for a couple of wine glasses, what
is he willing to do for $8 million or whatever
they're asking for? 3568
There's other evidence to substantiate that
he was smoking at this point in time.  For
example, yesterday in the deposition you heard
Mr. Gore say that he and Mrs. Gore used the patch
together and they both got blisters from it.
They both tried to quit at the same time using
the patch and both got blisters from it.  
The patch was only available starting in the
1990s, when he says he wasn't smoking, and he
couldn't have only used it with Mrs. Gore before
she passed away.  So if that story was true, that
he was using the patch with Mrs. Gore and they
both got blisters, if that was true it means he
was smoking in the 1990s, not started back after
his wife died.
In addition, you heard the story that he
told in his deposition that he was dipping in
Vegas and spitting in all the beautiful flowers
and killing them and Mrs. Gore caught him and she
said, "I'd rather you smoke than dip," and he
says he went back to smoking.  So that's his
testimony on that.  
What you're going to see is that this is
another record he sent to Philip Morris, April 2,
1996, when he says he wasn't smoking.  It says, 3569
"By signing below" -- and he said that's his
signature -- "By signing below I certify that I
am a cigarette smoker 21 years of age or older."
So Mr. Gore is telling Philip Morris he is a
cigarette smoker, please send me coupons so I can
get a chainsaw or wine glass or something else.  
And here's another one.  Same thing, 1996,
when he told you he was not smoking.  He tells
Philip Morris -- he signs and certifies that he
is a cigarette smoker.
So when was Mr. Gore lying?  Was he lying on
the forms he sent to Philip Morris or when he
testified here?  When was he not being truthful?
He says it was when he was filling out the forms
and he was just being untruthful because he
wanted free stuff.
This is the form Mr. Gore fills out after
Mrs. Gore passes away, when he goes to the
trouble to photocopy his driver's license, fill
out the form and send it in so he can get free
stuff.  He admits he's smoking at this point in
time, right?  So he has no need to lie on the
form, because he's already smoking at this point
in time.  
What does he say about how long have you 3570
smoked this brand?  He fills out that he's
smoking Marlboro.  He has a choice, less than one
year.  If he really did start smoking again after
Mrs. Gore passed away, then the answer would be
less than one year, because it was nine months
ago.  No reason to lie about this, because he is
a cigarette smoker.
But Mr. Gore checks one to two years,
meaning he did go back to smoking before
Mrs. Gore passed away; just like his testimony
about the patch would tell you, just like that
Las Vegas story would tell you.
So the point of this is not -- it's not
whether Mr. Gore was smoking or not after she
passed away.  It's whether you can believe his
testimony.
All the evidence is Mr. Gore was smoking
before she passed away, so why would he come in
here and tell you under oath, why would he tell
you that he went back to cigarette smoking for
the first year after 15 years, after she passed
away?  He told you that because he's hopeful that
it will show that he was so upset that you should
award him a lot of money.
Mr. Gore, the evidence is, will say anything 3571
at any time if he thinks it will help him get
something, and that's what he did sitting in that
witness stand here.  And for that reason and all
the other reasons I've talked about, if you get
this far in the verdict form, nothing.  Mr. Gore
should get nothing.
The last thing I want to talk about and then
Mr. Geise is going to talk to you, is the last
question on punitive damages.
Punitive damages.  They want you to come
back after your deliberations for another day or
two so they can ask you to give Mr. Gore even
more money than they've already asked for.  And
that money goes to Mr. Gore, it would go to
Mr. Gore.
Now, this has to be proven by a higher
standard, clear and convincing evidence.  You'll
see that in the jury instruction.  
I'd submit to you there's not any evidence
supporting any of their claims in this case under
the lower standard of proof, the greater weight
of the evidence.  There is absolutely no clear
and convincing evidence of anything in this case
that would justify an award of punitive damages.
There's no reason why anybody should have to come 3572
back for two more days, and if you get this far
in the verdict form, you check it "no".  That's
what I would ask.  Mr. Gore should not get
compensatory damages and he certainly should not
get punitive damages.
There are four different ways that your
verdict can be a defense verdict in this case,
and I'd submit to you that you can pick any one
of them and they're all justified by the evidence
in this case.
If you find that Mrs. Gore was not addicted
to cigarettes containing nicotine or even if you
find she's addicted, but find they did not prove
that addiction caused her carotid artery disease
and you check it "no", it's a defense verdict.
The case is over.
If you find that they did not prove that
Mrs. Gore's cancer started in her lung, they did
not prove that, you check it "no", it's a defense
verdict.
If you decide that Mrs. Gore is 100 percent
responsible, that's the end of the case, it's a
defense verdict.
If you decide to award Mr. Gore no damages,
if you write a zero there, if you get that far in 3573
the verdict form -- which I'd submit you should
write a zero and not get that far -- but if you
get that far and write a zero, the case is over.
Mr. Gore doesn't get damages, the case is done,
and you don't get to the punitive damages
question.
Any of these verdicts would be a verdict for
the defense.  All of these are justified by the
evidence and justified by the plaintiff's
failure, complete failure to meet their burden of
proof on any of these issues.
So I appreciate your attention.  Mr. Geise
is up next.  
Again, thank you for listening.  I did take
longer than I expected to, but I really
appreciate your being here and paying attention
to me.
Thanks a lot.


MR. GEISE:  May it please the Court,
Mr. Foote, Mr. Corr, Mr. Gore, and ladies and
gentlemen of the jury.  
Good afternoon or almost good evening at
this point.  Once again, I'm speaking third.
Once again, I'm going to try to be brief or at
least briefer than the first two presentations
you heard today, but I do want to start out by
thanking you.  As I said in opening, we couldn't
have a jury trial without a jury.  So thank you
for that.
The lawyers, we have to be here.  We choose
to do this for a living.  Mr. Gore is here, he
chose to file a lawsuit.  But you all didn't
choose any of this.  We chose you to be here.  So
thank you.
For the past three weeks now you've made
sacrifices in your daily lives, from your
personal responsibilities, from your jobs, to be
here every day to listen to the evidence, and
other than standing up when you enter or leave
there's really not much we've been able to do to
show our thanks.
Yesterday when it was raining, we couldn't 3578
even share an umbrella with one of you.  So it's
kind of a different situation.  But for
everything you've done for this jury process, for
your civic duty, for everything, I thank you on
behalf of myself and my client for what you've
done.
Now, you might recall during my opening
statement when I predicted that Reynolds would
not be a major character in the story of
Mrs. Gore's life, and that turned out to be
exactly the case.  
Now, I want to walk through some of the
evidence about that, but first, you recall
Mr. Foote said earlier today that Mrs. Gore
started smoking R.J. Reynolds cigarettes.  There
is no evidence at all to support that argument,
none.  What evidence did you hear about Mrs. Gore
smoking my client's cigarettes?
I'm going to walk through every witness you
heard.  Lynn Lilliquist, Mrs. Gore's cousin and
coworker, she came in, she didn't mention a
single Reynolds cigarette.
Sandy Yencho, Mrs. Gore's friend going all
the way back to high school, she didn't mention a
single Reynolds cigarette.   3579
Jerry Joe Schick, Mrs. Gore's high school
boyfriend, offered no mention of any brand.
Michael Tierney, Mrs. Gore's first husband,
didn't recall any brand she smoked.  
Christina Savage, one of Mr. and Mrs. Gore's
daughters, she said she had a recollection of her
mother smoking Belair sometime in the 1960s, she
didn't know the time period, and she didn't
mention Kool at all.
Kelly Welton, another daughter, came in and
had the same story as Mrs. Savage, recalled
Belair sometime in the 1960s, no mention of Kool.  
And you heard yesterday from Mary Faith
Shepherd, the third daughter who came and talked
to you.  She didn't mention any cigarette brand
at all.
Then there was Mr. Gore.  He said that
Mrs. Gore smoked Kool and Belair sometime in the
1960s, but again, he couldn't tell you how long
she smoked either of those brands.  
That's it.  That's it.  That's the entirety
of the evidence about R.J. Reynolds cigarette
smoking in this case.  That's it, eight
witnesses.  No one, no one came in and said she
started smoking with an R.J. Reynolds brand. 3580
No one came in and said she smoked an R.J.
Reynolds brand in the 1950s.  No one came in and
said she smoked an R.J. Reynolds brand when she
was 14, when she was 16, 17, 18, 19, nobody.
Nobody, there was no evidence of it.  Eight
people who knew Mrs. Gore came in and testified
either in person or by deposition, five of them
never mentioned Reynolds at all.
As I promised you in opening, Reynolds would
not be a substantial or a significant part of
Mrs. Gore's story.  Don't let Mr. Foote tell you
otherwise.  You heard the evidence.  
In opening statement I asked you to keep
your focus on Mrs. Gore and the evidence that
relates to her, and you remember I asked you then
to keep your focus on Mr. McCarter's five facts,
and you can see now why I asked you to keep your
focus on that.  You can see now after
Mr. McCarter's closing it's critically important
to focus on these key facts.
Yes, throughout the trial plaintiff's
counsel tried to take the focus off of those
facts, tried to take the focus off of Mrs. Gore.
They wanted to talk about things that had nothing
to do with her or in some cases they only wanted 3581
to give you half the story.  They would plant a
seed with you on direct examination and wait to
see if Mr. McCarter or Mr. Cruz-Alvarez or myself
would get up and show you the rest of the story
or talk about Mrs. Gore.
I want to give you just a few examples,
because frankly, it was one of the reasons I
guess I was here, to have to refute these
examples that they brought out that had nothing
to do with Mrs. Gore.
Mr. Foote showed you a Winston ad with the
Flintstones.  Do you remember that during
Dr. Proctor's direct examination?  They're just
planting a seed with you that Reynolds advertises
with cartoons on a kid's show, and that's all
they said with Dr. Proctor.  
So I had to get up.  It's one of the few
times I had to ask questions of a witness, and I
had to ask Dr. Proctor about it and I had to show
you the other side.  I actually had to show you.
I had to act it out, because Dr. Proctor didn't
show you the part I acted out for you.
You learned that the Flintstones were
originally an adult cartoon on prime time TV, not
a Saturday morning cartoon.  You learned that 3582
they were modeled after the Honeymooners, and it
aired in the evening and that the Flintstones
were cosponsored by Alka Seltzer and One A Day
vitamins, hardly targeted at kids.  
You also learned that Reynolds only
sponsored the Flintstones for that first year and
it was a few years later when the Flintstones
moved to a morning show and Reynolds never
sponsored it then.
Now, not only was there no evidence that
Mrs. Gore ever watched the Flintstones or ever
saw that ad, you learned something else.
Mrs. Gore never smoked Winston, never.  There's
no allegation of that at all.
Another example.  Dr. Proctor again showed
you a Camel ad that had a doctor in it or doctors
in it in 1949.  Again, no one ever suggested that
Mrs. Gore saw that ad.
Now, the other side of the story was that
the ad was for an unfiltered cigarette, which you
know from listening today and the last two weeks
she didn't smoke unfiltered cigarettes, and more
importantly, she never smoked Camel.
So the two ads they showed you, as
Mr. McCarter pointed out, Winston and Camel, are 3583
two brands my company makes, but two brands
Mrs. Gore never smoked.  According to their
allegations, she smoked Kool and Belair and
as you know by now, you never saw a single ad for
Kool or for Belair.  Instead they wanted you to
focus on things that had nothing to do with
Mrs. Gore.
Other times they focused on just half the
story.  Here are a couple of examples from some
of the documents that you may have seen or you
might see later this afternoon.  
1953 -- this is PT3608.  It's Claude Teague
and he does that research memo, and you probably
remember that, the plaintiff told you that he did
this research project and he found out all this
information and that Reynolds didn't make his
memo public.
But on cross examination I had to ask
Dr. Proctor and on cross examination he showed
you that document, the last three pages.
78 published articles are what Dr. Teague relied
on to write it, 78.  There was nothing in there
referring to anything that was private, anything
secret.  
Dr. Teague -- Dr. Proctor said some of those 3584
articles were hard to find.  Well, they may have
been hard to find, but you shouldn't criticize
Dr. Teague for doing a thorough job.  And the
final thing that Dr. Proctor had to admit about
that document is that there was no independent
research by Reynolds in it, none.
One other example that I didn't plan on
talking about, otherwise I would have made a
slide for it, but Mr.  Foote talked about it
again in his closing today, and this is this 1984
document.  It's PT3400, a 1984 document from
somebody named Diane Burrows and R.J. Reynolds.  
You know in 1984, that Mrs. Gore was
45 years old.  It's titled "Younger Adult
Smokers."  That's the title.  And that term is
defined in this document.  It's defined as people
18 to 24.
Now, when you go back there, if you want to
look through the whole document, look through it.
You'll see it is defined as 18 to 24 almost 200
times, 18 to 24.  So what you know is at 18 to
24, especially in 1984, every one of these people
18 to 24 is of legal age to smoke, every one of
them.  Legal anywhere in America, legal here in
Florida.   3585
You heard today in the instructions, and you
can look at them again when you deliberate, that
the making and manufacture, the sale and the
advertising of cigarettes are all legal
activities.  You can't hold somebody responsible
for a legal activity.  And that's what this
document is about, making and selling cigarettes
to people 18 to 24.
Now, they showed you two documents -- two
pages out of this and the funny thing was it came
up with Dr. Proctor, I think, and I wasn't going
to make a big deal about it, but it came up
today.
The one page, page two, that they showed you
and they had everything highlighted on it today
except for the one line that said "Repeated
Government Studies, Appendix B, have shown
that" -- so repeated government studies.  So I
thought there's no way this is the same thing.
But sure enough, Appendix B is the page they
showed you.  
But this chart they showed you, that when
people start it had the ages, 12, 13, remember
that?  Well, the interesting thing about that,
Mr. Foote said today this is a Reynolds study. 3586
This is Reynolds data.
It says, "Source:  Average of HEW data
reported in adult use of tobacco, 1970 and 1975."
HEW, the Department of Health, Education and
Welfare.  It's government data, not Reynolds
data.
Now, they talked in opening about marketing
to kids about 1951 and 1957.  That was a promise
they made to you, and they showed you a document
from 30 years later talking about adults.  And
worse, there's no evidence that Mrs. Gore smoked
a Reynolds or Philip Morris product between 1951
and 1957, none.  Every Reynolds or Philip Morris
cigarette that Mrs. Gore smoked, she smoked it as
an adult.  That's the facts in this case.
Mr. Foote talked about putting a feather on
the scale.  You remember that?  Well, they gave
you a feather.  We gave you a fact on that.  The
fact is every cigarette she smoked of these
companies was as an adult.
So why did you have to wait for cross
examination to get this full story?  Why did you
have to wait?  The answer is simple; to try to
got you mad, to get you upset, to get you to lose
the focus of these five facts, to get you to look 3587
at somebody other than Mrs. Gore for the facts
related to her case.  Because as Mr. McCarter
explained to you a little while ago, if you focus
on the facts and not on the feathers, Mr. Gore
loses in this case.
Now, Mr. McCarter walked you through the
questions on the verdict form.  I'm going to talk
about those, but I'm going to hit different
points than he hit or stress something that I
need think needs to be stressed.
On the first question he discussed the
definition of legal cause and he showed you why
she wasn't addicted, and he also showed you why
addiction would not be the but for cause of her
disease.  Even if you ignore her other risk
factors for carotid artery stenosis, the answer
with regard to legal cause and the answer to
question number one is still "no" because of this
question:
"If Mrs. Gore was not addicted, would she
have continued to smoke" -- you probably want to
see that, don't you.
"If Mrs. Gore was not addicted, would she
have continued to smoke?"  And the answer is, of
course she would have, because you heard she had 3588
no interest ever in stopping smoking through the
'50s, '60s, '70s, '80s, up until the 1990s.
For this reason alone addiction cannot be a
legal cause of her disease, because it was far
from a substantial cause for the reason that she
smoked.  So even if you decide she was addicted,
that addiction is not a legal cause.
Now, in your jury instructions you'll learn
that what legal cause is it must directly,
naturally, continuously, and substantially cause
something.  You saw that it did not.
Let's look at this.  The plaintiffs would
like you to believe, okay, if somebody is
addicted it automatically leads to injury and
there's nothing in between, nothing in between.
It's a straight shot.  
But you saw what comes in between.  You saw
what interrupts that.  You saw that addiction is
not the direct and natural and continuous
sequence, because what's in between any addiction
and any injury are Mrs. Gore's choices; her
choice to begin smoking against her father's
wishes.  You heard that her parents were dead set
against it.  Her choice to continue smoking
despite decades of warnings from her family, to 3589
continue smoking despite her doctors' advice, and
to not make an attempt to quit for decades.
When others told Mrs. Gore to make a
different choice, to choose to quit, she told
them to mind their own business and leave her
alone.
Now, although Mr. Gore respected Mrs. Gore's
choices while she was alive, now in this lawsuit
to ask for seven and a half million dollars he
doesn't want to respect her decisions.  He wants
to take her out of this picture.  He wants to
take her choices out of this.  He wants you to
ignore her decisions, he wants you to negate her
choices, but you know, she was doing what she
wanted to do.
And as she recognized, she had a right to do
it.  She had a right to smoke and she wanted to
protect her right, and that right to smoke and
her choice are what was the legal cause of any
injury she suffered as a result of smoking.
So for these additional reasons I echo
Mr. McCarter and say your answer to question
number one should be "no".
Now, I'm not going to say much about
question two, because I think Mr. McCarter 3590
covered that in detail, but I do want to stress
one instruction you received this morning; and
that said, "Smoking a defendant's cigarettes was
a legal cause of lung cancer and death if smoking
that defendant's cigarettes directly and in
natural and continuous sequence produced or
contributed substantially to producing such
injury, so that it can be reasonable be said that
but for smoking that defendant's cigarettes, the
injury would not have occurred."
Can it be said that but for Mrs. Gore's Kool
and Belair smoking, that her lung cancer would
not have occurred?  No, no one said that in this
case, not even Dr. Burns and how much he paid --
how much he was paid in this case.  
You heard all the testimony, I recapped it
for you about the lack of evidence of Mrs. Gore
using Reynolds cigarettes.  Such an insignificant
smoking history cannot contribute substantially
to any disease she got.
So this is another reason, a separate reason
that your verdict on question number two should
be "no" for R.J. Reynolds.  
So when you add up what Mr. McCarter talked
about and these other points, the answer to 3591
question one and question two for both defendants
should be a "no".
I'll spend a little bit of time on these two
questions that Mr. McCarter talked about, the
question with regard to concealment and any
agreement to conceal.
Now, there are essentially two parts to each
of these questions.  The first part is you need
to determine if information about the health
risks and addictive nature of smoking was a
secret to Mrs. Gore.  Did she have the material
information or not, and if so, you'll need to
determine if she reasonably relied on any
statement or misinformation to her detriment.
Well, here you know that the information
wasn't a secret to Mrs. Gore and you know she did
not rely on anything that Reynolds or Philip
Morris or any tobacco company said.
So the first part, were the dangers of
smoking a secret, Mr. McCarter went over all the
reasons the answer to this question with respect
to Mrs. Gore is a resounding "no".  She received
decades of information about the health risks of
smoking.
So on this first prong for questions three 3592
and four, the plaintiff cannot prove that the
material information about the health risks and
addictive nature were secrets from Mrs. Gore.
They assuredly were not, not at any time during
her smoking history and certainly not as of
May 5, 1982.
So for this reason alone the concealment
claims, questions three and four on the verdict
form must fail.  Your answer must be "no",
because the information was known to her.
There's another component to these questions
and another reason your verdict has to be "no",
and that's the issue of reasonable reliance.  
Now, another way to maybe try to explain
this is around Vero Beach there are a number of
bridges, bridges going over to Orchid Island, and
that's really what needs to happen in this
courtroom.  The plaintiff needs to build a
bridge.  But in the courtroom they need to build
a bridge from a statement or misinformation from
Reynolds or Philip Morris and then some action by
Mrs. Gore on the other side.  They have to build
that bridge.  They just can't put separate things
out there.  They have to connect it, and for
purposes of the verdict form this bridge is 3593
called legal cause, this bridge is called
reliance.  
When you look at the jury instructions
they'll say Mrs. Gore -- all of the questions on
the verdict form relate to Mrs. Gore, not some
other smoker.  They have to show that Mrs. Gore
relied to her detriment on a statement or
misinformation after May 5th, 1982, and any
reliance must be reasonable.
The plaintiff can't build that bridge, not
for Philip Morris and certainly not for Reynolds.
Not only did Mrs. Gore not rely on anything, but
any reliance wouldn't have been reasonable based
on what she knew.
Mr. McCarter talked to you about filtered
cigarettes and what was known and how they're not
going to be a basis for liability and how there
wasn't a conspiracy or agreement on that.
I want to talk about filtered cigarettes,
though.  Before Mrs. Gore picked up her first
cigarette, filtered or not, her father told her
smoking wasn't good for her.  Moreover, every
warning she received from her family and her
doctors was about a filtered cigarette, the
kinding of cigarette she was smoking.  She was 3594
told that her filtered cigarettes were another
nail in her coffin or cancer sticks.  Every
message she got referred to the filtered
cigarettes she was smoking.
Let's talk quickly about what she knew
during this period of time that she allegedly
smoked Reynolds in this 1960s.  
You heard in 1963 what Mr. Gore and her
doctors told her when she was pregnant with
Kelly.  You heard about the '64 Surgeon General's
Report.  You heard about the warnings that came
out in 1966.  You heard about what Mr. Gore and
her doctor told her in 1967 when she was pregnant
with Mary Faith.  You heard all that.  And with
all that information that she had, she didn't
even choose to try to quit, not at all.
But more importantly, during that entire
period of time she never doubted the health
risks.  She never doubted them.  She never told
anybody, "You're wrong, it's not going to cause
that."  She never said that.  And as Mary Faith
said yesterday, she never told her that one type
of cigarette was safer than a different type of
cigarette.  She just told people leave her alone
and mind their own business. 3595
Now, if there was any evidence at all that
Mrs. Gore relied on a statement or something from
a tobacco company, don't you think they would
have given that information to Dr. Proctor so
they could tell you about it?  Of course they
would have.  But they didn't, because it doesn't
exist.
Now, you heard argument today about light
cigarettes and low tar cigarettes and ultralight
cigarettes.  I'm not really going to say anything
about that.  Why?  Because those arguments don't
apply to Reynolds at all.  Mrs. Gore never smoked
a Reynolds cigarette that was a light, a low tar,
a low nicotine, or an ultralight cigarette,
never.
So these are additional reasons why the
plaintiff did not and could not prove that
Mrs. Gore reasonably relied on anything that
Reynolds or PM said or didn't say.  So for these
reasons you have to check "no" to questions three
and four.
One more reason, and that's the date May 5,
1982.  Mr. McCarter talked about the lack of
evidence after May 5, 1982.  On top of that, for
Reynolds, for my client, there's one other point.   3596
Mrs. Gore never smoked a Reynolds brand
after the 1960s, never.  More than a decade
before 1982 she stopped smoking Reynolds
products.  There can be no way that Mrs. Gore
relied on something Reynolds said or didn't say
after 1982, when she stopped using our products
over a decade before.
Mr. Foote said you don't check your common
sense when you serve on a jury and you take your
common sense back to the jury room with you.
I agree with that.  Common sense tells you
if she didn't smoke our product after 1982, she
wasn't relying on anything we said or didn't say
after 1982, and the fact in this case is she
hadn't smoked our products for over 10 years at
that point.
Now, beyond that, there was no suggestion
that Mrs. Gore was ever waiting for information
from Reynolds or Philip Morris.  She had the
information she needed.  She just wasn't
interested in quitting.  As you heard her own
doctors say and you heard her husband say she
wasn't motivated or "you can lead a horse to
water," and that sums that up.
By 1982 her husband, her children, her 3597
family, her doctor, her parents had been telling
her for decades about the material information,
about the health effects and addictive nature of
smoking.  Mrs. Gore didn't take action in
response to what they were telling her.  Is there
any reason to think she would have taken action
if she heard something else?  Of course not.
So if we look at questions three and four
again, first, because she didn't smoke an R.J.
Reynolds brand after 1982 and indeed not after
the 1960s, the answer for Reynolds on both of
these questions has to be "no".  It has to be
"no".
Moreover, because Mrs. Gore knew the
material facts about the health effects and
addictive nature of smoking at all times she was
a smoker and certainly by 1982, the answer to
questions three and four for both Philip Morris
and R.J. Reynolds must be "no".
Finally, because there's no reliance or no
legal cause or no bridge at all between anything
the company said or did and Mrs. Gore at any time
and certainly not after 1982, it's yet a third
reason that the answer to questions three and
four must be "no". 3598
Mr. McCarter talked about this allocation of
responsibility, and I'm just going to add a
couple of points on that.  One thing to keep in
mind is this responsibility question is not a
global comparison of conduct over time.  It's not
a question of whether Mrs. Gore was a nice person
or a special person.  That's not the issue, and
it's not a question of whether you think the
tobacco companies have done bad things over the
course of years.  It's a comparison of actions
that were the legal cause of her death.  It's a
very, very narrow inquiry.  
Now, you may have seen things in these
documents or statements that you don't like, that
R.J. Reynolds or Philip Morris or their people
said that you don't like and you don't agree
with, but the issue in this case is whether they
actually affected Mrs. Gore and caused her death.
If you find something you don't like is not
connected to Mrs. Gore, it can't be considered
for purposes of this comparative responsibility.
Mr. Foote asked was Mrs. Gore special.  I'm
going to ask a different question.  Was Mrs. Gore
responsible?  If Mrs. Gore had to assign
responsibility, would she accept it?  You heard 3599
nobody made decisions for Mrs. Gore, no one
could.  She believed she had a right to smoke and
didn't want anyone to take that choice or the
responsibility that comes with it away from her.
You heard that Mr. Gore -- and you saw the
video again.  He said people like his wife, who
don't want to change their minds, have to be
responsible for their own actions.
Finally you heard Mr. Gore's attorneys tell
you that they accept that Mrs. Gore is
responsible, and for those three reasons I agree
with Mr. McCarter that she's a hundred percent
responsible.
I'm not going to repeat anything.  That's
all I'm going to say about the question on
percentages and the question on damages.  
I want to talk to you for a few moments
about punitive damages, because if you get all
the way through this verdict form -- and I don't
think you should.  I think you should hit that
hard stop after question one, and if for some
reason you feel like going a little bit farther,
I think you hit the hard stop after question two,
and I think we're done.
If you move beyond that to questions three 3600
and four, there are multiple reasons the answers
have to be "no" to those questions.  But if you
do make it to the back of the verdict form,
you will have already fully compensated Mr. Gore
for his wife's death.  
Punitive damages are not about compensating
or making someone whole, they're purely about
more money for Mrs. Gore, and that's damages in
addition to those that fully compensate him.
They're damages that can only be awarded for
conduct that was a legal cause of the harms
suffered by the plaintiff.
Finally, and this is important, your
instructions told you that punitive damages
cannot be based on these findings.  Mr. Foote
talked about them, you heard them in the
instructions, you cannot use those as a basis to
find punitive damages.
As Mr. McCarter pointed out, there's a
higher level, a higher burden of proof that needs
to be met here and it's called clear and
convincing evidence.  I think when you consider
the evidence, you'll see they don't even come
close to meeting that, and I want to walk through
some of that evidence.   3601
First let's consider what Dr. Proctor told
you.  He told you that in the 1950s, when these
articles came out saying that smoking was bad,
that the companies, both Reynolds and Philip
Morris, they went to work.  They went to work
trying to identify the constituents and the
compounds that may be causing disease, or at that
time it wasn't known a cause were associated with
it.  Things like benzpyrene, you probably
remember that word in this trial.  
You heard from Dr. Proctor that Dr. Rodgman
at Reynolds was one of the first people to
identify a whole host of these constituents and
they found them in tobacco smoke in the 1950s,
and he submitted his research to the Surgeon
General's advisory committee about those
constituents.  Dr. Proctor told you that
Dr. Rodgman even gave a speech to the American
Chemical Society.
Now, Mr. Foote told you today that we didn't
share that information.  Dr. Proctor told you on
the stand that we did.
You heard about pH and you may hear about it
again when I sit down.  Dr. Proctor told you that
Reynolds identified the method to measure pH in 3602
smoke and they published the method in 1967 so
anybody could measure it if they wanted to.
You remember this document I used with
Dr. Proctor.  This is a document in 1968 from the
president of Reynolds to the head of R&D.  And
what does it say?  It says:  "In cooperation with
others, you should push the work concerning
tobacco and health.  You should prepare a plan to
foster any relationship with government personnel
in the quest for mutual understanding of facts,
ultimately to gain their cooperation in proper
research of the subject."
Then in the second point he writes:  "If
there is a safer cigarette, let's continue" --
which means the work was already going on -- "and
increase our efforts this program.  Please
prepare a plan to carry it out."
You heard how that plan was continued.  You
heard how the research continued in the 1970s and
1980s.  You heard from Dr. Proctor that Reynolds
developed cigarettes that heated instead of
burned the tobacco in cigarettes.  They were
called Premier and Eclipse.  
Now, Dr. Proctor said those were less
harmful cigarettes.  This is Dr. Proctor's
testimony in this case.  I asked him, "But they
also found that Premier reduced a number of
  3603
things?"  
He said, "Yeah, the polycyclics in
particular."
"So the cancer-causing polycyclic
hydrocarbons were actually reduced?"  
And he said "Yeah, dramatically.
"And everything else being equal, you think
both Premier and Eclipse are less harmful than
traditional cigarettes?" 
And Dr. Proctor said, "Probably, yeah."
Another point about these cigarettes is
Mr. Foote said there was this agreement that we
weren't going to make safer cigarettes, we
weren't going to market them.  
These cigarettes were on the market and
Dr. Proctor told you they weren't that popular,
but you also heard something else about those
cigarettes coming on the market and I don't know
if you remember this.  Remember that Dr. Proctor
said that despite the fact that they recognized
that Premier could be a safer cigarette, that the
Office of Smoking and Health and the Centers for
Disease Control called Premier a problem, and 3604
they had that meeting and they decided we're not
going to wait for any more research.  We're going
to initiate a war against Premier.
So Reynolds developed a product that
Dr. Proctor says is less harmful and safer and
the Office of Smoking and Health said we don't
want this on the market.
You heard about publications and Dr. Proctor
in his testimony called it distraction research.
But you heard the TIRC and CTR-funded research
that included thousands of published articles in
the peer-reviewed literature including ten from
researchers that went on to win Nobel Prizes.  
You heard from Dr. Heimann yesterday in that
video that in one year alone there were 174
articles published on smoking and health.  That's
about three a week.  
And the publications included this one from
1963.  Remember, I used this with Dr. Proctor.
Again, this is in evidence.  It's AIW-2649.  This
is 1963.  
Importantly, it says:  "This work was
supported in part by grants from the American
Cancer Society and the Tobacco Industry Research
Committee." 3605
I went through a lot of the findings in this
with Dr. Proctor, but today I'm just going to
leave you with one of the summaries and
conclusions.  "Heavy cigarette smokers thus
appear to be true addicts."
This is 1963.  This is research funded by
the Tobacco Industry Research Committee and
supported by Reynolds and Philip Morris.  This
isn't distraction research.  This is real science
that was relied on and then later cited by the
Surgeon General.  This isn't bad science and it's
not a secret that heavy cigarette smokers thus
appear to be true addicts.
When you look at the question of punitive
damages, this is not a record of wanton conduct
or disregard for human life.  This is a record of
trying to lower the risks of an inherently risky
but always lawful product.  This is a record of
trying to contribute to science and things that
were recognized by the public health community as
far back as the 1950s and 1960s, and trying to
lower the risks of an inherently risky but lawful
product shouldn't be punished or deterred.
A couple more points.  If you were upset by
CTR and TI and TIRC even existing, you heard from 3606
Dr. Proctor they don't exist anymore.  A lot of
the times when Mr. Foote or Mr. Corr would use a
document with you they would point out, "does
this say secret, does this say confidential?"
Well, Dr. Proctor talked to you about those
documents.
There's a public website with millions of
documents available.  I think he said it's the
largest online document database in the country,
the largest in the country, with over 85 million
pages.
So when this trial is over and Judge Cox
says you're released, you can do whatever
research you want on your own.  If you want to
look at every Dr. Teague document, go online and
look.  If you want to look at what Dr. Rodgman
said in the '50s and '60s, go online and look.
It's all available.
Now, looking at this information, there's no
need to punish or deter for changes that already
took place.  So if you get to this point on the
verdict form, and I don't think you should get
there, the evidence does not justify awarding
Mr. Gore more money.
So I would ask you to check "no" to question 3607
seven, if you get there, for both Philip Morris
and R.J. Reynolds.  The plaintiff has not met
that higher burden of proof.  The plaintiff has
not shown anything by clear and convincing
evidence.
At the beginning of this trial I told you
that the evidence would point towards a defense
verdict.  Now at the end of this trial it does
just that on the question of class membership,
question one.  On the question of what diseases
Mrs. Gore had and where they started and the
question on the legal cause of those diseases,
the plaintiff has failed to meet its burden of
proof.
Mrs. Gore made her own decisions throughout
her life.  She was a strong, stubborn, smart and
responsible woman who wanted to live her life the
way she wanted to live it and wasn't about to be
told otherwise.
One of her decisions was the decision to
smoke.  Mrs. Gore never saw herself as a victim
and never blamed the tobacco companies.  Don't
reward Mr. Gore by making Mrs. Gore a victim in
this lawsuit.
This is the only chance I get to speak you. 3608
As the plaintiff with the burden of proof, you
can see Mr. Foote and everybody over here are
working on things to say when I sit down.  They
worked throughout Mr. McCarter's closing, they've
been working throughout mine.
Just remember when he gets up how
Mr. McCarter and I have responded to everything
they've said through this trial, how we've
pointed back to the five key facts of this case,
how we've pointed back to the facts about
Mrs. Gore, how we've pointed back to the evidence
that you heard.  Keep these key facts in mind and
focus on the facts, not on the feathers.
Ladies and gentlemen, it's been a pleasure
to try this case in front of you.  I thank you
for your time.