         MR. MITNIK:  Good morning.  I want to again
    thank you on behalf of everybody for the sacrifices
    that you've made for this important matter that we
    need you here for, for -- and it's important to both
    sides that you be here.
         Everybody knows this is a sacrifice.  Y'all
    were good enough to say yes, I will add a day on,
    and everyone knows that's important.  It's important
    that you sacrificed, and we very deeply appreciate
    it.  But we need people like you who are summoned
    here to sit in judgment in a case in civil justice.
         This is a case -- and we went through jury
    selection to make sure we had the people that would
    come in here and didn't -- this isn't a place of
    special interest.  It's a level playing field and a
    place for justice, and we thank you deeply for your
    time.
         May it please the Court?
         THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
         MR. MITNIK:  I started out on -- whatever day
    it was, last -- when we started this -- with an
    opening statement, and I ended --
         And you can turn the PowerPoint on. And the last thing I told y'all in opening
    statement was this is a case about truth and
    consequences.
         We now are at the other end.  I was laying out
    what we anticipated proving, we're now at the other
    end talking about what has been proved.  And I hope
    that now it's clear why I said this is a case about
    truth and consequences in which these defendants
    would not tell the truth.  Not only wouldn't tell
    it, they twisted the truth beyond recognition, over
    and over and over and on purpose, and for one
    purpose:  Money.  Knowing full well the consequences
    that would follow of which one of those casualties
    was this man's wife.
         That's why we're here.  Because it is now time
    for there to be consequences for those actions.
         This has been a long road.  The Engle jury sat
    back in '94 for over a year.  Case went up to the
    Supreme Court and came back down here, where now you
    have the instructions from the Court.  And you're
    taking at the top from that Engle jury and we're
    proceeding on.
         And we're proceeding on for consequences, not
    just in part -- in large part because of what
    happened to Mary Goveia, but not just because of that, because the case expands beyond that.  Because
    we're also doing it to bring consequences to deter
    so that -- we know from the evidence that they are
    still finding ways to reach out to the teenagers and
    the youth and still selling a product unnecessarily
    that has addiction in it.  And we're hoping, through
    you in this process, this legal process, to
    encourage, through deterrence, a change in
    direction.
         Let me start with some of the fundamental
    principles and I want to walk you through some of
    the evidence and the law.
         The judge gave you what the burden is, and the
    burden is the greater weight of the evidence means
    the more persuasive and convincing force and effect
    of the entire evidence in the case.
         Now, what it does not say -- as if we were in a
    criminal case, which we are not -- is that our
    burden is creating doubt creates an out.  We do not
    have that beyond a reasonable doubt wherein creating
    doubt could create an out.
         We have this burden, which is a burden which is
    something that can be applied with common sense.  A
    burden that says what weighs more -- is the greater
    weight?  What weighs more?  What persuades me more? What, in essence, makes more sense.
         So with that proper -- and I'm going to speak
    to you later when we talk about punitive damages,
    there is a different burden with punitive damages:
    Clear and convincing evidence.  And I'm going to
    talk to you about that when we get there, but for
    now, everything up to that point in time, that's the
    burden.  Not the criminal burden of creating doubt
    creates an out, but what weighs more, what persuades
    me more, what makes more sense.
         These are undisputed facts of the case.  Plenty
    of disputes here, these aren't one or -- any of
    them.
         Cigarettes smoked by Mary Goveia were
    manufactured by defendants Philip Morris and R. J.
    Reynolds.
         Cigarettes smoked by Mary Goveia contained
    nicotine.
         Nicotine in cigarettes is addictive.
         Mary Goveia had COPD and it was caused by
    smoking cigarettes.  We're not fighting over what
    caused her death.  Did she die from smoking
    cigarettes?  Did she get COPD and die from smoking
    cigarettes?  That's not in dispute in this case.
    She did. Mary Goveia smoked cigarettes for 25 years
    before any warnings went on any packs and was deeply
    addicted.
         This is a different time and place.  This isn't
    someone who picked up cigarettes today.  And we have
    to keep -- if we do nothing else here -- it is so
    hard, like I talked to you about earlier, to keep
    that orientation to time and place.  I had a space
    in the other courtroom that I was saying that's --
    that's today and let's stay out of there unless I go
    there on purpose.  We've moved.  I'll make this our
    space.
         There will be a time when we talk about what is
    happening today with the marketing to teenagers
    today.  But the rest of the case it's not fair to be
    in there.  It's not fair to Mary Goveia; it's not
    fair to justice.  It was a different time in a
    different place.
         You saw the pictures.  It was a time when we
    had those funny-looking cars.  It was a time where
    people smoked everywhere.  It was the social norm.
    For goodness sakes, there were ashtrays in the
    OB/GYN's office with pregnant mothers smoking and
    doctors smoking.
         We -- it's utterly unfair to Mr. Goveia and to the concept of justice to apply what we know today
    in judging this case.  And I ask you to please keep
    that front and center.
         The statute of limitations defense.  You've
    heard the judge tell you -- because there was talk
    earlier, I want to make one comment, and that is
    that the statute of limitations is no longer an
    issue for your consideration, so we can put that
    aside 100 percent.  We've got other issues to deal
    with; that ain't one of them.
         All right.  The verdict form.  Class
    membership.  That is the question.
         Lawyers may pose hypothetical questions to
    frame issues in the case.  I may do it from time to
    time.  They're going to do it.  They're going to say
    the question is.  Well, we can, as lawyers, pose
    questions to say here's what I want you to focus on,
    but there's only one person in this room who decides
    what the questions are and it's Her Honor.  I don't.
    He doesn't.  He doesn't.  So when you hear the
    question is, I ask you to always keep in mind, use
    that as some kind of guide for persuasion to look at
    evidence.  That's the question, the first question,
    and only questions come from that verdict form.
         Was Mary Goveia addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so was such addiction a
    legal cause of her COPD?
         The answer to that question -- and I'm going to
    go through the evidence in just a moment -- is yes.
    The burden of proof, more persuasive, more
    convincing, what makes more sense -- was this lady
    addicted?  What's the proof to the contrary?
    Where's the evidence she wasn't?  It's overwhelming,
    but it's certainly more persuasive, more convincing,
    makes more sense, weighs more.
         Was the addiction one of the reasons that she
    smoked enough to get sick?  Was it a substantial
    contributing cause as opposed to some insubstantial
    or insignificant thing on the sideline?
         She got up first thing in the morning and had a
    cigarette every single day.  It isn't that tasty.
    All day (making inhaling and puffing noise) for 50
    years -- or how many years every day, all day, when
    there's an opportunity, and right before you put
    your head on the pillow, suck one more down, and get
    up the next morning and start it all over again with
    more.  That's not pleasure, enjoyment.  That's
    addiction.
         Does it mean addiction like it's the only thing
    going on?  No.  That's why we have law that's fair. It need not be the only thing going on.  The
    question is:  Did it contribute?  Was it a
    substantially contributing cause?  It's smoking in
    that frequency that makes no sense if you take
    addiction out of the equation.  It just doesn't add
    up without addiction.  For that much every day for
    that long to get -- to be told you got a lung
    disease -- by a doctor -- that could kill, and to
    keep smoking.  Can that be explained fairly and
    reasonably if you take addiction out of the
    equation?
         Thirty to 40 cigarettes a day.  Is it that much
    fun?
         Having oxygen on and still sneaking cigarettes
    out of ashtrays.  A nasty ashtray with butts.
    Addiction?  Do I need to say it for it to be so?
         A dignified lady by all accounts.  You heard
    from the neighbor, a nice lady.  Didn't curse.  Just
    a nice lady.  Sneaking down a hundred feet -- 300
    feet, a football field away, to bum a cigarette from
    a young man so her husband wouldn't know, and then
    walking all the way back.  That's just -- she didn't
    like it.  Yeah, she was addicted.
         Was addiction -- the second part.  Was
    addiction a legal cause of her COPD?  A.  A, right there, may be the most important little teensy word.
    It's the only one of the few words in the English,
    maybe the only -- one I guess is I.  That's only one
    letter, but, boy, does it carry importance in this
    courtroom.  A legal cause, not the legal cause.  A.
    Was it one of the reasons she smoked enough to get
    sick?  One of the reasons?  Take it out of the
    equation, and does it make sense?  Does any of this
    add up?
         There is -- all of the evidence was that she
    was intelligent and strong willed.  There's no
    evidence that she lost her mind.  How do you explain
    this if you take addiction out?
         Sole cause?  Nobody is saying it; nobody has to
    say that.  A cause, absolutely.  I would suggest
    overwhelmingly it was, but certainly it's more
    persuasive, more persuasive.  Certainly it weighs
    more, persuades more, makes more sense.
         So that I would suggest to you the answer is
    clearly yes, which brings her into class membership.
    And before I stop, this was --
         A JUROR:  Ah, what the hell.
         MR. MITNIK:  I'm sorry.
         THE COURT:  Let me just check in.  Just by nod
    of head, are you okay? A JUROR:  Yeah.
         MR. MITNIK:  Are we all right?  Okay.
         This is just trying to show you in a
    demonstrative picture way what I've been talking
    about.  Addiction to nicotine was a legal cause in
    why she smoked enough to get sick.  We know she got
    COPD from smoking.  And was the nicotine addiction
    one of the reasons?
         The power of nicotine addiction is their secret
    sales ingredient.  This is the way it works.  Back
    then -- I would suggest today people don't realize
    it is a highly addictive drug they are ingesting
    every time they take a toke on a cigarette.  Every
    puff is a highly addictive drug they're getting.
    There's a reason they keep going out in the cold and
    the rain.  There's a reason they race off airports
    into little smoky rooms.  There's a reason they get
    up first thing in the morning and suck another one
    down.  It's because it's the perfect driving force
    for someone in the business of selling product,
    because you get on it and you get physical tolerance
    which drives you to need more to maintain the
    effects of that drug.
         And there is no governor on this one.  It's
    unlike any other addictive drug.  Any other drug -- cocaine, heroin -- any of them, you can only do so
    much.  You end up making a fool of yourself; you end
    up getting arrested; you end up getting a divorce or
    getting fired; you end up vomiting or you end up
    with a horrible hangover.  There's nothing to slow
    this one down.
         They call it lightening in a bottle, and they
    unleashed its full power through inhalation.  They
    took a product that already had some -- a drug in it
    that could be addictive that people didn't
    understand, but was it causing an epidemic of
    addiction and disease?  Because, in its natural
    state, it was too harsh to inhale and it just
    trickled up through the mucus into the mouth.  And
    people -- you would hear of cases of people saying:
    I can't give up my chewing tobacco, I can't give up
    my cigar, but not this wave of out of control,
    run-amuck addiction until they altered that product
    in laboratories to get it down in the lungs.  Less
    harsh.  Okay?  And when they got it in the lungs,
    now you got it, BAM, to the brain, and now you've
    got the kind of addiction.  When you converted --
    when people converted powder cocaine into the
    free-base form, now you've got something that will
    sell your product. But because it doesn't come with the bells and
    whistles, you don't have to go down an alley to get
    it.  You march down main street in addicted America.
    And the problem was it then triggered, from all that
    exposure after exposure after exposure, disease.  An
    epidemic of disease.
         And when they found out, what did they do about
    it?  Buried it under a pile of an entire industry
    locking arms and coming together and pouring money
    into a campaign that went on for decades to create
    enough noise and distortion that it would get tuned
    out by many, many, many millions of people,
    particularly the addicted ones who had built in, by
    addiction, denial.  And they did it full well
    knowing the consequences.  And Mary Goveia was one
    of those mass of people that were casualties of it.
         It's not just Mitnik up here talking about it.
    I heard in opening I was passionate.  This isn't --
    what the lawyers say isn't evidence.  We brought you
    evidence.  I may be stirred up about it, but the
    evidence is coming from here, not me, and I can't
    create evidence by the tone of my voice.  But it
    can't be hidden in the light of a courtroom.
         Who ain't for money?  Do we really want to tout
    cigarette smoke as a drug?  It is, of course -- this is them talking in secret.  It is, of course, but
    there are dangerous FDA implications.
         Their market would collapse without the
    chemical compound.  We'd all lose our jobs and our
    consulting fees.
         The exit gate from the market should suddenly
    open, we could be out of business almost every --
    overnight.
         That's how they talked about it in private.
    That isn't how they talked about it to Mary Goveia
    and the rest of America.  We know how they talked
    about it to everyone else.  You've seen it.
         Smoking cigarettes causes COPD and lung cancer.
         Thousands of chemical compounds, including
    cyanide, arsenic, polonium -- whatever in the world
    that is -- 210, tobacco-specific nitrosamines, over
    70 carcinogens.  45 percent of all long-term smokers
    die of a smoking-related disease.  45 percent.  And
    it isn't from tobacco.  It's from unleashing the
    inhalable form of nicotine that drives profits
    through the ceiling.
         MR. COFER:  Excuse me, Counsel.  Your Honor,
    Williams, State Farm.
         THE COURT:  Same ruling.
         MR. MITNIK:  That's what it's about:  Profits over safety.  42 -- 420,000-plus Americans die every
    year because -- there were different numbers.
    460,000 is in the Surgeon General general report;
    Dr. Burns talked about 420-plus.  Depending on the
    exact time you've got different estimates.
         460 -- or let's say 450,000 Americans every
    year.  Right now.  Right now.
         Time out.  Now we can talk about now.  Right
    now.  And they're not dying from that nice American
    product out in the field called tobacco.  We never
    had this before they turned it into the inhalable
    form of nicotine through chemicals and alterations.
         And it doesn't have to be that way.  They can
    make tobacco without nicotine.  They can take the
    levels down to where it's not addictive.  They just
    won't because that's wherein the money lies.
         This is the Surgeon General's report, 2010 --
    2010, right?
         MR. PRYSOCK:  Yes, sir.
         MR. MITNIK:  This is the Surgeon General of the
    United States of America:  Highly addictive drug.
    Addiction keeps people smoking.
         Is it a legal cause -- a cause of why she
    smoked so much?  The Surgeon General thinks so.  He
    didn't speak it directly to her.  He doesn't know her.  But he's talking about this drug, and her
    actions tell you what you need to know about whether
    it had the impact on her that i does on so many.
         Not everyone.  Some people are fortunate.
    People that smoke less, people that smoke four or
    five cigarettes a day, they avoid it.  They may not
    get addicted.  Their chances go much lower than some
    people who get higher.  Some people can smoke more
    and be addicted but really not struggle that bad.
    This isn't an all come, all react the same.
         But for the vast majority, when they smoke
    enough, particularly when they start as teenagers
    while their mind is still developing and getting
    hardwired, their chances of having a life-long
    struggle to break free and falling short and ending
    up dying from it are high.  And that's classically
    who Mary Goveia was.
         Additives and chemicals have helped make them
    more addictive.
         That's not just us saying it.
         Filtered, low tar, or light:  Every bit as
    addictive and are no safer.
         You heard evidence in this courtroom lots of
    people today don't know that about lights.  Mary
    Goveia sure didn't know it in a different time and place when she switched to filters, because what's a
    filter do but take the bad stuff out and purify it.
         Boy, you're really addicted.  The idea of
    quitting is overwhelming.  Here.  Do this instead.
         What do they -- what's Mary Goveia got to do
    with what they did?  There you go.
         And then when they get further down the line
    with this conspiracy of theirs in this -- this
    concealment of the truth behind the wall of
    confusion on purpose, more people are trying,
    profits are being affected, sales are being
    affected, public health hasn't given up.
         So what do they do?  Lights.  You don't need to
    quit, switch.  What's lights?  Less tar, less
    nicotine.  Safer.
         What's that got a lick to do with Mary Goveia?
    Why are they in the courtroom with her?  She didn't
    switch to lights.  No, she switched to lights.
         Do you think this had an impact on Mary Goveia?
         By the way, Mary Goveia can't come in this
    courtroom and tell you.  She's not allowed.  It's
    not possible.  But actions speak louder than words.
    Her actions can speak for her, and her actions of
    smoking when the conspiracy hit and the only logical
    thing was to fervently start trying to break free had the truth been admitted.
         So it wasn't some big controversial noise with
    a bunch of scientists that can't agree on nothing.
    It's an admitted fact by the manufacturer.  It's not
    a hot news story with microphones for 50 years when
    someone says cigarettes cause cancer.  It's dead
    news.  No one would show up.  It's old news.  Stale.
    If it had been stale news because the jury wasn't --
    still remember that statement:  The jury was still
    out.  It wasn't.  It was only out because they made
    it so on purpose, knowing it not to be true.
         What were her actions?  What were her actions?
    Actions speak louder than words.  Her actions were
    plow full speed ahead.  Again, no evidence that she
    lost her mind, so why?
         And if they'd come out and said, It's true.
    Our products cause lung disease, COPD, cancer, no
    question about it, rather than, We got the best and
    the brightest scientists in the whole world looking
    for it; and we don't believe it's there, but if we
    ever find it, by golly we'll take it out or take
    them off the shelf.  So in the meantime, go on
    enjoying it -- to the addicted smokers.  It's your
    choice.
         That's what they told the world.  The logical reaction, if it worked on you, would be to not start
    just with a burning desire to try, try until you get
    off and just keep it up.  Not hit or miss.
         If it didn't work, that's what you'd see.
    That's not what we saw with Mary Goveia.  We didn't
    see the try, try, try.  Like millions of others, it
    worked to a T.  The master plan worked.  People
    weren't trying to quit.  Millions weren't.  Some
    were.  For goodness sake.  You've heard the number
    of over that 50-year period like a million a year
    quit, but that was like 2 percent.  The rest of them
    weren't because it worked.
         Is it just a big coincidence?  Her actions
    happened to be exactly as designed, to be precisely
    what you would expect if she was under the impact or
    the influence of it.
         And then switched to filters and then switched
    to lights.  She followed their plan as if they said,
    We're going to draw this up, and I want you to give
    an example so we can, in the boardroom, see this is
    how we hope it works.  They could just invite Mary
    Goveia.
         But, of course, it's got nothing to do with
    her.  Why?  Because she didn't see The Frank
    Statement, and she ain't here to say what show she watched.
         Well, the law doesn't require that she see a
    show or The Frank Statement.  It doesn't require it.
         The instructions talk about inferences.  You
    can -- and your common sense.  Sometimes actions
    speak louder than words and sometimes circumstantial
    evidence is more powerful than direct evidence.
         Direct evidence is when someone says this is
    what I saw or did.  Circumstantial is looking at
    what the circumstances and what the actions were and
    saying what makes more sense?  I'll give you an
    example.
         When I was younger and had all my hair, my
    daughter was young and she wasn't supposed to drink
    Coca-Cola before she went to bed because she'd get
    all wired up and wouldn't sleep.  I heard her
    rattling -- but she loved to drink Coca-Cola before
    she went to bed.  I heard her rattling around in the
    refrigerator.  I'm out on the dining room table,
    working.  And I hear her, and I think she's getting
    in the coke.  I just hollered, I didn't get up, I
    probably should have just got up, and I said,
    Jennifer, you're not getting in that coke, are you?
         No, daddy.
         Okay.  I probably headed her off at the pass is what I thought.  Then I hear boom.  What in the
    world?  Coming around the corner there is a big
    two-liter thing of Coca-Cola on the ground spewing
    everywhere.  She's got a little nightie on her with
    Coca-Cola on her.  She's holding the glass with ice,
    and it's foaming over.
         And I asked a dumb question, seeking the direct
    answer.  I said, Did you get into that coke?
         And here was the direct evidence in return:
    No.
         But the circumstantial evidence was
    overwhelming, and the circumstantial evidence in
    this courtroom is overwhelming:  They got Coca-Cola
    all over them.
         So when you hear she didn't -- she can't come
    in the courtroom and say I saw The Frank Statement
    or this show, look at her actions and the
    circumstances and see if they make sense otherwise.
         And if the sensible explanation is this thing
    probably worked on her because it was a mass
    wallpaper, you heard, effect, where it wasn't cane
    pole fishing.  They were not going door to door
    going (knocking noise), Mary Goveia, come out, we
    want to tell you what our pitch is.  They had too
    many customers to do it that way. Their aim was way higher.  They went for the
    information flow of the United States of America to
    create where if -- if you lived through that period,
    you lived through the controversy.  There wasn't any
    controversy; they made it all up.  The controversy
    lowers the threat level.  Controversy makes it not
    memorable.  It makes it forgettable.  It makes it
    unimportant.  It saps the strength of the truth.
         They weren't cane pole fishing.  They were
    casting a vast net.  And it's no excuse to somebody
    caught in the net to say, Well, you didn't see it
    coming.  You didn't see the worm on the hook.
         What we know is she ended up on the deck with
    the haul gasping for air.
         Have we proven reliance under the case law that
    I will get to you in a while?  And based on the
    proper burden -- not a criminal burden creating
    doubt creates an out, on a civil burden what weighs
    more?  What persuades me more?  What makes more
    sense?  Yes, we have.
         Addiction versus choice.  You're going to hear
    choice.  I want to pause for a minute before I talk
    about choice.
         I talked to you about it in opening.  You've
    now seen the evidence.  They used choice out in the field to sew the seeds of denial.
         While they're denying addiction and not coming
    clean about they're really in the business of
    selling an addictive drug, as they call it
    themselves in their own secret documents that
    weren't shown to Mary Goveia or the public, they
    considered it an addictive drug.  But their
    mantra -- and you saw it in the scare tactic
    document and others:  -- it's all just a matter of
    choice.  You just enjoy it.
         And that gave people the comfort.  They didn't
    know they were taking an addictive drug, but they
    didn't want to say, Gosh, I just can't quit.  That
    sounds weak.  But you can say proudly:  I just enjoy
    it.  This is my choice.
         And it armed the denial that comes with
    addiction to the teeth, and they did that on
    purpose.
         It would be like going to AA meetings.  The
    corporations all getting together and agreeing:  Run
    around the country as best we can and tell people
    when they raise their hand in an AA meeting:  My
    name is and I'm an alcoholic, or an alcohol and
    narcotics anonymous:  My name is and I'm addicted.
         They say, shh, sit down.  You're not addicted. It's just your own personal choice and you enjoy it.
         Oh, yeah.  That's what they did.  We're here
    for consequences.  They did it to her.
         We can't continue -- we can't defend continued
    smoking as free choice if the person was addicted.
         This is them behind the scenes, worried the
    word addiction was -- what they knew to be true was
    going to get out and it was going to have an effect
    they didn't like.
         Two -- this is the Surgeon General of the
    United States America:  Two factors refute smoking
    as a matter of free choice.  Most smokers start
    smoking as teenagers and then become addicted.
         Refuted as matter of free choice.
         Now, let me pause there.  Nobody is saying that
    she doesn't bear some responsibility.  We told you
    from the beginning when we were jury selecting, we
    told you in opening, and the judge has told you and
    I'm going to tell you again:  On behalf of Mary
    Goveia, Mr. Goveia has accepted some responsibility
    on her part.  That's fair.
         But under these facts, when you look at what
    she was doing as a little girl when she started not
    knowing any of this stuff we've heard in this
    courtroom, when she went through the heart of that conspiracy, not knowing any of the stuff we've
    learned in this courtroom, when she switched to
    filters, believing it was safer like so many did,
    and switched to lights believing it was safer like
    so many did, and the way it was designed.  And it
    was a sham.  It was a filter fraud.  Lights were a
    trick.
         And she did all those things.  And then deeply
    addicted, way down in the addiction cycle, she's
    struggling, cutting back.  Does that free her for
    her choices as a heavily addicted person?  No.  But
    those choices were constrained and effected.  They
    were not natural choices the way someone naturally
    makes a choice to say this thing's killing me and I
    can just put it down.  I'll just put it down.
         Now, compare it to the choices that they made.
    Now, compare it to the choices they made.
         These weren't addicted choices.  These weren't
    a child's choices.  They weren't choices living
    under a storm of misinformation and deception.
    These weren't choices made to believe that a product
    was safer than it really wasn't, unknowingly.  These
    were intentional choices behind the boardroom made
    by an industry, and particularly these two
    defendants, for one reason only:  To make money. Knowing it was going to have the effect of spurring
    this epidemic on.
         So we're going to compare the choices.
         But does she share in some responsibility?
    Yes.
         And any of these exhibits up here, if anyone's
    interested, those are the actual exhibit numbers on
    the top after EX 153 and they will be in evidence.
         Legal cause.  Legal cause need not be the sole
    cause if it directly and naturally -- you can read
    it.  You don't need me to stand here and read it.
         The part I want to point out:  Contributes
    substantially to producing such loss.
         Did the addiction play an important role, or
    was it just some irrelevant sideshow?  If she was
    not addicted to nicotine, would she have smoked that
    much?  Common sense.  Common sense.
         Yes, she is a member of this class.
         And I want to -- on this -- because it's going
    to come up again, let me just cover it now.  On this
    contributing cause, you will see the words but for:
    but for so and so.  And then each time you see that,
    you will see:  Need not be the sole cause so long as
    it contributes.  And I suggest that you use but for
    and not add the rest of the instruction in the definition.  It would be like saying lightening and
    stop it, and it could be a lightening bug or a
    lightening bolt.  So if we're going to do it, let's
    do it in context.
         The need not be the sole cause will be there
    with every but for.
         Brands that she smoked.
         And her early brands:  R. J. Reynolds -- the
    Lucky Strikes, the Camel.  Now, let me stop there.
         They have told you, and I expect they will tell
    you again:  Nobody knows what her first brand was.
    They don't.  Due to age and because that
    generation -- they called it the greatest
    generation -- they came up through the heart of
    this.  They came up out of the Great Depression and
    through -- before this conspiracy and when everybody
    was smoking.  The doctors and the policemen and the
    parents and everybody was smoking.  If you didn't
    smoke, you were the odd-man or odd-woman out.
         They say, You can't show what you started on.
    Well, due to age and due to the losses of that
    generation to this disease from this product, we
    don't have a list of family members or neighbors to
    come talk.
         But that's no obstacle to do it justice. You're not going to get an instruction where you got
    to know what her first brand was before John Goveia
    met her.  But what we do know is she was a daily
    regular smoker when he first met her at age 16.  And
    her early brands included Camel -- and primarily
    Camel and Lucky Strikes.  That's R. J. Reynolds.
         That's a teenager.
         She smoked those filtered brands.  Look at
    whose they are.  That's the evidence.  That's the
    evidence in the case.
         Now, is the evidence on this day she smoked
    this brand and then on the 12th of January of 1972
    she changed?  No.  That's not the way it works.  Who
    in the world could remember that?
         But the evidence is here in a reasonable
    fashion.  The only way it could be reasonably
    presented.  And that's what her brands were:  Philip
    Morris, R. J. Reynolds.  Filtered then went to
    lights.  Philip Morris, R. J. Reynolds.  Clearly the
    evidence -- and what's the evidence to the contrary?
    Where's the evidence she didn't smoke them?  I'm not
    suggesting they have to prove anything, but that's
    the evidence.  There isn't any evidence to the
    contrary.  She smoked them.
         And it matters.  You talk about causation.  You talk about addiction causing harm.  Look -- this is
    just a demonstrative to show the difference.  If
    someone is smoking a pack a month, just a social
    smoker, goes out on the weekends, that's how much
    they have on the left.
         Now look at the wall of exposures that you get
    if someone is a pack-and-a-half-a-day smoker.  Look
    at the number of hits over a 50-plus-year exposure.
    It's 2 and a half percent less.  Yes.  That's where
    the disease came from.
         It's also where the money came from.  Because,
    remember -- I'm not going to put the graph up again,
    but you saw that sales just taking off.
         Dr. Burns told you they created a market that
    didn't exist.  This isn't just fighting from one
    person to another:  I want your smokers.  They
    created an inhalable nicotine market through
    marketing and advertising.  They made it happen.
         And the sales went wild.  And when the cancer
    scare hit in '53, they came down and they got
    together and said:  What are we going to do?
         And what they decided to do is:  Everything in
    our power to make sure our customers keep smoking so
    our sales go up.  The heck with what happens to
    their health. That wall of cigarettes is what kills people,
    and that wall of cigarettes is what creates all of
    the money.  And that wall from addiction is part of
    why we're here hoping to deter, because you can make
    cigarettes without it.  There's a business out there
    booming with cigars.
         Turn it, from their own documents, from a need
    cigarette to a true-choice cigarette with a little
    encouragement.
         Evidence of addiction.  She began as a young
    smoker when the neuroplasticity of the brain -- you
    heard the evidence about how profound that is on
    most smokers.  And the statistics is if they don't
    get them young, they don't get them at all.  There's
    the reason.  As they mature and get older, if the
    brain hasn't been permanently altered from catching
    it during the developmental stages, many will get
    free.  But when you're that deeply addicted, this is
    the kind of situation you see:  Exactly this
    horrible story that was told here in this courtroom.
         She smoked a pack -- a pack-and-a-half to two
    packs, 30 to 40 cigarettes a day.  That's unnatural
    if you take addiction out of the equation.
         Inhaled 7 to 10 hits of nicotine each day.
    Smoked as soon as she woke up in the morning.  Would smoke in the middle of the night if she woke up.  In
    the middle of the night, mouth dry, I got to put
    cigarette smoke in my lungs.  Addicted?
         Smoke all the time, every room in the house,
    during different -- whatever she was doing, kept her
    cigarettes on the bedside.
         More evidence of addiction.  I'm not going to
    just sit and read all these things.
         Her withdrawals were severe.  A nice lady by
    all accounts would become unbearable when she didn't
    have the nicotine that she needed.
         Yes.  I suggest to you this evidence that is
    just and fair answer.
         Engle findings.  Once she is a class member,
    those findings come, boom, down into this courtroom,
    and they cannot be contested or denied.
         Unreasonably dangerous product.  Material
    information not otherwise known or available.
         I want to stop for a moment because we share
    each other's -- these PowerPoints with each other,
    and I know one of them they're going to -- R. J.
    Reynolds is going to put up says cannot conceal
    something otherwise available.  You're going to see
    this.  And when you see it, that's what it looks
    like.  I just ask you to remember what that says. Material information not -- in -- remember the judge
    told you what material is:  Something that would be
    important enough to consider important in making a
    decision.
         Material information not otherwise known or
    available.  That is the undisputable facts found in
    Engle that apply here.  So I don't know where it was
    otherwise available, but that's not what the law of
    the case is.
         And they intentionally got together and
    concealed it for the purpose that people would rely
    on it to their detriment.
         In order to be the legal cause of the product:
    Several claims.  There's the product and the
    negligence claim.  The product defect, which was
    unreasonable and dangerous.  A product that has
    addiction in it.
         More dangerous than it needs to be and ought to
    be.
         There's the need not be the sole cause.
         On the concealment and agreement, we have this
    extra language about, quote, reliance.  But, again,
    rely upon any statement made -- any statements made
    which concealed or omitted material facts about
    effects of cigarettes or addictive nature.  And then you have the same language about contributes
    substantially.  Material fact is one which is of
    such importance that Ms. Goveia would consider the
    same as significant in her decision making.
         Well, they hid this stuff.  So we're talking
    about was the stuff hidden something that would have
    been important in making decisions?
         This stuff?  We're selling a drug that addicts
    and kills.  We've gotten together to hide it on
    purpose.  Lights don't work a lick.  Filters don't
    work at all.  That wouldn't be important?
         Applying common sense.  It's all just a big
    coincidence that she followed the master plan to a
    T?
         One other thing.  They talk about, well, you
    start smoking because a family member smoked or a
    peer, a friend that smoked.  Peers and parents.  And
    that's why people smoke.  It's got nothing to do
    with our advertising.
         Here's a question.  This is one of those
    questions you wouldn't find in the verdict form, but
    I'm giving this just to frame the thought process:
    Why did parents and the peers start sucking hot
    smoke from a lit stick deep into their lungs?
         People go around a fire with smoke going -- if you're barbecuing, the first thing you do is
    (motioning).  I'm not talking about blowing smoke
    rings or chewing.  I'm talk about sucking into your
    taste buds and at the tongue.
         Everybody just spontaneously decided to start
    sucking all these cigarettes down into their lungs
    and they had nothing to do with it?  They were so
    effective in all of those ads in even promoting and
    teaching how to inhale, altered the product through
    additives, in flue curing, in blending, and all the
    things they did to make it softer so it could get it
    in the lungs, and then they demonstrated it though
    all those ads and suddenly everybody started doing
    it.  And they'd say, Well, you only do it because of
    your parents.
         They engrained into the fabric of society.  It
    was a right of passage to adulthood.  One of the
    tragedies of how that worked is once you injected it
    into the family it would spread like a virus.  In
    that time and place, it was not unusual at all.  It
    was the norm for everyone in the family to be
    smoking.  But they say, if asked, I did it because
    of the parents or I did it because of my friends.
    I'm sure that's a truthful answer.
         But what role did all that advertising and generating and creating to where that was such a
    thing that no one could do without it?
         And it spread through the families like a
    virus.  And that's -- that's not a reason they don't
    face consequences; it's a reason they ought to face
    them.  The fact that all those family members.
         Just like Mary Goveia.  Tobacco companies
    created a new market, engraved it in the fabric, and
    it became a social norm, and what did Mary Goveia
    do?  Precisely the way they planned it.
         Millions of smokers started out as adolescent
    smokers as the industry targeted the teens to fill
    the void.  As replacement smokers -- their word; not
    mine -- replacement smokers for the people who were
    dying prematurely.  Millions of them started as
    adolescents just like Mary Goveia.
         Actions speak louder than words.  There's your
    reliance evidence.  There's your legal cause
    evidence that these instructions from Engle do apply
    to her.
         Smokers most commonly switch brands to the
    leading brands as they were advertised more
    frequently and gained popularity.  Just like Mary
    Goveia.  Smoking the major brands as they became
    popular, that's where she would land.  Is that just a big coincidence?  Common sense.
         A majority of smokers fell prey to the filter
    fraud in the '50s, just like Mary Goveia.  All just
    a big coincidence?  Let's apply common sense.
         Many smokers based on advertisements switched
    to mentholated cigarettes to help smooth their
    throat when they had colds.  Just a coincidence?
    All just a big coincidence.
         Many smokers were fooled by the illusion of
    safety created by lights, and switched rather than
    trying to quit or trying more and harder to quit.
    Just like guess who?  Is that all just a big
    coincidence?
         Most smokers were unaware that the cigarettes
    they were smoking were no better and quite possibly
    could be worse than the full-flavored ones when they
    switched.  Just like Mary Goveia.
         Cigarette smokers were unaware that cigarette
    companies had gamed the system as to the lights, and
    what they were doing is trick the system so they
    could market it as lights.
         Mary Goveia thought they were safer.  She
    didn't know what was going on.
         Most smokers are unaware that a cigarette has
    been engineered for addiction.  They don't know that ammonia, flavor, and flue curing -- all these things
    made them more inhalable and, consequently, more
    addictive and dangerous.  Mary Goveia didn't know.
         Big coincidence?  This is evidence showing --
    I'm trying to pile all this evidence up so you can
    see on the reliance of this case and on the legal
    causation, once Engle comes in we have met our
    burden over and over.  Each of these are evidence
    meeting the burden.  We don't have to meet it a
    hundred times.  We meet it once and we've met it,
    but this is over and over proof.
         Smokers had no idea that these companies were
    up to behind closed doors and manipulating
    information environment and the truth.
         Absolutely no evidence Mary Goveia had any idea
    what they were up to behind closed doors.
         95 percent of daily smokers who try, fail to
    overcome the powerfully addictive effects of
    nicotine.
         Like who?  All just a big coincidence?
         Millions.  Millions.  And one of the
    instructions you got from the Court is you can
    consider not just the harm to Mary Goveia but the
    harm to others in determining whether punitive
    damages are warranted in this case. MR. COFER:  Objection, Your Honor.  Williams,
    State Farm.
         THE COURT:  Same ruling.
         MR. MITNIK:  Millions were caught in the very
    same web of deceit that she was.  Is that just a
    coincidence she's one of them?
         Just -- these are some of those pictures we
    showed you, just to help orient to the time and the
    place.
         This case is about Mary Goveia, but it is
    also -- now, I've talked about Mary Goveia.
    Everyone said, Well, we didn't hear about Mary
    Goveia.  I've been talking about Mary Goveia and
    used up dang near an hour.  Now we're switching to
    talk about the punitive damage phase and the other
    people affected.
         MR. COFER:  Your Honor, same objection.
    Williams, State Farm with respect to the
    demonstrative that's on the screen as well as to
    others.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Overruled.
         MR. MITNIK:  Cigarettes responsible for 443-
    deaths -- remember, I told you that number's a
    little different here and there in the evidence, but
    the point doesn't change -- accounts for one in five deaths in America.
         These are the early manipulations in the first
    cigarettes, so there's no mistake about it.  When
    Mary Goveia picked up those cigarettes and when she
    met John Goveia and was already a regular smoker,
    they already had all of these manipulations in it
    that were done on purpose for inhalability, which
    released the full power of this nicotine addiction.
         Created a new market where one didn't exist.
    You saw all these ads.
         Inhaling.  Do you inhale?  You can't help
    inhaling, but do you inhale?  Gosh, it's just a big
    coincidence that everybody started smoking -- oh,
    sucking smoke in their lungs.  It just happened.  It
    was just a freak thing of nature.
         (A video clip was played as follows:)
         Shall we just have a cigarette on it?
         Yes.
         What cigarette do you smoke?  You'll be
    interested to know how the doctors of America
    answered that question.  Tens of thousands of
    doctors, doctors in all parts of the country in
    every state of the union, doctors in every branch of
    medicine were asked:  What cigarette do you smoke?
         Do you inhale?  Then you're better off smoking Philip Morris, and here's how you can prove it.
    Light up a Philip Morris, take a puff, get a good --
         Don't miss the fun of smoking.  Don't miss the
    fun of smoking.  Mildness is a pleasure with Pall
    Mall.
         Don't miss the fun of smoking . . .
         Settle back and have a full-flavored smoke.
    Settle back -- settle back -- with a Marlboro.
         Let's take a Winston break.
         That's it.  Winston is the one filtered
    cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack.
    Winston's got that filter blend.
         Yeah, Fred.
         I tell you, Pearl, Winston is good smoking.
    Sure wish you could taste it.
         I am tasting it, Granny.
         (The video clip was ended.)
         MR. MITNIK:  Targeted teens.  You don't have to
    take my word for it.  We're going to take their word
    for it.  You can see it with your own eyes.
         Does advertising work?  This is a longer clip.
    I'm not playing this whole clip again, but I want to
    play a short part of it to make the point about
    people don't realize how advertising works it's
    indirect.  But, boy, did it work on America and Mary Goveia.
         (A video clip was played as follows:)
         Television advertising of cigarettes ended in
    the U.S. in 1971.  But Marlboro made a smooth
    transition to print and outdoor advertising.  This
    successful transition was largely due to the depth
    of the Marlboro country idea.
         Over the years, Marlboro smokers have
    recognized the quality of Marlboro and its
    leadership decision resulting in continued growth.
         In 1955, Marlboro sales in the United States
    were a modest 6 billion.  However, within only one
    year, volume nearly tripled, and Marlboro sales to
    smokers took off domestically.
         Marlboro is far and away the leader in the
    cigarette industry, and the trend is continually
    upward.
         In 1990, Marlboro sold more than 344 billion
    cigarettes worldwide.
         Marlboro is marketed in more than 150 nations
    and territories, making it the most widely
    distributed consumer-packaged goods product in the
    world.
         As early as 1954, Philip Morris's management
    recognized the potential of marketing a filtered cigarette.  In much the same manner, line extensions
    such as Marlboro Lights have taken advantage of
    changing tastes and attitudes of smokers to build
    the brand.
         Marlboro was among the first to introduce a
    lights line extension, and this kind of aggressive
    marketing has paid off, as Marlboro Lights has grown
    to become a significant part of the Marlboro
    business.
         (The video clip was ended.)
         MR. MITNIK:  Taken advantage of.  Their own
    words.  And bragging on the success of it.
         Is it all just a big coincidence that Mary
    Goveia switched rather than quit to Marlboro Lights?
    It sure is what they wanted to happen, and it did
    happen.
         Targeting teens.  We went through these ads.
    They're going back into evidence with you.  They
    will be back in evidence with you.  You can look at
    them yourself.
         Remember the one over on the left over here?
    Be happy, go Lucky.  And that -- you can't see it
    from there, but I'm sure y'all remember it.  She's
    holding a prom invitation in her hand.
         Replacement smokers.  These are their marketing practices at the time Mary was young.
         School days are here.  Popular to students.
    Lining up the students as consumers.
         Young-adult smokers have been a critical factor
    in the growth and decline of every major brand
    company over the last 50 years.  That's 1984.  You
    can do the math.  That's right when she was smoking
    as a kid.
         All just a big coincidence, or do they belong
    here and are we right to pursue the consequences?
         Replacement smokers.  Here's some more.
         Induce a presmoker or nonsmoker --
         THE COURT:  You're at an hour.
         MR. MITNIK:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         -- to become a smoker or nonsmoker to become a
    habituated smoker.  That was their aim.  Did it
    work?  Is there causation in this case?
         Thousands -- some -- excuse me -- some thoughts
    about new brands for the youth market:
    Realistically, if our company is to survive and
    prosper over the long term, we must get our share of
    the youth market.
         And remember, you saw the document where they
    were talking about youth, and then they switched it
    to young adults.  Young adults was the code, but we saw in the documents who it really was.  It was
    teenagers.
         More of these documents.  We just cherry pick a
    document.  They're increasing.  They're fighting
    amongst themselves.  These two, R. J. Reynolds and
    Philip Morris, are trying to figure out how to get
    those kids from each other.
         14 to 24.  There's the real one.  That's their
    source.  They don't have another fishing pond.  It
    doesn't work once they grow up.
         Here's the one on the right:  Primarily to
    13-to-24-year-old male Marlboro smokers.
         Is that -- right here in Florida.  Does that
    sound like young adults?
         Many youngsters consider cigarette smoking to
    be an acceptable and socially desirable activity.
    Because the health dangers of cigarette smoking are
    not brought home to them in an effective and
    meaningful way, many teenagers take up the smoking
    habit.
         That's the Federal Trade Commission of the
    United States of America.
         We're in the business of selling nicotine.
    We're in the business of selling nicotine, an
    addictive drug, effective in the release of stress mechanics.
         Remember stress mechanic.  Let me just stop for
    a moment.  I was going to tell you this later, but
    we're going to see some more how much time they
    spent on stress.  I suspect you're going to hear in
    defense that she smoked for stress.  It has nothing
    to do with nicotine; it's stress.  It's not
    nicotine; it's stress.  It's not nicotine.
         Stress is an essential ingredient in life, and
    it is an essential ingredient, you will see from
    their documents, that they studied extensively
    because it is one of the entire picture of
    addiction.
         Addiction comes from a drug that serves
    something, some purpose, to the person using the
    addictive drug, and one of the primary purposes is
    the relief of stress.  That's drug driven.  When you
    see stress in someone smoking in stress, that's
    evidence of addiction, not evidence of some
    alternative explanation.
         In designing any cigarette -- you can read
    these.
         These are just what we -- what we now know.
    I'm going to move in the box.  What we now know:  9
    out of 10 smokers start by 18.  99 percent start by 26 or they don't become -- have started by.  2,500
    youth and young adults become regular smokers.
         This isn't ancient history.  That's why I'm in
    the box.  This is today.  This is the Surgeon
    General report 2012:  At least a third of
    replacement smokers will die early from smoking.
         Young people start smoking -- when they start
    smoking, the more likely they would become addicted
    to nicotine and the more heavily addicted they will
    be.  Many teens who start smoking plan to quit
    smoking after a few years but find out too late how
    powerfully addictive nicotine is.
         For many years tobacco companies paid movie
    studios to have their product in movies.  Young
    people imitate behaviors they see.
         These kids believe -- stay in the box.  These
    kids believe today, and now I hear it's bad.
    There's no way to hide that.  But you can hide the
    power of nicotine addiction and make it sound like
    sparkling water or something.  So they think they're
    going to put it down and now you get them going.
    And most of them that think they're going to put it
    down, end up dragging oxygen tanks around.
         We need consequences.
         I'm told I need to move along time-wise. That's the Plaza Hotel.  Just a picture of the
    Plaza Hotel in 1953 when the conspiracy was hatched
    right there.  Hill & Knowlton.
         This is -- they knew about the -- that it was
    causing the disease.  Make no mistake about it; they
    knew it.
         I'm going to show you in just a minute the Hill
    & Knowlton document in 1953 that led into the
    conspiracy in which they said, Wouldn't it be
    wonderful if we could be the first to make a
    cancer-free cigarette.
         How in the world can they say they didn't know
    it caused cancer when they're saying, Gosh, I wish
    we could come up with what?  A cancer free
    cigarette.  They knew.  They knew.
         And here's what they planned.  Their own
    scientists, fortunately can't break.  Wonderful if
    we could come up with the first cancer-free
    cigarette.  But then they were telling the world, We
    don't know they cause cancer.
         Scientists -- let the scientists do the
    worrying.  Go on and enjoy your life.
         This document, Exhibit 62, will be in evidence.
    It's a very interesting document.
         One cigarette less a day, that would be maybe 40 billion.  That's where their mind is.
         They came and linked their arms and came
    together.  That's an important fact.
         I do have to pause one moment here.
         They're going to tell you how, Gosh, everybody
    knew at the turn of the century that these things
    were killing people.  What's the news?
         Well, what are they panicking for and linking
    arms if everybody knew?  Did the cigarette companies
    miss that class?
         The Frank Statement.  You saw it.  They went
    public to everybody.  Started the beginning of
    effecting the high level they aimed for of the
    information environment so that you had to have live
    in a cave not to know there was at least a
    controversy going on so that it wouldn't be sticking
    and be memorable to people years later because they
    muddied it up so much.
         Confusion and doubt.  We've been through these.
    I'm not going to stay long on these.
         These are their internal documents.  They set
    up these front organizations.  An industry shield.
    CTR was set up as a front.  That's them talking
    about it.
         20 years, single most important strategy was this brilliantly conceived holding strategy.  Well,
    while they were holding, people were dying.
    Including Mary Goveia.
         They weren't telling the truth.
         They know about the carcinogens and they know
    you can't filter it out, but they're reporting to
    the Surgeon General after they promised in the -- in
    The Frank Statement how they were going to cooperate
    with public health.  Here they are misleading public
    health.
         And attacking public health.  Saying what
    they're telling people -- saying it loud with big
    megaphones:  It's a gross insult to scientific
    community to suggest these things would hurt you.
         No, play it.
         (A video clip was played as follows:)
         It was suspect from the start.  HEW Secretary
    Califano launched his antismoking campaign a year
    ago with all the zeal of a reformed sinner.
         And now, in an apparent attempt to bring some
    science to the side of his new evangelism, the
    former three-pack-a-day secretary told the Surgeon
    General, Prepare a new report.
         It's issuance and internal HEW memo said, and I
    quote, Would be a media event, close quote. Turning a significant health question into a
    publicity stunt is an insult to serious science.
         America beware if Joe Califano ever gives up
    drinking or other pleasure pursuits, even the most
    intimate.
         (The video clip was ended.)
         MR. MITNIK:  That's -- remember they said that
    they were going to cooperate with public health.
    That's what they were doing.  And remember the
    documents prove they knew it really was doing
    exactly what the Surgeon General was trying to say,
    and they bragged in their internal documents how
    they got out in front of it and beat it to the
    punch.
         Look at all the microphones.  If everybody knew
    at the turn of the century, why is the media on
    there covering them talking about addiction or
    disease?  Why is it a hot story?
         It's breaking news because people didn't know.
         And there's a huge difference between knowing
    and hearing.  It's night and day.  Particularly with
    addicted smokers in denial.
         There's them bragging about jumping -- getting
    out in front of it, and then here's the mass of
    their efforts.  This wasn't just a little drop in the bucket that they were doing by pooling all their
    money from all of those other companies and these
    two defendants to fund this conspiracy to conceive
    this web of deceit.
         Our four speakers covered a quarter of million
    miles logged and nearly 800 appearances and put in
    300 hours on the air.
         You saw some of what was on the air.  You saw
    the scare tactic document where they go youth,
    youth, youth, youth.
         Here's who's scared.  They're scared that
    people are going to be deterred from smoking when
    the Surgeon General tried to warn them it was as
    addictive as heroin.  And it is.  The likelihood of
    getting addicted is higher than other drugs.  You
    heard it from Dr. Henningfield.  It is.  They wanted
    to diminish that and sugarcoat it down and mock it
    and trivialize it.  Why?  For goodness sake, you
    might actually deter some kids and lose some money.
         They were steering clear of scientific
    discovery.  These documents are in evidence.  They
    want the subjects to be avoided, attempting to
    relate human disease to smoking.  They don't want
    their people -- their scientists they promised were
    going to do this investigation looking into anything that was actually relevant to protecting the
    customers.  Just busy work or something.  Maybe even
    great research but not on addiction and disease.
         Doubt and confusion.  Doubt is our product.
         That's them talking.  Obviously the word is
    confusion.
         Psychological crutch.  To give a
    self-rationalization to keep smoking.
         That's them talking.  Guess who didn't get to
    read these?  Mary Goveia.
         Did they conceal things that would have been
    important to her?
         Therefore proves deterrence -- excuse me --
    proves reliance?  Absolutely.
         Hardball victims of cigarette smoking.  This is
    the industry's public relations sham.  Too, our
    position constitutes -- continues to mislead the
    public with a wink.  Unabashedly behind the scenes
    thinking what they were up to.
         But if this committee had not been formed, the
    cigarette industry now would be in a deplorable
    position.  The TIRC has been a successful defense
    operation.
         We're -- we are subject to the charge and may
    be subject to finding that we are making false and misleading statements.
         There they are in 1968 saying, in black and
    white, that they're anticipating they might get
    caught and they might be subject to a finding that
    they were making false and misleading statements.
    And it didn't deter them at all.  Full speed ahead.
         Does there need to be consequences?  Yes.
         Doubt is our product.
         For goodness sake.
         These are cumulative.  They are not as long as
    the originals.
         (A video clip was played as follows:)
         We want to be the detective just as much as the
    Surgeon General or the AMA.  We'll cooperate in
    every way.
         Well, obviously a filter takes out certain tar
    and nicotine.  I don't think the industry admits
    there are any bad elements.  If there are bad
    elements, through our laboratories, through the
    Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts of
    God and luck, we hope we may find them.  And if they
    are found, they will be removed.
         We do talk to the question of whether or not
    cigarettes are hazardous.  We do not believe that
    cigarettes are hazardous.  We don't accept that. Because when, as and if, any ingredient in cigarette
    smoke is identified as being injurious to human
    health, we are confident that we can eliminate that
    ingredient.
         You believe that cigarettes are safe?  Have
    they been proved to be safe, Mr. Cullman?
         I believe they have not been proved to be
    unsafe.
         And I concluded from that report that it's true
    that babies born of women who smoke are smaller, but
    they're just as healthy as the babies born from
    women who do not smoke.
         (The video clip was ended.)
         MR. MITNIK:  That's what the public was hearing
    and that message would domino effect out to the
    public.  It's group dynamics.  It's trickle down.
    You say it enough and you say it all over, it's what
    someone growing up in that era and smoking that air
    is impacted by without seeing a single one of these
    directly, because Mary Goveia is not here to say she
    looked at them.  But the circumstantial evidence:
    Actions speak louder than words.  Was she influenced
    by all of this?  Think about it.
         (A video clip was played as follows:)
         Take the controversy about cigarettes.  In the 91st Congress a house committee heard testimony from
    leading experts on smoking and health.
         The record shows that many of the country's
    most respected doctors openly challenged
    anticigarette claims.
         And I have to disagree with you in that we
    don't know what causes the illness that have been
    attributed to cigarette smoking.
         Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer?  Yes
    or no.
         (The video clip was ended.)
         MR. MITNIK:  I'm just pointing out the bottom,
    that last one, was in '83; this one is in '84.
    Because on the verdict for you saw, there is a
    breakdown of before '83 and after '84.  So I'm
    providing you the evidence so when you go back and
    deliberate, we got the dates so you can see.  This
    thing didn't stop in '83.  They continued to do
    things upon which common sense tells us Mary Goveia
    would have been influenced by and relied upon after
    '83.  So I ask you -- the one before and look at the
    dates.
         (A video clip was played as follows:)
         And I have to disagree with you in that we
    don't know what causes the illness that has been attributed to cigarette smoking.
         Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer?  Yes
    or no.
         It is not known whether cigarettes cause
    cancer.
         All right, sir.
         It has not been casually established.
         Cigarette smoking -- no causal relationship
    between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
         Despite all the research to date, there has
    been no causal link established.  The jury has not
    come in.
         It may not be harmful.  We're not convinced.
         It may be or it may not be.  We don't know.
         Do cigarettes cause cancer?
         I don't know if they do or not.
         I'm not in a position to give you an answer.
         The medical experts agree that smoking causes
    emphysema.  Do you agree?
         It may.
         Okay.  They agree that smoking causes lung
    cancer.  Do you agree?
         It may.
         Do you know whether it does?
         I do not. Yes, I may be convinced.  We don't know what
    causes cancer in general right now, so I think that
    we may find out what causes cancer and we may find
    out some relationship which is yet to be proven.
         (The video clip was ended.)
         MR. MITNIK:  They didn't know.  They didn't
    know.  That was their position.  You know otherwise.
    Consequences for doing that, to create doubt and
    confusion, fabricated and made up, knowing better,
    and they were the only ones creating the
    controversy.  Nobody else was.  It was all them.
         We went through the reliance facts.  Let me
    just do it quickly here.
         She started smoking Camels and Lucky Strikes,
    the top advertised brands.
         She switched to filters when they came out.
         She smoked Kools when she had the sore throat.
    She switched to lights when it was promoted as a
    safe alternative rather than a nonstop quitting
    effort.
         Marlboro and Marlboro Lights were the most
    heavily advertised and most successful in history,
    and she switched to their brands.  Is there reliance
    before and after '83?  Yes, there is.
         Mary Goveia's daughter said she smoked lights because they were better for you.  They had less tar
    and nicotine.
         Defendants continued to advertise cigarettes as
    lights the entire time Mary was alive and all the
    way until 2009, and she didn't have the benefit from
    what Dr. Henningfield shared with you.
         These were the manipulations when the lights
    come about and later on.  More manipulations.  All
    the way down to smoke molecules being engineered to
    get deeper into the lungs for one purpose:  Make
    them more likely to get addicted.
         They controlled the levels of nicotine
    precisely.  It wasn't by accident.  They say so.
         They increase the pH, messing with the pH to
    get nicotine kick and ammoniation.
         It's the sine qua non.  It's the heart and soul
    of the product they're selling.  The addiction
    they're selling.
         Manipulating -- here's another one that was
    very telling.  They figured out -- you got one brand
    looking at the other.  You got R. J. Reynolds
    looking at Philip Morris, and they're saying, My
    goodness.  This one product, this Marlboro is
    selling so good it just took off.  And they figure
    out why:  They're using ammonia.  Look above when they figure it out.  Nobody else had ammonia but the
    Marlboro.  Everybody jumped on.  Why?  Because of
    the free nicotine, which is like free-basing, and it
    helps addiction and guess what else?  Sales.
         And it shows how the sales were taking off when
    they figured out the free nicotine and the, quote,
    code word kick.
         Tobacco industry misled the public about safety
    of filters.  Illusion of filtration.
         Too to under -- Surgeon General.  It as a tool
    to undermine the prevention and cessation.  The
    illusion of filtration is the internal secret
    document of the cigarette industry.
         Smokers of filtered cigarette was getting just
    as much nicotine and tar as he would have gotten
    from a regular brand.
         The industry does not believe there are any bad
    elements.  If there are, they're going to just take
    them out.
         Here's our triple, quadruple, quintuplet filter
    capable of removing whatever constituents of smoke
    is currently suspect.  That's how they were plotting
    and playing behind the scenes.
         Dr. Henningfield and Dr. Burns talking about
    the light sham.  Defendants allowed public health officials to believe lights were safer even when
    they knew they were not.
         They were tricking those, in multiple ways, the
    FTC machines, until they brought them down and said
    no more.
         They continued to market lights 2009, 10 years
    after Mary Goveia's death.  Public health scientists
    did not learn these defendants were gaming until the
    internal documents came out and, Dr. Henningfield's
    own words, were bamboozled, and the FTC concluded
    that they would no longer be a smoke screen for
    tobacco company's shameful marketing practices.
         These are opportunities along the way.  Every
    time they could have made forks in the road, they
    could have made a corporate choice to do the right
    thing and did just the opposite, over and over and
    over.
         Let me back up.
         Annual advertising budget for Mary Goveia, in
    evidence at Exhibit 111, they spent a billion
    dollars a year, the industry, on advertising.  A
    billion a year.  If you take just 1 percent of that
    and were to say would 1 percent of it have reached
    Mary Goveia, 1 percent, it would be $10 million
    spent.  If it was half of 1 percent reached Mary Goveia, it would be $5 million in a year spent.  Was
    she subjected to and influenced and affected with
    those kind of numbers?  5 million is a half a
    percent, 10 million is 1 percent.  If she just
    bumped up against a small percentage, would she have
    been impacted by all that advertising?  When you
    look at all the ways she changed and tracked the
    popular brands and moved along the way, yes, there's
    reliance.
         Damages.  You shall consider certain elements
    of damage.  And the judge -- you have them and the
    judge read them to you.  And they're really -- they
    break into two major categories:  The loss of
    companionship and the mental pain and suffering.
    Companionship is the aloneness.  The aloneness of
    not having that person.
         Mental pain and suffering is not just the
    loneliness and aloneness, but the grieving and the
    things that he had to go through both watching her
    die and then going on dying.
         And we have to look at it under the
    circumstances.  We cannot just put this in a vacuum.
    The circumstance in which she died, where he had to
    see her tethered, tethered to the oxygen tank.
    Where he had to go through the frustrations, the frustrations of his wife after seeing Dr. Fakih and
    trying to get her to stop, and her weaning back but
    her sneaking off and smoking, and having to go down
    and talk to the neighbor not to give her any more
    cigarettes.  And having watched her.  You heard
    Dr. Burns talk about the straws going from -- to --
    to watching that.
         The frustration of it.  To have her not able to
    break free from this.  He's now learned this thing
    has caused this horrible thing to my treasured wife,
    my soul mate.  And he can't get it off of her.  Like
    an intruder in the home he couldn't protect his wife
    from.  That's part of the -- part of the totality of
    the circumstances.
         And knowing now what he knows about what was
    going on and the effect that has on his grieving, to
    know what was really going on behind the scenes by
    these defendants.
         So we have to weigh and assess his loss under
    those circumstances not any other circumstances.
    The totality of those circumstances.  A man that
    came up out of what they called the greatest
    generation.  A man who came up and left school to go
    work coming out of the Great Depression.  A man who
    volunteered to go into the armed forces in World War II and was trained on special projects and
    stormed the beaches of Normandy and got special
    accommodations of valor from the French government.
         They call it the greatest generation.  There
    were great sacrifices made.
         He came home, back to his sweetheart, the girl
    he saw in that factory for the first time and went,
    That's the prettiest girl I ever saw in my life.
         He came back.  He came back and visited and
    surprised her like something out of the movies at
    the factory.  And then got back and carried the
    romance on until he could work two jobs and earn
    enough money he felt responsible enough they could
    get married and they got married.  They had
    children.  And he worked to the bone two jobs a day
    to support his family.
         And then, finally, after all that hard work and
    the time that keeps you away from your spouse,
    working to one goal:  We're going to get to a point
    of retirement and they came down here to Florida to
    spend those years together.  All those years
    required to be apart working two jobs, now we can be
    together.
         And how did they act?  They were inseparable.
    They were together all the time. And how is he now, having watched the way his
    wife died and cut short that time?  They were, but
    for this, healthy.  You can look and see this is a
    vibrant man at 88.  His wife by all accounts had no
    health problems until this came up.  Lots of years
    together to enjoy this time, and suddenly this
    horrible disease comes into the picture and death
    comes into the picture and then knowledge about what
    was going on.  Those are the circumstances that we
    have to weigh and assess this under.
         And I would suggest under the circumstances and
    the facts of this case that the starting point of
    the discussion about what is fair and just for what
    was taken from him, and what the totality of the
    circumstances are, would be $5 million.
         And if you did the math and you took just those
    two separate categories -- and it says you shall
    consider the certain elements, plural -- if you took
    just two of those and took that over 20 years,
    that's about $15 an hour for those two categories.
         There's Mary Goveia.  These pictures are in
    evidence.  Mary and John.  Mary and John and the
    grand kids.  Part of the pleasure of a grandfather
    is to watch his grand -- his wife with the
    grandchildren.  Granddaddies love their kids, but there ain't nothing like a grandma.  She -- he
    watched his wife again with those grandchildren, and
    taking that pride and joy of seeing those kids and
    her together.
         That's Mary Goveia and John.
         And I don't want to be hokey and have that fade
    away, but I know of no other way to make the point.
    That space is gone and they played a significant
    role, these two defendants, in that outcome.  A
    significant role in that outcome.  And there ought
    to be, ought to be consequences.
         Reckless.  This is -- now I'm moving to the
    punitive damages part of it where we're asking you
    to please return a verdict that says that not only,
    yes, yes, yes through these questions on the verdict
    form, but then we go to:  Were punitive damages
    warranted?
         Was there clear and convincing evidence?  I'm
    going to talk to you about that.
         Reckless disregard for human life.  An entire
    lack of care.  Conscious indifference to the
    consequences.  Reckless disregard for the safety and
    welfare of the public.  Reckless indifference to the
    rights of others.  Intentional violation of those
    rights. Goodness sake.  Is this case not about that?
    If it's not about that, it's not about.
         Clear and convincing evidence is -- and there's
    the whole instruction.  Take it all.  But I
    highlighted the part that seems to make more common
    sense in the application in this case.
         If you have a firm belief or conviction about
    the matters that they did these things:  Conscious
    disregard, reckless disregard for the health,
    welfare, and rights of the public.  And if they did
    and you have a firm belief, which this evidence I
    would suggest reaches no other conclusion, then the
    answer to that final question are punitive damages
    warranted is yes.  And we ask you that you answer
    that question yes, and then we'll have a -- one more
    day to make this all count to try to bring forth
    change through deterrence and punishment.  One more
    day.  No more.
         And you can consider harms suffered by other
    persons in assessing the reprehensibility of the
    wrongness of what they did.
         I'm going to skip this for the sake of -- all
    right.  I'm going to hit this quick.  I'm being told
    I'm running out of time, but go anyway, so bear with
    me. This is in evidence.  This is the summary of
    Philip Morris.  Their own summaries in literature.
    Either their own research, their own comments -- and
    occasionally some outside literature they're talking
    about, but most of it is their own.  And it's years
    of it.  And it is so telling.  While they were out
    saying it's not addictive and while they were out
    saying nobody knows if it's really bad for you, this
    is them talking.
         The need cigarette.  The vast majority of
    cigarette smoke is very difficult to quit.
         We know.  Defense counsel for Philip Morris
    told you in opening statement -- and what he says
    isn't evidence, but it's not disputed.  They said it
    in opening statement, that of those millions of
    people that did quit -- and the much bigger number
    were unable, but the ones that did, the vast
    majority were addicted.
         We think that most smokers can be considered
    nicotine seekers.  This is how they're talking about
    it.  All summarizing one document.
         Pharmaceutical needs.  Increased awareness of
    the deleterious, deleterious -- bad -- increased
    presence of deleterious substance in smoke may
    dissuade smokers from smoking, but there is strong evidence, in quotes, that's their quote, strong
    evidence that she -- that they will -- the will to
    smoke is impervious to concern persuasive pressures.
         That's them talking in their own document.
    That's how they're describing it in their document.
         We offer the conviction -- and I don't know if
    that was -- I honestly don't know if that was
    referring to an external document or internal, but
    it's them talking about it themselves.
         Ultimate explanation for perpetuated cigarette
    habit resides in the pharmaceutical effects.
         Under stress.  Anxiety.  I want you to see,
    this is back in evidence, how many of these talk
    about stress, anxiety.  Study it.  Learn it.  And
    then they're going to tell you, Oh, she just smoked
    because she was under stress.
         She smoked because she was addicted, and one of
    the triggers that helps sell cigarettes to addicted
    smokers is stress.  It's not an alternative
    explanation; it's part of the explanation for
    addiction.
         Anxiety.  Anxiety suggests a reduced delivery.
    They're worried if you brought the amount of
    nicotine down it may be a stepping stone and could
    be -- lead to quitting and hurt the industry. There's more.  They don't want to risk people
    getting off the hook.  The market would collapse.
    Nobody would get their jobs or consulting fees.
         This is the one that -- that they anticipated
    that they couldn't get caught.
         One of the tragedies of this and one of the
    reprehensible things is it's clear they were
    studying the medical literature closely, closely.
    So when that literature that they -- the stuff they
    talked to Dr. Burns about the relative risks, that
    if you quit by X you'd be okay.  But they're on top
    of all of that.  They're keeping close tabs, yet
    they still kept the holding strategy going as
    opposed to saying, Hey, it's not too late folks.  If
    you quit now, you may make it.  They continued to
    bury it.
         (A video clip was played as follows:)
         Brenda Dawson represents the cigarette
    companies through the Tobacco Institute.
         The industry, like any other industry of
    consumer products, wants to make sure that those
    things that are trade secrets are kept as trade
    secrets.
         But a lot of the -- a lot of the food products
    that we see have ingredients, and they list the ingredients, sometimes they even list the percentage
    of ingredients.
         And in that list of ingredients you'll see
    words like flavorants, where the manufacturers are
    not required to, in fact, turn over what can only be
    termed a recipe.
         I don't think anyone is asking for the recipe.
         The manufacturers provide the list to the
    federal government.
         Could the President of the United States look
    at the list if he wanted to see it?
         He would probably have to be designated as an
    employee of the Department of Health and Human
    services to look at the list.
         Ron Davis was Michael Hendrickson's
    predecessor, running the Office of Smoking and
    Health:
         I think it's absurd that a product that's used
    by 45 million Americans is used by those people
    without knowing what's in the product.
         The list of additives is so secret that
    Dr. Davis was required to keep it under lock and
    key.
         Outside my office, the director's office, was
    the safe. The safe?
         The safe.  It would take 20 minutes to get into
    the safe.  It's not just the normal lock where you
    have to turn to three different numbers.
         (The video clip was ended.)
         (A video clip was played as follows:)
         I'd like you to rise and then those who will be
    testifying as well, will you rise.
         Would you raise your right hand.
         Do you swear that the testimony you're about to
    give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
    but the truth?
         THE GROUP:  I do.
         Please consider yourselves to be under oath.
         Let me begin my questioning on the matter of
    whether or not nicotine is addictive.
         Let me ask you first, and I'd like to just go
    down the row, whether each of you believe that
    nicotine is not addicted.
         I heard virtually all of you touch on it.  Just
    yes or no.  Do you believe nicotine is not
    addictive?
         I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
         Mr. Johnston?
         Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction.
    There is no intoxication.
         We'll take that as a no.
         And, again, time is short.  If you could
    just -- I think each of you believe nicotine is not
    addictive, I just would like to have this for the
    record.
         I don't believe that nicotine or our products
    are addictive.
         I believe nicotine is not addictive.
         I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
         I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
         And I, too, believe that nicotine is not
    addictive.
         (The video clip was ended.)
         MR. MITNIK:  Someone who is under a powerful
    addiction deserves and needs to know the truth so
    they can get help, not that.  Not that.  This isn't
    like -- and they knew it -- like somebody enjoying
    chocolate or cake.
         Mary Goveia deserved to know the truth to arm
    herself the best she could to fight it.  And
    remember, decades earlier, we're in the business of
    selling nicotine, an addictive drug.  By any
    definition you want to slice it, that's what -- there may be changed definitions out.  The Surgeon
    General's, while they're trying to figure it out
    light-years -- light-years behind this industry, if
    industry knew it way back then this was nothing but
    concealment and coverup for a purpose:  For money.
         I would suggest to you in filling out this
    form, these first two questions deal with the class
    membership just by defendant and that it, as to
    both, I would suggest you, under this evidence, that
    the just and fair answer is yes, yes.
         The next question has to do with showing that
    there was cause -- it was a contributing cause to
    her smoking enough to have gotten disease and death.
         I'm sorry.  I feel like I'm crowding you.
         The answer, now moving to page 4, deals with
    this reliance stuff that we talked about where
    materiality is they were concealing important --
    information that would have been important to know
    to Mary Goveia in these decisions.  And I would
    suggest to you there is no meaningful barrier, as I
    showed you before, between '82 and before and after
    '82, and there is no barrier between defendant to
    defendant.
         Then we go on to the conspiracy:  Did these
    people agree, these two defendants agree with others in the industry to help pull this off?  We've shown
    you the evidence.  Where's the evidence to the
    contrary?
         I would suggest -- and this is within the
    collective wisdom of the jurors, but based on the
    difference between a child starting smoking and
    somebody addicted being fooled, where she has
    responsibility.  But it's far different than the
    intentional conduct, knowing conduct for money, on
    purpose, by these defendants for so many years, that
    they share the lion's share of the responsibility.
    And I would suggest to you that a fair distribution
    would be 45 and 45 and 10 percent.  The damages that
    you decide, this is -- you put your collective
    wisdom and decide under the totality of the
    circumstance of this case what would be fair and
    reasonable.
         And then under the circumstances is there clear
    and convincing evidence of punitive damages?  Yes,
    there is.
         And that brings us to the point that we will
    have done the law regarding Mary Goveia and we can
    do some important work that needs to be done.
         Thank you.


MR. MITNIK:
Okay.
I know you're tired of
hearing all of us talk.
I've only got 20 minutes.
I'm going to move quickly because I've got an hour's
worth and I can't get to it, so I'm going to cover
what I can. 3715
They put something up here and they talked
about how we picked and choosed -- that the
plaintiff pick and choosed things to show you.
Well, what's good for the goose is good for the
gander when you talk in those terms.
Let's talk
about what these defendants picked and chose.
They put that statement up making it sound
like, Boy, she kept smoking because she wanted to.
It left out the key thing that she said that's in
the testimony -- and you were here; some of you may
have taken notes -- that she said she wouldn't
because she couldn't.
She said she couldn't is what
her comment was.
And that just got left off to make
it sound like she just decided -- she was just
strong-willed and "I want to do it."
Couldn't -- couldn't -- was the testimony that
went exactly with that statement.
It just got left
out.
Couldn't is a whole different story.
And it's
not alone because we have an independent
confirmation that that's how she felt about it,
because that neighbor, the boy that lived down the
street she was bumming cigarettes from after she had
been told you could die if you keep smoking.
Told
the neighbor, Quit young while you still can.
Quit
young while you still can. 3716
So let's talk about the real facts here, not
pulling it out to make it sound something different
than it is.
And it goes to that clip of Mr. Reasoner where
he said, Remember, it's like a dear old friend.
That's the problem with addiction:
It's like a dear
old friend.
And he said you give it the benefit of
the doubt.
You give it the benefit of the doubt.
That's what they banked on and were victorious
banking on it, that people who were addicted would
listen to that counter-message that was coming out
and drowning out what the public health was
desperately trying to do.
Remember, he said they
spent -- the cigarette company spent more in a day
than the clearinghouse had in a year.
They drowned
the message out.
And it's like listening to an old friend.
It's
like telling somebody who's a dear old friend that
he did -- someone accused him of doing something
bad.
And you go, I wouldn't believe my friend would
do that.
And, remember, this time they were, quote,
legal.
If they're really that bad, they're legal?
And you're giving the benefit of the doubt to your
dear old friend until the dear old friend comes 3717
forward and says, I really did do it.
And that
person tells his wife, I wouldn't have believed it
if I hadn't heard it come out of his mouth.
They wouldn't let it come out of their mouth,
and that's who she and everyone else needed to hear
it from.
By the way, you heard the evidence.
Harry
Reasoner, with all of his intelligence, and he knew
the report, the power of this addiction, went on
smoking and died from it.
Taking responsible [sic] for her part.
They
are trying to turn that into somehow that means it's
all her fault.
Some -- listen to the logic.
Someone says, I'm going through her husband to take
some responsibility for my part in a situation where
there's plenty of fault to go around.
And that somehow is a bad thing?
That somehow
would say they have no fault because Mr. Goveia
stands up and says, Yeah, there's some fault there?
That's sure -- that's not the law, thank goodness.
That's not the law and their fault in this is
mighty.
They say we're guessing, undermining
circumstantial evidence and inferences.
An
inference isn't really something you rely on in the 3718
courtroom, except the Court gives you instruction on
you can rely on the inference.
And let's think about it.
She's not alive, so
we're going to say, Gosh, you don't need proof --
and this all started years ago.
And the people
lived through that and died through that and there
aren't many people left.
So now we're going to say
you have to rely on circumstantial evidence and
inferences if that's wrong?
That would be like my
daughter in that situation saying, Dad, you're just
guessing that I got into Coca-Cola.
You don't have
any real proof; it's all just circumstantial.
Burns and Dr. Henningfield looking at -- they
said that they -- looking at the history of things.
They didn't just look at the history.
Those guys
lived through the history of this fight.
And we heard about money being made by them.
The money spent -- those two have been engaged with
these defendants and the cigarette industry trying
to bring about change for decades and lived through
much of this we're talking about.
The amount of
money spent on the other side of that struggle, what
they've been paid is a drop in the bucket.
They say she's not addicted.
Where's the
evidence?
Who -- where's the evidence that she's 3719
not addicted, for goodness sake?
She says, Stop
young when you can.
She says -- the testimony is
she couldn't.
And she -- it makes sense.
What other explanation for someone who says
you're going to die if you keep smoking?
Unless
there was evidence she's suicidal, which there's
none.
She loved them grandbabies and her husband.
Why would there be friction in a loving relationship
over stopping when the doctor tells you this?
Unless there's addiction in play.
It just doesn't
add up.
Common sense.
Sports heroes, movie stars were used by motor
oil.
It works.
Let's talk -- let's be consistent
in what we say.
It doesn't work, but everybody else
is just wasting their money on it?
It works, but,
by the way, motor oil doesn't have an addictive drug
in it, it's not consumed, and it doesn't cause death
and it isn't targeted at children.
Chains and glasses.
That glass is overflowing
with the evidence.
The chain has been linked.
I
spent the first hour of my closing argument laying
all the evidence -- linking it together.
I want to give you a quick analogy -- two quick
analogies here.
One, I drove in this morning.
It was foggy. 3720
And I live out in the Groveland area.
You come
through the hills.
And I come through a hilly area
and I hit the fog and I can't see and there's a lake
over there.
And I know there's a lake over there
because I go through it when it isn't foggy.
But if
I didn't know from driving through already, I'd
never know there was a lake there because of the
fog.
That's what they did with this conspiracy,
except it was always foggy.
They kept the fog
running.
And now they say, You should have seen the
lake.
And let's be clear:
This suggestion that she
had no idea they were bad for you defies the
evidence.
The evidence from her daughter was she
switched to lights because she thought they were
better for her.
That's the evidence.
The evidence they were talking about was
Mr. Goveia saying, "We didn't know" -- he said, "I
didn't know it was that bad."
He didn't know it was
that bad.
And then they asked, "Did you talk to
Ms. Goveia about it?"
He said, "No, we hadn't
talked about that."
But we know she was concerned.
She didn't know
it was that bad because they hid the truth and it's 3721
inexcusable that she wouldn't know it and it's only
because of them and they're at fault for that and
there's reliance.
And there's causation that she
didn't know and there's a giant difference between
hearing and believing and knowing.
But we know she
heard some because that's what the testimony -- only
testimony was.
That's why she switched.
So we
can't take evidence out of context here.
This is
important business.
One other analogy.
Cell phone.
They make it
sound like because there was some evidence out
there -- and they make it sound like, gosh -- they
put up a clip, clip, clip, and said, Everybody must
have heard -- remember the amount of money spent,
one day versus -- they spent in one day what public
health can spend in a year.
And they pull a couple
clips.
But the men that lived through it --
Henningfield and Burns -- told you how frustrating
it was fighting against their message to get it out
to people.
And now it's like saying that, well, you
may have heard cell phones can cause a brain tumor.
Just you heard that.
Some people were saying it.
But, again, no, it's not proven and you don't really
know.
And everybody's putting the phones to their 3722
head.
This would be analogous to if you move forward
50 years and found out that everyone's got --
there's an epidemic of brain tumors from it and you
found out way back then that all of the people that
were selling cell phones got together and conspired
to keep secret that they knew for a fact it was
causing it and causing brain tumors and made it all
sound like junk science.
And they'd then say, well,
what's that got to do with us?
It was just your
choice.
They talk about her sister having COPD and
other things.
That's glaring proof of the reliance.
It's glaring proof that what they did did touch her
in a significant way.
Those were golden
opportunities.
But for a powerful addiction and but
for them concealing it, how do you explain not
reacting to that?
She had -- she wanted to live.
There's no
suggestion to the contrary.
If it's just a
nonaddictive and put them down and you had been told
the truth, your sister gets sick, you stop; the
doctor tells you, you stop.
The concealment had an impact.
Her actions and
the loss of those opportunities tell you all you 3723
need to know that she was touched deeply by what
they did.
You can't square what she did any other
way.
Did she try a million times to quit?
That was
the exact outcome they targeted.
Their entire
conspiracy was built around the idea of we're going
to convince people there's no real reason to try to
stop, not while it's all so iffy.
And if you're
still concerned, here, take some filters and switch.
You don't have to give it up.
You're addicted.
You
don't have to.
We've given you another choice.
And
then we're not done.
We're going to give you another choice; this
time lights.
And then they say, well, you didn't
try.
It's because it worked.
What more proof is
there that it worked?
She switched and she thought
they were safe, and they were muddying the waters to
no end about it.
Why wouldn't there be more attempts to quit
when someone who's warning someone, quit while
you're young and you can?
Why wouldn't there be but
for those things?
Do we know for sure?
No, we don't have to
prove it for sure.
We have to prove it by the
greater weight, more persuasive, more convincing, 3724
not -- this isn't a grade and -- grades and out case
(verbatim).
Do I have those forms to connect this?
Here are those brands we keep hearing.
The motivation, while he's getting there, has
to be red hot and nonstop for someone who is deeply
addicted like this.
Everything they did was to
douse that flame of motivation and to make it hard
to sustain.
And then they say, ah, you didn't try harder
and more.
That -- they were success -- she was
a R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris success story.
That's what celebrate.
And then say, huh, that
proves we didn't do anything?
It proves they did.
These are the brands.
In the '60s and '70s
over here under the filter brands, that's the '60s
and '70s.
When you hear Philip Morris, she didn't
smoke anything until way later, that's the '60s and
the '70s.
That's the testimony.
You-all were here
and taking notes.
That's the evidence in this case.
Then we look over at the Marlboro Lights.
That's in the '70s.
That's the evidence, '70s and
early '80s.
It isn't the direct.
There's no evidence, you
can read those jury instructions, that says you have 3725
to have seen specifically one of these things we
showed.
If it was, it would be massively unfair.
She's not alive.
It's not the way it works.
But it was cast a big net and we're going to
have group dynamics triple down and domino so that
everyone in the family is smoking, and this affects
society.
And then we look at their intended master
plan and then what reaction they were shooting for
and then look at what her reaction, what her actions
were and do they fit.
And then look, is there some
other really reasonably explanation?
Everything she
did fit to a tee and there is no other rational
explanation, and that's the way the law works on
proving up causation in a case like this under these
circumstances.
The warnings from the Surgeon General.
She'd
been smoking -- in '85, she'd been smoking for 45
years; 45 -- and you saw the evidence.
They didn't
work anyhow.
She was deeply addicted by then.
What
kind of defense is that?
THE COURT:
Five minutes.
MR. MITNIK:
Okay.
You heard talk about other people, other people
under the instruction and other people could make
their own claims and this is her claim. 3726
But here's something:
You heard from
Dr. Henningfield talking about the importance of
coming to court and telling the truth.
How many
people didn't know what was learned in this
courtroom when they died?
This is an opportunity to
make a difference on something significant for
someone that falls within the parameters of the law
to try and do something here.
They said Dr. Henningfield -- he tells you all
you need to know.
He says she was deeply addicted,
deeply addicted.
Was he just making it up?
You
decide.
And he described how it affects people and
why they keep smoking.
There's your legal cause.
Now we're in the class membership.
Dr. Henningfield
answers that all by himself.
Is he making it up?
Or is he reliable?
They say, Boy, everybody knew what they needed
to know at the turn of the century with nicotine
fiend or coffin nails.
Well, pick a side.
Then the
next moment they say, Well, we didn't know as an
industry; we didn't understand it and the Surgeon
General didn't understand it and nobody understood
it.
Well, how is that?
How does that square?
It's not about the ability to quit.
That is
nowhere in your jury instructions.
The Judge 3727
defines the question.
That's why it need be a
cause, not the sole cause.
People can quit heroin
that are in gutters.
It's not whether you can quit;
it's whether addiction was one of the reasons she
kept smoking.
And for goodness sake, that's clear.
Psychological crutch.
That was somebody else's
word.
No.
You heard the -- just because someone
else at some other point used the same word in the
English language doesn't mean it doesn't mean the
things it obviously meant in the context by these
defendants.
Give me one second.
Here is -- this is -- run
out of time.
Frustrating, but it's rules and let me
be done here.
You saw the clip of Robert Heimann.
For the --
who said, "We do not believe that the warnings are
justified.
We do not believe our products are
injurious to health.
The Surgeon General is wrong
to conclude that cigarette causes lung cancer.
The
warnings are not justified and Congress is dead
wrong."
That's the industry.
We need consequences.
Here's Heimann, 1986.
It was America's position and
his position that cigarettes were not injurious to
health.
America -- American, the tobacco company, 3728
want -- which is -- R.J. Reynolds is responsible
for -- wanted consumers to believe those statements.
Smokers are justified in relying on the statements
that smoking cigarettes were injurious to health.
Common sense versus coincidence.
Truth and
consequences.
440,000 deaths a year.
That's --
MR. WEAVER:
Objection, Your Honor.
Williams
State Farm.
THE COURT:
Same ruling.
MR. MITNIK:
The RJR one that I read to you --
oh, in 1992 the CEO said, "We don't find fault in
our smokers who believe in continuing to smoke."
That's what they say.
THE COURT:
Mr. Mitnik, one minute.
MR. MITNIK:
Yes, ma'am.
440,000 deaths.
That's 50 an hour.
By the end
of the day, that's 1,200 more.
This is an opportunity under the law and the
facts to try to make a step.
In progress, progress
is a process.
It's like links in a chain.
And each
step matters.
And you never know which step is
going to be the one that brings you to your
destination.
And I ask you to answer those
questions yes based on the evidence and the law and
give us the opportunity to come back here tomorrow

to make that final step that matters in this process
that brings us here today and bring back a verdict
that says the truth matters.
