         MR. MITNIK:  Okay.  We're almost done.  And
    thank you for coming back today.
         The purpose of all of this coming to this point
    is, as I told you yesterday, was progress is a
    process, and this is part -- a step in that
    progress.
         We never know when the last step is going to be
    the one that takes us to our destiny, but every step
    matters.  And this matters.  And it matters that we
    get this part right. I anticipate the argument will be that there's
    no need to punish nor to deter.  We're a changed
    company.  Everything is different now.
         The primary difference that has not occurred is
    they're still marketing teenagers.
         You heard the testimony of Dr. Cummings.  You
    heard nothing to the contrary.  We've had a witness
    come in from both RJR and Philip Morris, and you've
    heard no contradictory evidence.  And that is the
    undisputed evidence in this case.
         You saw the Surgeon General's report as to the
    number of kids that are picking up smoking today.
    Now.  While we're sitting here.
         The -- the specific number was 2500 -- 2500 are
    picking it up a day.  A day.  A day.  It's got to
    stop, and it's going to take encouragement, but it
    needs to come from people like you who are giving
    your time, that came out of this community here in
    this process that matters.
         It's not just the children.  It's not just the
    teenagers.  It's addiction.  It's the combination of
    those two.  Because it is not a product that a
    teenager can pick up safely and say -- like they
    think, like they believe - this is the problem --
    like they believe:  Now, today, I know these things can kill you, but they won't kill me because it's
    not powerfully addictive.  It's not like heroin.  It
    doesn't have the same kind of withdrawal.  It
    doesn't have intoxication.  All of the word games
    that they have been using to diminish and sugarcoat
    and trivialize this powerful addiction.
         It's more addictive than those drugs.  It
    doesn't get you high; it doesn't have life-wrecking,
    immediate consequences, but that's not a good thing;
    that's a bad thing because there's no natural
    governor to slow it down.
         All day, every day, for decades.  And here
    comes disease and epidemic, and you have these kids
    that were the kid that thought, I'm going to horse
    around with this and look cool.  And I'm going to
    put it down before it hurts me.  And they don't
    appreciate what they're tangling with, and they end
    up like Mary Goveia, tethered to an oxygen tank.
         You have people like Dr. Henningfield who comes
    down who wants to get the truth out.  We've gotten
    the truth out, but we've got to take a step and get
    their attention and say, You can't -- you don't have
    to sell addiction.
         Do they want to take the cancer-causing stuff
    out?  Yeah.  It's a hindrance to profits.  But they can't get it out.  But they can get the addicting
    out.  But they don't want to.
         And they'll say, Oh, it tastes horrible.  Get
    this stuff we want them to take out:  Tastes
    horrible.  It don't make the product taste worse.
    What it does is make it not addictive.
         But if you take just one brand and put it on a
    shelf down in Tampa, what good does that do?  The
    addicted smokers try it and say, I'm not smoking
    that.  It doesn't fix what I want, what I'm craving,
    what I need, what I'm addicted to.
         So they go back.
         But you've heard about now we have a framework
    with the FDA in place.  We haven't had that until
    recently.  Where you can have a level playing field.
    Where there can actually be industry-wide, where
    everybody does the same thing at once.  It's now
    within reach.  But there needs to be encouragement
    to this industry, and we have the two companies.  We
    have two leaders, R. J. Reynolds and Philip Morris,
    in this courtroom, and an opportunity to say there
    will be consequences if the course doesn't change.
         And the punitive damage instruction says to
    deter them and others.  And others.  To say those of
    you in this industry:  Change.  You have a framework in which it can be done industrywide, but you need
    to be motivated in the currency they understand.
         Now, how do we do that?  And do they need it?
         We heard from Dr. Lipowicz.  He's this -- the
    same double-talk.  Have they ever announced publicly
    this is a highly addictive drug?  No.  Haven't you
    said it's not?  Yeah.  Well, maybe it can be to
    some.
         I don't even think it's a drug because it
    doesn't benefit you.  Or I don't think it's a hard
    drug.  Or what -- it's time for the double-talk to
    stop.
         And there's got to be a reason because they're
    not doing it.  And we want to help them change
    direction and protect another generation.
         So how do we do it?  The judge gave you an
    instruction, and the instruction deals with there
    really is a blueprint that's provided in those
    instructions.  And you heard what their net worth
    is.  You've heard how much money they make in a day.
    Net, net, take home.  $9.5 million a day.  Three
    and -- I forgot -- point 4 or whatever it was a day
    for R. J. Reynolds.  A day.
         Where's that coming from?  Runaway sales from
    an addictive drug that has people use it in a frantic, unnatural way.
         People sell cigars with tobacco in it and make
    good livings.  We don't have epidemics of disease
    and death and hooking teenagers.
         You take that kind of money and you say, What's
    it going to take to get their attention?  Well, I
    could stand here and argue huge numbers, hundreds of
    millions of dollars for that, and I'm not because
    there's also another -- because it's important we do
    this step correctly -- there's another parameter.
         There has to be enough at one end that gets
    their attention and too little doesn't do it with
    that kind of income.  Something that would otherwise
    sound like a lot of money under other circumstances
    just isn't enough to be anything but a drop in the
    bucket.
         On the other hand, the Court gives you an
    instruction that you cannot, because of the
    compensatory damages that y'all awarded -- and
    everyone is very grateful of your time and your
    attention and all your efforts; thank you -- but we
    also have law that creates parameters which I want
    to share with you so we do this right.
         And those parameters include that the amount of
    punitive damages must not be unreasonably large when considered in relationship to the compensatory
    award.
         So we kind of have a framework.  While it
    would -- there could be great justification to argue
    for much larger, we also have to comply with the law
    here and fit in here somewhere that counts and
    sticks and matters.
         And my suggestion -- and I thought about it,
    and I thought about how to fit it into those
    parameters and still accomplish what we are to --
    the aim of trying, not only to punish for what
    happened in the past but to bring about part of the
    process of change, and try to put it in some kind of
    terms that can be understandable because that kind
    of money is hard to wrap one's mind around.
         And I didn't notice it; someone else in my
    group noticed it.  But they noticed out in the
    parking lot that there is a -- jurors, do you have
    your parking ticket?  Remember no back-end parking
    or you will receive a $45 fine.  It's on level 5.
    And someone brought it to my attention, and I
    thought, you know, that is something we can work
    with to try to understand the application of the
    idea of how this is a fine.
         Now, if you took somebody that had an annual income of -- I'm just going to use, because the math
    works here.  It's simple.  It makes sense -- $30,000
    even in annual income, just as a comparison to try
    and understand this.  If you took somebody with a
    $30,000 annual income and said, You got a parking
    ticket for $45.  Now, that's not going to break them
    and you're not supposed to break them.  That's not
    what the purpose of punitive damages, is to bankrupt
    somebody.  And that wouldn't bankrupt someone with
    that kind of an income, but they wouldn't be happy
    about it.  They're not so wealthy like some rock
    star and get a $45 ticket and throw it to the valet
    and laugh.  You would be upset about it but it
    wouldn't ruin you.  But it would get your attention.
    And the next time you came into here, you likely
    wouldn't back in parking.  It would have a deterrent
    effect.
         And what we have done is simply run the math --
    applying to the annual income, using the money that
    they make a day, and just spreading it out over a
    year -- of R. J. Reynolds is $1,200,000,000 is what
    their net, net, take-home cash is.
         And truthfully, the annual income we're using
    for the example would be a 30,000 you people would
    be paying tax, so actually you've got to figure they're making more and then come down to 30, after
    tax, to be a true comparison.  I'm probably giving
    them too much benefit of the doubt here, but be that
    as it may.
         And the $3,400,000,000 of Philip Morris can
    just apply the same percentage.  And that's by the
    way not 15 percent.  I know y'all see that, but when
    I looked, I went, Whoa, 15.  That's less than
    1 percent.  It's 0.15 percent.  Less than --
    significantly less than 1 percent of the annual
    income.
         But it doesn't sound like much, but that $45
    matters.  And if you just convert it, simply convert
    it to the real world of the kind of money they are
    making, it comes out to R. J. Reynolds is $1,800,000
    and Philip Morris is $5,100,000.  And if you total
    those, you're just about $7 million.  Just about.
         Now, I want to make something clear.  This is
    something I'm putting up to assist.  And if -- if
    you decide, I think it ought to be equal between
    them, you do what you think's right.  You can take
    that $7 million and say right down the middle.
    Three and a half million dollars each.  It doesn't
    have to be this way.  But I wanted to have it
    accurately reflect something that makes some sense that we can use a little bit of math, even though
    that's not some table that you must follow.
         Now, given their income, I could argue loads
    more, but I've got to comply with the law here.  As
    much as there may be a desire for a bigger number to
    draw more attention in this effort to truly go, All
    right.  We've got to pay attention to this.  Start
    making some differences.  Not just talking about
    things on addiction and on the kids.
         But I'm not and I'm not because I'm being some
    nice guy.  I'm not because I want to have a verdict
    that's in compliance with the law so it matters.
         But anything less than that is within your
    purview, but I'd ask you -- this isn't a situation
    for -- I'm -- someone saying say this number and
    really means less.  The goal and the aim and you
    coming back here and giving another day of your time
    is to truly get their attention, and with these kind
    of numbers, you start going much below that and it
    just doesn't fit the bill.  It doesn't fit the
    purpose.
         I'm going to sit down and save a little bit of
    rebuttal time.  I have 15 minutes left.  Thank you
    very much.


         MR. MITNIK:  There are two parts to the
    punishment; two parts to punitive damages.  One is
    punishment and one is to deter.
         Punishment -- and by the way, let me just deal
    with this.
         There was the talk about what's -- you know,
    the -- Mary Goveia.  Mary Goveia started smoking as
    a teen.  You heard the testimony that went
    unrebutted, undisputed, that they threw all that
    marketing and all those ads you saw with Santa Claus and "Flintstones" and "I Love Lucy."  They created a
    market for people to suck smoke into their lungs in
    the inhalable form of nicotine.  They engineered for
    an inhalable form of nicotine because it released
    addiction, and then they drove the kids to it with
    all those ads and created a market.  Not fighting
    for market share, created it.  These defendants.
    And she started young, so this has got -- meets all
    of the checklists under the law.
         Punish.  These websites and these sudden
    epiphany after all these years where we saw what
    they knew back in the '50s to be true.  Because why?
    The holding strategy, as they described it, had run
    its course.  And then and only then did they say
    what they knew all along to be the truth.
         As I told you, this is a case about truth and
    consequences.
         Mary Goveia passed away by then from a horrible
    disease, so from the punishment perspective, that's
    looking back.
         And I want to touch on one other thing.  We
    spent a lot of time during jury selection picking
    the right people for this case, and one of the
    questions we dealt with at that time, that I raised
    with an eye towards this moment, was:  Some people would be bothered to the point of distraction by
    where the money goes, because once you've done the
    compensatory and we're into punitive, it's about
    punishing them and them.  It is punishing them.  It
    doesn't have anything to do with compensating.  And
    I talked to you about that.
         People may feel like they'd rather it be
    differently; but, by gosh, if we prove it under the
    law that punitive damages should be awarded, it
    would not be a distraction to you to do punitive
    damages.
         And there were plenty of people in the room who
    said no, I would be bothered to distraction worrying
    about where the money was going.  That's why I asked
    it.
         But everybody that was picked on this jury
    swore in that process that that will not be a
    factor.  You prove it, I may not like it, but I will
    put it aside and it will not have one iota of
    influence on it.  And we are glad we went through
    that process and glad we have you here to do the
    job, and that's how we feel about it.
         The single source of the unified message was
    just the opposite that Mary Goveia got, and that's
    part of the punishment. But going forward and going past the punishment
    and talking to you about the deterrence side of this
    thing.
         The defendants gave you an amount and if you
    did -- and I had to real quick do the same math over
    there -- it would be a $5 fine.
         And I would just ask you to apply your common
    sense to how wise it is if the intent is to bring
    about change and motivate in a way that the
    defendants won't like it within the parameters of
    the law but something they really won't like, how
    wise would it be to take the number they say it's
    okay with us.
         It isn't about just a number.  It's about the
    impact.  And we can't take their number and expect
    an impact.
         They say it's a new company and you've met the
    new face.  Dr. Lipowicz.  Well, I'm going to leave
    it to you to judge how different that face was.  You
    decide.
         But remember the evidence that came from the
    new face.  He was there 12 years knowing what they
    were saying to the public wasn't right, that this
    isn't causing cancer, to climb the corporate ladder.
    Mouth zipped.  Denied that they manipulated nicotine to hit a sweet spot.
         You decide.  Was Dr. Henningfield telling you
    the truth and the documents of theirs, speak the
    truth -- their internal secret documents speak the
    truth for which Dr. Henningfield came and explained
    the truth to you?  Then right now we have the new
    face sitting right here saying no, we don't
    manipulate nicotine levels.
         Well, don't you put nicotine back in, in the
    reconstitution?  You heard from Dr. Henningfield
    that's how they do it.  That's how they manipulate
    it very precisely.  And their own documents talk
    about how they're doing it.  He's just plowing full
    speed ahead.
         No.  New face?
         And here's the explanation:  No, nicotine
    doesn't come out.
         And then we asked -- I'm like what in the
    world?  Then we asked a few questions, and you see
    the word game.  The same word games.  He says -- he
    said:  Oh, well, it goes to liquid form and a solid
    form, and we put the two forms together so really it
    never came out.
         Really?  In an honest world if you take the
    juice and the fruit and squeeze it and the juice comes out and you catch it in a cup and you take the
    fruit and throw it into the garbage can, would
    anybody say no the juice didn't come out?
         That's the new face.
         FDA.  They fought it up until Mary Goveia
    passed.  R. J. Reynolds kept fighting it.
         The website.  Philip Morris put up the website.
    Their -- the face of the website.  This is the
    changed company.
         I'm sorry.  R. J. Reynolds put up the website,
    and on the website this was their demonstrative aid.
         I don't have time.
         It's hard to see, but you can see the Surgeon
    General reports on the website.  This is their
    website they brought to show you:  210, 206, 204.
    Guess what's not on there?  They said, We just send
    everybody so there's transparency.  What's not
    there?  Look just above 210.  Where is 212?  You saw
    it.  Why isn't it on their website?  Well, I wonder
    if it could have something to do with 212 is
    preventing tobacco use among young -- youth and
    young adults.  The one that was designated to deal
    with the problem we're here asking about.
         They say:  Everything's changed.  All the
    transparency in the world.  We send them to the -- but they don't send them to the one about youth.
         Coincidence?
         PM's website -- I'm not going to stop and put
    it up, but Philip Morris's website, they say:
    Smoking can be addictive.
         Smoking can be.  That's the old habit language.
    It's so good you won't want to put it down.  Not an
    addictive drug, let alone a highly addictive drug.
         Highly addictive drug can deter children.  They
    could -- lots of kids drink a beer.  Very few kids
    injected heroin because they went:  I might be
    hooked for life.  I'm not messing with that.
         When you tell these kids highly addictive drug,
    it means something different.  Gosh, it could be a
    little addictive like a jog and I'm addicted to
    jogging.  It's night and day.  Highly addictive drug
    is a deterrent.  Where is the deterrent?
         It is transparency to change.
         There's still undisputed evidence of marketing
    to the kids, and we know that's the only replacement
    source for everybody that's dying still.  We're
    trying to protect the next generation.
         Garner.  Mr. Garner.  Here's another face.
         Ammonia.  Okay.  You heard all the testimony
    how ammonia in free-base nicotine boosts the addictiveness.  You heard it from Dr. Henningfield.
    Uncontested.  And it just so happens the new phase
    that RJR brings puts up on the screen for you a list
    of all the ingredients to show how transparent they
    are, and it just happens that that one got cut off
    because of the landscaping effect.  Just happened
    the ammonia got left off.
         The FDA has the power -- they just told you
    again -- to tell them to remove something.  And what
    we're trying to do is encourage them rather than go
    into a situation of hurdle after hurdle, go with an
    incentive to participate in that process to say
    we're taking it out across the industry, to deter
    these defendants and others similarly situated.
         The mule analogy.  If you got a mule and he's
    headed down the path where all the carrots are
    because he loves those carrots but he's supposed to
    be going to the safety of the field and he happens
    to have kids on his back and there's a cliff he's
    heading towards to get the carrots and the kids are
    liable to fall and he won't move towards the safe
    field, perhaps he needs another swat or two.
         Walking and moving don't help if you're going
    in the wrong direction.  If you're -- they can't get
    the cancer out, so they can try all they want.  The right direction is to get the addiction out.  They
    can and won't.
         So they're walking; they're just not walking
    where they belong, and we need to protect who's
    riding on the backs.  And we need to get their mind
    off them carrots, which are money, and over here on
    the protection of those youth.
         And I ask you before I sit down.  We picked
    that number because it fits the purpose and the law.
    Not less so that it doesn't work, but not more so
    that it exceeds the law.  That, as we hear the sweet
    spot of nicotine, is the sweet spot of justice,
    truth, and change.  And I ask you to please deliver
    that verdict.  Thank you.
