    MR. COFER:  When we received your verdict last
    night, we studied it hard to try to understand your
    reasoning without having the ability to talk with
    you.  And we did that so we could understand what
    information might be relevant to you today to help
    you decide what you need to decide this afternoon.
         As you know, much of the first part of the
    trial dealt with Philip Morris a long time ago, 50
    or 60 years ago.  Back in the 1940s, the 1950s, and
    the 1960s.  And because of that, we thought the
    evidence that might help you today do your job today
    was evidence about Philip Morris today.  Philip
    Morris in 2014.
         Now, when the trial began, Mr. Mitnik talked a
    lot about the 1940s and 1950s, the 1960s, and the
    culture of smoking that existed then, because in his
    mind that was the important time for you to
    consider.
         The focus was on the past.
         But members of the jury, today, your job today,
    the focus is clearly on the present and on the future.  And the reason why is, unlike Phase 1 where
    your job was to determine the amount of money to
    compensate Mr. Goveia for his loss, your job today
    is to determine whether you should award additional
    money to Mr. Goveia to punish and deter Philip
    Morris in 2014.
         With the verdict you gave yesterday, you've
    already told him:  Here is the amount that we feel
    is appropriate to compensate you for your loss.  So
    this is a different issue and it's a different
    consideration.
         So your job today is to determine whether
    Philip Morris needs to be punished and whether the
    Philip Morris 2014 needs to be deterred.
         You know, one thing that's in all of our common
    experience?  People change.  People change and
    companies change too, because the fact is all a
    company is, is just the people who work for it.
    That's all our company is.
         So let's talk about the Philip Morris of today,
    in 2014.
         What is Philip Morris doing today?  What has it
    been doing for the past 15 years?
         So we brought you Dr. Lipowicz to talk with you
    about that.  He told you that today Philip Morris admits that smoking causes disease.  He told you
    today that Philip Morris admits that smoking is
    addictive.
         You've heard about the steps the company is
    trying to make so it can have a seat at the table
    with the public health community so they can
    participate to try to make safer products.
         You've heard how the federal government is now
    regulating Philip Morris in a very significant way.
         And you saw the chart.  As you know, for the
    past 48 years there's been warnings.  For the past
    43 years there have been no television ads.  There
    have been warnings on print ads for 42 years.
         Since 1998 Philip Morris has not advertised on
    billboards.  The company has not given away branded
    merchandise, like Marlboro T-shirts and Marlboro
    hats.
         In 1999, you heard that the-- Philip Morris
    changed its public position on smoking and addiction
    to agree with the public health community.
         In 2005, Philip Morris voluntarily pulled all
    of its ads out of magazines and mass media.
         Since July -- June of 2009, the FDA has had
    full regulatory authority of Philip Morris and the
    other tobacco companies. Today there was a jury, unlike 40 or 50 years
    ago.  The Food & Drug Administration has the final
    word over what goes into a cigarette, what comes out
    of it, and what the company can say about it.
         I showed you the websites.  They're hard to
    read but you remember what they said.  They said
    that Philip Morris is committed to ensuring that the
    public hears a single uniform message, and that that
    message comes from the public health community.
         You heard one of the criticisms Dr. Burns and
    Dr. Henningfield had of the companies was that they
    confused the public because they said things that
    were different and they didn't send a uniform
    message.  Well, members of the jury those days are
    over.  They've been over since 1999.
         Philip Morris' website provides links to public
    health websites like the Centers For Disease
    Control, the World Health Organization, the Surgeon
    General.  If you go to Philip Morris' website, it
    says:  Learn more, click here.  And it takes you to
    the sorts of information that Dr. Henningfield and
    Dr. Burns told you that the public needs.
         Since about 2009, Philip Morris -- I'm sorry.
    Since about 2000, you heard, since about 2000,
    Philip Morris actually supported FDA regulation. You heard Dr. Lipowicz tell you that.  And among
    other things the FDA can now establish the levels of
    smoke constituents, including nicotine, in
    cigarettes.
         The FDA can prohibit the companies from placing
    new products on the market.
         The FDA can restrict what the companies say
    about their products, and they can enforce standards
    for reduced-harmed products.
         The evidence you heard today is that the FDA
    has complete control over the design and the
    manufacture and the sale of cigarettes, the
    marketing of cigarettes.
         So let's think about what that means.  I know
    from your verdict that you were concerned about
    things that you heard in this courtroom.  I can't
    know exactly what it was, but I know you were
    concerned.  But let me tell you this:  If you were
    concerned about advertising, the only place Philip
    Morris advertises anymore is in the stores where you
    buy the cigarettes.  The displays.
         If what concerns you are the ingredients used
    in manufacturing cigarettes, Philip Morris has
    provided the FDA with a list of the ingredients it
    uses by brands. In addition, the FDA has the power to tell
    Philip Morris and the other companies to remove any
    ingredient that it thinks increases the harm.
         If what concerns you is the level of nicotine
    in cigarettes, the FDA has the authority to tell
    Philip Morris and the other companies to reduce that
    level of nicotine down to a specific amount.
         If what concerns you were filter and low-tar
    cigarettes, the FDA can tell the cigarette
    companies:  You can't sell those companies anymore.
    It hasn't done it yet, but it has the authority to.
         If what concerns you was that the company had
    internal documents they didn't share, you now know
    that there are on a website over 4 million
    documents, and that the FDA has the ability to
    access the internal documents and files of the
    companies and to physically inspect, as they have,
    the company's labs and the company's manufacturing
    facilities.
         And if the FDA wants additional information,
    they're in power to get it, members of the jury.
         If what concerns you are the public statements
    that Philip Morris made that Dr. Burns and
    Henningfield told you undermine the Surgeon
    General's message, Philip Morris isn't making those messages any more.  They're not doing it.  They told
    you on their website and they told you publicly that
    they direct people to the public health authorities
    for the message.
         There's no question, members of the jury, that
    today, in 2014, Philip Morris operates in a much
    different climate -- much more regulated, much more
    highly controlled -- and it's changed its culture.
         Things are different than they were in the '50s
    and '60s and the '70s, and given these controls and
    given these changes, you don't have to worry about
    them ever being repeated again.
         Common sense also tells you that the people who
    used to work at Philip Morris that made those
    statements that upset you, they don't work there
    anymore.  It's not like if you left this courtroom
    and went to Richmond and said where's Bill Dunn?
    Where's George Weissman?  Where's Joe Cullman?  I
    want to talk to those guys.  They're gone.  And
    they've been gone for a very long time.
         Instead you might meet someone like
    Dr. Lipowicz, who wasn't born until 1960.  He was
    six years old when the first warning went on the
    pack.  He's from a completely different generation,
    and he's literally, literally a lifetime removed from the conduct that you heard that concerns you.
         You know, Philip Morris has the same name, but
    it's not the same company because the company is
    made up of the people who work there.  Just like I
    have my grandfather's name, but I'm not my
    grandfather.  We're two different people.
         The question you have to decide today, members
    of the jury, is whether to award additional money to
    Mr. Goveia to punish the Philip Morris of today for
    the conduct of people who no longer work there.
    Simply put, that's the question you're being asked.
         And so I would suggest you ask yourself:  Is it
    fair?  In your minds, do you think it's fair to
    punish the people who work there in 2014 for the
    actions of the people --
         MR. MITNIK:  Objection, Your Honor.  We're
    punishing people.
         THE COURT:  I'm going to overrule it, but I'm
    going to ask that you stay on track.
         MR. COFER:  I will, Your Honor.
         So I just ask respectfully, members of the
    jury, that you think about the conduct and who did
    the things that said the things that upset you and
    who's at the helm today.
         The Court has instructed you that you can only punish Philip Morris for the conduct that harmed
    Mary Goveia.  Please read those instructions very
    carefully.
         The law does not permit you to punish Philip
    Morris for harms that were caused to others.  And
    let me tell you why that's important.
         So the first thing Mr. Mitnik said was, Well,
    here's why you need to punish Philip Morris.  It's
    because kids are still smoking.
         Well, members of the jury, we talked in closing
    argument yesterday that the whole idea of kids
    smoking is a very provocative one and it's an
    emotional one, but here's the deal.  Before you can
    punish Philip Morris in this case for the fact that
    kids are smoking today, there has to be some
    evidence that Philip Morris caused Mary Goveia to
    smoke, and there was no evidence of that.  There was
    no evidence presented in this case that Mary Goveia
    ever smoked a single cigarette made by Philip Morris
    when she was a child.  Look at your notes and think
    about it.  There was none.
         There was no evidence in this case, members of
    the jury, that anything Philip Morris said or did
    caused Mary Goveia to smoke when she was a child.
         Teenage smoking -- I understand it's an emotional issue.  I understand it gets people upset.
    But under the law, you can't punish Philip Morris
    for the fact that kids smoke unless there's some
    evidence that Philip Morris caused Mary Goveia to
    smoke when she was a kid and harmed her.
         And members of the jury, there is none.
         When you look at the instructions, you'll see
    that you can't punish based on anger or emotion.  It
    has to be based on the law.  It has to be
    dispassionate, and it has to be based on what you
    heard in the courtroom.
         So let me end with an analogy.  Everyone knows
    that mules -- or where I grew up, they call them
    jackasses -- and everybody knows that mules are
    legendary for being stubborn.  And so sometimes if
    you wanted to get a mule to move, you had to smack
    it on the rump.  But if you have the mule moving and
    the mule's moving in the direction that you want,
    does it make sense to chase after the mule and smack
    it again because it didn't move faster?  What kind
    of a message does that send?
         For over the last decade, Philip Morris has
    been moving in the right direction.  Philip Morris
    has been trying to align itself with public health.
    And I understand that Philip Morris has a way to go before it gains the public's trust, but it's trying.
    And you know it's trying because you heard the
    evidence and you heard the testimony of
    Dr. Lipowicz.
         Philip Morris admits smoking causes lung
    cancer, COPD, and other diseases.  Philip Morris
    admits that smoking is addicting.
         As Dr. Lipowicz told you when Mr. Mitnik said:
    Would you say highly addictive?  It's a highly
    addictive drug?
         He said:  We tell them to look at public
    health.  Get the message from public health.  People
    say things different ways, but that's what we tell
    the public.
         Philip Morris supports a single, uniform
    message on smoking, and says:  Members of the
    public, get that from public health.
         So members of the jury, here's the question:
    Would punishing Philip Morris today for what it did
    decades ago, would it serve a purpose?  Because
    punishment without a purpose isn't justice.  Would
    it serve a purpose?
         Here's the message that I respectfully suggest
    that you send, and that is:  Philip Morris and
    everyone else who's watching, step up to the plate. Be transparent.  If you make mistakes, you admit it,
    and you try to correct your behavior.  And sure, you
    have to compensate people for the damage that you've
    done in the past because that's only fair, but you
    don't get punished today for changing and trying to
    do the right thing.
         Awarding a large sum of money to Mr. Goveia
    isn't going to send a message to Philip Morris to
    change its behavior.  Philip Morris has changed its
    behavior.
         The Philip Morris of today operates very
    differently than the Philip Morris of the '40s and
    the '50s and the '60s.
         But if you disagree with me and if you think
    Mr. Goveia has satisfied his burden of proving, in
    2014, that there is a purpose to awarding punitive
    damages in this case, then -- in your verdict --
    let's talk about what you've already done.
         You've determined that Mr. Goveia was fairly
    compensated for his loss in the amount of $850,000.
    Any money that you award him in this phase is above
    and beyond that.  It's not to compensate him; it's
    to punish and deter.
         Mr. Mitnik suggested you award around
    $7 million.  I would suggest that if you decide that punishment is necessary and appropriate, you take
    the $850,000 that you determined was the amount of
    his loss and you double it, and you charge Philip
    Morris with 425,000 of it and you charge
    R. J. Reynolds with $425,000 of it.
         And if you do that, here's what you will have
    done.  You will have said:  Philip Morris and
    Reynolds, you're paying Mr. Goveia the $850,000 for
    his loss.  And in addition, you're paying a fine.
    You're paying twice for the damage that you caused
    to Mary Goveia.
         So Mr. Goveia will be compensated for his loss
    and Philip Morris will be punished by paying a fine
    of double the harm they caused in this case.
         Members of the jury, as I told you yesterday,
    thank you for your time and your consideration.  We
    respect your verdict.  We respect your service.  We
    appreciate very much that you've taken the time to
    listen to us and listen to my closing argument.
    Thank you.
         THE COURT:  Mr. Weaver, closing argument.
         MR. WEAVER:  May it please the Court?
         THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
         MR. WEAVER:  Counsel, Mr. Goveia, Ladies and
    Gentlemen, good evening. Thank you.  Thank you for all your hard work.
    And I think we've all worked hard, and I appreciate
    what you all have done.
         My client appreciates your service.  My client
    respects your judgment.  But we're here for, as
    Mr. Cofer indicated, a different purpose.
         You know, when I was a child one of the things
    that I used to like to do was go to the amusement
    parks where I could be five or six years old and
    feel like I was driving.  I would get in the cars
    and they would go forward and there would be the
    metal rails that would go down on either side, and
    they were kind of like bumpers.  The car would just
    bump back and forth.  And in looking at the jury
    instructions for this phase, these are kind of like
    your bumpers.
         Mr. Mitnik talked to you about one sentence in
    the entire instruction, and what I want to do is
    highlight a couple more.
         On the first page it talks about whether
    there's a continuing need for deterrence in light of
    any changes in the conduct of the defendant from the
    conduct on which you based your determination.
         On the very first page in the fourth paragraph,
    the first sentence:  You may, in your discretion, decline to assess punitive damages at all.
         Let me see number 1, please.
         So what the law tells you is that it's up to
    you.  If you feel like punitive damages need to be
    awarded, you may do that; but if you feel that
    punitive damages are not necessary given what you've
    heard, that's within your power as well.
         On the second page it also talks about you
    taking into consideration any mitigating evidence.
         Mr. Mitnik told you that's the law.  You need
    to take into consideration any mitigating evidence.
    And that's evidence which may demonstrate there's no
    need for punitive damages or that a reduced amount
    of punitive damages should be imposed against either
    defendant.  Any mitigating evidence.
         And Mr. Mitnik's take on the last sentence of
    the second page, the amount of punitive damages you
    award must not be unreasonably large when considered
    in relation to the amount of compensatory, requires
    you to look at and decide that there's a reasonable
    relationship between any number you would come to
    and any number that you've already reached with
    respect to compensatory damages.
         6, please.
         The R. J. Reynolds of 2014 is under new ownership, new executives, new scientists.
         Chuck Garner sat -- Garner sat in that chair
    and he showed you who the Reynolds of today is.
         Number 7, please.
         He showed you that the senior management of
    R. J. Reynolds Tobacco has taken a completely
    different approach to the manufacture and sale of
    cigarettes.
         Number 8, please.
         A completely different approach because all
    these people are gone.
         16, please.
         We have transparency in ingredients now and
    additives.  And just by way of -- you know, I didn't
    even want to bring this up, but Mr. Prysock in his
    cross-examination made the point about the brand
    list not mentioning ammonia.  If you've ever tried
    to print something on a landscape as opposed to a
    portrait, you can only fit so much on and still have
    it be readable.  But when we showed you this, when
    Dr. Garner and I showed you this, look at the
    bottom:  Ammonium alginate.  So we weren't trying to
    hide something.
         Transparency in documents.  Dr. Garner told you
    about how every document that's produced in litigation is now publicly available.
         Fundamental changes.
         Number 15, please.
         There have been fundamental changes at
    R. J. Reynolds.  R. J. Reynolds now tells people to
    go look to the Surgeon General.  But tobacco
    products, even though they're legal, they're not
    safe.
         Snus which is part of the risk-reduction
    strategy of the new Reynolds can still cause cancer.
    The technology just doesn't exist.
         18, please.
         You heard Dr. Garner talk about project --
    product stewardship and about how the Reynolds of
    today operates on a continuum of risk in terms of
    products.
         We're under the microscope of the Food & Drug
    Administration.  So you need to ask whether or not
    there's really a need for punishment and deterrence
    today.
         Reynolds tells smokers that its product is
    dangerous.  People like Charles Garner come to work
    every day trying to improve the product, that is a
    legal product, to give to its consumers who make the
    decision that they want to smoke. Reynolds will continue to do that.
         Ladies and Gentlemen, I would prefer that you
    exercise your discretion and that you reach a
    determination that punitive damages are unnecessary.
    But I understand if a decision needs to be made, I
    would join with Mr. Cofer's suggestion that what you
    do is you double the amount of compensatory damages.
    You double the amount that you've offered to
    Mr. Goveia, that you've rendered to Mr. Goveia, as
    full compensation for his loss.  By doubling it, I
    guarantee R. J. Reynolds has heard and will continue
    to hear your message.
         Thank you for your time and thank you for your
    work.
