MR. GEISE:  Yes, Your Honor.  May it please the
Court, Miss London, Mr. Spragens, Mrs. Gray.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
Once again, it's the bottom of an inning.  
And, once again, I want to start, as I have  99
throughout this whole process, by thanking you, thanking you
for your service.
The lawyers, we have to be here.  We choose to do
this for a living.
Mrs. Gray, she's here because she chose to file a
lawsuit.
But you all didn't choose to be here.  We drafted you
to be part of this.
Now, there are a range of ways that people can
contribute in this country.  Some who serve in the military and
serve in our armed forces make a great sacrifice.
All of us that take part in voting when election day
rolls around, that's a small part of the participation.
In a couple months, we'll pay our taxes.  That's part
of it.
Serving on a jury is a big part of that as well.
So whatever you decide, whatever your verdict is, you
can go back to your family, to your friends, to your
co-workers, and you can tell them that you contributed to
making this country what it is, because you have.
And once again, on behalf of myself, my team, and my
client, we sincerely appreciate your service.  So thank you.
Last week, when we started this, I told you that this
case was not about other smokers.  It was only about Henry Gray
and the choices that he made. 100
As this case now comes to a close, that's what this
case is still about.
Last week I told you that you would hear an avalanche
of information that had nothing to do with Henry Gray, and you
did.  And you heard about some of that again already this
morning.
You saw hours of testimony from Dr. Grunberg,
Dr. Proctor, Dr. Feingold that tried to prove things that
didn't need to be proven, things that already had been resolved
in that other case, and things that I told you, in my opening
statement, weren't an issue here.
What do I mean?
Dr. Proctor and Dr. Feingold spent a lot of time
telling you that smoking causes diseases.  You heard that from
me on day one of this trial.  It wasn't an issue then, and it's
not an issue now.
Dr. Grunberg and Dr. Feingold took a lot of time
telling you that cigarettes and nicotine are addictive.  You
heard that from me on day one of this trial.  It wasn't an
issue then, and it's not an issue now.
Another thing this case isn't about, and never has
been about, is whether cigarettes should be or are legal.  They
are.  They're legal to make, legal to advertise, legal to sell;
all legal acts.
Now, Dr. Proctor kept talking about butter yellows 101
that had been banned by the FDA.  Do you recall that?
But you heard a different story about cigarettes.
You heard that cigarettes were banned here in Florida over 100
years ago.  And the State of Florida, knowing that they were
dangerous and knowing that they were addictive, decided that
cigarettes should be legal once again.  And they have been ever
since.  So maybe butter yellows aren't legal, but cigarettes
are.
I also told you that the Plaintiff would only tell
you half the story and you would probably have to wait for
cross-examination, or the bottom of the inning, to hear the
whole story.  And the Plaintiff did just that.
How many times did we have to show the rest of the
story with a witness during cross-examination?
The Plaintiff would plant a nugget with you on direct
examination, leave it out there, and see if we ever came back
to it and addressed it.
Now, when we did come back to it and we did address
it, you might remember what Dr. Grunberg told me.  He's like,
"Mr. Geise, you're cherry-picking."  Remember that?
Well, let's see what we found in that bowl of
cherries that we picked throughout this trial.
I'm going to start with Dr. Teague, 1953.  This was
one of the first documents they showed you.  And they told you
that Dr. Teague did a research project and he found all this 102
information about cigarettes and that Reynolds didn't make that
research memo public.
But, on cross, you heard that that memo had 78 cites
at the back of it, cites to publicly available literature.
Now, it may be true that some of those articles were
more difficult to find than others, but I don't think we should
criticize Dr. Teague for doing a good job.
And that wasn't the only half-story they had that
involved Dr. Teague.
You remember Dr. Grunberg showed you a 1972 document
from Dr. Teague that said nicotine was the sine qua non, or the
essential element, or the primary reason.  Do you remember that
document?  And he made it sound like that concept was unknown
to scientists.
So what did we have to do on cross?
Can I see Number 1, please?
On cross, I had to show you this Lewin article,
originally from 1931, that was cited in the 1964 Surgeon
General's report, that stated the decisive factor in the
effects of tobacco, desired or undesired, is nicotine.
In the Lancet article in 1942, smoking tobacco is
essentially a means of administering nicotine.
And this, from the Reader's Digest in 1950:
"Nicotine is the essential ingredient of tobacco.  It is what
makes tobacco, tobacco, and not just another weed," 30 years 103
before, 20 years before, 8 years before what Dr. Teague wrote
in 1972.  Dr. Grunberg didn't tell you any of that.  We had to.
Another example of only telling you half the story
was the internal company research about nicotine.  Dr. Grunberg
suggested that the research was done to find a level of
nicotine that would keep smokers addicted, or he suggested that
cigarettes were rigged, or he suggested that the pH levels were
finely adjusted in a way to drive market share.
But on cross of Dr. Grunberg, you heard the other
side of the story.  You heard that that research was done at
the urging of the public health authorities.  You heard that
the National Cancer Institute suggested research into things
like vent holes, and reconstituted tobacco, and different kinds
of filters.
And you heard that the NCI recommended adjusting the
pH to change the nicotine delivery, and also utilize free
nicotine.  They suggested that you look at a high nicotine
tobacco yield.  They suggested adjusting the tar-to-nicotine
ratio.  The idea is, let's get tar down because that's where
the carcinogens are, but let's keep nicotine up because that's
why people are smoking.  And it was all done in a program to
explore a way to make a less hazardous cigarette.
Can we see the next dem, please?
We showed you this document.  We showed you the
meeting minutes from the National Cancer Institute's Tobacco 104
Working Group program.  We showed you that it was a meeting
with the National Cancer Institute, the Department of
Agriculture, and R.J. Reynolds.  We showed you that.  And the
exhibit number, if you want to look at that, is 484, if you're
interested while you're deliberating.
Now, throughout this, Miss London and Dr. Grunberg
said this was nicotine manipulation.  But the NCI called it
progress toward a safer cigarette.  I mentioned that
Dr. Grunberg talked about this 1970s Reynolds document about pH
and sales level.
Can we see the next dem?
And you can see, in 1974, that's the document they
referred to.  But the document we had to show you, a document
that Dr. Grunberg knows about, but didn't tell you about, is
from 1996, where Reynolds looked back over the two decades of
information and said, "There is no evidence from the historical
data review that the smoke pH of RJR brands was purposely
increased to enhance sales."
And you'll have this document back there in evidence,
Document 428.  And if they try to tell you that the pH levels
were purposely set to drive sales, here's a chart you're going
to see in that exhibit.  And you can see how the pH levels go
all over the place.
Does that look like it's directed to drive sales?
No.  Dr. Grunberg knew that, but he didn't tell that 105
you.
They showed you a lot of memos from a lot of
scientists at Reynolds, but there was one memo that
Dr. Grunberg and Dr. Proctor didn't show you.  And that was
this one, from the president of Reynolds to the head of R&D.
Can we see Number 4, please?
From 1968, "Areas of Special Emphasis," and this is
DX391.  "In cooperation with others, you should push the work
concerning tobacco and health.  You should prepare a plan to
foster any relationship with government personnel in the quest
for mutual understanding of facts, ultimately to gain their
cooperation in proper research of the subject.
"If there is a safer cigarette, let's continue and
increase our efforts in this program.  Please prepare a plan to
carry it out."
This memo wasn't prepared to be a trial exhibit.  It
was a directive to continue, which means that work was ongoing,
and it was directed to "increase our efforts" to develop a
safer cigarette.  Dr. Proctor knew about that document, but he
didn't include that in what he wanted to tell you.
Dr. Grunberg pointed to random phrases from internal
records and told you the industry didn't mention addiction to
the public, the public had no idea.  But we had to show you
otherwise.  We had to show you this article.
Can we see the next dem, please? 106
Do you recall this?  1963, in the American Journal of
Psychiatry.  This was a study that was co-sponsored by the
American Cancer Society and the Tobacco Industry Research
Committee.
And what did it conclude?  It said, "Nicotine appears
to have certain addictive qualities.  Considerable evidence
suggests that true physical dependence may develop to tobacco."  
And the summary and conclusions:  "Heavy cigarette
smokers thus appear to be true addicts."  That's in evidence.
That's Exhibit DX122.
And Dr. Grunberg says we're cherry-picking.  Why
didn't he show you that?
One final example, the testimony before Congress in
1994.  They showed it to you a couple of different times.  They
put it on their board, wherever the board is.
Now, first of all, that has no connection to
Mr. Gray.  You know, by 1994, that he had quit smoking.  And no
one suggested that he ever saw that testimony in any form.  And
beyond that, Miss London asked Dr. Grunberg and Dr. Proctor
about it, put it on her board, and you heard yesterday about it
again, when Woody Wilner, Dr. Feingold's friend, was asking
Dr. Gentry those questions on the videotape?
But you know who Mr. Wilner should have asked the
question of?  Dr. Feingold.
Why?  Because when I asked Dr. Feingold, over the 107
last couple days, he told you the same exact thing that the
Reynolds representative did before Congress.  Dr. Feingold told
you, back in 1988, back in 1992, in the '90s, he didn't think
smoking met the classical definition of addiction either.  And
I asked him specifically, and he told you, in 1992, he said
nicotine was not addictive.
So they didn't put that on the board, but it should
have read this.
Can we have Dem 43, please?
1992, their expert, Dr. Feingold, says, "Smoking is
not addictive."
And then I asked him again, I'm like, "But wait a
minute, by 1992, wasn't nicotine addictive in the mainstream
science?"
say?"
He said, "Absolutely it was."
I said, "but what did you think in 1994; what did you
And this is what he said:  In 1994, again, he said
smoking was not addictive, and he said that Surgeon General
Koop was dead wrong.
Ladies and gentlemen, I submit that this is a pretty
important other side of the story, what their own expert said
in '92 and '94.  But they didn't tell you that.  We had to.
So why did you have to wait until cross-examination
to get the full side of the story?  Why did you have to wait to 108
get the side the Plaintiff didn't want to tell you?
Why?  The answer is simple:  To get you mad.
Dr. Grunberg and Dr. Proctor weren't here to offer a
single opinion about Mr. Gray.  In fact, they couldn't.
Neither one of them knew anything about the facts of Mr. Gray.
They were here as professional witnesses, to get you mad so
that you would decide this case on emotion instead of the facts
of Mr. Gray.
Now, when speaking about professional witnesses, you
heard from the Judge this morning this instruction.
Can we have Number 6, please?
"When a witness has been or will be paid for
reviewing and testifying concerning the evidence, you may
consider the possibility of bias and should view with caution
the testimony of such witness where court testimony is given
with regularity and represents a significant portion of the
witness's income."
That's Instruction Number 5 in the instructions you
will get.  "View with caution."
Now, make no mistake, you saw some professional
witnesses.  Dr. Grunberg, you heard, last year made over a
hundred thousand dollars testifying in cases for Miss London's
firm.
Now, when I asked him about it, and compared it to, I
think, about the same amount he made as a professor, he tried 109
to tell me, "It's not a significant portion of my income
because my wife makes a ton of money."
Do you remember that?
And while he has studied thousands of smokers, he
never studied the only smoker who matters in this case, Henry
Gray.
Dr. Proctor, another professional witness,
$2.5 million and counting.  And you recall, he kept hinting
that organizations like the AMA were on the take because they
received funding from the tobacco industry?  Do you remember
those suggestions?  Well, "view with caution."
Judge Benitez pressed Dr. Proctor on that issue,
"Where is the document that says that?"
He never produced it.  Not at all.  And while
Dr. Proctor studied cancer and gemstones, Germans and
ignorance, just like Dr. Grunberg, he didn't study Mr. Gray.
One more professional witness, Dr. Feingold, the
40-million-dollar man.  And he makes millions of dollars each
year testifying, not treating patients.  And when he isn't
doing that, you see he's writing books and papers with
plaintiffs' attorneys, and he's giving secret lectures to
attorneys at conferences where they talk about how to bring
these lawsuits.
But Dr. Feingold is not an advocate, is he.  Of
course not, just ask him.  He denied that how many times?
CLOSING ARGUMENT BY MR. GEISE
   110
The Plaintiff's case was designed to get you mad, so
you wouldn't focus on the one person who matters in this case,
Henry Gray.
Now, Mr. Gray was an afterthought to the Plaintiff's
case.  And I think a perfect example of that was today, again,
with their giant board.  Throughout the trial, they put up
facts up there that they thought were important for you, but
through the trial they never put a single fact on that board
about Henry Gray.
And then, lo and behold, you come in today, they put
up a board, and they got some green things on there about Henry
Gray.  It's an afterthought.  It wasn't part of their
presentation.  They waited until today.
Another thing, all the evidence you saw about Philip
Morris?  That's also a distraction at this point.  They're not
here.
Now, if you focus --
MS. LONDON:  I object to that.
THE COURT:  Well, they're not here.
So, ladies and gentlemen, I told you that you're not
to speculate, or think about, or . . . try to figure out why
Philip Morris is not here today.  Don't.
Go ahead.
MR. GEISE:  Thank you, Your Honor.
Because, ladies and gentlemen, if you focus on Henry 111
Gray, unlike Dr. Grunberg, or Dr. Proctor, the Plaintiff loses.
The Plaintiff loses because Henry Gray was not an
out-of-control addict.  He maintained control over his smoking
choices, and he smoked because it was a choice he made.
The Plaintiff loses, because if Mr. Gray was
addicted, it wasn't the legal and substantial cause of his
injuries.  Instead, his choice to start smoking, his choice to
continue smoking, in decades and decades of warnings, and his
choice to resume smoking after months or years of quitting, at
a time when their own expert said he wasn't addicted, were the
legal cause of his actions and their consequences.
And finally, the Plaintiff loses because she can't
prove a link, or build that bridge, between anything Reynolds
said or didn't say and any smoking decision made by Mr. Gray.
Now, I've already spent more time this morning than I
wanted to, talking about things that have nothing to do with
Henry Gray, so let's get into what this case is really about.
You heard a lot about Mr. Gray and what motivated him
to succeed in life.  He was smart, he was educated.  He
succeeded in undergrad, in law school, graduated with honors,
law review, built a successful law practice.  He was a doer, he
was an achiever.  He made his own decisions, including the
decision to smoke.  And when you focus on Henry Gray and his
decisions, the Plaintiff loses.
Can we see Dem 7, please? 112
Now, as in opening statement, the Plaintiff has the
burden of proof.  And these are really the first two questions.
And I'm going to walk through the verdict form like Miss London
did, and you're probably not going to be shocked to see that I
check a different box than she did.  But let's get up front
what the first two questions are going to be:  Addiction
and addiction causation.  Plaintiff has the burden of proving
these things.
Now, one thing, when you go through the verdict form
and you go through the jury instructions, you are not going to
get any questions on the rules that Miss London keeps telling
you about.  That might be relevant in some other case, but
those aren't the questions you need to answer in this case.
So the first question on your verdict form is going
to be whether you find, from a preponderance of the evidence,
whether Henry Gray was addicted to cigarettes containing
nicotine.
Now, you will need to define what addiction means in
this case.  The Court is not going to define it for you in your
instructions.  And you heard, when I crossed Dr. Grunberg, that
he said the Surgeon General has recognized that there is no
consensus on a definition.  And you've learned that the
definitions for addiction have changed over time.
You saw a definition from Miss London today.  We
heard evidence on that.  You heard about other definitions that 113
look to whether there was intoxication or deviant behavior,
other definitions look to see whether there was a loss of
control, and others look to see if the smoker became
significantly impaired or distressed.
Now, you heard from a number of witnesses that
Mr. Gray was addicted.  But they basically boiled it all down
to, if you smoke for a long time, you're addicted.
Remember Dr. Feingold's chart he used, the Fagerstrom
test?  Whether you're a zero or a ten, you're addicted.
Now, a couple points to consider.  Although
Dr. Grunberg criticized the American Psychiatric Association's
book, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, he did admit that
the book reports that about 50 percent of daily smokers are
addicted.  So that means 50 percent of daily smokers are not
addicted.  So the mere fact that you smoke, and smoke daily,
and smoke a lot, it doesn't mean you're addicted.  You need
something more.  You need to experience a loss of control.  You
need to smoke compulsively.  You need to become impaired and
distressed.
Ladies and gentlemen, choosing to do something you
want to do, or enjoy doing, is not a sign of impairment or
distress.  Doing what you want to do is not a disorder, it's a
decision.  And Mr. Gray had the choice and the control to make
a different decision if he wanted to.
Now, for a very long time, he did not make a 114
different decision.  Why?  You heard it from Dr. Slaton.
Can we see the next slide?
What did Mr. Gray tell him?  The timing wasn't right.
The reason that Mr. Gray smoked for as long as he did is
because the timing wasn't right for him to choose to quit.  He
wasn't going to quit until he was ready to, until he was
motivated to.
And Dr. Slaton told you that people need to have an
internal motivation.  It can't come from a loved one telling
you to quit.  It can't come from a doctor telling you to quit.
It had as to come from within.
And Mr. Gray chose to smoke until he was motivated,
that fear factor Dr. Slaton talked about.  And when it was
time, when the time was right and when he was ready, he quit.
Deciding you're not going to quit until the timing is
right is an example of controlling your smoking.  It's proof
that smoking did not control Mr. Gray, but Mr. Gray controlled
his smoking.
And also consider Dr. Feingold's testimony.  He said,
after you quit for a month or two months, and certainly after a
year, you're no longer addicted.  We'll talk about it in a
minute, but what does that mean?  What does that mean for
whether Mr. Gray was addicted?
Certainly, when he stopped for a couple of months in
the 1970s, it's beyond that time period, and definitely when he 115
stopped for a couple of years in the 1990s.  Even Dr. Feingold
said he was not addicted then, not addicted the rest of his
life, and importantly, not addicted at the time of his death.
Because Mr. Gray never experienced a loss of control
over his decisions, because he never lost the ability to quit,
because he was never significantly impaired or distressed, I
submit he was not addicted.
So if I could have the ELMO for one second?
So with respect to this first question, was Henry
Gray addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, I submit,
based on what you heard, the answer to that is . . . no.
THE COURT:  Do you see what I said earlier, ladies
and gentlemen?  We all make mistakes.
MR. GEISE:  And that's important.  Because even if
you check yes, it doesn't really matter for purposes of this
case.  And that's because of the second question.  If you
answer no to Question 1, the case is over.
But, even if you answer yes to Question 1, I would
argue that you have to answer no to Question Number 2.  And
Question 2 asks whether an addiction to cigarettes containing
nicotine was a legal cause of Mr. Gray's injuries.  And this is
how the Court's instruction will define it.
Can we switch back over, please?
And this is Instruction Number 10 that you'll
receive. 116
It says, "In order to prove that addiction to
cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of Mr. Gray's
injuries, Plaintiff must prove by a preponderance of the
evidence that such addiction directly and in natural and
continuous sequence, produced or contributed substantially to
producing such injuries, so it can reasonably be said that, but
for the addiction, his injuries would not have occurred."
The evidence proves that addiction is not the but-for
reason for any of Mr. Gray's smoking behaviors, and not the
but-for reason for the cause of his injuries.  The but-for
cause of his smoking was his choice, his decision to smoke for
as long as he did, because that's what he wanted to do, despite
his knowledge of the risks that he was taking, and the timing
wasn't right for him to do otherwise.
So ask yourself this question.
Can we see Number 18?
If Mr. Gray was not addicted, would he have continued
to smoke?  But for his addiction, would he have continued to
smoke?
The answer is of course he would --
Bless you.
JUROR 6:  Thank you.
MR. GEISE:  The answer is, of course he would have.
We know that he did.  For this reason alone addiction cannot be
the legal cause of his injuries, because it was far from the 117
substantial cause of his smoking.
If his smoking behavior would have been the same
whether he was addicted or not, then addiction cannot be a
substantial cause because it didn't make a difference.
Mr. Gray was smart enough and educated enough to know
the risks of smoking.  But for years he was not motivated to
want to stop until the timing was right.  So even if you decide
Mr. Gray was addicted, that addiction was not a legal cause.
Now, here's another way to break down what's in that
instruction to see what is legal cause.  And the addiction has
to cause the injury.  And legal cause, it must directly cause
it, naturally cause it, continuously cause it, and
substantially cause it.  And you saw that Mr. Gray's choices
were the direct, the natural, the continuous, and the
substantial causes of his injuries.
Let's look at the next slide, please.
So in between here, where there needs to be legal
cause, what do we have in between there?
We have Mr. Gray's choices:  his choice to begin
smoking, which nobody suggests has anything to do with
addiction; his choice to continue smoking despite the health
warnings from his family; his choice to ignore the warnings and
continue smoking.  
And you heard from Mrs. Gray yesterday that there
were times where he just refused to try to quit.  His choices 118
also include the choice to stop smoking when the time was right
and also to choose to start smoking again at a time when he was
not addicted.  Those are the choices that led to his injuries,
not addiction.
I told you during my opening statement that you'd
learn some facts about nicotine and addiction, and you did.
Nicotine addiction does not permanently change your brain
receptors.  It doesn't interfere with the smoker's ability to
understand the dangers of smoking.  And it doesn't interfere
with a smoker's ability to make a choice to quit or continue
smoking.
And nicotine does not prevent a smoker from quitting
for good.  Every witness agreed -- Dr. Grunberg, Dr. Feingold,
and Dr. Slaton -- any smoker can quit.  
And Dr. Grunberg admitted that over 60 million
smokers, including millions of addicted smokers, have stopped
smoking for good.
Can we have Number 13?
And Dr. Grunberg told you that those smokers had the
same brain changes that were going on, he told you those
smokers had the same dopamine release that was going on, those
smokers had the same exposure to ads and whatever else was out
there, and those smokers were smoking the same cigarette, the
same kind of cigarettes.  Despite that, they all quit.  Between
1964 and 1979 alone, you heard that 30 million smokers quit, 119
1.3 million per year, or 3,000 people a day.
Now, I talked to Dr. Grunberg about those statistics,
and you remember what he said?  He said there are lies, damn
lies, and statistics.
Well, these aren't my statistics.  These are numbers
from the Surgeon General and the CDC.  And these aren't lies or
damn lies.  These are cold, hard facts.
Now, Dr. Grunberg told you that it takes motivation,
determination, and persistence to stop smoking.  And you heard
that Mr. Gray's quit attempts were not motivated, were not
determined, were not persistent.
What did his friend and doctor, Dr. Slaton, tell you?
He told you that Mr. Gray would make what he would
call periodic attempts to quit, but not what he would call a
sustained effort to quit.
Dr. Slaton testified that he told Mr. Gray repeatedly
to quit smoking, and offered him a list of health reasons why.  
Mr. Gray's response?  He said the timing wasn't
right, he wasn't ready, he wasn't motivated.
He never said, "I can't."  He never said, "I tried
and failed."  He never said, "I'm hopelessly addicted."  
He said the timing wasn't right.
Now, despite his knowledge of the risks of smoking,
we'll talk about those in a moment, Mr. Gray did not make any
attempt to stop smoking in the 1950s or the 1960s.  In those 120
decades he chose to continue to smoke, and did not choose to
even try to quit.  The timing wasn't right.
After his wife quit in 1959 or '60, after the 1964
Surgeon General's report, and after the warning labels in 1966,
you saw how many people quit.
Can we see the next slide, please?  14, please.
Okay.
Warnings were on the packs in '66.  You heard about
the other people, 13 million Americans quit there.  Mr. Gray
never tried to quit.  Why?  The timing wasn't right.
Now, Miss London didn't really talk about this in her
closing argument, but you heard conflicting evidence about
nicotine gum and patches.  Dr. Slaton, Mr. Gray's golfing buddy
and doctor, he could not recall that Mr. Gray ever used the gum
or the patches.  And if he used the patches or the gum during
that time, Dr. Slaton was his doctor, he would have been the
one who would have had to prescribe it.  He had no recollection
of it, and you saw there were no medical records that indicated
a prescription for it.
Now, Mrs. Gray said he might have used them, he might
have used the gum or the patches, but she doesn't know if he
did, how far or how long.
Either way, if he used the patches or the gum, he
continued to smoke while he was using them.  Now, you know that
doing that is against the instructions for the use of those 121
products if you're trying to quit.  And so did Mrs. Gray.  She
knew that, and she told her husband he was foolish for doing
that.
So even if Dr. Slaton is wrong, and whether Mr. Gray
used the gum or patch, Dr. Slaton was right to say it wasn't a
serious or sustained attempt to quit.
Now, Dr. Grunberg and Dr. Feingold told you that, to
be considered a serious quit attempt, you have to do what?  You
have to stop smoking for 24 hours.  So any of these gum or
patches attempts, they weren't a serious quit attempt because
there wasn't a 24-hour effort.
But --
You can take that one down.
But what is as important is, when Mr. Gray made a
serious attempt to quit smoking, he succeeded.  When he did
abstain from smoking for 24 hours, he went a lot longer.  When
the timing was right, he quit.
You heard that Mr. Gray quit for a couple of months
in the late 1970s.  You heard that he had stopped; they went
out of town to a football game; he ran into a friend of his
there, who offered him a cigarette; he took the cigarette; and
he started smoking.
Now, when he did that, he knew full well that smoking
was bad for him.  He knew full well.  And there is no evidence
on that occasion that he was experiencing any withdrawal 122
symptoms.
Miss London talked about withdrawal symptoms in
closing.  But one thing to remember about withdrawal symptoms,
what did Dr. Feingold tell you yesterday, their expert on
Mr. Gray's addiction?  He told you he never saw any evidence of
withdrawal symptoms.  That was their expert.
So in 1977, there's no withdrawal symptoms, he starts
smoking again.  He didn't resume smoking because he was
compelled to by an addiction.  He didn't resume smoking because
he had these uncontrollable cravings.  He didn't start smoking
to put an end to his withdrawal symptoms.  He made the choice
to start smoking because his friend offered him a cigarette and
he wanted one.
And you know that Mr. Gray stopped smoking for years
following his lung cancer diagnosis.  You know the story.
Dr. Slaton told you.  The fear factor.  Once he was diagnosed,
he stopped, and he didn't smoke for a couple of years.  Then,
when his wife was out of town, he went out with the boys and he
started smoking again.
Now, there's no dispute that Mr. Gray quit smoking
for at least two years.  Dr. Slaton said so.  Dr. Feingold said
so.  And Miss London said in her closing that Dr. Feingold said
anyone could quit.  Well, Dr. Feingold said, Mr. Gray did quit.
And Mr. Gray's medical records say the same thing.
Can we see Number 15, please? 123
You've seen these records, they're in evidence.
"Patient's wife went out of town last week.  After three years
of not smoking, he smoked three packs of cigarettes over a
three-day period."
And Dr. Feingold told you, "I think the doctor is
wrong there, it's not three years, it should be two years."
Fine, it's two years.
And then Dr. Slaton wrote, "I last saw Henry in the
office on February 9.  At that time, Henry was not smoking, not
complaining of shortness of breath.  Apparently, a week ago he
became increasingly despondent and went out with the boys.  He
since that time has been smoking two to three packs of
cigarettes per day."
Now, Miss London stated that Mr. Gray was still
smoking.  But you heard from Dr. Slaton about this bond that
golfers have.  Dr. Slaton told you that he was with Mr. Gray
every week, at least twice a week, for at least four hours a
time while they played golf.  And he told you, during that time
for those two years, there's no evidence that Mr. Gray was
smoking, he didn't smell it on him, nothing.
And Dr. Slaton told you that you share everything
with your golf buddies, even things you don't tell your wife.
So if Mr. Gray was still smoking, his golf buddies and
Dr. Slaton would have known.  But he wasn't because there's no
evidence of that. 124
Now, again, when Mr. Gray started smoking when he was
despondent and went out on the town, he didn't start smoking
because he was compelled to by an addiction, he didn't resume
smoking to put his cravings to an end, he didn't resume smoking
because he was having any withdrawal effects.
Dr. Slaton told you, when Mr. Gray started smoking
again, when his wife went out of town, he went out on the town
with the boys.  And beyond that, Dr. Slaton said he didn't know
what triggered it.  And it was something he thought back about
for the last few years.  But he told you what didn't trigger
it, and that's addiction.
Dr. Slaton told you that Mr. Gray, at that time, had
been quit for years and wasn't experiencing any withdrawal
symptoms:  no irritability, no fidgeting, no difficulty
concentrating.  I asked him all of those questions.  And he
said, "Mr. Gray just made the choice to start smoking again."
And he said, with everything else that was going on
with Mr. Gray's life at that time, he thinks he just said, and
this was his quote, "The hell with it," and decided to smoke.
And there's one more thing, an important thing that I
think seals the deal on this second question about addiction
causation.  And that's Dr. Feingold.
Dr. Feingold admitted that Mr. Gray was not addicted
when he stopped smoking in the '90s.  Not addicted.  After
quitting for more than a year, Dr. Feingold said, he's no 125
longer addicted, not then nor when he died.
Ladies and gentlemen, the undisputed evidence from
Mr. Gray's golf buddy and doctor and their expert on Mr. Gray's
addiction, Dr. Feingold, is that addiction played no role in
Mr. Gray's choice to start smoking again, none.
Now, if you're not addicted when you do something,
addiction can't be the legal cause of your results.  If you're
not addicted when you do something, addiction can't be a cause
at all, not the legal cause.
Now, for Mr. Gray, when he made a serious attempt to
quit smoking and the timing was right, he succeeded in
stopping.  Addiction had no impact on that choice.
But he went back to smoking because he was with a
buddy at a football game or he had a boy's night out or he just
said, "The hell with it."  These episodes are proof that his
smoking decisions were based on what he wanted to do and not
based on addiction.
People make unhealthy choices, choices that they are
not compelled to make, but choices they make with the knowledge
of the consequences.  
Smoking was such a choice for Mr. Gray, but it wasn't
the only one.  You saw and heard from Dr. Slaton that he had
uncontrolled hypertension.
Now, Mrs. Gray said she had no idea that her husband
had uncontrolled hypertension.  But Dr. Slaton told you he had 126
strokes and peripheral vascular disease that he told Henry
about and told him that's a reason why he needed to take his
anti-hypertension medication.
Mr. Gray didn't take it.  He knew the risks, and he
chose to take the risk to his health instead of choosing to
take his medicine.  It was an unhealthy decision caused by
choice not by any addiction.
And the Surgeon General has repeatedly said, when it
comes to smoking, that the choice lies with the individual.
Can we see Number 16, please.
You saw these during the testimony.  1977 Surgeon
General's report, 1986.  The Surgeon General says that
cigarette smoking is a personal choice health behavior; and
even though it's an addictive behavior, the individual smoker
must decide whether to continue that behavior or not.
Mr. Gray chose to start smoking; he chose to ignore
decades of warnings; and he chose to start again after months
or even years of quitting.  Those choices had nothing to do
with addiction.
Now, in this trial, it doesn't matter whether you
think the choices Mr. Gray made to smoke were good choices or
bad choices.  What matters is that they were his choices, and
we shouldn't second-guess them.
But now, almost 20 years after his death, the
Plaintiff doesn't want you to respect Mr. Gray's choices.  In
CLOSING ARGUMENT BY MR. GEISE
   127
this lawsuit, to get money, they tell you that his decisions
were not his own, that he lost control, and that he only smoked
because of addiction.  But Dr. Koop reported who is in control.
Can we see Number 17?
You remember this.  I used it with Dr. Grunberg.
"Ultimately, you are the one that has control over
your behavior.  The cigarette is not going to light itself and
jump into your mouth, nor are you going to go into a
brain-induced hypnotic trance and light the cigarette.  No
matter how much you have smoked or how much you like to smoke,
the choice to light up is always yours."
The cigarette never jumped into Mr. Gray's mouth.  He
made each and every choice, despite the knowledge of the harm
that it could do to him.  Whatever choice he made, that was his
decision.
Dr. Feingold said, "You don't become a robot."  And
Dr. Feingold said, "Smokers always have free choice."  
And when Mr. Gray made that choice to smoke, his
choice was the legal cause of any consequences.
As a result, any disease or death brought on by
Mr. Gray's smoking was not legally caused by addiction.
Instead, the substantial cause of his smoking and disease was
his decision to smoke.
Can I have the ELMO, please?
So if you'd look at Question 2 on the verdict form, 128
"Was an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal
cause of Henry Gray's injury?" the answer to that question has
to be no.
And if the question to that is no, you sign this form
and you're done and this trial is over.
I want to talk for just a minute on the medical case,
and part of it is that both sides -- we don't have a lot of the
medical records.  So it's hard to say much about it. 
And Miss London is absolutely right.  We didn't call
a medical witness to talk about anything.
But Question 3 asks whether smoking is the legal
cause of Mr. Gray's death.  I just want to make a few points.
First of all, on COPD and emphysema, Dr. Feingold
told you that if a person stops smoking by the age of 35,
they're unlikely to develop emphysema, chronic bronchitis, or
COPD.
So to put that in context, Mr. Gray turned 35 in
1966.  If he stopped when his wife did in 1960 or the Surgeon
General's report in '64 or the warning labels in '66,
Dr. Feingold said he would never have developed COPD or
emphysema.  
On lung cancer, Dr. Slaton told you that they treated
Mr. Gray's lung cancer and treated it well.  He told you they
got it.  Mr. Gray was lucky.  And his lung cancer never
recurred.  Dr. Feingold disagreed with Dr. Slaton. 129
But either way, you saw there's no dispute that lung
cancer is not listed on Mr. Gray's death certificate as a cause
of death.  And interestingly, cigarette smoking or addiction
isn't listed there either.
One other thing about Mr. Gray's final months.  You
heard and saw the records that he was doing pretty well when he
saw Dr. Slaton in February of 1995.  Dr. Slaton said he's not
smoking; there's no shortness of breath; he's doing all right.
Then you heard something changed.  Mr. Gray became
despondent.  He went out with the boys.  He started smoking
again.  He decided not to take his blood pressure medicine.
And his condition after that point spiraled.
Dr. Slaton told you there were a mix of things going
on at the time of Mr. Gray's death.  One of them was his
uncontrolled hypertension that had earlier been -- he had been
told could cause his strokes and his peripheral vascular
disease.  And Dr. Slaton also told you at the time of his death
he couldn't rule out a heart attack that could be brought on by
stress or by hypertension.  
And that's about all we know about the medical case
here.  So that's about all I can say about the evidence you
saw.
I want to turn to the next questions you'll need to
answer on the verdict form.  And these are Questions 4 and 7.
And I think we have them, right?  Do we have 130
Number 19?  Can we switch over, please.  Thank you.
Questions 4 and 6, I guess is what I said.  And the
questions are 4, 5, 6, and 7 that are related to the claims of
concealment and conspiracy to conceal.
And Miss London walked through these, and I tend to
agree with her that she read them correctly.  And you see that
whether Henry Gray relied, to his detriment, on statements made
by Reynolds that concealed or omitted material information
concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of
cigarette smoking, and then a similar question in Number 6 with
regard to an agreement to conceal.
Now, there are essentially two parts to these two
questions.  First, the material fact questions.  You need to
determine if material information about the health risks and
addictive nature of smoking were a secret to Mr. Gray.  And if
so, you'll need to determine if he relied on any statement to
his detriment.
And here, the information wasn't a secret to
Mr. Gray.  And he did not rely on anything that Reynolds said.
So let's look at Number 20, please.
Were the dangers of smoking a secret?
Ask yourself, were the material facts about the
health risks and addictive nature of smoking known to Mr. Gray?
Did he know the material facts that he would have used in
making a decision? 131
Now, the other side of the story showed that the
public knew about the risks of smoking and the addictive
nature.  And, more importantly, so did Mr. Gray.  Dr. Grunberg
said people who are more educated are exposed to more
information about the health hazards.  And that was certainly
true of Mr. Gray.  It was drummed into him over and over by his
wife, his cousin, his children, and his doctor.
Now, I wanted to make a board and put my own Post-its
on it.  But as you've noticed throughout the course of trial, I
make a lot of notes on these yellow Post-its, and I make a mess
of them.  So Miss McKinniss was kind enough to recommend that I
don't try to get creative and I just go with something that we
have made up so I don't have to create them.
So what we did is we put down all the evidence you
heard through this trial about information about the health
risks of smoking and the addictive nature of smoking.  The blue
is what was out there for the public that we talked about.  The
green were specific instances and evidence that you heard about
Henry Gray.
Now, I'm not going to go through every one of these
squares one by one.  I'm not going to do that.  But I am going
to stress a few of them.
Now, this story about knowledge of the health risks
of smoking starts before Mr. Gray was born.  I mentioned it a
few minutes ago in Florida. 132
Can we see Number 21, please.
The Florida Health Notes in 1906.  The State of
Florida official bulletin said, "Today, the cigarette is looked
upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco
addiction."  This is long before Mr. Gray was even born.
You saw the coverage in the newspapers and the
magazines.  I'm not going to go through every one of them.
Look at the Reader's Digest in the 1950s.  These are all in
evidence.  We talked about them with Dr. Proctor and some with
Dr. Grunberg.
Let's look at Number 23, Life magazine.  You heard
about these studies about the painting of the mice's backs and
it produced tumors.  And it was covered in Life.  And you heard
that Henry Gray read Time all time.  And Time covered these
risks.
Can we see Number 24.  
Three different articles in evidence, DX59, 76, and
367.  And I've pointed out the ones just from 1953, where it
reported "Beyond any doubt" -- and you look down and it said,
"This shows conclusively that there is something in cigarette
smoke which can produce cancer.  This is no longer merely a
possibility.  Our experiments have proved it beyond any doubt."
Now, not surprisingly, the public health officials in
the 1950s recognized this widespread dissemination of
information.  You saw the program "See It Now" from, I think it 133
was 1955, where Dr. Hammond, one of the pioneers in this
research, he took to the TV.  
And what he did he say?  He said people should be
warned of the dangers and they are being warned.  He is one of
the guys who is making history in the 1950s, not somebody like
Dr. Proctor who is studying it 60 years later.  And Dr. Hammond
said people should be warned and they are being warned.
Not only did the public know, but Henry Gray knew.
Miss London asked in her closing, "Would it have made
a difference to him?  What would have made a difference?"
Well, you know all the things that didn't make a difference to
Henry Gray.  And let's talk about those.
First, Mrs. Gray.  They were married in 1957.  1959
or '60, she read an article that smoking was bad for your
health and decided to quit.  It made sense to her that it was
unhealthy, so she stopped.  And she told Mr. Gray he should do
the same thing.  Despite his wife's warning, Mr. Gray chose to
continue to smoke.  He knew the risks, but the timing wasn't
right.
Miss London said we all want to protect ourselves.
Mr. Gray didn't want to protect himself there.
Mrs. Gray continued to tell Mr. Gray about the health
risks in the 1960s.  And you also heard about Henry Gray's
cousin Betty Williams.  Every time he picked up a pack of
cigarettes, she told him he should quit because it was bad for 134
him.
And his response?  He ignored her.  He knew the
risks, but the timing wasn't right.  He didn't want to do
anything to protect himself.  He ignored her.
You heard that in addition to Time, Mr. Gray
regularly read two newspaper, the Gainesville paper and the
Jacksonville paper.  Those sources covered the risks of smoking
for years.  
You heard about the 1964 Surgeon General's Report.
It linked smoking with lung cancer.  And it was front-page news
across the country, including in the papers Henry Gray read.
Can we see 26, please.
January 12th, 1964, both the Florida Times-Union and
the Gainesville Sun, big print, above the fold, lead story
about the 1964 Surgeon General's Report.
You heard that Mr. Gray's morning routine was
cigarette, cup of coffee, and read both of those papers.  That
morning, he had in his hands two papers that told him about the
'64 Surgeon General's Report.
You saw the coverage in Time on that.  This is,
again, 1964 report.  That was included.
You saw the coverage in Life, "Verdict on Cigarets:
Guilty as Charged."
You don't need to be Columbo to figure that one out.
It's right there in the title.  It was on the evening news on 135
all three stations.
Go to the next step.
1966, the warning label goes on packs of cigarettes.
And you heard that millions of people quit smoking after that.
And Mr. Gray could have too.  But he didn't even try.  The
message was being communicated to Americans in towns large and
small across the country.  
Remember this quote from Daniel Horn?
Number 30, please.
"You could stand on the rooftop and shout, 'Smoking
is dangerous' at the top of your lungs, and you would not be
telling anyone anything they did not already know."
It was communicated under Mr. Gray's rooftop too.
When Mr. and Mrs. Gray's children were growing up in the '70s
and the '80s, they encouraged him to stop smoking.  And he gave
them the same response he gave his cousin Betty.  He ignored
them.  He chose to continue to smoke.  He knew the risks, but
the timing wasn't right.
And Mr. Gray also saw family members die of
smoking-related diseases.  You recall the evidence that his
mother died of lung cancer.  Despite her death, he knew the
risks, but the timing wasn't right.
And the warnings kept coming.  You saw that the
warnings changed.
Can we see 31, please.   136
1970, 1985, with the rotating warnings.  You saw the
public service announcement with Yul Brynner.  Mrs. Gray told
you she remembers watching that and seeing that with Mr. Gray.
Outside of his family, Mr. Gray's law partners and his golf
buddies were on him to quit smoking.
You heard about slang terms for cigarettes, "cancer
sticks" and "coffin nails."  You heard that Mr. Gray himself
used the term "coffin nail" to refer to his cigarettes.
You heard about songs, "Smoke! Smoke! Smoke! (That
Cigarette)," that Mrs. Gray remembered when she was a teenager.
Now, I talked about coffin nails.  Let's talk about
coughing.
Mr. Gray had a smoker's cough for years before
Dr. Slaton started treating him.  And Dr. Slaton said he told
Henry that it was caused by his smoking, and Henry knew it was.
Dr. Slaton told him it might go away if he quit smoking.  Every
cough was another warning to Mr. Gray, a reminder that what he
was doing was hazardous to his health.  He knew the risks, but
the timing wasn't right.
And finally, Dr. Slaton.  He told you what he told
Henry, that smoking was bad for him, that smoking could kill
him, that smoking would lead to premature death, to lung
cancer, to COPD, to emphysema, to peripheral vascular disease,
everything.  Dr. Slaton told Mr. Gray.  The material facts
about the health hazards of smoking were communicated directly 137
to Mr. Gray.  There was no doubt in Dr. Slaton's mind that the
risks of smoking were not a secret to Henry Gray.
And the instruction that you heard will tell you that
it can't be a legal cause if the falsity was obvious.  Well,
Mr. Gray knew the truth about the health risks and addictive
nature of smoking.  There's no way you can look at this
evidence, both what was in the public and what was communicated
directly to him, and say otherwise.  He had the material facts.
And those material facts didn't make a difference to him.
Did Mr. Gray ever respond to his loved ones or his
doctor and say that the risks were unknown?  No.  Did he ever
say he doubted the risks?  No.  Did he ever say he needed some
more information to help him make a decision?  No.
So on this first prong for Questions 4 and 6, the
Plaintiff cannot prove that the material information about the
health risks or addictive nature were secrets from Mr. Gray.
They assuredly were not.
So for this reason alone, this first prong alone, your
answer to the claims on Number 4 and Number 6 must fail.  And
your answer must be no.
But there's another reason that those answers have to be
no.  And that reason goes back to something I said in opening
statements.  Remember the bridge analogy I used?  And I said
there's lots of bridges around Fort Myers, the Edison Bridge,
the Sky Bridge?  To prevail on Questions 4 and 6, the Plaintiff 138
needs to build a Henry Gray Bridge in this courtroom.  
And the bridge they need to build is between some
statement, something that was said or not said by Reynolds, and
some action that Mr. Gray took or failed to take because of
that.
Now, for purposes of the verdict form, you'll find out
this bridge is called "legal cause."  It's called "reliance."
And when you see this jury instructions again, they will say
that Henry Gray must rely, he must rely to his detriment, he
must build a bridge.
The Plaintiff has to prove that Reynolds' conduct caused
Mr. Gray, not some other smoker, to take some action, to rely
on something that was or wasn't said and get a disease caused
by smoking that he otherwise would have avoided.  And if the
Plaintiff can't guilt that bridge, then they fail to meet their
burden of proof.
Ladies and gentlemen, the evidence you heard never let
the Plaintiff lay the first brick in building that bridge.
This is what the evidence concluded.
Can we see 32.  
Mr. Gray did not rely on any statement by any tobacco
company.  Now, Miss London talked about it again today in her
closing argument.  She talked about marketing.  She talked
about the amount of money spent on ads.  She brought it up.
She shows you ads. 139
But you remember before Dr. Proctor testified, Judge
Benitez gave you an instruction.  You were getting ready to see
ad after ad after ad.  And you were instructed this:  "There's
no indication or evidence that Mr. Gray ever saw or relied on
these advertisements in deciding to take up smoking or
continuing to smoke."
Now, that was the instruction at the time.
As you know now at the end of this trial, that is still
the case.  And that's why we didn't need to put on a witness to
talk about advertising, because advertising had no connection
to Henry Gray.
Dr. Proctor couldn't link any ad or statement to
Mr. Gray, because he didn't know anything about Mr. Gray.  The
only witness you heard from who knew Mr. Gray -- two of them,
Dr. Slaton and Mrs. Gray -- did either one of them mention
anything about advertising?  No.  Did either one of them say,
"Oh, Mr. Gray saw these ads.  He liked ads for that product.
He watched this television show and saw ads on it"?  No.
There's no evidence at all linking Mr. Gray to any
advertisement.
Now, Miss London talked about, oh, you know, people
started when they were young and they were affected by these
advertisements.
Well, let's look at the evidence about Mr. Gray.
You heard that Mrs. Gray knew him when he was in high 140
school but has no idea if he started smoking when he was in
high school.  The first evidence they gave you of Mr. Gray
smoking was, after his high school graduation, he takes a trip
down to Mexico, and you saw he's sitting there and he and
another guy with a couple of women, and there's a cigarette
pack on their table.  That's after he's out of high school.
So all this talk about youth marketing, first of all,
you know there's no connection between marketing and Mr. Gray.
And you know that he was out of high school before there was
any evidence that he smoked.
Now, Dr. Proctor and Dr. Grunberg spent hours telling
you about statements that the industry representatives made.
And whether they were based in science or not at the time, or
whether some of those positions were clung to for far too long,
they may be relevant in some other smoker's case, but they are
not relevant in Mr. Gray's case.
For these claims, Claims 4 and 6, the Plaintiff has to
build a bridge between something Reynolds said or did or didn't
say or do and Mr. Gray.  She didn't do that.  Her testimony
proved she couldn't.
Can we see 33.  
These are questions I asked Mrs. Gray yesterday.  Can
she identify any statement that Mr. Gray ever heard, read, saw
from any tobacco company, from any organization, from anybody?
Did he ever talk about the Frank Statement? 141
The answer to every one of those questions was no.
That's the evidence you have.  Across the board, unequivocal
proof of no reliance.
Now, Miss London argued that even though there's no
evidence about Henry Gray hearing, reading, seeing, or relying
on anything.  You know, you can just assume it happened.  Infer
it.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, assumptions are not facts.
Someone who has proof doesn't need to rely on an inference or
an assumption.  And Miss London may talk about filters and
menthol and low tar, but the best she can do is make some vague
reference that Mr. Gray maybe thought those cigarettes may have
had less bad stuff in them.
I submit those things have nothing do with this case for
a few reasons.  She can't make that connection.  She can't
build the bridge.
First of all, you heard a lot of testimony about lights.
And Miss London even slipped into it and talked about lights in
her closing a little bit.  Mrs. Gray said she doesn't recall
her husband ever smoking a light cigarette.  Lights have
nothing to do with Henry Gray.
Second, Mrs. Gray told you yesterday she doesn't know
why Mr. Gray smoked a menthol cigarette.
And, finally, with regard to filters, you remember I
asked Mrs. Gray specifically, "Do you have any idea where Henry 142
Gray got that idea?"  And she said, "No."
To prevail in this case against Reynolds, they need
proof about Reynolds.  And they don't have it.
Beyond that, you heard from Dr. Proctor.  He admitted
that he's not aware of any statement from Reynolds that filters
or menthol cigarettes were safe or safer.  So if Mr. Gray
thought it, Dr. Proctor told you Reynolds didn't say that.  But
you saw who did, the public health community, the Surgeon
General's reports.
Can we see Number 34.  
Dr. Proctor went through and he talked about how the
public health community said the use of filter cigarettes may
decrease lung cancer mortality.  And they talked about filter
tips and lower tar and nicotine.
As Dr. Proctor admitted to a question Judge Benitez
asked him, the scientific community was pitching these ideas.
Since they did, and if Mr. Gray came to some understanding
based on what they said, it can't be a basis of liability
against Reynolds in this case.
And even so, even so, Dr. Slaton cleared this all up.
He said he made sure Mr. Gray understood.  He told him that
light, menthol, filter, low-tar cigarettes were just as
dangerous for him and they were not safer.  He told him if they
had less tar and nicotine, he might just smoke more of them and
make it worse.  And Mr. Gray didn't disagree.  He didn't doubt 143
it.  He didn't say he saw something different on "Face The
Nation."  He didn't rely.
So use your common sense and focus on the facts about
Henry Gray.  When the Plaintiff can't produce a single witness
to say Mr. Gray heard, read, saw, and, most importantly, relied
on anything Reynolds said or didn't say, don't infer otherwise.
Can we see Number 35.  
So the question, "Did concealment of information cause
Mr. Gray's death?"  The answer has to be no.  There was no
suggestion that Mr. Gray was just waiting for Reynolds to say
something.  He had all the information he ever needed to make
his decisions.  But for years, the timing wasn't right.
And if there was any evidence in this case that Mr. Gray
relied on any statement of Reynolds, don't you think they would
have given that information to Dr. Proctor or Dr. Grunberg?  Of
course they would have.  But they didn't because it doesn't
exist.
Dr. Slaton gave you all the proof you need.  He told you
of all the health risks he discussed with Mr. Gray for years.
He told you Mr. Gray listened to him and heard everything.  He
knew that smoking was dangerous for him.  He had no doubts.  He
listened and he was grateful.  He never doubted the risks.  He
never said more research was necessary.  He never said there
was a controversy.
And ladies and gentlemen, this case is only about 144
Mr. Gray.  And there's no evidence at all that he heard or
relied on any statement from R.J. Reynolds.  And no matter what
some other smoker may have done some other place, the Plaintiff
has to prove what Mr. Gray did.
She didn't do that here.  She didn't build the bridge.
There's no proof of reliance.
Now, turn back to the verdict form here.
Can I have the ELMO, please.
Questions 4 and 6 are the two we're talking about on
whether he relied to his detriment -- relied to his detriment.
Because Mr. Gray knew the material facts about the health risks
of smoking and the addictive nature, the answer to these two
questions has to be no.  Because there is no bridge, there's no
reliance, there's no legal cause on anything Reynolds said or
didn't say, it's another reason why the answer to these two
questions has to be no.
Now, I'm going to touch for 15 seconds on Questions 5
and 7.
Miss London talked about legal reasons for before 1982
or after 1982.  The fact of the matter is there's no evidence
that Mr. Gray relied on anything, not before 1982, not after
1982.  So when you check "no" on those boxes, there's no need
to answer the questions on 5 and 7.
Can I have Number 18, please.  I promise I'm only going
to make you switch one or two more times.  Will, can we have 145
18.
Comparative fault.  Now, if you get to this question on
the verdict form, you will have already decided that Mr. Gray
was addicted, that addiction was a legal cause of his injuries,
that Reynolds' conduct was a legal cause.  And if you get that
far, you'll have to allocate responsibility between Reynolds
and Mr. Gray.
Now, Miss London kept talking about whether I'm going to
say that Mr. Gray acted unreasonably.  And I looked through
Judge Benitez's instructions, and I don't think there's
anything you will be instructed about having to say Mr. Gray
acted unreasonably.  I'm not going to say he made any
unreasonable decisions.
Now, a couple points to keep in mind with respect to
comparative fault.  Comparative fault is not a global
comparison of conduct.  It's not what did Henry Gray do versus
the global conduct of the tobacco industry over all time.
It's a comparison of actions of Henry Gray and Reynolds
that were the legal cause of his injuries.  It's a very narrow
inquiry.  Now, you may have seen things that Reynolds said in
public or wrote internally that you don't like.  But the issue
in this case is whether they affected Henry Gray and caused his
injury.
If you find something Reynolds did was wrong or you
don't like it but it's not connected to Henry Gray, it can't be 146
considered for part of your analysis for comparative fault.
Now, Miss London said in opening and said again today
that they accept some responsibility for Henry Gray.  They said
they wanted to be clear and upfront about it.  But you never
heard that from Mrs. Gray on the witness stand.  It's only been
something you've heard from Miss London.
But if they accept responsibility, let me ask you a
couple questions.  Responsibility for what?  Responsibility for
the choice to start smoking?  Responsibility for the choice to
continue smoking?  For the choice to continue smoking knowing
it's bad for you without stopping, when millions of Americans,
including your wife, chose to stop?  Is it responsibility for
successfully quitting smoking but starting again at a time when
you're not addicted and you're out with your friends?  Is it
responsibility for ignoring the warnings you received from your
family and friends?  Is it responsibility for refusing to even
try to stop?
If we learned anything about Mr. Gray in this trial, we
learned that he was a man who was responsible and in control.
Because ultimately you are the one who has control over your
behavior.  You can't control your behavior to 10 percent or
50 percent; you control it 100 percent.
And nobody made Mr. Gray's decisions for him.  Nobody
could decide for him to choose to smoke.  And nobody could
choose for him to stop smoking.  Only Mr. Gray could make those 147
choices.  He had the control.  He had the power.  He had the
responsibility.
In fact, you never heard that Mr. Gray blamed anyone
else for his injuries.  He was a successful attorney.  And he
knew his injuries were related to smoking.  And Dr. Slaton told
him that for years.  Yet he never blamed the tobacco companies
or said that he wanted to sue them.
So if you get to this point on the verdict form, I ask
you to give him 100 percent responsibility for his conduct,
because ultimately he was the one with responsibility for and
control over his behavior.
If you find everything that I've said this morning and
this afternoon unpersuasive and decide to return a verdict for
Mrs. Gray, you'll have to decide on an amount of damages.
That's in Questions 9 and 10.
And this is hard.  You can't put a value on a human
life.  And we all feel compassion.  And we all wish Mrs. Gray
the best.  But compassion and good wishes are not reasons to
exceed common sense and good judgment.
Your instruction will tell you that any such award
should be fair and just.  And it needs to be just and
reasonable.  It can't be a number that Miss London pulls out of
the air.  There needs to be an evidentiary basis for it.
And, as anticipated, Miss London asked for millions of
dollars.  It isn't a question of whether Reynolds is a big 148
company or not.  If you find Reynolds liable, it's a question
about what damages Mrs. Gray has as a result of her husband's
death.  You consider what little evidence you heard on that
during the trial and compare it to the size of the award that
Miss London asked for.  So if you get to this point and you
make an award and decide to compensate Mrs. Gray, please
compensate her based on the evidence you heard.
Finally -- and it really is finally for me because this
is the last time I get to speak to you -- if you get all the
way through the verdict form, you have to decide whether
punitive damages are warranted.  That's Question 11.  And if
you get that far, you will have already fully compensated,
Mrs. Gray for her husband's death.
Now, punitive damages are not about compensation or
making someone whole.  Punitive damages are about more money.
Can we see Number 36, please.
They're damages in addition to damages that fully
compensate the Plaintiff.  They can be awarded only for the
conduct that it was the legal cause of the harms suffered by
the Plaintiff.  And importantly, punitive damages cannot be
based on the findings that you've heard so much about.  So you
can't consider them as a basis for your punitive damages.
You've heard from Miss London, punitive damages not only
is about more money; it's about more trial.  It would be
another phase with more witnesses. 149
Now, punitive damages are designed to punish and deter.
And the Plaintiff must meet a higher level of proof, called
clear and convincing evidence.
Can we see Number 37.  
And this is from Instruction Number 19.  It spells out
your instructions here.  I'm not going to read the whole thing.
You've heard that it needs to be by clear and convincing
evidence.
"As I've already instructed you, a preponderance of the
evidence means" -- let me start at the beginning again.
"Plaintiff bears the burden of proving that punitive
damages are warranted by clear and convincing evidence.
"Here is the exception to the burden of proof that I
mentioned earlier.  As I have already instructed you,
preponderance of the evidence means an amount of evidence that
is enough to persuade you that a claim or contention is more
likely true than not true.
"In contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence
that is more compelling and persuasive.  It is evidence that is
precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight
that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation
about the matter in issue."
Here, a hunch or a suggestion that Mr. Gray may have
thought something based on some unidentified source does not
meet this higher burden of proof.  It's evidence that is not 150
precise, not explicit, and nothing but confusing.  Evidence
here must be Reynolds' conduct that clear and convincingly is
linked to Mr. Gray.  Again, there needs to be a connection.
And when you consider whether to punish Reynolds,
consider the testimony you heard about their efforts to develop
tobacco products that may reduce risk.
Can we see Number 4 again.
Dr. Proctor.  He told you that Reynolds hired
Dr. Rodgman in the 1950s, and he went to work identifying the
constituents in tobacco.  And Dr. Proctor credited Dr. Rodgman
and Reynolds with identifying a lot of those constituents and
publishing on the methods they used to do so.
He told you Dr. Rodgman was an excellent scientist.  And
you heard about his speech to the American Chemical Society,
talking about the cancer-causing PAHs, or polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons, that he identified in cigarette smoke.  And he
even drew the compounds.
And the 1964 Surgeon General's Report relied on
Dr. Rodgman's disclosed research on carcinogens.
Dr. Proctor told you that Reynolds made what he
called a huge effort to take out the carcinogens.  When people
identified candidates that might be causing the harm, he told
you Reynolds tried to take them out.  He said Reynolds spent a
fortune trying to do so, and they lowered benzo(a)pyrene, which
Dr. Feingold talked about, and other PAHs. 151
Later on, when Reynolds discovered that
tobacco-specific nitrosamines could be reduced by changing the
way the tobacco barns cured the tobacco, they shared the
discovery with the public and paid to redesign the barns to cut
down on those things.
Can we see Number 41, please.
Larson, Haag, Silvette called that the Green Monster.  
In 1964, General used it -- Surgeon General used it,
thanked the companies for it, and referred to it repeatedly.
Dr. Grunberg told you it's a comprehensive account of
the world literature.  It summarized thousands of articles,
articles both pro and con on the issues, and it was relied upon
by the Surgeon General's Report.  And Dr. Grunberg told you
that his mentor ordered him to read it, and he still uses it
today.
Can we see Number 42, please.
In the 1960s -- you've already seen the meeting
minutes from the NCI.  But in the 1960s, Reynolds provided the
information to the Surgeon General's committee and started
working with the National Cancer Institute on their Tobacco
Working Group.
In the 1970s, they continued that work and looked
into things we looked at before:  the tar-to-nicotine ratio,
the other things that the public health community and folks
like Dr. Russell were proposing. 152
In the 1980s, you saw Reynolds' efforts continued
with this focus on a cigarette that heated, instead of burned,
tobacco.  It's called Premiere and later Eclipse.  Dr. Proctor
told you that Reynolds spent a billion dollars trying to
develop that.
And you saw the notes there that the public health
community didn't even take the time to see whether it did
reduce those carcinogens or not.  It just panned it anyway, out
of hand.
And no matter what Miss London says now, during the
time Mr. Gray was alive, the public health community was
encouraging Reynolds to make lower-tar and nicotine cigarettes.
I want to mention a couple things about CTR.
Dr. Proctor told you that CTR funded research that
produced over 7,000 peer-reviewed articles in prestigious
journals, told you the research had substantial influence on
the public health community.  He told you the grantees were
cited repeatedly, over 600 times, in Surgeon General reports.
He told you that research led to ten Nobel laureates.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is not a record of wanton
conduct and disregard for human life.  This is a record of
trying to lower the risks of an inherently risky, but always
lawful, product.  This is a record of a contribution to science
that was recognized by the public health community.
There were some successes and some failures, but 153
Reynolds tried.  And trying to lower the risks of an inherently
risky, but always legal, product should not be punished or
deterred.
And you also heard how things have changed.
Dr. Proctor talked about previously secret documents.  They're
secrets no more.  He told you there are over 80 million pages
available online and on the public website.
You can take that down, Will.
When this trial is over and the Judge doesn't give
you your admonition and you can go on Bing or Google or Bling,
or whatever you want to, if you want to, you can go online and
look at all of these internal documents.
If the company position on smoking and health and
addiction throughout the years angers you, you heard that that
position has now changed.
Over a decade ago, Reynolds finally admitted that
smoking caused cancer and was addictive.
And you saw Dr. Gentry yesterday.  And it is
Dr. Gentry.  And I tried to be respectful of every one of their
witnesses and called them "Doctor" if they were doctor.  It is
Dr. Gentry.
Dr. Gentry said that he didn't disagree that smoking
caused disease or that smoking was addictive.  In fact, over
and over and over and over again, he answered the question the
same way.  He told Mr. Wilner, "Yes, cigarettes are addictive, 154
and we're trying to get the harmful constituents down in smoke.
We know it's risky."  
He mentioned that cigarettes are now under FDA
regulation, and he said he would hope to develop a better
relationship with those regulators.
Looking at all this evidence, there's no need to
punish or deter Reynolds for changes that took place over a
decade ago.
So if you get to this point on the verdict form --
one more switch, Glenn; sorry -- in Question Number 11, you
cannot find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive
damages are warranted.
Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Gray made choices
throughout his entire life.  He chose his profession, he chose
his lifestyle, he chose his golf partners, and he chose to
smoke.
And just as we should respect Mr. Gray for his
successes in his life, we should respect his choice to smoke.
And we should respect that he made that choice to continue
smoking for a number of years.  He made that choice in the face
of news reports about the risks, in the face of warnings from
his wife, his cousin, his children, and his doctor.
He ignored requests that he stop until the timing was
right.  And when the timing was right, he did quit.  But then
he made a choice to start smoking again, after months or years 155
of quitting, when he wanted to, when he was out with his
friends at a football game or just for the hell of it.  We
should respect those choices as well.
Mr. Gray was not a victim.  He lived his life the way
he wanted to, and he enjoyed his life.  He did what he wanted
when he wanted, how he wanted.
Don't reward the Plaintiff by making Mr. Gray a
victim in this lawsuit because of his choices.
Now, this is the only chance I get to speak with you.
I don't know if Miss London saved any of her time for
rebuttal, but because I can't respond to her, I ask you to keep
in mind how we've responded throughout this trial to give you
the other half of the story.
And as you deliberate, I ask you to keep the full
story in mind and answer Miss London and any questions you have
as you think we would.
I told you I would do this at every step of the way.
I'm going to conclude how I began, and that's by thanking you.
I thank you for your time and attention over the past two weeks
and especially for your time and attention to my remarks today.
Thank you.