MR. BIGGER: Counsel. Counsel.
Good morning.
JURORS: Good morning.
MR. BIGGER: I know it's been a lot of -sometimes it's been a lot of hurry up and wait and hurry up and wait, and everyone here appreciates your patience. I know it's taken two weeks out of your lives to come, go through this process.
We all appreciate what you've done, the jury service you've given us, you've been an extremely attentive jury, listened to everybody, listened to
both sides of the case, we've noticed that, and we appreciate it. It wouldn't work without folks like yourself coming from the community and doing thi
And so this is the last -- well, second-to-last time I get to talk to you. You will hear from me now and then defense will go, and the I'll have chance to get up again to respond. Since we have the burden of proof, I get to go last. I go first and I get to go last.
But I just want to say thank you on behalf of my client, Mr. Rizzuto, for your attentiveness and diligence.
If we can go to slide 1.
At the outset of this case, I told you that this was an important case to John Rizzuto and to all parties, but this is an important case to John Rizzuto. You are his only jury. This is his only case. He's not going to be able to come back another time, there is no -- nothing for him to do in the future. This is his one time, and you are his one jury, and this is a very important case to Mr. Rizzuto.
I think you've seen from the evidence that has come out in this case during the course of the trial that there are in many ways just two
different views of the evidence or two different belief systems, if you will, as to what the evidence shows in this case or what the evidence has proven in this case.
And to summarize those, if we can go to slide
2,	one side of the case believes that the evidence has shown that the ultimate responsibility for the devastating consequences, as you've seen in the evidence, the devastating consequence to Mr. Rizzuto of a lifetime addiction to cigarette smoking, is a shared responsibility due to the fact those cigarettes are defectively designed and the companies acted negligently.
The other side of the case believes the tobacco companies have no fault.
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Your Honor, as discussed previously.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BIGGER: As you heard in the instructions they believe they have no fault for the devastating consequences to Mr. Rizzuto despite what you'll hear that he is a class member, as the evidence has shown, and these companies acted negligently, the designed defective nicotine delivery devices, cigarettes, that's what they are, they concealed
and they conspired to conceal the health effects and the addictive nature of smoking.
And your verdict in this case will speak the truth to which of those is correct, and that's what we've been asking you to do since the beginning.
We believe we have proven our case. We believe have met our burden.
If we can go to the next slide.
At the beginning of the case, I also mentioned that it's important to keep your eye on the ball.
And there were a number of issues that were brough up at different times, different things that came into the case, different questions and different things on -- that the parties presented that aren't going to be issues in the case. You're not going to see them on the verdict form.
The judge told you he is going to -- you are going to answer some questions, that's going to be on the verdict form. I'll show you what that looks like right now.
Can we switch to the Elmo for a second?
So this is your jury verdict form. There is going to be seven questions on it altogether, and there will be some instructions for you to follow, and you will see there is seven questions on there.
As you look at this verdict form -You can switch back, Danny.
As you look at this verdict form when you go back and you're reaching your decisions, there is going to be a couple important things for you to do. The first thing is you are going to have to elect a foreperson. Someone is going to have to make the role of foreperson and be the sort of decider or leader, if you will.
The second thing is obviously to answer those questions, but before you answer the questions, it's important that y'all deliberate because you all sat here, you heard the evidence, you all may have different views on what the evidence shows.
It's important to discuss that because your role is going to be applying the evidence in this case to the law the judge instructed you on. And you'll have a copy of those instructions. You'll have the law as well for you to apply to this case from the evidence that you've heard.
Now, what you're going to see on that verdict form or what you're not going to see on the verdic form are some things we told you in the beginning If we can go to the next slide.
These questions will never be on that verdict
form, they're not on there. You can look at it and see, whether Mr. Rizzuto, whether John was able to quit. Whether he lost total control over his smoking. Whether he chose to smoke or whether h deserves to be rewarded for smoking. Those aren't any of the questions you are going to be asked to answer in this case.
The questions you are going to be asked to answer in this case, you are going to have to look at them from the same measure we told you about i the beginning.
If we can go to the next slide.
You are going to have to look at those, and you're going to have to look at whether we proved our case by this standard, it's instruction number
3	in your instructions, and the judge told you that the greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in this case.
Look at the entire case. We started this case on Thursday, we had opening statements a week ag Thursday. We put on our first witness,
Dr. Henningfield, and then we continued with our case. We rested yesterday morning. The defense started their case and they rested yesterday
afternoon.
You want to look at it all. Look at the entire case and say did we have the more persuasiv and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence, did we prove our case, that's the standard we apply, and you'll apply that standard to those questions on that verdict form.
And I have a slide that in some ways shorthands it, just because I didn't have enough space.
But as I've said, there is seven questions for you to answer. So the first question you are going to have to answer is, is Mr. Rizzuto a member of the Engle class? That's that first question on the verdict form.
Second question is, and it's really two questions, which is why it's in blue, was Mr. Rizzuto impacted by the tobacco industry's anc by these defendants' fraudulent concealment and/or their conspiracy to conceal?
So you're going to see the first question number 2 is on fraudulent concealment, did the concealment of these companies cause injury to Mr. Rizzuto, was it some insubstantial thing or did it cause him injury. Third question is, was it
just these defendants or was it the effect of the entire industry.
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Your Honor, for th reasons noted earlier.
THE COURT: Okay. Overruled. Go ahead.
MR. BIGGER: Was it the entire industry, working collaboratively as you saw through those organizations, the Council For Tobacco Research, the Tobacco Institute, all the things they did throughout those decades, was it the collaborative effort of an industry as a whole trying to silence a message or create controversy, did that have an impact on Mr. Rizzuto or was it meaningless.
What portion of the shared responsibility for John Rizzuto's injuries belongs -MR. GERAGHTY: Same objection, Your Honor. THE COURT: Okay.
MR. BIGGER: -- belongs to Philip Morris and Liggett. So this question is going to be here.
I'll just show you.
If we can switch to this, Danny.
After you get through the fraud and the conspiracy to conceal, the next question is going to be number 4, please state the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of John Rizzuto's
COPD/emphysema that you charge to the parties in this case.
And as you heard the judge, the next two lines are going to be damages, and there will be an instruction down here that says, "In determining, do not make any reduction because of the fault.
The court will make the appropriate reductions as required by law."
MR. GERAGHTY: Same objection, Your Hono THE COURT: Okay.
MR. BIGGER: So the damages question it's going to ask you what is full and fair compensation to what happened to Mr. Rizzuto already and for what is going to happen to him soon. And you hear the standard is reasonably certain. What is he reasonably certain to incur in the future, what does his future look like based on the evidence that we brought you.
And finally, what message needs to be sent to these companies to punish them for what they did to Mr. Rizzuto and to deter them or any other compan from ever acting this way again.
That decision is entirely up to you. That's the only one, question number 7, lucky number 7, is the one that has a higher standard because as I
said in opening, we don't want to just punish companies if they are not acting to very a reprehensible level.
You can look at the evidence in this case, look at what this industry and look at what these companies did over the years and decide is this the kind of case where a message needs to be sent to punish and deter.
Can you go to the next slide, Danny?
You've seen these before. A couple of them were really foundational issues. I just wanted to put a few of them up here.
So Mr. Rizzuto has been a Florida citizen and resident, that relates to that Engle class membership thing. Philip Morris, a Virginia corporation.
At all relevant times, Marlboro cigarettes were manufactured by Philip Morris, that's Philip Morris is Marlboro. Marlboro cigarettes contain nicotine. At all relevant times, L&M cigarettes were manufactured by Liggett. L&M cigarettes contain nicotine.
Nicotine in cigarettes is addictive and/or dependence producing. That's a stipulation, no dispute. Cigarette smoking causes COPD. And nc
just generally, but for Mr. Rizzuto. The defendants have stipulated, before we even came here, that cigarette smoking was the medical cause of his COPD. So those are facts that we can accep as true. We don't have to worry about putting on evidence of that in this case.
Now, the first question, as I said, is Engle class membership. And this is the broader view oi the definition, but on or before November 21st, 1996, a person had to be a Florida citizen or resident, you saw that, suffer from a disease caused by smoking, you also saw that.
So as I told you in the beginning, you are going to hear a lot from us about whether Mr. Rizzuto was addicted and, if so, as we believe why that addiction was the legal cause of his emphysema. Those are the two questions that are there.
And if we go to the verdict form, you can switch to here, you'll see that. So question number 1 -- I'll figure this out one of these days.
Question number 1 says, "Was John J. Rizzuto addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his chronic obstructive pulmonary disease?"
That's the class membership question. And you can see down here there are instructions. If you answer no to this, that means the defendants win.
If you answer yes, you'll proceed on and you'll answer the rest of the questions and follow the other instructions on the verdict form.
So first part of the Engle class membership is addiction. We brought you from the beginning of our case Dr. Jack Henningfield, we also brought you Dr. Michael Cummings, and they talked to you ab in their opinion, based on all their experience you heard about, the work with the Surgeon General, the work in the World Health Organization, running smoking cessation clinics, working for NIDA, the National Institute of Drug Abuse, these were some of the leading experts in the world on these issues that are asked by these organizations to assist.
They came in and they reviewed the materials pertinent to Mr. Rizzuto, they looked at it, and they said no doubt, Mr. Rizzuto was an addicted smoker.
In your common sense, you may have gotten that as well from the evidence that you saw from Mr. Rizzuto and from what you saw in the case that he was an addicted smoker throughout those years.
We wanted to explain to you why addiction is such a powerful force. We brought you that evidence that showed that addiction to nicotine is a cycle. It begins in adolescence with teens and preteens.
We brought you the evidence the addiction to nicotine is a disease of the brain. It isn't just something that is inconsequential. It actually changes the structure of the brain, particularly with a developing brain. You even heard that wit! the first witness in the defendant's case yesterday.
Dr. Benowitz was testifying, he said when we did tests on rats, there is young rats, it changes the brain; with adult brains, it doesn't. Those brain changes happen when the developing brain i occurring if nicotine gets in there, and it is something that is very, very difficult, then, throughout that person's life to resist because the brain is changed.
Addiction in nicotine involves physiological and behavioral components. It's not simply a habit, like biting your nails or other things that we call habits. It's actually a physiological addiction. There is a drug in there that the body
has taken in, that the chemical processes of the brain have changed, and that person is different, there is a physiological addiction now.
You even saw it in the defendants' own documents. They acknowledged that themselves in their documents. The testimony of those corporate executives through their documents acknowledged that.
Addiction often results in relapse despite efforts to quit. Known fact. It takes numerous quit attempts, most people fail in their first -95 percent of smokers fail in their first quit attempt. Most take seven times or more before succeeding.
We saw that not only in the evidence of the experts on that generically, you also saw that with Mr. Rizzuto. He tried and tried and tried, there was relapse, he tried to quit, that's what it takes.
And psychoactive effects of nicotine mediate mood and feeling. You heard that from Drs. Henningfield and Drs. Cummings that oftentim people say I smoke when I'm stressed out, because their body is going through withdrawal. There is withdrawal not simply from a long quit attempt.
There is withdrawal from cigarette to cigarette.
You heard about how that nicotine metabolizes and there is a life, if you will, where as your body, the tanks get a little lower, gets a little empty, your body starts telling you, you get that urge, that feeling, that craving, that's your body wanting the nicotine, that's what it does to the addicted smokers.
I think you heard from Dr. Benowitz yesterday in the defense case that it's like a thirst or a hunger. If you're thirsty, you want a drink. Nicotine addicts are thirsty, but they don't need a drink of water, they need nicotine, and they get it from a cigarette.
Surgeon General Koop, you -- one of his pieces of -- and, you know, I should -- excuse me, forgiv me. We have a board, there is a lot of evidence that came in to this case, and what we have tried to do is just give you a place to start, if you will, for the areas that you need to look at to look at our case.
Can anyone see that?
JURORS: (Nods head affirmatively.)
MR. BIGGER: Okay. Just a place to start. There is obviously more evidence than that, but w
tried to give you a place to start if you wanted to know what evidence there was on these issues, if you're back there in the verdict room, you want to look at the evidence and you want to deliberate, look at the evidence, talk about it, that's a chance for you to at least have an idea.
But Surgeon General Koop in 1983, he came ou with the Surgeon General's Report and said after examining all the available evidence, this report concludes that cigarettes and other forms of tobacco, addicting, nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction, and the pharmacologic and behavioral processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine.
We even heard that in the evidence yesterday from Dr. Benowitz again, that the addicts, people who are addicted to heroin and cocaine, they go through rehab and they're able to get off those, they still can't quit smoking.
Alcoholics are able to go through detox and get off alcohol, but they smoke. They can't even kick cigarettes, despite the fact they kick those.
It's a deep and entranced addiction.
And it's not just our words. Philip Morris's
own words, we know this to be the case. These words are completely applicable to Mr. Rizzuto's circumstances. This is Philip Morris acknowledgin themselves finally, after they came clean, acknowledged that nicotine is addictive. They said in 2003, "The younger people are when they start smoking, the more likely they are to become strongly addicted to nicotine.
"Symptoms of addiction, having strong urges to smoke, feeling anxious or irritable, or having unsuccessfully tried not to smoke, can appear in teens and preteens within weeks or only days after they become occasional smokers."
Those are Philip Morris's words acknowledging what is true for Mr. Rizzuto, what was true for Mr. Rizzuto. He started at 13 years old. He became strongly addicted to nicotine. He had those symptoms of addiction, only weeks or days after he became an occasional smoker.
Now, he wasn't smoking Philip Morris cigarettes back then, it was L&Ms. He started on that path with those L&M cigarettes. Those were available to him, that's what he bought. Remember you heard from him, he said he would take Coke bottles and cans just to get a couple of nickels to
get 30 cents to buy a pack of L&Ms.
That's what he started with. And the addiction started all the way back then. And it continued on as Philip Morris lured him over to their brands and got him into Marlboros and made him a customer for life, the addiction continued.
It was just a continuous cycle as you saw from Dr. Cummings. Once you get into that cycle, it is very, very difficult to break out.
The evidence was abundantly clear with regard to Mr. Rizzuto's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine. You heard there are these people called chippers who are just occasional smokers who smok occasionally. There is people who want to smoke, they just enjoy it, they don't want to quit.
You saw from this case, that's not this case.
That does not fit this case. Mr. Rizzuto was not someone who was a chipper. He was someone who smoked heavily, one to two packs a day. Just to give you an idea what that is, I tried to bring a small example to kind of visualize that.
Got a bad leg. I'll just hold it.
Theatric effects, Your Honor.
That's one pack-year. That's one pack-year.
365 packs, one pack a day, one year, right here.
Two of these, when it was the L&Ms and when it w< Philip Morris, Marlboros, that's what Mr. Rizzuto was smoking.
This isn't someone who is an unaddicted smoker just smoking because they enjoy it, smoking for pleasure, smoking for taste or the blend. This is a person who is smoking because they need the nicotine.
He became a regular smoker when he was 13, yoi heard about that from him in his own words, you heard about that from the experts. First thing in the morning, tried to quit many times, '70s, '80s,
'90s.
It's documented in the records before this lawsuit was ever filed, before we ever came to court, started six years ago before we ever got here, in the records Mr. Rizzuto was telling his physician I want to quit, but I have a hard time discontinuing this habit. I desire to quit, I'm trying to cut back, I'm trying to stop.
It was in there before we ever came here. The cravings from Dr. Sorresso. The diagnosis from Dr. Pirrello that he was nicotine dependent, cigarette dependent, that was in there before we ever came in there. That was 1994. That was when
their executives were standing up before Congress saying nicotine is not addictive. Mr. Rizzuto's doctor is diagnosing him as nicotine dependent.
All these facts were in. They calmed him.
There were times when he chain smoked. He was irritable, anxious, you heard about that in the '80s when he became abrupt. Those are difficult.
You know, someone remembering these things in 2008, remembering back to 1984, were you irritable were you anxious, in his own words he told you he was abrupt, he was short with his kids, you know, he was a different person.
I mean, those are the way that people describe these things remembering back, you know, 30 years at that point or almost 30 years at that point trying to describe it to someone, a defense attorney in deposition, that's how it's done.
He would leave the movie theater. The only place he didn't smoke really was church during mass. It was an hour long, and he would get out, and he would have a cigarette. He still craves cigarettes. Thinks about them weekly if not daily. He gained the weight. And he had that last cigarette right before bed. That's an addicted smoker, folks, no doubt about it.
Once you decide Mr. Rizzuto is addicted, the next question is was the addiction the legal cause of injury. Okay? And there is an instruction the Court gave you, he read it to you, you'll have it back there.
Instruction 4 is the one that deals with this, and it's the second piece of that class memberships. But if I may, addiction is a legal cause of injury if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such injury so that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction, the injury would not have occurred.
And in order to be regarded as a legal cause, addiction need not be the only cause. It may be a legal cause even though it operates in combinatio with the act of another, some other cause, if the addiction contributes substantially.
You have heard testimony in this case there are many causes. What the law requires is that that addiction be one among many.
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Your Honor, misstates the legal instructions.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BIGGER: What the law requires is that
that would be one among many. And you can look the evidence and you can say was that addiction a substantial contributing cause or was it just some insubstantial thing. That's what it means, was it insubstantial.
If you decide it wasn't a legal cause, you have to say that a 39-, 40-year addiction to cigarettes, smoking two of these a year, doing all those things we saw on that was just some insubstantial thing that led to emphysema. The evidence is not consistent with that picture.
You heard about even the genetics. There's other causes in there. So the Surgeon General which we put into evidence, that's Exhibit Number 22, 2010 in the most concise fashion it just summarizes how this point works. Nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products and this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases described in this report.
The addiction is a contributor to heavy smoking, the 39, 40 years of heavy smoking, the heavy smoking stipulated is what caused the emphysema. That's how smoking is the legal cause of emphysema. You saw from the Surgeon General
you heard it from Dr. Cummings, you understand it from your own common sense, that's how addiction leads to these diseases.
These diseases don't happen to the social smokers. Remember the amount of exposure where person has a few, what that adds up to versus the 5 million or 3 million exposure the heavy addicted smoker has. That's why that burden, you heard from Dr. Benowitz yesterday morning, 400,000 a year because of that exposure, time and time again, daily, 20 year, 40, 60, just keep it going, all those exposures over that lifetime from an addiction, that's how it causes disease.
Once you have determined that Mr. Rizzuto is an Engle class member, that's when those findings kick in. So answering question 1 I think is the only way consistent with the evidence. Oh, excuse me.
Can you switch over here for a second, Danny?
Mr. Rizzuto was addicted and his addiction was a legal cause of his COPD. We believe that's the answer for that question. And once you answer that question that way, the Engle findings come in, and we told you at the beginning we had a few different claims in this case. There is negligence, there is
strict liability, there is fraud to conceal, fraudulent concealment, and then there is a conspiracy to conceal. And that's what these findings relate to.
So Philip Morris and Liggett Group were negligent. That's the negligence claim. It's already established for class members like Mr. Rizzuto that Philip Morris was negligent, that was determined. The question here is was his addiction a legal cause. Because they made -negligently designed those cigarettes. They're defective cigarettes.
Number 4, they placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. Number 5, they concealed or omitted. Concealed o omitted is important. Omitted is telling someone something that doesn't have all the truth in it. Concealed is just not telling anybody anything.
You saw the evidence of both in this case. That's why it says they concealed or omitted. They did it both. Material information not otherwise known oi available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes.
And then the sixth one down there, that's the conspiracy finding. It's a long one, but it's long because it has all those other companies in there. You've heard some of those names during the evidence. Those are the names of the other companies.
This wasn't something that Philip Morris and Liggett just did on their own or that they did even individually. This was done by the entire industry because that's what made it so effective.
The entire industry walled up, they put up that industry shield, the front organization, CTR. They fronted friendly research, they tried to suppress research. All those things you heard about, they did it as an industry, and the force of the industry was as strong if not stronger than what these individual defendants could have done their own.
I think I told you during opening statements sometimes if you're a basketball fan the analogy works, if you're not, this will probably go over your head, basketball is a team game, there's five players, but sometimes there is the all-star, the guy who's the greatest player who beats you that night. He scores 50 points and he beats you on his
own. Sometimes the whole team beats you. You know, the team plays well together, the team beats you. That's what this is about.
Philip Morris, they obviously were an all-star. You saw their success, you saw their sales, you saw how they dominated the marketplace. Sometimes Philip Morris beats us. We believe Philip Morris beat Mr. Rizzuto. Their concealment had an impact on him. But the entire industry's activity had an impact on Mr. Rizzuto as well, and that's what that sixth finding relates to.
You recall this from the beginning. We told you we would prove our case. We told you this was what we were going to prove through the evidence in this case, that the business model of these tobacco companies was to attract teenagers and college students, trap them in an addiction cycle for as long as possible, and then repeat indefinitely with new smokers when the old smokers died or quit.
We've proved that to you not through anything I've said, we've proved that to you through their own documents. The testimony of their own executives, through those documents made at the time, 20, 30, 40, 50 years ago, even more, 60 years ago. The testimony of those executives proved our
case.
What did they do? Same slide from opening, I want to show you that we proved our case by walki through it. They attract teenagers and college students by making it seem like a thing for grownups and mature, a rite of passage. You heard that from Mr. Rizzuto.
He felt like it was the thing, it was popular, it was cool, he felt mature, he was older, he was part of that crowd. They make smoking socially acceptable and culturally very prominent.
The modern -- and I misspoke during opening and they called me on it, but the modern cigarette didn't exist. Cigarettes existed, but not like we have today, not what caused this, not what caused 450,000 deaths a year.
The modern cigarette industry didn't exist before the turn of the century, early 1900s, and it was from the advertising and promotion of that industry, the mass advertising campaigns that led to what we have today, led to this generation of addicted smokers.
You remember all the -- you'll see it again in a moment, but the celebrities, the movie stars, the athletes, the doctors. Doctors. Doctors smoked
cigarettes, it's okay. The acceptability that was promoted by the industry was intended to do exactly what it did, it's to create a generation of smokers. Half, in the '50s half of the people 15 and over were smokers. That's from their own documents. They knew that.
Now, what did they say privately about this.
What did they say privately. Well, in 1959, before Mr. Rizzuto had ever even touched a cigarette, "We should win more young nonsmokers with mildness." More young nonsmokers. They were trying to desig their cigarettes, like you've heard from Dr. Henningfield and Dr. Cummings, with mildness, make the smoke easier to get in to get young nonsmokers. This is 1959.
I asked Miss Bonhomme about this. You saw her. She was the corporate designee. So Philip Morris obviously is a corporation, they can't -it's a company, so it's, you know, but it's a person under the law, but they can't appear here.
If you have to ask the company questions about what the company knew and when, they designate a perso to speak. And you heard from her.
I asked her this question, I said, "You would agree with me that a goal of all the marketing,
advertising, and promotion of Marlboro cigarettes was done to sell cigarettes?" And she said, "Well, the goal of the marketing is to sell cigarettes to adult smokers in the United States."
Didn't sit right, so I asked her again and I wanted to clarify. "Is it your testimony on behalf of Philip Morris that the only people to whom Marlboro marketing, advertising, promotions were directed is to current adult cigarette smokers?"
"That is my testimony." Speaking on behalf of Philip Morris under oath. February of 2010 -- 13.
2013.
We showed you the documents. Exhibit Number 25, it's over there on the place to start board.
This is from 1981, it was that 15-year look back at the success and the growth of Marlboro. "It is important to know as much as possible about teenage smoking patterns and attitudes. Today's teenager is tomorrow's potential regular customer, and the overwhelming majority of smokers first begin to smoke while still in their teens. The smoking patterns of teenagers are particularly important to Philip Morris. At least part of the success of Marlboro Red during the most rapid growth period," which Mr. Cummings told you was when Mr. Rizzuto --
they got him, they sucked him in, was because it became the brand of choice among teenagers who the stuck with it as they grew older.
"The decline in the percent of teenagers who smoke, their decreased levels of consumption and the decline in their absolute numbers mean the industry can no longer rely on an ever increasing pool of teenage smokers to replace adult smokers lost through natural attrition."
That wasn't some small thing. That's not wrong headed, folks. That is attracting teenagers, hooking them as kids, getting them in your addiction cycle, and then recognizing that they'll replace those other ones you lost through natural attrition.
Ms. Bonhomme denied it under oath on behalf of the company.
So they engineer addiction. That's the next step. Once they get the kids in, once they get the young in, they start experimenting, they start going down that pathway into the addiction cycle, you've got to keep them there. You heard from Dr. Henningfield, he was the very first witness we had, you remember he did the dissection, and one of the things he did was to show you that you can take
the nicotine out. Remember he did that, put the -he did the dissection, and he put it in there, and he said you can -- soluble, you can get it out of there?
He went through and he told you all the things in there that are not accidents, they're deliberately designed, they're features designed in the cigarette for one purpose, to keep people smoking cigarettes and to get kids smoking cigarettes. Manipulating the nicotine to find that sweet spot.
You might recall the analogy he used was that NASCAR analogy. The cars are all the same. And tobacco contains nicotine. It grows. It's in there.
But what they do is they engineer it, just like those NASCAR cars, they may have the same kind of tools to work with, but why is it that some guys win over and over and over again that have the best cars that have the best -- because they're the best, and that's what Philip Morris was, they were the best. That's why Marlboro became so successful.
He told you about it was the sole of Marlboros that the other companies were looking for, the
industry was trying to figure it out. Why has Marlboro got this figured out? Dr. Henningfield told you it was because of those design features in part, design features and their promotion.
Designing the cigarette to make it elastic so that no matter what the tar and nicotine rating was smoker could get the dose he needed. It was all about getting the smoker what they needed to satisfy their needs.
The vent holes, y'all remember we put that on there, and I think at first Dr. Henningfield couldn't even see them and somebody saw them an said, "There they are." Those vent holes are on there for a reason. That's not an accident and people don't know they're there.
You can't even see them unless you cut the thing open and lay it on a projector to shine a light underneath it. But they're there for a reason. Philip Morris knows they're there. They knew exactly why they were there.
Ash conditioners, even the ash. I mean, they focus grouped the ash to see which ash is the most attractive. That's the level of detail they put into these cigarettes they design, and they're all the same. They're universally the same.
Everywhere you go, you get the same nicotine delivery to make sure that any smoker who is out o their pack for that day, out of their daily supply of nicotine, if they need more, they can go to any convenience store, Walgreens, CVS, grocery store, and get what they need, nevertheless the sweet spot.
The flavorings, the additives make it more inhalable, more tastier, especially for those young smokers that need that mildness. The chemicals, the acetaldehyde, he told you about that, how it contributes and works with it. You saw that wasn't something he was making up. That's from Philip Morris's own documents 1980, Victor DeNoble. H studied it.
He had the rats, he confirmed that nicotine is a reinforcing agent, well known to Philip Morris. Wouldn't let him publish it. Dr. Henningfield told you about that. They also found out that acetaldehyde had something to do with it too. Thai was in smoke, it was a great thing it was there because it made it even stronger.
Go to the next one if you can, Danny.
Chemicals to enhance the freebase formation of nicotine for that impact, that transgeminal nerve
so that as soon as it hits that your brain knows, oh, I know it's coming now, finally, you know, I was craving it, now I'm going to get it. And it starts that process already.
And that process, you remember I told you during opening that process is our natural process.
It is hard wired in every one of us, by God or by nature, to allow us to reinforce those activities that are life preserving, self-preservation.
We get pleasure, those chemicals are released to preserve those most important functions like eating and procreation. Those are the exact same things that their drug devices hijack, that nicotine hijacks and takes over. That's why it is so difficult to quit. That's the disease of the brain.
Marketing the products, the efforts to fight, we'll talk about that a little bit more.
So what do they say privately again? What do they acknowledge in their own documents? What w; the testimony of their executives that we brought you that you had to hear what they knew for so long?
1963, John had just started smoking. Just started smoking. The Surgeon General's Report had
not come out. There were no warning labels on cigarette packs. According to Philip Morris's document, he was probably already addicted. Their document says that those symptoms start after just occasional smoke for teens and how dangerous it is when teens are smoking. What do they know? "Moreover, nicotine is addictive. We are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug."
The question you needed to ask yourself is why aren't they telling people this? Why didn't they just say this? If it's no big deal, if everybody knew, if it was in the scientific literature, why the concealment? Why the conspiracy? Why?
Because this was their secret to their business and they knew when the secret got out, people were going to start trying to quit and weren't going to start smoking, and that's why rates have gone down. You saw on that chart, once the word started getting out, smoking rates have gone down. They still got their hooks in enough to keep them going, but -MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Your Honor. I w object and move to strike.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BIGGER: The rates go down.
MR. GERAGHTY: Motion, Your Honor.
MR. BIGGER: The -- oh, we can go to the next one.
Philip Morris, 1980. Looking down at the bottom, their nicotine program. "My reason for this high priority is that I believe the thing we sell most is nicotine." This is 20 -- what, 25 years later. Not quite 20 years later. Better at math. "I believe the thing we sell most is nicotine." They acknowledged it, but they weren't telling anyone else. They weren't acknowledging it to anyone else at all, they weren't saying this.
Smoker psychology program review, 1977. Abou the time John is trying to cut down, cut back because of the cost, he wants to quit, he desired to quit, it was expensive, he didn't know at the time what they knew about the health consequences, but he wanted quit. What did they know? They kne he was like a rat pressing a hungry lever, okay?
"Operant conditioning is quite different.
Consider the classical operant experiment. Put a hungry rat in a cage, put a lever in the cage, make it so that a push on the lever delivers a pellet of food. In its random movements, the rat will push
the lever, he'll get the pellet. The rat will soon associate lever pushing with the food pellet. Consider the smoker. Smoking the cigarette is the lever press. The effect of that smoking act upon his person is the reward. That effect reinforces the smoking act." He comes to push the lever ten, 20, 30, 40, 60 times a day if you're smoking three packs a day.
They knew, they knew their smokers were like rats, like lab rats, and they just kept on treating them that way, that's what they did, to people like Mr. Rizzuto and others like him.
What was the result? You saw this one during opening too. We showed you that before the turn of the century, the modern cigarette industry, people weren't smoking. You know, people were smoking some cigars, they were using some tobacco, but you didn't have the epidemic, the crisis that we had rise because of this. Up to 700 billion in 1980 at the peak.
It worked. Their plan to attract teenagers, to engineer addiction and keep them smoking worke Philip Morris, Liggett and Philip Morris got a lifetime customer when they got these kids in it, just like Mr. Rizzuto, they attracted him in.
So if we can go over here.
The next two questions you're going to have is was the concealment or omission of material information about the health effects a legal cause of John J. Rizzuto's COPD/emphysema. Yes, no as each company. On the third question, it's a little different because this is the conspiracy one.
There is not a question as to each company, because they're all responsible for what the other ones did.
In a conspiracy, you heard the judge, each coconspirator is responsible for what the other ones did. In for a penny, in for a pound, they're all in it together. Liggett's in with them, too.
They got in four years later, but they went right along with it as soon as they got into it. They didn't ever sound an alarm. Was the defendants' conspiracy to conceal information a legal cause of Mr. Rizzuto's COPD/emphysema, so these are the questions you have to answer. We've talked about this a little bit already.
You can go back to the slide, Danny, just for a sec.
Another way that I've said that is was the concealment and conspiracy meaningless, or did it
have some impact on Mr. Rizzuto. There is a reas I say it like that. Again, in the instructions, this is the law that the Court gave you, and there is going to be two of them, instruction 5 and instruction 6, and they look very similar, the concealment and the conspiracy are similar type claims, but this is the sort of essential point and it's a little longer instruction and you'll see that, but these are the essential points.
A material fact is one that is of such importance that Mr. Rizzuto would not have acted he did but for Philip Morris's concealment or omission of the fact. So it tells you, the stuff they concealed is the stuff that was of such importance that Mr. Rizzuto would not have acted he did but for their concealment. It's a legal cause of injury if it directly and in natural continuous sequences produces or contributes substantially to producing.
It's the same as the legal cause for the addiction. That's the language that is required to prove legal cause for these claims. And then there is a concurring cause one, too, same thing in the bottom. Doesn't have to be the only cause and it's not the only cause, there is some things.
Mr. Rizzuto himself has some partial responsibility.
MR. GERAGHTY: Object. Your Honor, I obje for the reasons we discussed yesterday.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. GERAGHTY: Motion, Your Honor.
MR. BIGGER: So you look at that and you say that -- I'm sorry, excuse me. You look at that and you say was it some insubstantial thing or did it contribute substantially to produce. That's what you have to decide. Was this orchestrated effort by the industry something insubstantial or was it some substantial thing. 6, as I said, is very similar, that's the one for the conspiracy.
Look back at the evidence. Let's look back at the evidence. What was the evidence in this case about the conspiracy? Was it insubstantial or was it meaningless or was it something that had an impact on Mr. Rizzuto?
1958, Mr. Rizzuto has never touched a cigarette yet, hasn't started smoking. 1958, that British American Tobacco Company comes to the this is four years into the conspiracy after that meeting at the Plaza Hotel, they issue the Frank Statement, they accept a responsibility, a basic
responsibility in the lives of their customers.
1958, Liggett & Myers, Philip Morris, the two defendants here, A.D. Little, which was Liggett & Myers's outside contractor, and TIRC, that's the industry shield that they set up, they came and visited them, they talked to them all, they asked them all what do you know about whether smoking causes lung cancer, what is the state of the art, what do we know?
With the exception of that one individual from Yale, the individuals whom we met believe that smoking causes lung cancer if causation we mean an change of events which leads finally to lung cancer and which -- it should be which, involves smoking as an indispensable link.
They knew it in 1958, both of these defendants knew it in 1958, before Mr. Rizzuto ever touched a cigarette. They just didn't tell anybody. They didn't tell anybody. There was hearings going on. You heard about Leroy Burney, you heard about the things that were taking place in the joint study in 1957.
The scientists, the public health was trying to get this message out too, but they were being stifled by the TIRC, by the shield, it was
suppressing us. They were putting out counter statements. If they would just say this, just say this, tell people, tell your customers.
1961, a couple years later, Mr. Rizzuto, probably about the time he just started smoking, he said it was the spring of '61, this is March 1961, this is L&M cigarettes. There are biologically active materials present in cigarettes, tobacco. These are the cancer-causing, cancer-promoting poisons.
Just tell people. They just didn't tell anybody. They concealed it. They kept it to themselves.
1961, they had some -- they looked at the information. There was some information availabl in the public. They looked at it, Philip Morris did, they analyzed it in 1961, they looked at some of the work the scientists were doing. They agreed with the scientists. Carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke.
Present technology does not permit selective filtration. It's -- there is bad stuff in our cigarettes, and we can't take it out. Contrary to what we said before, if there is ever anything harmful, we'll stop making it, we'll not do it
anymore, here it is, there is harmful things in our cigarettes.
Presentation to -- I think this is the board or, you know, R&D committee, this is Dr. Wakeham presenting to higher-ups in the company, senior executives, decision-makers in the company, there's bad things in our cigarette we can't take them out.
What should we do? What would a responsible company do?
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Your Honor, move to strike.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BIGGER: Surgeon General's Report comes out in 1964. George Weissman who was a executive at Philip Morris to Joe Cullman, president of the company. We must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking.
What was it you heard from Dr. Henningfield and you heard from Dr. Cummings? What is it smokers need that addicts need? They need that rationale, that psychological crutch, that little bit of doubt, just maybe it's not going to happen to me. The warning label, it may, may not, maybe it will happen to me, you heard the evidence, it
was clear. Not everybody is that way. Mr. Rizzuto was. It may not happen to me. He had that psychological crutch. They gave him the psychological crutch and the self-rationale to continue smoking, and now they want to use it against him.
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Your Honor, I'd m to strike the comment.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BIGGER: So in 1968, the controversy is continuing. This is where they did that Tiderock thing, they were going to do that huge new thing to restart the controversy, this is Earle Clements, the former senator who was in charge of the Tobacco Institute, recognizing in unequivocal terms, "Our basic position in the cigarette controversy, what we are doing now is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes."
This was their representative. These aren't random people. They created this organization, they put their executives in charge of it, both Philip Morris and Liggett were in charge of this organization.
These were their spokespersons. These were the people that they had putting their message out as a shield, as a front. And this is what their own people recognized at that time, in '68. '68.
1972,	while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed, helping us win important battles, it is only fair to say it is not nor was it intended to be a vehicle for victory. It's a holding strategy.
Holding strategy because, as you saw in the business model, get kids in, engineer addiction, and when people quit or die, replace them with new ones. That's why they needed a holding strategy, because their business was a cycle, and they knew they would have more teenagers, more kids comin in, get them addicted. If some quit, let's just get some more. They just needed a holding strategy.
THE COURT: You used 48 minutes.
MR. BIGGER: Yes, sir. I'll try and move through this quicker. Thank you for letting me know, Your Honor.
Why was it all happening? What was the biggest fear, what was the biggest concern? Right here. 1980, the National Institute of Drug Abuse,
NIDA, was going to put a warning, they were going to put a warning on cigarette packs that cigarette smoking is addictive, nicotine is addictive and the alarm bells went off because the secret was about to get out.
I am told the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. We can't defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. This was those same individuals, this was their industry shield, their representative speaking on their behalf. This is what they recognized and acknowledged. It's not about choice, it isn't about free choice. A person is addicted.
They knew it then, they know it today.
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Your Honor, I move to strike.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BIGGER: I told you at the outset of the case that obviously the judge told you that common sense, you can apply that. You've got to go back, though. It's like we've talked about, you've got to go back, what was common sense, what was reasonable at the time, back into that time, into
that era. Given everything these companies were doing, the industry was doing, given everything that was promoted, given what a kid was growing up with at the time, you remember these.
These were the ones that me and Mr. Rizzuto talked about, you know, the significance of those things, that the icons at the time were promoting it, doing it, advertising it, they were used in celebrity endorsements as well, they were on television, they were everywhere.
Oh. Hold on a second. Let me go to the Elmo for a second. We believe the evidence is clear.
It wasn't just the concealment, it was the entire conspiracy, it was the whole thing, it was the entire industry. And the question we're on now is number 4. So looking at number 4, we've told you this already, that Mr. Rizzuto accepts his fault and -MR. GERAGHTY: We object, Your Honor, with statement.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BIGGER: Accepts his fault and wants a fair portion of the responsibility. And you heard the instructions from the Court, I think it's instruction 10, I believe, but there will be an
instruction that guides you on this.
You put the percentages down, the Court handles the rest. You don't reduce the damages yourself. You don't take the numbers out and do the math yourself, the Court does that.
The only question the evidence has shown is what portion belongs on the tobacco companies who created and designed nicotine delivery devices, marketed to ensnare teens into the addiction cycle, and then made them customers for life, what is their fair share of that responsibility?
At the time Mr. Rizzuto was being diagnosed with COPD after a lifetime of being a faithful customer of Philip Morris and L&M, after getting o: the track, at the time that he was being diagnosed with a disease that will continue to affect him for the rest of his life and affect him as you saw in a pretty substantial way, what were these companies doing at that time when he's getting diagnosed with COPD?
(Video clip played as follows:)
SPEAKER: I'd like you to rise, and those who will be testifying as well, rise.
Would you raise your right hand. Do you swear that the testimony you're about to give is the
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth?
SPEAKERS: I do.
SPEAKER: Please consider yourself to be under oath.
MR. WYDEN: Let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive.
Let me ask you first, and I'd like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. I heard virtually all of you touch on it and just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
MR. CAMPBELL: I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
MR. WYDEN: Mr. Johnston.
MR. JAMES JOHNSTON: Congressman, cigar and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. There is no intoxication.
MR. WYDEN: We'll take that as a no, and again, time is short. If you can just -- I think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive, and I just would like to have it for the record.
MR. TADDEO: I don't believe that nicotine or our products are addictive.
MR. TISCH: I believe nicotine is not
addictive.
MR. HORRIGAN: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
MR. SANDEFUR: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
MR. DONALD JOHNSTON: And I too believe th nicotine is not addictive.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. BIGGER: Mr. Rizzuto was getting a diagnosis of a chronic, progressive, fatal disease, and they were standing before Congress under the oath in front of God and the American people and saying -MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, I would object to that comment and move to strike, I have a motion.
THE COURT: Sustain.
MR. GERAGHTY: Motion, Your Honor.
THE COURT: I said sustain.
MR. GERAGHTY: But I have a motion in addition.
THE COURT: Okay. You want to -- we'll take it up in a minute. Go ahead.
MR. BIGGER: They took an oath to tell the truth. They stood before Congress. You saw from their own documents what they knew at that time,
that the thing they sell most is nicotine. They knew what they were doing and they said it's not addictive as he's getting the sentence for emphysema.
So the final question -- not final question but the next question you have to answer is what is the fault -- oops, sorry, go over here.
That's a suggestion. It's up to you. You can make those numbers anything you want as long as they're a hundred percent. That is our suggestion from what the evidence has shown.
We can go to the next slide, Danny.
Next question for you is what is full and fair compensation, and there is going to be an instruction, instruction number 8, it tells you what you need to look at, what the -- what evidenc you need to evaluate in this case. Look at that instruction, you read it, you apply it to the evidence in this case.
Mr. Rizzuto was just here on -- you can read that one. Mr. Rizzuto was just here on Wednesday and you heard from him. I'm not going to even try to summarize or retell you what he told you. You all were here, it was just a couple days ago. You remember. Anything that I try to say right now
would be a disservice. It would be not the same as the way he expressed it.
This is his case. This is his only case. And you heard from him what this case means to him an what his future holds, from him and from Dr. Sorresso and from Miss Pennachio. You heard : from all of them. I'm not going to go through that, you all remember it and think about it when you're back there, you remember your memories of your testimony.
So on the -We can go over here, Danny.
That was the number that you saw for the future from Dr. Raffa and Miss Pennachio. I'm going to just give you a range. You are free to reject it, accept it, whatever you want. But this is the total amount for medical expenses in the past and to be incurred in the future.
You saw from the life care plan testimony,
Dr. Raffa's testimony, it's like a prepaid debit card, whatever is put on it for the future is put on it and if there is complications, if it's worse than that minimum life care plan, if things end up being worse, it runs out it runs out.
So it's up to you to decide what he's
reasonably certain to incur. That is a suggestion. Again, like anything else, you're free to follow it, accept it, reject it.
The second line is what is the amount of his damages for pain and suffering, disability, physical impairment, disease, mental anguish, inconvenience, aggravation, loss of capacity for the enjoyment of life, in the past and in the future.
He's had COPD now for almost 20 years. According to the actuarial tables, it will be another 16 years if he should live out. I think you've got a clear picture of what those 16 years will look like from him, from Dr. Sorresso, from this. This is obviously the most substantial aspect, though, the compensatory damages.
Compensatory damages I told you in the beginning it's putting something else on someone, it's putting a burden on them they were not supposed to bear or taking something away, depriving them of things. Under the law, if you d( that, you have to compensate the person.
I would -- it would be completely inconsistent with the evidence if I were to suggest anything less than $5 million for that.
In the past, the last 20 years, whatever else he bears in the future. Like everything else I have told you that is a suggestion from the evidence in the case. Accept it, reject it, whatever you think the number is appropriate. That is your decision. These are simply suggestions.
The final line on here is punitive damages.
And the judge gave you an instruction on the believability of witnesses. You'll be able to evaluate that. You saw, you saw the testimony come in. You didn't see a lot of witnesses from the tobacco companies, but you saw testimony of their executives in videos, you saw the testimony of Philip Morris's corporate representative and you saw the testimony of the documents. You can evaluate that and say what does that testimony show, what does that evidence show.
If we can go to the clip.
(Video clip played as follows:)
SPEAKER: These pictures are from Superman II Marlboro, made by Philip Morris, is shown at least 13 times. I asked the Tobacco Institute why Marlboros were shown so often in Superman II.
SPEAKER: Do you think cigarette manufacturer had something to do with that?
SPEAKER: Yeah, I think that -SPEAKER: Cigarette manufacturers don't make movies.
SPEAKER: But what do you think, that the movie maker just showed Marlboro on his own?
SPEAKER: Perhaps the movie maker was a Marlboro smoker.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. BIGGER: Wasn't true when she said it. That's the industry spokesperson. Just a small little example of the types of conduct that was going on. They were putting it in the movies and then they were saying, surely that wasn't us. You saw the documents yourself. It wasn't just her. Another example, I asked Miss Bonhomme about th Marlboro advertising campaign, wasn't that intende to be a hero.
"That was one of the purposes, to use a heroic, rugged figure like the Marlboro Man; is that fair?
"In the Marlboro advertising, the representation was not to show someone who was a hero, but to show someone who took charge of their own destiny." Down to the last line, "It was not so much to have the cowboy to be the hero." We
played you that video. It was the last thing we did in our case. You remember the video.
(Video clip played as follows:)
Here are six criteria for understanding Marlboro advertising and the Marlboro Man. First and foremost, the cowboy is the hero.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. BIGGER: Given those things that probabl seem insignificant in the long run, they're lying about those things. What about the stuff that would -MR. GERAGHTY: I would object and move to strike, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BIGGER: What about the stuff that really mattered, about the consequences of the disease yo saw in the documents? About the fact they are selling addiction? You decide in this case if punitive damages are warranted or not. You have seen the evidence, you've been a very attentive jury. You can decide for yourselves, did we meet the burden, did we rise to that level? Is this a case where these companies need to be punished fo what they did to Mr. Rizzuto, to others like him? Does a message need to be sent to these companies
to not act that way and deter others from acting that way. You'll have a chance to decide that.
I know I used more of my time than I wanted to, Your Honor. Do I still have a little bit of time left? Okay.
Thank you for your attention, I hope you -oh, let me do this last thing. The answer is yes as to both.
In for a penny, in for a pound with Liggett, they were part of it with everybody else. They didn't sound the alarm, they didn't do anything different and Philip Morris you've seen it all from them. Thank you for your attention. I appreciate everything, you've been very attentive this whole trial. I will talk to you again in just a few minutes.
