MR. GERAGHTY: Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
JURORS: Good morning.
MR. GERAGHTY: You know my name is Bil Geraghty, and along with Frank Cruz-Alvarez, we represent Philip Morris USA, and I want to repeat what Mr. Bigger said. We can't thank you enough for the time and your service over the last two weeks.
You have been extremely attentive. You have been very, very patient with us. You haven't laughed out too loud when I kept saying, hey, we'r getting close, but now when I say it, it is true, we are getting close, but I just want you to know it has really been a pleasure to present this case to you, and we thank you so much.
This process wouldn't work if there weren't people who were willing to sacrifice some of their time to help us resolve a civil dispute like this. And as I said again, this time, we are getting close. It's almost time for you to retire to the jury room and deliberate in this case.
Judge Musleh is going to give you the
instructions that he read already, and you're going to get a verdict form, and with that verdict form, you're going to decide the issues in this case.
But before you do that, I would like to take this opportunity to summarize the evidence that you've heard over the last week or so.
Recall that when I spoke to you last Thursday during my opening statement, I told you that the plaintiff would spend a great deal of time talking about statements made by Philip Morris and Ligget more than 30, 40, and in some instances more than 50 years ago. And I told you a week ago I wasn't going to try to defend those statements.
Philip Morris and Liggett said things and expressed ideas that today neither you nor I would say or think.
But I also told you that if that was -- if that is what this case was really about, we would not have spent the last two weeks together. But we have. We have spent the last two weeks together.
And that's because this case isn't about all cigarette smokers, it's not about the general public, it's not about whether you believe people should smoke cigarettes or not, and it's not about whether you believe there are cigarette smokers ou
there who were influenced by the things that you saw and heard during this trial.
This case is about one former cigarette smoker, John Rizzuto, and it is only about John Rizzuto. This is his lawsuit. And you now know after hearing Mr. Rizzuto testify that he wasn't paying attention to anything that Philip Morris or Liggett or any other cigarette companies were saying.
Judge Musleh will instruct you that the plaintiff has to prove that something Philip Morris said or failed to say, you saw the phrase "legal cause", and in that instruction, you'll see the words "directly and substantially."
The plaintiff bears the burden to prove to you that something that Philip Morris or Liggett said or failed to say had a direct connection and a substantial impact on Mr. Rizzuto's decisions about cigarette smoking.
And there was no evidence about this in this case. That may be the case for some cigarette smokers, but you now know that is not Mr. Rizzuto' story because you've heard that story over the last week.
Just as I told you a week ago, Mr. Rizzuto
told you on Wednesday he didn't hear anything that any cigarette company said about the health risk of smoking. He wasn't waiting for Philip Morris or Liggett to tell him that cigarettes were dangerous or that he needed to quit.
You now know that Mr. Rizzuto was the only person making those decisions. This is what he told you during his testimony on Wednesday about this very subject.
Mr. Rizzuto was very clear on Wednesday, he never saw the Frank Statement. He never heard of the Tobacco Industry Research Committee. He neve heard of the Tobacco Institute. He never heard of the Council For Tobacco Research. He never heard any statement that any of those organizations ever said.
He never heard any statements about smoking and health from any tobacco company. He was clear as a bell on that particular issue on Wednesday of this week.
And ladies and gentlemen, there is no dispute about that, that is his testimony under oath. You heard it here just two days ago.
Now, let me say something about the findings from this earlier Engle case you heard about. And
there is no debate about this. Those findings don't establish that Philip Morris or Liggett are liable, meaning legally responsible to the plaintiff in this case.
You now know, because Judge Musleh instructed you, that you get to decide by your verdict in this case whether those findings have any applicability to Mr. Rizzuto, whether those findings have any meaning in the context of the story that you've now heard about him and how he lived his life.
After all, this case is about Mr. Rizzuto. He is the one who filed the lawsuit and is now asking you to award him millions of dollars for his decision to smoke cigarettes for more than 35 years. And you are the only folks who have heard Mr. Rizzuto's story.
Now, everyone in this courtroom feels sympathy for Mr. Rizzuto. We're all human. It's only natural. But as the Court instructed you, you have to set that sympathy aside and decide the issues in this case based only on the evidence you've heard and the instructions that the judge has given you. And I know that you all will be able to do that.
Now, remember a week ago, I told you that this case was about two words, control and
responsibility. I told you those two words sum what this case was up -- summed up what this case was all about.
And I told you, as you listened to the evidence, ask yourself a series of questions as you listened to the evidence. Who was in control of Mr. Rizzuto's lifestyle choices? Who was in control of his efforts to quit smoking? Who controlled his motivation to quit?
Was Mr. Rizzuto addicted? And if so, was his addiction so strong, so substantial, that's the word from the legal cause instruction, that it overpowered his ability to quit smoking?
And finally, did Mr. Rizzuto rely on anything that Philip Morris or Liggett said or failed to say about the health risk of smoking.
Can you see that, sir?
JUROR VALINE (299): Yes, sir.
MR. GERAGHTY: We've heard a lot of testimoi about the lifestyle choices of Mr. Rizzuto during this trial. He made those choices, and no one else did.
You have now heard that Mr. Rizzuto is a strong and intelligent person who he made decisions about the way he wanted to live his life, and that
included about smoking even though he understood the warnings that were all around him. You know now that Mr. Rizzuto did enjoy smoking cigarettes. He enjoyed it for more than 35 years until he quit in 2000.
Smoking was something that Mr. Rizzuto wanted to do and something he was not ready to give up until he made the decision to quit for good in 2000.
And like many people, Mr. Rizzuto understood that these lifestyle choices came with health risks; yet he chose to engage in those activities anyway. And to this day, he still makes lifestyle choices that his doctors tell him have potential health consequences.
Remember what he told you Wednesday about th very first pack warning in 1966. He knew smoking came with a risk, but he decided to ignore that risk. He lives his life the way he wants to do it, and, of course, Mr. Rizzuto has every right to do that.
But unfortunately, Mr. Rizzuto's lifestyle choices have now resulted in serious health consequences. We all know that. But he now wants you to hold Philip Morris and Liggett legally
responsible for the decisions he made about how he would live his life.
Mr. Rizzuto is asking you to award him millions of dollars for the decisions that at the end of the day, ladies and gentlemen, he and only he made.
Now, let me take a minute and talk about the burden of proof. You've seen documents, you've seen medical records, you've heard testimony for the last week or so.
Let me remind you the plaintiff bears the burden of proof on all of the issues in this case by the greater weight of the evidence. The greater weight of the evidence. And you saw what that means, the words more persuasive, more convincin
Well, that means that to tip the scales in their favor, the plaintiff has to bring in a mountain of evidence bigger than the mountain of evidence we've brought you to show that Mr. Rizzu was always in control.
And we've brought that evidence to you primarily through the cross-examination of the plaintiff's expert witnesses and, of course, through Mr. Rizzuto himself. He is the key witness in the case. This is his story.
We brought you persuasive evidence that Mr. Rizzuto was in control, and he has the burden to establish more persuasive evidence, and he simply failed to do that in this case. And I'll point that out as we walk through the evidence.
Now, Mr. Bigger made a comment about the fac that we didn't bring any live witnesses. The burden of proof isn't about who brings the most witnesses, it's about the most persuasive and most convincing force and effect of the evidence you've heard. Those are the words the judge used.
You heard everything you needed to know from me, Mr. Cruz-Alvarez and Miss Ruiz through the questions we asked the plaintiff's own witnesses. Ladies and gentlemen, the defense case took only three and a half hours yesterday afternoon. We didn't think you needed to hear any more evidence before you could go ahead and decide the issues in this case.
You'll recall that during my opening statement, I walked you through a significant -- a timeline of the significant events in Mr. Rizzuto's life. And that's because this case is about Mr. Rizzuto.
And I'm going to walk you through that
timeline again, and we're going to summarize and I'm going to remind you of everything you've heard over the last week. And when I'm done with that, we're going to go through the verdict form. But before we do that, I want to remind you of the four key points I told you the evidence would establish about Mr. Rizzuto and about this case.
This is the same board I showed you a week ago on Thursday.
Mr. Rizzuto was not motivated to quit smoking until after he was diagnosed with COPD. He told you that on Wednesday. He was very, very clear, h said I didn't think about quitting smoking for health reasons until after Dr. Pirrello told me I had COPD. That was 1994.
When Mr. Rizzuto was motivated, in the last couple of years of the '90s, leading up to 2000, he quit smoking cold turkey with no serious physical withdrawal symptoms. That's undisputed.
You heard Mr. Rizzuto's COPD is stable, and you heard Dr. Sorresso say he has referred to his COPD as being stable for the last ten years. Meaning it is not getting progressively worse every single year.
Mr. Bigger asked Dr. Sorresso a very important
question. Hopefully you all remember. He said what's Mr. Rizzuto going to be like in five years? How is he going to be in five years?
Dr. Sorresso, a very, very honest guy, said, well, I'm optimistic that with some hard work and all things being equal, he'll be in the same condition five years from now that he is today. That's what Dr. Sorresso told you.
And, you know, Mr. Rizzuto continues to make lifestyle choices about his diet that his doctors have told him have potential health consequences. He's making those decisions today.
And as we walk through the story of Mr. Rizzuto's life, I want you to think about these four key points, and these will tell you everything you need to know to reach your verdict in this case.
So I'm going to show you the same, it's the same timeline we saw just Thursday, and you've no heard all the evidence. Everything we put on this timeline, ladies and gentlemen, we've proved, we'v proved. And we'll start right in the beginning.
But I want you to understand again, I said this a week ago, nothing I say is intended to be a criticism of anything that Mr. Rizzuto did or did
not do during the course of his life. Everyone has the right to make decisions, even decisions that all of us here in this courtroom today, looking back with the benefit of hindsight, might say, you know what, that was not in his best interests.
But we believe in free will. That is a fundamental principle upon which this country was founded. You have the right to make decisions for yourself. But with that right comes the obligation to accept personal responsibility for the consequences of those actions. And not partial responsibility; full responsibility.
So let's get started. You know Mr. Rizzuto was born in 1947 in Queens, New York. You know his parents are John and Margaret Rizzuto. You know he's the youngest of four children.
You know he was raised by strong and strict Italian Catholic parents. Mr. Rizzuto told you his father was a strict man. He said he was European old school. That was how Mr. Rizzuto was raised back in the 1950s in New York.
You also know that his mother and father and his older brother Frank smoked cigarettes.
Mr. Rizzuto looked up to and admired his older brother. You also heard that many of Mr. Rizzuto's
friends had started smoking before he did. So it's no surprise that later on, Mr. Rizzuto goes on to become a cigarette smoker.
Mr. Rizzuto didn't smoke cigarettes because of any statement made by a cigarette company. You never heard any evidence to that effect.
Mr. Rizzuto told you I smoked cigarettes because m mother, my father, my brother, my aunts and uncles and all of my friends smoked cigarettes.
And you heard from the plaintiff's only two experts, Dr. Henningfield and Dr. Cummings, what did they tell you? They said that is the single most important factor in determining whether a person will start smoking cigarettes.
Now, let's look below the blue bar and let's talk about what was happening here in the United States with respect to cigarette smoking and health long before Mr. Rizzuto was even born.
Mr. Bigger pointed it out, yes, he was wrong, cigarettes did exist before 1900 and 1910. What you heard was that back in the mid 1800s, the 1850s, before Philip Morris existed as a company, long before the introduction of what you've heard referred to as the modern cigarette, cigarettes were being smoked and inhaled and people were
becoming addicted to them.
You heard about roll-your-own cigarettes.
Dr. Henningfield, their first witness, told you about that.
What did Dr. Henningfield say? He did talk all about these different design features of cigarettes, but remember when I cross-examined him I asked him about every single one of those design features.
First he told you, well, the 60 million people who quit in this country, they smoked cigarettes with all of those same design features. But what else did he tell you? People had been inhaling roll-your-own cigarettes for more than 150 years. Roll-your-own cigarettes deliver more tar and nicotine than commercially manufactured cigarettes.
He told you that roll-your-own cigarettes, go out in the yard, pick tobacco, dry it, cure it, roll it, are just as addictive as commercially manufactured cigarettes. That's what Dr. Henningfield, the very first witness in this case, told you.
He said those roll-your-own cigarettes are just as dangerous as commercially manufactured cigarettes, and finally, he told you they are just
as likely to cause lung cancer and COPD.
You heard that from Dr. Henningfield, the plaintiff's first expert.
You also heard Dr. Henningfield and Dr. Cummings tell you that a hundred years ago, a hundred years ago, people were referring to cigarettes as coffin nails. They were referring to cigarette smokers as nicotine fiends and saying people had a nicotine fit.
They told you that people were referring to cigarette smoking as an addiction and as addicting more than 100 years ago. More than 100 years ago long before Mr. Rizzuto was born.
I showed you this document, it's in evidence. This is from the Florida Department of Health. This is in 1906. They're referring to roll-your-own cigarettes. This is before the modern cigarette. "Today, the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco addiction."
Dr. Cummings also told you that there was information linking smoking with diseases back in the 1920s, the 1930s, and the 1940s, again, before Mr. Rizzuto was born. None of this was a secret from the American public, as plaintiff would have
you believe.
And very briefly, I want to respond to one thing. Mr. Bigger mentioned to you that Philip Morris was saying in secret internal documents that the product we sell is nicotine.
Well, you'll remember, there was a speech given by Mr. Bill Dunn from Philip Morris in 1972 at a group called CORESTA, which included official from the Department of Agriculture, the FTC, and the National Clearinghouse of Smoking and Health.
He said the product we sell is nicotine. He said that at a public speech. And I showed it to you. Dr. Cummings said this was a public speech, contrary to what Mr. Bigger tried to tell you. And that all the research that nicotine reinforces behavior was in a book published by Philip Morris and the Council For Tobacco Research in 1973.
1973.
Now, you also heard Mr. Rizzuto himself had heard the term cancer stick and he understood exactly what that phrase meant.
As we move into the 1950s, you heard this from Dr. Cummings and Dr. Henningfield, there is more research being published, you heard about the famous mouse skin painting study by Drs. Ernst and
Wynder -- or Ernst Wynder and Dr. Graham.
These studies made front-page news in the United States. Front-page news, to the point that Dr. Cummings told you by 1954, when Mr. Rizzuto would have been six years old, 90 percent of the people in this country had heard that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer. 1954. That's the evidence you heard from the plaintiff's own expert.
Now, was Mr. Rizzuto aware of health effects caused by smoking? Well, he had a distinct memor that he still remembered 60 years later of health effects of smoking. He remembered his father having a persistent smokers cough back in the mid -- he said it was like 1955 or 1956.
His dad was persistently coughing at night, and he associated it with the fact that his father was smoking Lucky Strike cigarettes, 60 years before he recalled the event in his deposition.
So we move into the early 1960s. You know that in 1961, at about the age of 13 or 14,
Mr. Rizzuto tries cigarettes for the first time.
He lifts or steals a cigarette from his mother or father's pack of cigarettes, and he leaves the house and goes down the street to smoke because he
knows his parents would not allow him to smoke cigarettes. He knows that. It's been engrained in his as part of his upbringing and education.
He hides his smoking from his parents.
Shortly thereafter, you know, he begins to smoke with his friends, that's what he told you.
We move forward into 1961, same period of timi here. You heard Mr. Rizzuto, he developed rheumatic fever at about the same age, 13 or 14, and as a result of the rheumatic fever, he developed something called degenerative joint disease of his feet.
And you know he's had serious painful and difficult foot injuries essentially his entire adult life. And ladies and gentlemen, that is relevant to the ultimate issue you have to decide in terms of to what extent those injuries are one of the real limitations he's dealing with and has dealt with over the last 20, 25 years.
Now, as we go into the early to mid 1960s, you know that Mr. Rizzuto attends John Adams High School. He told you smoking was strictly forbidden at the school. But what does Mr. Rizzuto do? He sneaks cigarettes in the school bathroom and smoke with his friends. The evidence shows this is but
one of many warnings that Mr. Rizzuto chose to ignore along the way.
In the next couple of years, he gets two other very powerful warnings. First he's caught by his father and his father tells him don't smoke.
That's what his father told him, in about 1963, when Mr. Rizzuto would have been about 16 years old.
And even though Mr. Rizzuto said my father wa a very strict man, he told you what to do and he expected that you would do what you were told, and even though Mr. Rizzuto knew that if he had been caught a second time by his father, he would have gotten slammed, Mr. Rizzuto continues to smoke cigarettes despite what his father told him.
Around the same period of time, he gets caught again by his older brother, Frank Rizzuto, who also tells him, the term he used was knock it off.
Knock it off. But again, even though Mr. Rizzuto admires, looks up to and considers his older brother a father figure, Mr. Rizzuto doesn't listen to what his older brother told him and he continues to smoke cigarettes.
Now, that brings us to 1964, we're below the blue bar here. In January, you heard the Surgeon
General of the United States issues a landmark report. The report says cigarette smoking causes lung cancer and chronic bronchitis, which you now know is a type of COPD. Mr. Rizzuto would have been about 16 years old when this report was released.
Two years later, in 1966, Congress places the first warning label on cigarette packages. It says, "Caution: Cigarette smoking may be hazardoi to your health." This was -- both of these events were big news, you heard all about it in the testimony in the case.
Mr. Rizzuto was 18 years old when this warning first came out. And remember what he told you during his testimony. Mr. Rizzuto remembered the language of this warning word for word, 50 years later.
And what's remarkable about that is, as you now know, this language only appeared on the warning label for about a four-year period between 1966 and 1969.
What else did Mr. Rizzuto tell you? He told you that he understood that that warning meant cigarette smoking would affect some people, and it would not affect other people.
He told you he didn't know, when he read the warning, which group he was going to be in.
And I asked him the question, and he said -- I said what was your attitude about it? He said my attitude was it won't happen to me.
But he understood he was taking a risk, but Mr. Rizzuto chose to ignore the risk and to continue smoking. That's what he told you.
Later this year, you heard he graduates from high school, he's drafted by the US Army, and you heard that he was discharged honorably by the US Army after only seven months because his feet swel up like balloons and his degenerative joint disease in his feet. He's discharged seven months later.
He goes to work for the post office shortly thereafter, and later in 1968, he marries his wife, Marianne Rizzuto.
In the early 1970s, he and his family, they move to Spring Hill. His parents also move to Spring Hill at the same time. After he comes down here, he gets a job at the Port Richey post office.
Now, here we are below the blue bar. In 1970, when Mr. Rizzuto is about 23 years old -- excuse me, 20 -- yeah, 23 years old, the warning label on cigarette packs changes, it says, "The Surgeon
General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." And remember what Mr. Rizzuto told you. He said I never read another warning label after the one in 1966.
One year later, in 1971, all cigarette ads are taken off of television and radio and a year later, in 1972, warnings appear on all ads in a newspaper a magazine, or on a billboard. That's as of 1972.
Now, the plaintiff would have you believe that these warnings and health messages were somehow being drowned out by statements made by cigarette companies. Again, remember the evidence that yoi heard.
Dr. Henningfield and Dr. Cummings told you that during this period of time, millions of smokers in America are quitting. The Surgeon General referred to it as an era of unprecedented quitting.
Dr. Cummings told you that between the first Surgeon General's Report in 1964 and 1979, 30 million people quit smoking. 30 million. That's 2 million people every year for 15 years.
They've heard the same information as Mr. Rizzuto. Many of them smoked cigarettes wit the very same design features, including Marlboro.
Many of them are addicted. It may take them mor than one attempt to quit, but millions are quitting and they're quitting for good. But not John Rizzuto. He told you he ignored the warning.
Now, that brings us to the mid to late 1970s. You heard that two of the people that quit during this period of time were Mr. Rizzuto's mother and father. His mother quit earlier in the late '60s.
You heard that she had polyps on her throat. She was concerned about her health, and she quit smoking.
In 1977, John Rizzuto's father quit smoking also for health reasons. You heard he had the chronic cigarette cough, and so in 1977, his father quit smoking cold turkey. And John Rizzuto was there. He told you he was surprised his father quit because he had been a heavy smoker for many years.
But unlike his parents and the 30 million other Americans who quit during this period of time, the evidence you've heard is that Mr. Rizzuto enjoys smoking cigarettes, he's in good health, and he has no real interest in quitting.
Now, the plaintiff has tried to tell you Mr. Rizzuto has wanted to quit smoking cigarettes
since the 1970s. But remember what he said to yoi under oath. He said during the entire decade of the '70s, I never set my cigarettes down once and stopped smoking. Not once.
What he told you was I cut down a couple of times, but he cut down to a pack a day, but not because he was concerned about his health, but because cigarettes were becoming expensive. That the evidence that you heard in this case.
Now, we brought you the testimony of Dr. Benowitz. And you recall, you saw his video yesterday, and I'm sure many of you were probably wondering why is Geraghty playing this because h says nicotine is addictive, many people get addicted, many people are highly addicted.
But we brought him to you because Dr. Neal Benowitz is the senior scientific editor of the 1988 Surgeon General's Report. He is one of the foremost authorities on nicotine and nicotine addiction in the world. He is a medical doctor, a cardiologist.
We wanted you to hear from him. You know, he's no friend of the tobacco industry. He testifies against Philip Morris and other cigarette companies. But he brings a scientific perspective
that isn't tainted by the bias that Dr. Cummings told you he has against these companies. And we'l talk more about his testimony as we go forward.
But Dr. Benowitz told you unless you quit for a day, we don't even consider that to be a real attempt to quit. That's what Dr. Benowitz told you during his testimony yesterday.
And what we know about Mr. Rizzuto is he enjoyed smoking cigarettes. He was very clear in his testimony when I asked him questions. He said I enjoyed smoking. I enjoyed the taste. Smoking helped calm me when I was nervous or anxious. It helped to relieve stress and anxiety.
I enjoyed smoking with coffee. And he said he drank a lot of coffee. He enjoyed smoking after all of his meals. He enjoyed smoking with his wif and his friends and his family. That's the testimony you heard from Mr. Rizzuto.
Now, the same year you heard Mr. Rizzuto's degenerative joint disease gets worse, he has his very first surgery on both his right and left foot. Unfortunately you heard the surgeries only provids him with temporary relief, and by 1984, the pain has gotten worse and he goes to see his doctor,
Dr. Kipp. Dr. Kipp performs another surgery.
And Mr. Rizzuto, because of how debilitating the pain is and how much discomfort he has from walking as a letter carrier, Mr. Rizzuto goes out on disability for four years from 1984 to 1988.
And I bring that up, ladies and gentlemen, because you need to understand, this was a -- this was and is a serious injury. He told you degenerative means it's going to get worse. He wa; incapable of walking for four years, from walking, sitting, and standing because of this degenerative joint disease.
Now, same period of time, 1984, you heard the very first time, the very first time that Mr. Rizzuto tries to quit smoking, he's successful. He quits smoking cold turkey for six weeks. What was the reason he said he wanted to quit? Well, he told you the price of cigarettes were high, had five kids, and he was out of work. And this is important for several reasons.
First, it shows when Mr. Rizzuto wants to quit smoking, he can, and without any assistance. And second, the length of time he quits is important too.
You remember you heard from Dr. Henningfieli and Dr. Benowitz. What did they tell you about th<
effect of nicotine after someone quits smoking? They both told you, within 72 hours, all the nicotine is gone from a person's body. Within two to three weeks, the majority of the physical withdrawal symptoms are gone or have subsided. Within three to four weeks, this increase in brain receptors that you heard about, the nicotine receptors, return to normal. That's what Dr. Benowitz told you yesterday on that videotape.
And remember, Mr. Rizzuto quits for six weeks in 1984. So when he quits for six weeks in 1984, all or most of his withdrawal symptoms are gone, all of the nicotine is gone from his body, the nicotine receptors in his brain have returned to normal, he's 37 years old, and there is a warning on every single pack of cigarettes that he buys, a warning he understood meant that he could develo] disease.
Now, that brings us to 1985. And 1985, the warnings change again, and one of those warnings very clearly says smoking causes lung cancer, hear disease, and emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy.
Did these warnings at this point in 1985 tell Mr. Rizzuto anything he had not already heard? O
course not, ladies and gentlemen. But he told yo he ignored all the warnings after 1966. But he's known this now for decades.
In 1988, he has more pain and discomfort in his feet. He has more surgery by Dr. Kipp. But he's cleared to go back to work on a limited basis He told you he couldn't stand for long, he couldn' sit for long, he couldn't walk for long, but he delivered the mail in a truck. He told you he had a truck route.
The same year, 1988, Mr. Rizzuto catches his son smoking, his son Anthony, tells him I don't want you to smoke. I don't want you to smoke. That's what he tells his son in 1988.
Now, that brings us to the early 1990s. And I'm going to back up. Mr. Rizzuto told you that between 1984, when he quit smoking for -- quit smoking for six weeks and 1990, he said he nevei put his cigarettes down and quit once. Never trie* to quit once between 1984 and 1990.
But in 1990, he's hospitalized with a very bad bout of pneumonia. He's hospitalized, he said I had no desire to smoke cigarettes because I wasn' feeling well. And, of course, you can't smoke in the hospital, so he stops smoking for two weeks.
And even though he doesn't smoke cigarettes for two weeks, Mr. Rizzuto told you I don't recall feeling any physical withdrawal during that period of time. But as soon as he gets out of the hospital, he resumes smoking. This bout of pneumonia is yet another clear warning, another clear warning that he should quit. But Mr. Rizzuto decides to resume smoking because he enjoys it.
And here we are in 1992. The foot problems get worse. He has surgery in '92, '93, and '94.
And you heard Mr. Rizzuto tell you in September of
1993,	September of '93, when he's 45 years old,
Mr. Rizzuto leaves work at the post office and never works again. He's out on disability because he can no longer do the job of a letter carrier because of the ongoing and progressive degenerativi joint disease in his feet.
And I emphasize this because there is no dispute that the reason he had to leave work in 1993 is because of his foot problems. And it's important for you to understand the impact that that has had during the course of his adult life when you think about the impact his choice to smok cigarettes and his COPD have had.
Now, during the same period of time, the early
1990s, '91 and '92 and '93, you've heard Mr. Rizzuto begins to complain of bouts of bronchitis and cough to his primary care doctor,
Dr. Pirrello.
Dr. Pirrello ultimately diagnoses Mr. Rizzuto with mild COPD in 1994, and Dr. Pirrello tells Mr. Rizzuto in no uncertain terms you have to stop smoking cigarettes. That's what he tells him, you have to stop smoking cigarettes. This is in 1993, 1994.
And what did Mr. Rizzuto tell us, ladies and gentlemen, in his testimony? I asked him this question. "Mr. Rizzuto, isn't it true that you never thought about quitting smoking for your health, for your health until after you were told by Dr. Pirrello that you had COPD."
And his answer was, "I would say that's fair."
So think about this, ladies and gentlemen.
This is extremely important. This is a case in which you have heard Mr. Rizzuto is asking you fo $6 million for his decision to smoke cigarettes, but at the same time, he's acknowledging to you I never once in my entire life thought about quitting smoking for health reasons until after I was already diagnosed with the disease that we're here
talking about.
Now, in 1995, you heard he has a new primary care doctor, Dr. Young. Dr. Young tells him to quit as well. He tells him many, many, many times. You'll have the record -- all of Dr. Young's records are in evidence. PMU-019754 and PMU-019875.
Mr. Rizzuto told you, he told you almost every single time I went to go to the doctor's in the 1990s, the doctor told me I needed to quit. But what did Mr. Rizzuto also tell you? Well, he said, you know what, when Dr. Pirrello told me I had COPD, I didn't think it was that big of a deal, didn't seem all that significant to me. That's what Mr. Rizzuto told you on Wednesday. This is i
1994.
And Mr. Bigger told you that Mr. Rizzuto tried to quit smoking many, many, many times. But wha did Mr. Rizzuto say under oath, right here on the stand? Between that time he was told he had COPD in 1999, he said there were a couple of times where I woke up and I said I'm not going to smoke today.
And whether it was 9 o'clock or 9:30 or 10 o'clock or 11:00, then I would have a cigarette, and by the end of the day, I was smoking cigarettes
again. That's what he told you.
Do those sound like serious, committed efforts to quit? Particularly when he acknowledges to you at that point in time, I didn't take my own disease process that seriously.
Now, you also heard, Mr. Rizzuto said at one point in time that Dr. Sorresso gave him Wellbutrin or Zyban. Do you recall that? The record's in evidence, you'll see the record. That's the one record where Mr. Rizzuto actually says and Dr. Young writes down that he expressed a desire tc stop smoking.
But Mr. Rizzuto told you he only took the Zyban for a couple of days. He never stopped smoking when he was on the Zyban. And when he started to feel some strange side effects, he just stopped taking the Zyban altogether and he never went back to Dr. Young and said give me somethin; else.
Now, if you want to know how motivated Mr. Rizzuto truly was, think of these undisputed facts. Mr. Rizzuto told you he never tried Nicorette gum. He never tried the nicotine patch. He never went to a stop-smoking course or class.
He never took hypnosis. He told you he never
actually asked any of his doctors help me quit smoking.
These were all methods that were available to him. All of these were methods that were available to him if he was truly committed to quitting smoking.
Who was making those decisions? Only Mr. Rizzuto. Only Mr. Rizzuto.
Now, remember Dr. Henningfield told you, and this is a key fact, Dr. Henningfield told you he's looked at this issue. Sure, people say all the time I think I should quit or I want to quit, but he told you that only 10 percent of smokers at any one point in time are actually ready and prepared to quit smoking. That's what he told you. That's from Mr. Henningfield, the very first witness you heard.
Mr. Rizzuto said there wasn't a single day, not a single day between the early 1990s and 2000 that he ever stopped smoking for one day. And wha the records do show, and you'll see them in evidence, is that in the late '90s, long after he had been told he had COPD, '96, '97, '98, he does begin to cut down to a half pack, sometimes less than that, but he always goes back up.
That brings us now to December of 2000. And you know the story now. He has an onset of shortness of breath. The next day, Mr. Rizzuto goes to the hospital. He's in the hospital for two days.
And what does Mr. Rizzuto do? He said for the very first time, for the very first time in his life, he was actually concerned for his health about cigarette smoking. But at this point, he's been smoking for 38 or 39 years. And what does h do? He quits smoking cold turkey. He quits smoking cold turkey.
And after he quits, you've heard it, he doesn't experience any physical withdrawal symptoms. None. He reports cravings several months later, no question. No question about that. But no physical withdrawal symptoms.
Now, the plaintiff, through their experts, tried to suggest, well, you know, maybe he wouldn have experienced physical withdrawal symptoms because he was in the hospital and he had a bout of shortness of breath. But remember, he was discharged two days later. Two days later. He said he felt better after he got out of the hospital.
He saw his doctor three weeks later,
Dr. Sorresso. Dr. Sorresso's record says feeling good. But in all of those records, in all the questions we asked Mr. Rizzuto, he told you I didn't feel any irritability, I didn't feel abrupt or short, I didn't feel nervous or restless or anxious, no withdrawal symptoms.
If Mr. Rizzuto were truly, truly a terribly addicted smoker, like you've heard, of course he would have reported physical withdrawal symptom and his doctor would have written it down in his records.
Now, the fact that Mr. Rizzuto quits and the way he quit shows us two things. First, it shows us that as far as Mr. Rizzuto is concerned, it didn't matter what anyone said to him, not his father, not his brother, not his doctors, and certainly not a cigarette company. Mr. Rizzuto wa not going to summon the effort to quit smoking until he decided it was time to quit. Nobody else could make that decision for him, we all know that
And second, it shows that when he finally chose to do so, Mr. Rizzuto was able to quit cold turkey with little difficulty and no serious physical withdrawal symptoms.
Now, you've heard since Mr. Rizzuto quit smoking, Dr. Sorresso has continually said his COP is stable or controlled. I showed you this record, this is from Dr. Sorresso, this is last year, March 2012, Dr. Sorresso said the patient's COPD remains stable. And Dr. Sorresso repeated that and told you he was stable when he testified here a week or so ago.
And fortunately for Mr. Rizzuto, his breathing problems don't prevent him from living an independent lifestyle. And I want to be very clear when I say this, ladies and gentlemen. By saying that, I don't mean to suggest at all that Mr. Rizzuto does not have limitations due to his COPD. Of course he does. Of course he does.
But you heard Dr. Sorresso say his COPD is stable. He hasn't been hospitalized once for COPD in 13 years. He doesn't use supplemental oxygen at all during the day or when he travels. His pulmonary function tests are not a true reflection of how well Mr. Rizzuto does.
And finally, and I told you this earlier,
Dr. Sorresso said all things being equal and with some hard work and a commitment to continuing to take his medications, I am optimistic that
Mr. Rizzuto will be in the same condition five years from now.
In other words, ladies and gentlemen, there is nothing in Mr. Rizzuto's history over the last 13 years to suggest that all of a sudden, he's going to take a terrible turn for the worse.
Dr. Sorresso told you, as a matter of fact at the end of my cross-examination, I asked him, he told you that in light of the fact that Mr. Rizzuto smoked cigarettes for so many years, and in light of the fact that he smoked for about six years after he was diagnosed with COPD initially, he said Mr. Rizzuto was fortunate to be able to do many of the things he does.
And you heard that he obviously has other health issues in addition to the degenerative joint disease, he has chronic low back pain and sciatica. He has poor circulation in his legs. He had surgery just a few months ago to relieve the pain and the cramping in his legs.
You heard that he has hypertension, elevated cholesterol and diabetes. You also heard that he has prostate cancer and he's recently completed a round of radiation therapy, but hopefully, according to his doctors, he's got a very good
prognosis.
And I raise this because there is no claim for money damages in this case based on any of these other health problems. The only claim for damages in this case is for COPD.
And that's the story, ladies and gentlemen.
That's the story you've heard over the last week or so. That's the story that's brought us together for the last two weeks.
Now, what I would like to do with the time I have remaining is walk through the verdict form. Can I get the Elmo real quickly.
This is -- Mr. Bigger showed you this, but these are the questions you're going to be asked to decide.
And the question you're going to be asked to decide, number one, was John Rizzuto addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his chronic obstructive pulmonary disease slash emphysema. And this is th board that I showed you a week ago Thursday.
The judge has put it all into one question, but it is two questions, as Mr. Bigger told you.
Was John Rizzuto addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal
cause of his COPD? And it's important to note at the outset that this verdict form does not ask you whether cigarette smoking was, quote, medical cause of his COPD. There is no debate about that in this case. Cigarette smoking was the medical cause of his COPD, but that's not the question you are being asked to decide in this case.
So the first thing you have to ask is was Mr. Rizzuto addicted. And I told you at the outset the Court would not give you a definition of what it means to be addicted. And there is no such definition in the instructions.
It will be up to you and your experience and your common sense to determine what you believe it means to be addicted in this case. You get to decide that.
Now, the plaintiff brought you two experts, you heard from Dr. Henningfield and Dr. Cummings and they both gave you a very simple definition.
If you smoke cigarettes on a daily basis and if you smoke a lot of cigarettes, you were addicted. You also heard them say, both Dr. Henningfield and Dr. Cummings, that in every single case in which they've ever testified, they've always said the cigarette smoker is addicted.
Dr. Cummings testified that if you smoke one cigarette per day, you are addicted. That's what he said. That's all it takes. But you have to ask yourself, is that a real definition? Is that sufficient in a court of law when you're asking for $6 million in damages?
And as we walk through his life and walk through the timeline, Mr. Rizzuto's story, you knov the facts. You know Mr. Rizzuto was not a chain smoker. Even he denied that. He wasn't some tortured smoker who tried year after year after year to quit by different methods. That's not Mr. Rizzuto. There are smokes like that, but that's not the story you heard about Mr. Rizzuto.
So what are the undisputed facts? We know that in 1984, he quit smoking cold turkey the very first time he ever tried to put cigarettes down for six weeks. And second, we know when he finally made the decision to quit and quit for good, he quit cold turkey in 2000 with no serious withdrawa symptoms. Does that sound like someone who was hopelessly addicted to you? Of course not, ladies and gentlemen.
But even if you accept the definition that the plaintiffs experts have given you, and even if you
conclude that Mr. Rizzuto was addicted, your work is still -- just beginning, because the second part of the question is the critical part. Was Mr. Rizzuto's claimed addiction a legal cause of his COPD?
What does it mean for something to be a legal cause? And Mr. Bigger put that on the screen for you, he put the language. But frankly, the language is extremely hard to follow for any of us, no question about it. But you will see the words "directly and substantially" in that language. The addiction must directly and substantially produce or cause the addiction.
But rather than to parse the words, I'll give the example I gave during voir dire if someone walks along the -MR. BIGGER: Objection, Your Honor. May we approach?
THE COURT: Well, that's using his time.
MR. BIGGER: That misstates the law, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Okay, this won't count against your time.
MR. GERAGHTY: Okay, thank you, Your Hono
(The following is at the bench.)
MR. GERAGHTY: Where am I time-wise?
THE COURT: You used 56 minutes.
MR. GERAGHTY: Oh, good. I'm ahead of schedule.
MR. BIGGER: Your Honor, this objection, I think he was about to say, and he referenced in voir dire, during voir dire he referenced something about an analogy of legal cause being if someone crosses the street, you know, you have to find out if they had their headphones in and that kind of stuff. That misstates the law. Your Honor has instructed them on the law. He can't -- that analogy has nothing to do with the law on legal cause.
MR. GERAGHTY: Well, Your Honor, I think I' entitled to try to give them -THE COURT: You're going to come back, you got -MR. GERAGHTY: He's got 15 minutes.
THE COURT: Got 14, 15 more minutes.
MR. BIGGER: I understand, but still it doesn't allow him to misstate the law. That's not the law on legal cause, did he have his headphones in or was he not looking both ways. That's not the law. Legal cause is whether the conduct, in this
case the addiction, was a legal cause of the injury.
MR. GERAGHTY: The simple thing is I'll just preface it with look, the judge gave you the instruction, follow the instruction, but let me just give you an example.
THE COURT: You can tear him up on that on cross-examination -- I mean when you get back up.
MR. GERAGHTY: He's not going to get to cross-examine me.
THE COURT: When you get back up there on your -- you can tear him up on that.
MR. BIGGER: I would rather not have the jury have an inaccurate statement of law.
THE COURT: I can't tell him to not say that.
But just -- I can't tell him -- I can't tell him not to say that.
MR. BIGGER: My objection is misstates the law, Your Honor says overruled, that's fine.
THE COURT: Your objection is he misstates the law?
MR. BIGGER: Yes, he's going to misstate the law on the instruction of legal cause.
THE COURT: He just told them -MR. GERAGHTY: I thought he misstated the lai
too, but -- I'll just -- okay.
(In open court.)
MR. GERAGHTY: As I was saying, the instruction is -- candidly, ladies and gentlemen, it is a little bit difficult to follow, no question. But you'll see the words directly and substantially in there, that's in there, but I think it might be helpful just to give you an example. I gave you the example in voir dire. Someone walks across the street and they get hit by the bus. Clearly the bus is the medical cause of whatever injuries they have, but in order to understand legal cause, you need to know more information than that.
And it's just a simple example, was the person crossing the street when the light was green? Were they texting when they crossed the street? Were they on their cellphone? Were they not paying attention?
The simple point being that you need to know more about the circumstances of the individual before you can determine that addiction is the legal cause. You need to know all of these things before you can determine whether addiction was th legal cause in this case.
And the question, ladies and gentlemen, really boils down to this. It really boils down to quitting, quitting in the context of this particular case. Could Mr. Rizzuto have quit smoking, simply put, could he have quit smoking whenever he was truly motivated to do so, or was his addiction so strong, so substantial, that's the language, that it overpowered his free will and prevented him from being able to quit smoking?
If you believe that Mr. Rizzuto could have quit smoking whenever he was truly motivated to quit, then addiction cannot be the legal cause of his COPD.
Was John Rizzuto a mindless, hopeless addict, someone who had lost his free will, or could he have quit smoking whenever he was truly motivate to do so? The answer is of course, of course he could quit. Of course he could. And what is the most convincing and persuasive piece of evidence you have in the whole case? The fact that he did. He did quit smoking in 2000, cold turkey, with no serious withdrawal symptoms.
Now, certainly the plaintiff has talked to you a lot in this case about addiction and about nicotine. You've heard that nicotine changes the
structure of the brain. It increases the number of nicotine receptors in the brain. You've heard that nicotine is more addictive than heroin or cocaine. Those are all the things you heard from the plaintiff about nicotine. And ladies and gentlemen, that's why we called Dr. Neal Benowitz
Can we go back to the -- to this for just a second?
You saw Dr. Neal Benowitz by videotape yesterday. I told you again, the only medical doctor that you've heard from on this issue of addiction. The senior scientific editor -- one of the senior scientific editors along with Dr. Henningfield of the 1988 Surgeon General's Report, the report that determined for the first time that nicotine was addictive. He is one of the world's leading authorities on nicotine and nicotine addiction.
And I wanted you to hear from him because I knew, despite everything he would tell you about these changes in the brain, this increase in nicotine receptors, I knew at the end of the day, he would tell you these things because we took his videotape. He answered my questions. I was the second person to cross -- that examined him. And
what did he tell you?
THE COURT: You've used 60 minutes.
MR. GERAGHTY: Thank you, Your Honor.
"The stimulating effect of nicotine is, quote, a little more intense than caffeine, but much less so than cocaine." That's what he told you.
"Nicotine doesn't prevent a smoker from understanding a warning."
It does not rob you of your free will. And he told you, quote, "Smokers don't, quote, lose the ability to be responsible for their own actions."
That's what Dr. Neal Benowitz told you yesterday by videotape.
In fact, all the experts agree, every single expert you've heard from, Dr. Henningfield,
Dr. Cummings, and Dr. Benowitz agreed with these facts, these facts. 60 million people have quit smoking in this country. They all smoked cigarettes with the same exact design features Dr. Henningfield told you about. Many of them wer Marlboro smokers. 90 percent of these people highly addicted, according to Dr. Henningfield,
Dr. Cummings, and Dr. Benowitz.
Most of these people quit without any assistance whatsoever. And what did they tell you
were the keys to quitting smoking? Motivation, persistence, and willpower. That's what they told you and you know where these qualities come from. Not from a nicotine patch, not from a prescription to Zyban. These qualities come from within each individual. You know that. You knew that before you all were selected to be the jurors in this case.
And finally, recall that the plaintiff has admitted in this case, they admitted that Mr. Rizzuto's own actions were a partial legal cause of his COPD. So what does it mean to say you were a legal cause? What does it mean when you sa they accept responsibility? It means they acknowledge, ladies and gentlemen, that Mr. Rizzuto's own decisions were a direct and substantial cause of his COPD. That's the definition of legal cause.
It also means they acknowledge Mr. Rizzuto could have quit smoking in time to avoid his COPD. That's what they admit by saying Mr. Rizzuto was a legal cause of his own disease.
And what's key about this, ladies and gentlemen, is at the time that they made this concession, they knew everything they were going to
tell you during this trial, about Philip Morris and Liggett, about the effects of nicotine, and about in the way that Mr. Rizzuto lived his life. They knew all those things when they agreed that he was a legal cause of his own disease.
Now, the evidence shows that for many, many years, many years, Mr. Rizzuto enjoyed smoking cigarettes, continued to smoke in the face of many warnings, wasn't interested in quitting for health reasons. Sure, cigarettes were expensive. He said he tried to quit for that reason. But he wasn't interested in quitting for health reasons. And as you know, he simply was not motivated to quit smoking until years after he was diagnosed with COPD.
Mr. Rizzuto, ladies and gentlemen, is no different than the 60 million other Americans who have quit smoking in this country. He is independent, intelligent, and strong-willed. He always had the ability to quit. Even if you ultimately believe that Mr. Rizzuto was addicted, he demonstrated to himself and everyone in this courtroom that he was able to quit when he decided when he decided it was time to quit smoking.
John Rizzuto has always been in control of his
lifestyle choices, not Philip Morris, not Liggett, not the nicotine in cigarettes.
He told you Wednesday he believes he is still addicted to cigarettes today. And I asked him, I said, Mr. Rizzuto, if you are still addicted today, your addiction has not caused you to smoke a single cigarette in the last 13 years. Of course, he had to agree because those are the facts. You all know those are the facts.
And this means, ladies and gentlemen, emphatically that addiction cannot be the legal cause of Mr. Rizzuto's COPD. It is Mr. Rizzuto's decision to continue smoking cigarettes in the face of all the warnings and his decision not to make a committed effort to quit until after he had already been diagnosed with COPD in 1994. That is the on and only legal cause in this case.
And if we could go back to the Elmo for just a second. Ladies and gentlemen, your answer to this question should be no, his addiction was not the legal cause of his COPD in this case. If you answer no, your verdict is for the defendants, and the case is over. If you answer yes, then that means you've decided there is liability, and that Mr. Rizzuto is entitled to money damages.
Now, I don't think you'll get beyond this question, but let me address some of the other questions on the verdict form if we could. And 2 and 3 are -- sort of go together, so I'm just going to show you 2 here for a second.
Was the concealment or omission of material information about the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes by each defendant a, quote, legal cause of John Rizzuto's COPD/emphysema. The language in question number 3 refers to conspiracy, but it's the same thing, it must be a legal cause of his COPD.
Could we go back to the -- for just a second?
The gist of these two questions, questions number 2 and 3, ladies and gentlemen, is exactly what I told you last Thursday, did anything that Philip Morris or Liggett say or fail to say about the health risks of smoking have a direct and substantial impact on Mr. Rizzuto's decisions about smoking?
And ladies and gentlemen, I think the evidence is very clear on this, you've heard absolutely no evidence that Mr. Rizzuto ever saw, read, or heard a single statement about smoking and health made by a cigarette company.
We went back in time over a hundred years.
You heard all about John Quincy Adams and Mark Twain. You saw the Florida Health Notes. You know that none of this was a secret known only to Philip Morris and Liggett. You heard Mr. Rizzuto testify, he told you he knew he was taking a significant risk with his health when he saw that warning in 1966. We know what information Mr. Rizzuto has, we know when he got it, and we know what he did in response. You've walked through the story.
So let's look at what the plaintiff showed you. You saw many, many videotapes during Dr. Cummings' presentation, but 1954, Frank Statement to Cigarette Smokers. You saw Howard Cullman in 1964. Joe Cullman 1971. You saw two gentlemen, Drs. Wakeham and Mr. Bowling 1976. Yoi saw lots of Tobacco Institute spokespersons. You saw the Congressional testimony, Mr. Bigger just showed it to you, and what did Mr. Rizzuto say? I showed you this at the very beginning of my presentation. His testimony was clear, no question about it.
The key question I want to ask you is this, as you go back to deliberate. Ask yourself the following. Would this story, the story you heard
about Mr. Rizzuto, anything you heard about Mr. Rizzuto, would any of this story have been any different if these statements had not been made?
That's the real question for you to decide. And you already know the answer. You know the answer. It wouldn't have made any difference, because Mr. Rizzuto never saw it, never heard it. You now know, just as we discussed with many of you in voir dire, Mr. Rizzuto wasn't paying attention to anything that Philip Morris or the Tobacco Industry Research Committee were saying.
THE COURT: You have three minutes.
MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, I'm going to nee< about five to get through a couple of these issues, okay.
THE COURT: Okay, I'll give you extra time too.
MR. GERAGHTY: You know his father, his brother, his father, his brother, his doctors.
Mr. Rizzuto didn't listen to what any of those people told him. Mr. Rizzuto quit when he decided it was time to quit. No one else could have made those decisions for him. What makes any of us think that anything that Philip Morris or a cigarette company might have said would have made
difference?
Now, I want you to understand, if you answer yes to 2 or 3, that means you go to question 7. If you answer no to 2 or 3, you do not reach question 7.
Let me go to -- since I'm running short on time, I'm going to speed up here.
MR. BIGGER: Just a second, Your Honor. Can you clarify that? No to both 2 and 3.
MR. GERAGHTY: Yeah, right, no to both 2 an
3,	right.
You're going to be asked, there is a question called comparative fault. I just want to say this. You saw Mr. Rizzuto yesterday. He told you this is America, people do what we want. This question really boils down to personal responsibility. What does it mean to accept personal responsibility?
I talked with several of you about drinking alcohol and other lifestyle choices. How many of you go out, drink vodka, drink one too many vodka drinks and you wake up the next day with a hangover, who looks in the mirror and says to themselves, you know what, I'm only 10 percent responsible for that decision? No one says that. Should it be any different for 35 years of smoking
cigarettes? Of course not, ladies and gentlemen.
Of course not.
Now, I just want to briefly talk about the issue of damages. $6 million. Ladies and gentlemen, given the facts of this case, given what you now know about Mr. Rizzuto, given the fact tha he never tried to quit smoking for health reasons before he was diagnosed with COPD, this is not a case in which millions or even hundreds of thousands of dollars should be awarded. You know his COPD is stable. All the evidence you heard about the future is completely speculative.
Just one point I want to make. In the 20 years that Mr. Rizzuto has had COPD from 1994 to now, the plaintiff put in medical expenses for the last 20 years, he's only had $50,000, $56,000 of past medical expenses for the past 20 years. Given that, what makes anybody think that over the next 16 years, and their experts predict his life expectancy is 16 years, what makes anyone think that he's going to need a million dollars? There is no basis to award anything like that in this case.
Now, the final point I want to address is the issue of punitive damages. And what you are being
asked to decide today is whether or not punitive damages should be awarded in this case. You are not deciding the amount. If you say yes, that punitive damages should be awarded, there will be another phase of the trial, there will be additional witnesses and evidence presented to you, and you will have a second round of deliberations in which you decide what an appropriate amount of damages should be.
But what you need to understand is any punitive damages would go to Mr. Rizzuto and only Mr. Rizzuto. And the purpose of punitive damages is to punish and deter. If you decide Mr. Rizzuto is entitled to money to compensate him for his injuries, you compensate him fully through the award of compensatory damages. Punitive damage are additional money awarded to plaintiff above and beyond any compensatory damages you might awar
Now, based on the evidence you heard in this case, there is no basis to award punitive damages. You heard Mr. Rizzuto say it yesterday, there is -this is America.
Can you put the -- back on? Cigarettes are a legal product in this country, ladies and gentlemen. People in this country have been
smoking, inhaling, and becoming addicted to cigarettes for over 150 years ago, long before Philip Morris even existed. Dr. Henningfield, this is a more youthful version of him here, what did he tell you?
Philip Morris and Liggett have made concerted efforts to try to develop a safer cigarette.
They've made efforts to reduce carcinogens in cigarette smoke. And he told you that was a responsible thing for those companies to do. In a case in which there has been a warning label on the product for nearly 50 years, in which the risks have been commonly known for nearly a hundred, a the plaintiff told you that he ignored those warnings for decades and didn't try to quit for health reasons until after he developed a disease,
I would submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, there is simply no basis to award punitive damages.
In a case in which Mr. Rizzuto admits his own decisions, his own actions were a legal cause of his disease, there should be no question that punitive damages are inappropriate, and you should answer no to question 7 if you even get there.
Just two or three more remarks and I'll sit down, Your Honor.
Now, as you listen to what Mr. Bigger says, and you heard he gets to go -- have rebuttal, that's because he bears the burden of proof, I want you to remember the four key points. The four key -- oh. Yeah, there it is. The four -- well, that's not it. It's in my board here. These four key points tell you everything you need to know to decide the issues in this case.
You all know we enjoy a tremendous amount of freedom in this country. We have the right to make decisions and lifestyle choices that are not always in our best interests. But with that freedom comes the obligation to accept personal responsibility for the consequences.
And in the end, that is what this case is really about. Are we going to hold Philip Morris and Liggett liable, legally responsible for the informed decisions of a strong and independent ma who lived his life the way he wanted to live it based on the evidence you heard, I think the answer is clear.
I'm going to sit down in about a minute or two and Miss Ruiz will speak to you. And when she's finished, Mr. Bigger is going to have an opportunity to get up and have the last word,
again, because he bears the burden of proof.
I don't know what he's going say. But when you listen to him, ask yourself the following:
What does this have to do with Mr. Rizzuto? Wha does this have to do with the story of Mr. Rizzuto you've heard over the course of the last week?
The evidence, ladies and gentlemen, you've heard, supports one and only one verdict, and that is a verdict for Philip Morris and Liggett.
Again, ladies and gentlemen, I want to thank you so much for your attention today and your attention and patience with me over the course of the entire trial. You have been wonderful to work with, and I can't thank you enough. So thank you very, very much.
