MR. HAMMER: Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the Court, counsel.
Gabe, can I get the easel, please? Thank you, sir.
First and foremost, I want to thank all of you for taking out of your lives two weeks, now into three weeks, and the time sitting here as jurors, because remember when we sat here two-and-a-half weeks ago, and we talked about the fact that people get their jury summons, they come up with all sorts of excuses to get out of here.
During jury selection, you guys heard it, you heard some of the excuses that people came
up with to get out of here; and I can
you all enough for, you know, sitting through here. And I know a lot of you guys have things going on with your lives, in your personal lives, that -- you know, you're here, and we really thank you for that.
As a juror, I can't stress enough the awesome power you have. You have the power to render a decision in this case, the power to do justice, the power to do the right thing. And I know that you'll exercise that power in the right way.
You know, as lawyers, sometimes we get caught up in legal arguments, and oftentimes we forget what the case is really all about. In this case -- Number 4 -- that's what this case is all about. It's about Laura Grossman, it's about Jessica, it's about Steven, and it's about Jan.
It's about the fact that Laura Grossman, she died at a very young age. It's about the fact that she died knowing she had lung cancer. It's about the fact that she died from smoking cigarettes for 20 years of her life, one-and-a-half packs a day.
You know, today's February 24th, 2010.
February 24th, 1993, was one of the last happy days of Laura Grossman's life. That's when she had Steven, 17 years ago.
And now, 17 years later, we're here in this courtroom talking about what she died from. You know, it -- it's a little strange, because she had doctors treating her for almost two years, doctors who dedicate their life to treating people with cancer.
Dr. Kalman, you heard him come in here.
He fought for almost two years to try to save this woman's life from lung cancer. He had no question about it, no doubt in his mind.
You know, when you -- as a patient, you go to a doctor, you go there, you have your tests -Think about what happened back in March of '94. Laura goes to her doctor because she's just got a cough. She's happy, things are great. I've got a cough, you know, it's been pretty persistent; Jan, maybe we ought to go to the doctor because suddenly I'm coughing up blood. You know, there's something wrong here, let's go check it out.
And she goes and she checks it out, and
the doctor says, well, you know, maybe we ought to do a biopsy because we found this lump in your throat here, it's a little strange. Let's do a biopsy just to make sure. Hopefully it's nothing, but let's do a biopsy.
And they do that. Dr. Marema gets the biopsy back, calls Jan and Laura into the office. You remember Jan told you they sat there almost to the end of the day, because
what Dr. Marema was going to tell them was pretty serious stuff. And he tells them, you've got cancer.
And what does Jan and Laura do? They take the report and they don't wait, they go to a doctor, looking for a doctor, an oncologist. They don't make an appointment, they go to Dr. Kalman's office.
Well, first they go to a cancer clinic, and they're told, we can't help you, but, listen, go down the street to Dr. Kalman's office, he might be able to help you out, he's an oncologist, he specializes in cancers.
They go to Dr. Kalman's office, and she goes to the window, hysterically crying, with her pathology report.
Dr. Kalman took the stand, and he told you he remembered this woman. He treats thousands of patients. He remembered her because that stuck in his heart, stuck in his head. You remember something like that. You remember a scene like that, a woman coming into your office, hysterically crying, not even making an appointment. He remembered her without even looking at a medical record.
And he does an exam, and he says, you know, we ought to get this checked out. I'm checking you out, I'm going to do a physical exam. And he did a full physical exam, remember? We saw the note. Number 12, please.
We saw his note from his office on March 11th, 1994. She came into my office hysterical.
So, he did an exam, he checked her out, checked out her breasts, checked out her -- all her symptoms. And what did he find?
The symptoms he found were that she had swollen glands -- second paragraph -- swollen
? lands, she's a heavy smoker, she's had a cough or several weeks, with occasional hemoptysis, blood, coughing up blood. Heavy smoker,
complaining of occasional pain, no upper or lower GI symptoms. No relevant GYN symptoms, gynecological symptoms. No urologic symptoms. And he based that on an exam. That's what doctors do.
So, he said, you know what, let's get you a CT scan. You know, you had the x-ray, it showed something in your chest, let's get a more confirming test, a CT scan. Let's get a CT scan of your chest, of your head, so we can know what's going on there, because I'm concerned about what's in your chest, what the x-ray showed.
And so they do a CT scan -- Number 14, please -- and it shows a mass in her chest.
Dr. Hughes -You heard Dr. Hughes. He comes in here and he tells you, I looked at that, I looked at the scans, that's cancer. That's a primary cancer. And if that came into my office today,
at Broward General Hospital, if Im sitting there at my desk and this case came across my desk today, I would look at it, it's cancer, no-brainer, next case.
He writes his report and sends it over to
Dr. Kalman. Number 13, please. And his impression is a large pericardial effusion with right hilar and right superior mediastinal mass. Right upper lobe and middle lobe infiltrates are demonstrated. A mass in the chest.
Dr. Hughes says, the Board-certified radiologist says, that is the picture of lung cancer. That's what he told us, remember?
That was his testimony.
And, so, based on the report, based on the exam, based on the pictures, Dr. Kalman says, well, you know what, let's do some more tests, and let's do a nuclear medicine bone scan. Number 15. Let's do -- Number 16 -- a CT of the abdomen without contrast, a CT of the pelvis with contrast, CT of the abdomen with and without contrast, and he orders these tests on March 14th.
And those tests tell him there's nothing going on anywhere else in the body; not in the pelvis, not in the abdomen, not throughout the bones. There's nothing else going on except for this mass in the chest, in her lung. He's done everything.
And the pathology report, remember it says -- the first one by Dr. Tapia -THE COURT: Mr. Fisher, can you see the screen?
JUROR FISHER: No.
MR. HAMMER: I'm sorry, let me get this out of your way. I apologize.
THE COURT: Careful, the reporters need their space, too.
MR. HAMMER: Dr. Tapia, he tells -- based on the biopsy they took to rule out lung cancer and gastric -Well, what does Dr. Kalman do? He does tests to see where -- to confirm his diagnosis, because as soon as he checks her out, he thinks, I've got lung cancer here.
And then he does tests to confirm; and, sure enough, there's no other signs of cancer anywhere. The coughing up the blood, that's an instant sign of lung cancer. No other symptoms. What is it? It's lung cancer. He sees patients, thousands of patients a day -or a year.
I mean, it's -- it was a no-brainer to him. And he's the one treating her. But he
runs all of these other tests to make sure, to rule out the other things. And, so, for the next almost two years, he treats her for lung cancer.
You know, in diagnosing and treating a
patient, it's a lot different than in a courtroom setting. Remember we talked about the scales of justice, and in a courtroom setting, greater weight of the evidence,
51 percent. That's what has to be proved in a courtroom setting. But, you know, when you're treating and diagnosing a patient, it's a lot higher than that.
Now, can you ever be 100 percent certain of everything in life? No. But you know what? When you're treating and diagnosing a patient, you're about 98, 99 percent sure, because you have to be because your patient's life depends on that decision.
Dr. Kalman, he was a juror back in March of '94. Think about that. And his burden of proof was a lot higher than greater weight of the evidence. And he made a decision, based on what he was presented at that time, that it was lung cancer, no question about it, and he
treated her for two years for lung cancer.
But not only that, remember Jan told us that after they went to Dr. Kalman, they went to Dr. Weick, another oncologist. Not they, he did, because he wanted to get a second opinion. Jan went there with Laura's whole packet, with the CT scans, with the pathology tests, with the x-rays, with the reports from Dr. Kalman, and he went to Dr. Weick. And Dr. Weick looked at everything that he had there.
And he didn't say, well, wait a minute, you know, Jan, wait, you know, I think Dr. Kalman might have jumped to a conclusion too fast; I think maybe we need some additional tests here; I think maybe -- you know, maybe you should have your wife undergo some testing, bring her to me, because I don't know if Dr. Kalman got it right here.
That's not what Dr. Weick told him.
Dr. Weick told Jan, I'm sorry, Dr. Kalman is right, your wife has lung cancer.
Another oncologist made the same exact diagnosis back in March, a second opinion. Another doctor who made a decision not by a greater weight of the evidence, but he, again,
was sure, because a patient's life depended on it.
That's the burden in medicine. In medicine, the doctors are faced with decisions every day. What do we do to treat this patient? Oh, well, you know, I'm not really sure, I'm 51 percent sure, so I'm going to go this way. That's not what they do. Tney're almost absolutely sure of their diagnosis.
They have to be. They have to be in order to treat a patient.
So, now we've got two jurors, Dr. Kalman, Dr. Weick -THE COURT: Two what?
MR. HAMMER: Two jurors.
THE COURT: Two jurors?
MR. hammer: They made a decision. not by a greater weight of the evidence, but by, basically, 98, 99 percent, they rendered their verdict back in March that Laura Grossman had lung cancer.
And then during the treatment -- because once Dr. Kalman saw and confirmed everything that he thought, that there was no other cancer, it was in the lung, he started her on
chemotherapy because it was important because she was already at Stage III, Stage IV. We've got to treat this woman before it eats her alive, because that's what cancer does.
So, he sends her -- sets her on a course of chemotherapy, and what happens? That first course of chemotherapy, it actually worked. It started shrinking the mass, which was confirmed later on; further confirmation that he was right.
You see, medicine is evolving, medicine is not just a snapshot of one day. When you're treating a patient, medicine is constantly evolving, and sometimes courses of treatment change, sometimes diagnoses change, but not in this case. In this case, for almost two years, the doctors treating her, they all had the same opinion.
So, Dr. Kalman, because he wants to treat Laura aggressively, and because Laura wants to be treated aggressively -- because she had a lot to live for, she had just given birth to Steven a year before, she had everything to live for -- he sends her up to Karen Fields up at Moffitt, another oncologist, another cancer
specialist.
And when Karen Fields gets ahold of Laura, does she look at the chart, does she look at the records? Because, you know, when a patient goes to another facility, a whole stack of records goes along with her, so they know what's been going on.
And, you know, when a doctor is treating somebody, they review those records, because that's what they're trained to do, that's why they have the records. You know that all of those records, all those records, went along with Laura to the Moffitt Cancer Center.
And Dr. Karen Fields, an oncologist, she didn't say, well, wait, you know, Ms. Grossman, Mr. Grossman, listen, I know Dr. Kalman's been treating you, and I know you got this second opinion from Dr. Weick, but, listen, you know, those guys are a little off base, you know, I know that you trust them, and I know you went to him first, and I know he's been treating you now for the past couple of months, but, you know, I'm sorry, he's wrong, he's got it wrong, you don't have lung cancer, you got something else, you got a GI cancer, you got breast
cancer. No, that's not what she said.
She confirmed exactly what Dr. Kalman said, exactly what Dr. Weick said. You've got lung cancer. She never questioned it. Not a note in the record that any doctor questioned it.
And, again, Dr. Fields is treating Laura for her disease. She's got to make a decision, not by 51 percent, like you all as jurors, but 98 percent, 99 percent.
You've got to be sure when you're treating an individual, especially with a chemo treatment that Dr. Fields was talking about -And chemotherapy, that's like poisoning your body; and you heard that they've got to -in order to do the course of treatment that Dr. Fields was talking about, they were going to have to take bone marrow out to replace the bone marrow because it was going to be destroyed. That's a heavy dose of treatment they're doing to Laura.
And this was serious stuff. But she doesn't say, wait, Laura, the doctors were wrong, you don't really have lung cancer, they were mistaken. She never says that. So, there
we got a third juror, 98 percent, it's lung cancer.
And for the next almost two years, how many doctors -- Number 18 -- how many doctors treated Laura? Forty-one. Forty-one different doctors saw Laura, treated Laura. Some made diagnoses -- again, Dr. Kalman, Dr. Weick,
Dr. Fields -- all confirming she had lung cancer.
Not one of these doctors on this list ever said, listen, Jan, Laura, I need to talk to you, you know, the doctors that have been treating you, they're wrong, they made the wrong diagnosis, they're wrong. I mean, you know, I know they got you on this course of treatment, but that's wrong.
Not one doctor out of 41. Forty-one doctors, all of them who swear to take an oath to treat patients and try to make them better, they all looked at the same case, they all looked at the same medical records, the same medical records, and made the same decision. They all did. They didn't question it. Not one of them questioned it ever in almost two years.
And then in the last month of Laura's life, Dr. Kalman brought in Dr. Sutton, pain management specialist, because by that time the chemo treatments, the pain, was taking its toll on Laura.
Dr. Sutton comes in to manage that pain. That's what she specializes in; she manages people who are at the end of their lives, to help them deal with it. Dr. Sutton never questioned the fact that Laura had lung cancer.
In fact, on the death certificate,
Dr. Sutton wrote, immediate cause of death,
metastatic carcinoma of the lung. The lung cancer that Laura Grossman had metastasized, spread throughout her body, ate up her body from the inside out, and that's what killed her. Not one doctor over nearly a two-year period ever questioned that.
So, you know, sometimes as lawyers we forget the big picture, and there's a lot of legal arguments that we make, you know, greater weight of the evidence; but the fact is, 41 doctors, 41 individuals, trained, specializing in oncology, specializing in cancer, specializing in the treatment of cancer, not
one of them questioned any of these records, not one.
Every single one of them with a certainty of 98 percent, 99 percent, because that's -- as a doctor, that's your standard, that's your standard. You've got to be sure when you're treating somebody, you've got to be sure.
And patients don't just get handed off to another doctor, and the doctor looks at it, oh, he said lung cancer, okay, I agree. That's not how it works. We all know that. These doctors are constantly checking each other because they want the best for their patient.
And you know what? Laura Grossman, they remembered her. Before they even looked at the medical record, Dr. Kalman remembered her from 1994, 16 years earlier. Without even looking at a medical record, he remembered she was the woman that walked in hysterically crying.
Dr. Sutton remembered her. She treats thousands of patients at the end of their life. She remembered her. Without even looking at a record, she remembered her.
Now, that is incredible. I mean, we go to our -- I mean, you go to a doctor, and most
of the time the doctor has to open up the file, read the notes to remember, oh, hey,
Mrs. Jones, hey, how's your daughter, Jessica?
You know, you see your doctor, and if you don't see him in the office, half the time he doesn't remember who you are. These doctors remembered her. They remembered what she went through. They remembered she had lung cancer.
You know, sometimes in litigation, even doctors lose sight of what their job is. We heard from Dr. Mamus, the defense expert in this case.
Dr. Mamus works at a cancer center, treats patients with cancer, tells you proudly -- he told you -He took the stand, and said, I see thousands of patients, and, in fact, half the time, you know, they come to me with the wrong diagnosis and I -- you know, I correct it.
Well, Doctor, isn't it important to get the whole picture and not jump to a conclusion? Yeah, that's important.
Doctor, wouldn't you say that the
treating clinician would have a better perspective on things? Wouldn't you say that
Dr. Kalman, who saw -- Number 21 -- who saw Laura Grossman 91 times, knew the patient better than you, wouldn't you say that?
Yes.
And despite that fact, Dr. Kalman and all the other 40-plus additionals who diagnosed her with lung cancer and treated her for lung cancer, you do not think she had lung cancer, is that right?
That s correct.
Even though he acknowledged that Dr. Kalman would know more and be in a better position, he knows better.
And then we asked him about the radiology. And, you know, it's amazing to me. The radiology in this case -Dr. Hughes, Board-certified radiologist, what did he tell you? That's the classic picture of a primary lung cancer.
Dr. Mamus, the defense expert, in rendering his opinion that Laura never had lung cancer, never even bothered to look at the actual films.
Think about this: He was on the stand for several hours, and what did he say? At the
time of his deposition: I made my opinions, I opined that she did not have lung cancer.
Well, Doctor, did you even bother to look at the CT scan itself; not just the report, the CT scan itself?
No, it wasn't necessary.
Really?
Really, it's not necessary to make a diagnosis?
You're coming into this courtroom and talking to us, and you're telling us, the lawyers, the people in the courtroom, the Judge, the jury, that you made a diagnosis without looking at the CT scan films themselves?
No, that wasn't necessary.
So, let's see. Dr. Mamus, he is the one oncologist, basically, in the United States that makes a diagnosis and thinks the CT scan itself is not important to making that diagnosis. That's crazy. Is that really believable?
So, then, Doctor, I guess you relied upon just the report of the Board-certified radiologist?
Number 13, please.
And the first line on that impression, large pericardial effusion is demonstrated.
Now Number 12, please. Number 12.
Doctor -- he was asked in trial: Doctor, you do not believe she had pericardial effusion?
Answer: I do not.
Well, let's go ahead and highlight the impression. This is the same CT scan you looked at on direct. The first words are "large pericardial effusions demonstrated in this patient." You disagree with Dr. Hughes' assessment?
His response: I think the chances are 90 to 95 percent that is incorrect.
You're not a radiologist?
No.
You're not Board-certified in radiology?
Correct.
The first impression, large amount of pericardial effusion, he says, no, that report's got to be wrong.
Well, the report's not wrong, because -Number 14 -- because he's telling us she didn't
have lung cancer, she might have had gastric cancer, because in the initial pathology report it says rule out GI or lung.
So, he said, well, it's definitely not lung, so maybe it's GI. But he's got to tell us that there was no large pericardial effusion because -Question: Have you ever seen pericardial effusion in a patient with gastric cancer?
Not that I recall.
That's why he's got to tell us that there's not large pericardial effusion, he's never seen it in GI cancer.
What's going on here? What is going on
here?
Number 13 on Mamus, please.
And yet when he's asked, Doctor, you would defer to a Board-certified radiologist in interpreting CT scans of the chest, wouldn't you, he says yes.
And then he says he doesn't think she's got pericardial effusion despite the fact that's the first impression Dr. Hughes says in his findings.
And when he's confronted with the fact
that 41 other doctors treating her -- 41 other doctors treated her, never questioned the fact that she had lung cancer, never had a question.
Number 6, Mamus. He says, I'll take your word there were 41 physicians. And he sat there in this chair, very smug, and said, "to me, I'm not impressed."
That's the doctor for the tobacco companies that they want you to believe.
Really? That's a doctor who took the same oath that 41 other doctors did to treat and care for patients?
That's a doctor that's running a cancer center in this state, who's treating patients every day, who's teaching new doctors. That's what he's teaching them? That's a scary thought.
And then when it came time for you, the jury, to ask a question -- Number 24, Mamus --
your question: Do you feel that Dr. Kalman misdiagnosed Laura Grossman and treated her with the wrong chemotherapy?
The witness, Dr. Mamus: This is a difficult question.
I mean, really, the question calls for a
"yes" or "no" answer; right?
How did he answer? This is a patient who presented with an advanced cancer, an advanced carcinoma. Number 25. Very, very challenging. I think just for the jury to know this, if you have a metastatic carcinoma, a carcinoma that may spread to other organs, the only carcinoma that we can cure in men and women reliably with treatment via chemotherapy -And he keeps going on, and he talks about Lance Armstrong and testicular cancer, and then he's cut off.
Twenty-six. And he says: If I could ask as part of the question -The Judge says: It's really not directly responsive to the question. The question was: Do you feel Dr. Kalman misdiagnosed Mrs. Grossman and treated her with the wrong chemotherapy?
His answer: I think what was especially important in this case was really two or three things. I think looking, when we were hiring a specialist in the case, the pathologist -27 -- the pathologist tells us we have to consider gastrointestinal cancer.
So, I think it is important to try to establish whether or not it is gastrointestinal cancer. An endoscopy -- sorry -- would have been very helpful. A very simple thing would have been to do some blood tests, which I mentioned earlier, to see if there are any possible way -And we stood up, this is not responsive to the question.
Again, second time, very simple question. Did he misdiagnose her, yes or no; did he use the wrong chemo treatments, yes or no?
And then you step back into the jury room. Twenty-eight. You guys came back out. The Judge said: I'm going to repeat the question one final time. This is my final question: Do you feel Dr. Kalman misdiagnosed Laura Grossman and treated her with the wrong chemotherapy?
And, once again, his response: What I feel is that as best as I can tell from reviewing this record, he gave her what I feel would be appropriate chemotherapy up front. At that point, the fact she did not have a complete response, there was no chance of cure.
Now, although it is true we can do tests to fine-tune where they came from, at that point it was not a curable illness. She did receive a lot of different drugs in an attempt to save
er life, but she was not curable at presentation with any drug combination unless this was a germ cell tumor.
And then the Court asked: The last thing you said was what?
He says: This was not curable with any drug combination unless there was a germ cell tumor or cancer of unknown primary. My feeling is her cancer of unknown primary, that -- the patients that are cured are undiagnosed cancer tumors.
Three times to answer a simple question posed by you all. And look how evasive he is.
Now, the Judge is going to tell you, the -- you, the jury, have awesome power. You, the jury, get to weigh the credibility of the witnesses, and you get to look at their demeanor on the stand, you get to weigh how they answer the questions; do they answer them directly, do they answer them evasively, you get to look at how they react on the stand.
Are their answers consistent with the other testimony in the case? Those are all questions you get to consider.
But you know what? When it comes to an expert, you guys even have more awesome power. You have the power to accept that testimony or totally reject it. Totally reject it. If you, the jury, don't find it credible, you can totally reject it.
Now, I ask you, Dr. Mamus, is his testimony credible, or should that testimony be rejected?
And then we asked him about how much money he made; that he worked on this case for 80 hours, he gets $600 an hour. Eighty times 600, that's about $48,000.
So, you tell me, did he have 48,000 reasons to not be candid with you all? Yeah, he certainly did. He works for the tobacco company, and he wants to keep on working for them. That's why he came in here like that.
So, I ask you folks, did Laura have lung cancer? Forty-one different doctors.
Dr. Kalman saw her 91 different times. Number 25, please. Ninety-one different times.
That's a lot of time spent with the patient, and not once did he change his diagnosis, nor did the other 41 doctors.
Did Laura Grossman have lung cancer by a greater weight of the evidence? Every one of those 41 doctors said she did by 98 percent of the evidence.
And, of course, we did call our own experts, Dr. Dollinger and Dr. Feingold, and they told you they reviewed every single medical record, they reviewed every single picture that was taken, x-rays, CT scans, they reviewed all the tests that were done, and they all told you -- both of them told you, this is lung cancer.
And Dr. Feingold explained to you, picture is the classic picture of lung cancer. It's shaped like a crab, cancer, the zodiac sign. That's where that comes from. It's the classic picture. The classic picture that Mamus never bothered to look at. The classic picture that shows pericardial effusion, that he says, no, there was none. Why? Because it doesn't fit into his case.
So, did Laura have lung cancer? Yeah,
she did. Did we prove that by a greater weight of the evidence? Absolutely. Should you even question it? No, you really shouldn't.
So, now the next question becomes, well, did she die from smoking cigarettes? And Dr. Feingold told you tnat but for the fact of her smoking for 20 years a pack and a half a day -- 20 years, a pack and a half a day -- 30 cigarettes a day, 30 cigarettes a day, takes about ten minutes to smoke a cigarette, 300 minutes.
Five hours out of her day, five hours out of her day. Twenty-four hours in a day, most people sleep maybe six to eight hours. Five out of 16 to 18 hours of her day spent smoking cigarettes.
Now, if she didn't do that five hours a day for 20 years, Dr. Feingold told you she never would have gotten lung cancer and she would be alive today, sitting with us. We wouldn't be here. She would be celebrating Steven's 17th birthday. She smoked five hours a day.
So, now the question becomes was she addicted to cigarettes? Let's talk about that.
Because no matter what, the cigarette company says, I don't care how much she smoked, I don't care how often she smoked, I don't care what the family says that she always had a cigarette in her mouth, I don't care that pictures of Laura show her with cigarettes all the time -Number 7, Number 8, please.
Think about this: You're taking pictures, just family pictures. These weren't taken for this case, these are just family pictures. She's always got a cigarette in her hand, always. And that's what Jan told you, that's what Jared told you, that's what Keri told you, that's what Jessica told you. She remembered that when she was a little girl.
Now, we didn't call Steven up here because he was only a year old when she was diagnosed, two when she died, so he doesn't even remember his mom. Always a cigarette. These were family pictures.
Think about this: A cigarette all the time, that's how they all remember her. But you know what? The tobacco company says, we don't care about that, that doesn't matter, she wasn't addicted.
Well, lets talk about that.
Dr Benowitz, we heard from him. He was the doctor that was on the video. He's the doctor that worked on the Surgeon General's report, helped put it all together. He's the doctor that's written thousands of articles on addiction, the preeminent authority on addiction.
He told you that a person that smokes a pack a day for 20 years is highly addicted. In fact, the person that smokes a pack a day for ten years is most likely addicted. Laura smoked a pack and a half for 20 years.
And he also told you that a person that smokes a pack a day for ten years and starts under the age of 20, they're addicted.
Now, there's a lot of questions about when Laura started smoking; and you heard from her sister, she started smoking when she was a kid.
You heard from her sister that she smoked marijuana. So what? Why does the defense have to bring that up to you? To cast doubt, to cast stones at Laura? She's a bad person for smoking marijuana?
She smoked cigarettes for 20 years, folks. She was addicted to cigarettes. She
?rew up in a house where her mother smoked, her ather smoked, her sisters smoked. Her mom, when she was a kid, would go out and buy cigarettes for Laura. That's what she grew up in, a house that smoked. She saw it every day. She grew up at a time -Think about this: She grew up at a time when cigarettes were everywhere, cigarettes were on TV, cigarettes were in the media, cigarettes were in the movies, they were sexy, they were cool. It was fun to smoke. Hey, you know, smoke like I do on TV. You know, you can be as sexy as I am with that cigarette in your hand.
Those are what all the ads were doing, influencing people to smoke. Have a good time.
THE CLERK: Ten minutes, counsel.
MR. HAMMER: Wow. Number 34. Here's a typical ad. Hey, stand on the ski slopes, let's take a cigarette break, it's great, look how much fun you could have, smoke Vantage. Vantage pleasures. It's great, good stuff.
They don't show you ads of people walking
around with an oxygen tank and an oxygen mask. They don't show you ads with people doing chemotherapy. They don't show you ads with people with laryngectomies having their voicebox removed, smoking cigarettes through that hole.
And, oh, by the way, defense brought in an expert, Dr. Chacko, and he told you -Imagine this: Doctor -- Doctor, someone comes into your office -Number 19, Chacko. Someone comes into
your office having a laryngectomy where they -their throat's removed, talking through a voicebox, and they tell you, Doctor, I want to quit smoking, I've been smoking a pack a day for 20 years and now I'm smoking through the hole in my throat, I want to quit smoking. You wouldn't even think that person is addicted?
And his answer: If a person came and told me that, whether he's addicted to cigarettes or not is not even an issue. He is smoking, so I would tell him to stop smoking.
That's not the question. You would not say that person is addicted?
Based on that, no.
Really? A guy sucking cigarettes through the hole in his neck, smoking for 20 years, a pack a day, saying, I'm coming here to quit,
I'm coming here to quit, help me. No, you're not addicted.
Really? That's the expert they bring in?
And then we asked him: Doctor, how much have you been paid -- Number 1, Chacko -- how much money have you been paid for working on this case? Kind of a simple question, right?
Answer: Well, I've worked on this case -- since you bring this up, I've worked on this case for a year and a half and I've reviewed 7,000 pages.
Question: Just how much money?
Answer: Yes, but I don't want the jury to get the wrong impression.
What is that?
And then the Judge intervened and said, but you need to answer the question.
And finally he says, $50,000.
So, again, he's got 50,000 reasons to tell you that Laura wasn't addicted. And he's got a lot more than that, because you know what? He's been used in other tobacco cases,
and will continue to be used in other tobacco cases as long as he comes in here and tells juries like you, that person is not addicted. That's what they bring forth to you?
You know, we spent a lot of time talking about, with Dr. Feingold, about what was known, about what was known in the scientific community. We wanted to shed some light on what was known in the scientific community about cigarettes and cancer, because at the beginning, nobody really knew, but all of a sudden cancer started rising.
Remember we saw that chart, where suddenly at the beginning of the century, cancer started rising in the United States.
Why? So, they started doing studies.
And Dr. Wynder, he did that mouse study where he painted the tar on the back of mice and suddenly they developed cancerous tumors on the back; Dr. Wynder and Graham.
And that study kind of prompted everybody to realize, hey, there is a link between
smoking cigarettes and cancer. And then they continued to do studies, and he went through these studies over the years, which eventually
prompted John F. Kennedy, the President, to say, hey, I'm concerned about what's going on here.
Surgeon General, I want you to do a study, gather some of the greatest scientists that we have in the nation, gather them together, and do a report for me and tell me whether or not cigarette smoking causes cancer, because I'm concerned about what the scientific community is saying. I want to know for sure. I'm the President, I'm responsible for my people in my country, I want to know what's going on. Do that study.
And what do they say? They say that -1964 report -- cigarette smoking is causally related to lung cancer in men. Boom. It's related to lung cancer in men. That's what the Surgeon General report said.
And what does tobacco do? What do they do? Listen to their responses.
(Thereupon, a videoclip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
The scientific director of that committee is Dr. Clarence Cook Little, who summarized the
committee's views on smoking and health just prior to today's Surgeon General's report.
It recognizes the complexity of these problems and the existence of great gaps in our knowledge. It will do its best, hopefully in cooperation with all other agencies interested in similar objectives to close these gaps and to solve the problems involved. It recognizes that smoking is one of many environmental factors which need further study in order to obtain the scientific perspective essential to accurate and comprehensive understanding of the nature and eventual control of the diseases already mentioned.
That was the situation even prior to today's report, and now the Federal government, through this report, has put itself squarely into the controversy. Quite naturally, the tobacco industry reacted this afternoon. The spokesman for the industry was George V. Allen, president of the Tobacco Institute.
Secondly, further research is needed. In short, this report is not the final chapter.
I don't think the industry admits there are any bad elements. If there are bad elements,
through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find tnem; and if they are found, they will be removed.
I don't think that there is a causal relationship established between cigarette smoking and any disease. If there were, Diane,
I don't think there would be a cause without the effect or the effect without the cause, and we all know that that happens.
The institute said Anne Browder would speak for them.
The case is still open.
MR. HAMMER: The case is still open. But what did we hear? Number 44. Their response, does smoking cigarettes cause lung cancer? Number 44, please. Well, more testing needs to be done. The tests are inconclusive. That sounds strikingly familiar.
Dr. Mamus, who says -Did Laura Grossman have lung cancer?
What did he tell you? More testing needed to be done, the tests were inconclusive. That's tobacco's mantra. They've said it since 1964, and they said it in this courtroom. That's
their position, doubt to the American public, doubt to you.
THE CLERK: One hour, counselor.
MR. HAMMER: Thank you.
So -- Number 43 -- I ask you, did Laura Grossman have lung cancer? Forty-one doctors said she did. Oh, but, wait, one doctor said she didn't, Dr. Mamus. Is that reasonable?
Come on, folks. Let's talk about truth here.
The Surgeon General's report on addiction. Once again, the United States Government was concerned about the addictive nature of cigarettes. Is it addictive?
1990 -1988, look at this. Another Surgeon General report. And they say, this report explores nicotine addiction. Cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting. Nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction. Tobacco addiction is similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as cocaine and heroin.
And what does tobacco say? No, more testing needs to be done. It's inconclusive. And it wasn't until 1999, four years after
Laura Grossman died, that RJ Reynolds finally acknowledged that you got us, cigarettes cause lung cancer, cigarettes are addictive.
But what's really important? The entire time -- just like Dr. Mamus -- the entire time they're saying, more research needs to be done, the tests are inconclusive.
So, we asked Dr. Feingold: Dr. Feingold, you did scientific studies. Can you tell us what dramatic scientific study popped up in 1999 that suddenly -- suddenly told the tobacco companies, oh, it does -- it does cause lung cancer and it is addictive?
Nothing. Nothing changed. They just admitted it.
Was any more testing done?
No.
And yet today, in this courtroom, even
though they admit it, Laura Grossman, she wasn't addicted to cigarettes, that's what they say. Laura Grossman, she didn't die of lung cancer, that's what they say.
Is that being credible? Has the tobacco industry been credible when the Surgeon General's report came out about lung cancer?
Were they credible about addiction? Were their witnesses credible in this case? No, not at all.
Did we prove that Laura Grossman was addicted to cigarettes? Did we prove by a greater weight of the evidence, 51 percent, did we prove that she had lung cancer caused by those cigarettes? Absolutely.
The doctors told you they were 98 percent sure, 99 percent sure. We proved it. And we belong in the class. We belong -- we deserve to go to Phase 2; Phase 2, where we talk about fault, where we talk about other things, where we talk about what the tobacco companies really did. That's the next step.
But, for now, the question, was she addicted, here's the question you're going to get: Was Laura Grossman addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was the addiction a legal cause of her death by lung cancer?
And the six of you that go back there should check off "yes" because 41 doctors said so, and you should say so today.
Thank you very much.
THE BAILIFF: Jurors are entering.
THE COURT: Mr. Hammer, you may proceed,
sir.
MR. HAMMER: Thanks, Judge.
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. HAMMER: The good people of RJ Reynolds, that's who they represent. Let's look at RJ Reynolds.
(Thereupon, a videoclip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
Joining us live now from Station WFMY in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, is Edward Horrigan, Jr., chairman of the board of the RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company.
These charges are the accumulation of 20 years of statistical association why science has still failed to establish a causal link.
What's the other side? That's what I'm trying to get to.
The other side, Ted, is that it is not a closed case. The fact is that science does not know what causes the diseases that we are associated with creating in human beings who smoke cigarettes. And as long as science continues to believe that, we continue to believe that it is an open case and not a
closed case.
Okay. Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, "yes" or "no"?
It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer.
All right, sir.
It has not been causally established.
Cigarette smoking -- no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
Despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established.
No causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease?
No. As a matter of fact, there are studies that -- while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been
studies conducted over ten years that would say, again, that science is still puzzled over these forces.
When you talk about the vast -- the preponderance of scientific evidence, study after study after study, and government study after government study, certainly draws a correlation between cigarette smoking and any number of diseases, does it not?
The point is that the tobacco industry has spent over $120 million in independent arm's-length research. So, when we talk about the preponderance of research, we say that there are studies that, unfortunately, are never published. Now, when Mr. Benzhaf says, we have to buy space, all we're trying to do -perhaps we call it debate, but we would like less emotionalism, and we would like a climate of understanding.
Well, I mean, you can take out the ads. I mean, instead of ads with -- with sexy ladies that are with slits up their skirts and guys with hair on their chest, why not take out ads which -- which tell us what all these studies say?
That's, Ted, precisely what we intend to do. These ads are not designed to sell cigarettes or to promote the benefits of smoking. These ads are designed, as you will see over time, to present, in a high-road statesman-like factual way, some of the other points of view that we think the public should be aware of rather than being driven by zealots who are, frankly, trying to bring cigarette smoking in America to an end.
All right. We're down to our last 40 seconds, Mr. Horrigan, they're all yours. You want to pick up on the last part, the kids?
Yes. Thank you. You will see in the forthcoming -MR. BIERSTEKER: This is not in evidence.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. HAMMER: Number 27.
So, this is what Mr. Horrigan was talking about, can we have an open debate? This was
the campaign that they decided to do. Can we have an open debate about smoking? Because for them it was still an open issue, cigarettes don't cause lung cancer.
Number 32. Instead of telling us not to
smoke, maybe they should tell us what to smoke. Vantage. Vantage has a unique filter that allows rich flavor to come through it, yet substantially cuts down on tar and nicotine.
We want to be straightforward.
Well, let's see. They produced a cigarette, Vantage, with lower tar and lower nicotine, which means, I guess, they could have taken the nicotine totally out.
In fact, Dr. Benowitz -- can I have Benowitz, Page 423 -- told us in his testimony -(Whereupon, an excerpt of the videotape deposition of Neal L. Benowitz, M.D. was played to the jury as follows:)
Doctor, let me ask you the question again. Philip Morris, RJ Reynolds, Lorrilard Tobacco Company, the Liggett Group, those companies don't add nicotine to their cigarettes, do they?
Well, what do you -- what do you mean by "add"? I think I explained clearly what I meant by "add."
Doctor, you know that in the course of the manufacturing process -- we talked about
the fact that in tobacco, nicotine is a naturally occurring substance, right?
Yes.
It occurs naturally in tobacco.
You wouldn't have a cigarette without nicotine, right?
Correct.
Okay. And in the course of the manufacturing process, from the point it comes from the leaf all through the process, nicotine actually is taken out of the cigarette, right?
Yes.
MR. HAMMER: During the manufacturing process, nicotine is taken out of the tobacco leaf and then put back in. So, wait. If they were really concerned, instead of just making low-nicotine cigarettes, in their open debate -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. HAMMER: -- they would take the nicotine -MR. BIERSTEKER: Your Honor, this is not appropriate.
THE COURT: Sustained. This is Phase 2.
MR. HAMMER: They wouldn't be addicted -THE COURT: Excuse me, sir. He objected and I sustained it.
MR. HAMMER: I didn't hear that.
THE COURT: That's not for this phase. That's Phase 2 argument.
MR. HAMMER: Cigarettes have nicotine, which is what causes people to become addicted. Lower nicotine? Without nicotine, people don't get addicted. Without nicotine, Laura Grossman wouldn't have gotten addicted.
Let's talk about that. Number 30. When I switched to Vantage, I didn't get nearly as much grief from my husband. They're promoting their cigarette to housewives, that's what they're doing.
Let's talk about that a little bit.
Laura Grossman told you that, well, she was aware of the warnings, she was aware of the health risks. Okay. Well, yeah, we didn't contest that. That's all about fault. Keep that in mind. That's not for Phase 1. The question is, was she addicted to the product, did she smoke a pack and a half of cigarettes a day for 20 years.
And if you want to cut it back, you know,
to their point of 1984, when she quit with Jessica, well, she smoked a pack and a half for the ten years after she quit.
Dependence, addiction, there's levels.
Was she addicted even the slightest bit? RJ Reynolds says no. Dr. Chacko says no.
Folks, what makes somebody continue to smoke through a pregnancy? We asked Dr. Chacko. He said, well, if a woman has their kids in the car and the kid has asthma and she smokes, well, then that's an indication of pregnant -- I'm sorry -- of addiction.
Well, what about a mom who smokes with a baby in her belly? Oh, no, that's not a sign of addiction, she chose to smoke.
Choice and addiction are not mutually exclusive. You can choose to smoke because you're addicted. You continue.
Alcoholics quit drinking, but they're still addicted to alcohol, and as soon as they get around that drink, they're tempted; and if they have that drink, they start drinking again.
Cigarette smokers, it's hard -- hard to quit, they acknowledge that. But once you
quit, once you're around a cigarette, you crave it again. We all know that. That's common sense. That's the whole idea behind the product.
The product is the delivery mechanism for the nicotine. That's what it is, it's the delivery mechanism for the nicotine.
Just like the needle is the delivery mechanism for the heroin addict, the straw is the nicotine -- the delivery mechanism for a cocaine addict.
It's the delivery mechanism. Nicely packaged, nicely packaged, very pretty, nice packaging. A lot nicer than a needle or a straw.
Conveniently packaged 20 in a pack, the
perfect dose of nicotine for their daily use, and some people need more than that.
Laura Grossman was addicted, no question about it. They talked about, well, did it cause her lung cancer. If she was addicted, did it cause her lung cancer.
You're going to hear the Judge explain to you, did it cause or contribute to cause her lung cancer. That's what the instruction's
going to be.
Listen carefully when the Judge instructs you. Did the nicotine in the cigarettes which addicted her, did that addiction contribute to her getting lung cancer? Yeah.
Because without the cigarettes, the tar wouldn't have destroyed the cilia inside the lungs, and she wouldn't have gotten lung cancer. That's how it works.
They spent, according to Mr. Horrigan, $120 million in independent research, TIRC, TI, you know, the Tobacco Industry. Really?
Well, there were 30,000 pages of scientific research that the Surgeon General studied, but that wasn't good enough for them. They still denied it. Doubt is their product.
And doubt is their product in this courtroom. They want you to doubt the fact that Laura Grossman was addicted to their cigarettes, they want you to doubt that she had lung cancer.
Let's put up Number 9, please. Laura Grossman -These are from the hospital records, the medical records, all sorts of indications that
she smoked a pack and a half for 20 years. That's what she's telling her doctors who were treating her. Thank you.
And the testimony from her own family -Number 6 -- from her own family, she had a cigarette in her mouth all the time. And you know what? Somebody -- Number 8, please -- who has a cigarette in her mouth all the time -That's pictures of her, candid pictures. You don't take candid pictures with cigarettes dangling all the time if you're not always smoking. It's always there, in all sorts of scenes. Number 9.
You know, we heard a lot of talk about quitting, and the fact that she didn't try to quit; and the fact that she quit when she was pregnant, so, therefore, she wasn't addicted. But she continued. She continued until the day she died. She continued while she was pregnant.
She had her husband go out to buy cigarettes in blizzards. She got into an argument where she threw the plate down -- the food down the stairs because she wanted more cigarettes. She was addicted. And yet RJ
Reynolds says no.
the clerk: Ten minutes, counselor.
MR. HAMMER: Thank you. Number 21, please.
Defense talked about this chart. This is how Laura presented in 1994, all of these symptoms, and, yeah, Dr. Marema, when he looked at that x-ray, which prompted him to do the biopsy, he saw a mass in her lung. He saw it. Every doctor saw it, right down the line.
Number 14. Every doctor saw what was in this picture, consistently, a mass in her lung, in the shape of a crab, cancer, and not one of their experts commented on it. They commented on the report. Dr. Mamus said, oh, no, the report's wrong, no pericardial effusion, no mass, but did he ever put that up?
So, wait. If there's no mass -- if there's no mass, what is that? What is that crab-like shape? What is it? It's cancer.
And yet none of their experts commented on it.
Did they bring a radiologist to tell you, no, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, I'm looking at this mass and that is not cancer?
No.
Dr. Hughes, Dr. Kalman, the doctors you heard in this case, you know what they did?
They came in here because they treated Laura Grossman. They came in here because they knew it was the right thing. They came in here to tell you, the jury, what they observed over that course of treatment.
And, yeah, 41 doctors saw Laura Grossman or were involved in her case. Did they all diagnose her? No, they all treated her. And that's exactly what that board says. Mamus says, I'm not impressed by that.
And you know what Dr. Kalman did when he left here? He went back to his office and he treated patients. And you know what Dr. Hughes did when he left here? He went to Broward General and read CT's. And you know what Dr. Sutton did when she left here? She went back to her office and treated patients at the end of their life with lung cancer and other cancers.
You know what all the treaters in this case did, all 41? They continued treating patients. You know what Mamus did? He went back to his office, picked up the next file
that he could testify for for the tobacco companies -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained. Inappropriate argument.
MR. HAMMER: They start talking about Mamus says, well, I don't know, you know, maybe it was -- it was breast cancer. But wait a minute. Number 24, please. Look at all these reports, all these exams. It's all in the medical records, no breast masses.
And, most importantly, there was a
mammogram. Number 42, please. A mammogram. There is no mammographic evidence for malignancy. What does that mean? There's no breast cancer.
Number 22, please. When Laura died, between September and November of 1995, these are all the things she had. This is where all of her cancer was, eating away her body. Look at it. What's interesting about that, all the cancers that were documented that she had at the end of her life, not one gastric cancer ever documented.
She had metastasis in the brain, she had
bone cancer in her legs. Nothing.
Put that down.
Not one gastric symptom the entire time. And Mamus comes in here and says, well, it could have been GI cancer, it could have been breast cancer, it could have been lung cancer. Oh, no, it couldn't have been lung cancer.
Now, the pathologists, they're brought in to analyze tissue for the presence of cancer, and each one of them confirmed that there was cancer present, that it was a metastatic cancer.
And each one of them said metastatic cancer could be consistent with GI or lung, rule it out; and that's what every doctor continued to do as they met up with Laura Grossman.
Not one of them said, hey, wait a minute, it's not lung, it's GI; it's not lung, it's breast; it's not lung, it's something else.
Not one of them except for Mamus.
Come on, folks, we all know what happened here. Laura Grossman, from the day she was diagnosed till the day she died, metastatic lung carcinoma. She was diagnosed with it, she
was told that's what she had. Not one day did any doctor tell her or her family otherwise.
And Dr. Kalman, you heard him, he didn't waver, he didn't vacillate, he didn't say, well, you know, now that I look at it, I'm not really sure. He didn't say that to you. He said that's what she had, that's what I treated her for.
You know, we said fault, that is not for this phase. Whether she made the right choice to smoke, whether she smoked knowing that it might hurt her, those are all for Phase 2.
Whether she was aware of the warnings, whether her family discussed it, made her aware that it was dangerous, that's all for Phase 2 in apportioning fault, not in deciding whether or not she had lung cancer and whether she was addicted. Please keep that in mind.
THE COURT: You have five minutes, sir.
MR. HAMMER: You know what I found very interesting? Defense counsel said the blood in her cough, he used the word "occasional." Do you remember he used that word? And yet when
e GI -I mean, I'm sorry, when the pathologist
used the word "occasional" signet cells, he said, oh, that doesn't matter, she had signet cell cancer and that's not what one of the pathologists say.
She had occasional signet cells, which are consistent with GI and lung cancer, which is why the pathologist said, rule it out; and that's what Kalman did, and that's what she was treated for till the end of her life.
Schaller, remember what he said to you all? He was asked about, did the word "addiction" appear in any of those textbook; and he said, I was told not to say the word "addiction." Wow, that's pretty -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. HAMMER: That's pretty telling. I was told not to say the word "addiction."
Number 4. Folks, this case is about Laura Grossman. It's about Laura Grossman, it's about whether or not Laura was addicted to cigarettes. It's about whether or not that addiction killed her. It's about whether or not she had lung cancer. That's what this case is about right now. That's just the threshold
to get to Phase 2, where you'll learn a lot more about RJ Reynolds and their behavior.
So, let's get to Phase 2, and then we'll talk about that, and we'll talk about fault and the other things, but let's get there first.
This case is about Laura Grossman, it's about Laura Grossman and her family. Number 5, please, Number 6, please. It's about the fact that she had lung cancer and died from lung cancer.
Number 14, please. Number 14, please.
What is that? What is it? It's lung cancer. It's the picture of lung cancer.
Dr. Hughes told you that. Mamus didn't even bother to look at the slides. That's offensive. An oncologist coming in here and telling you that Laura Grossman didn't have lung cancer, he doesn't even look at the radiology.
Remember, the whole idea of treating an individual, it's a team effort; the pathologist, the treating oncologist, the referring physician, the radiologist, it all paints the big picture. You can't just take one piece, it's all a big puzzle that fits
together.
And when you take it separate and apart, like they want you to do, break it apart, take the puzzle apart in the pieces, you know, there's some questions.
Certainly when you take a puzzle apart, and you start moving the pieces around the room, it's hard to tell what that piece is,
what the big picture is, isn't it?
But then when you put those little pieces back together, like Dr. Kalman did, pathology, the symptoms, the radiology, all the other doctors, when you put the pieces together, when you use that team approach, it's lung cancer.
THE COURT: You need to conclude, sir.
MR. HAMMER: Yes, sir.
They not once explained to you what that is. It's lung cancer.
Keep in mind the Judge's instructions.
THE COURT: Sir, you have to conclude.
MR. HAMMER: Okay. The verdict form, check off "yes," and let Jan, Jessica and Steven, let us get to Phase 2, so you can hear the rest of the story. Thank you.