MR. FREIDIN:  Good morning to you. 
THE JURORS:  Good morning. 
MR. FREIDIN:  Thank you as well.  
I'm going to change subjects, but I just want 
to say about what we just heard is that when one 
thinks about all the things that were said about 
millions of people, and you heard from the Defense 
expert, Dr. McGregor, that millions of people have 
died from COPD, millions, and John is one, imagine 
the frame of mind who said we will keep marketing 
knowing that will happen.  
But my job is a different job, so I'm going to 
talk about some other issues briefly.  They've 
raised some issues, so I'm going to talk about 
them. 3150
The first issue the Defendant raised was 
whether or not smoking caused the COPD or emphysema 
that John had.  And it seems like a pretty simple 
proposition at this point.  We know, for example, 
that approximately 90 percent of all COPDs come 
from smoking.  So if I had a hundred pennies down 
here, 90 of them start out being COPD.  
And for some reason, they're not even 
contesting that.  They haven't had anyone come in 
and say smoking wouldn't have caused his COPD.  
They had someone come in and say, well, we just 
don't know because he had some railroad exposure. 
So we knew that was coming, and we did what -- 
as a responsibility to you as a jury, we decided we 
were going to bring in somebody who really knew 
what they were talking about to help you to make 
this decision.  So we got Dr. Systrom.  And you can 
see on the board his credentials.  He's Dartmouth 
and Harvard, all those other things.  
I just want to focus on the one in the middle.  
You know, he's a professor at Harvard.  20 years 
directing the fellowship program, the largest 
fellowship for pulmonary medicine in the world, at 
Harvard.  
I'm not going to be someone who says, well, 3151
whatever is Harvard is great.  But I'm kind of 
impressed that Harvard decided to let him run their 
program for training pulmonary physicians for 20 
years.  So we wanted to have somebody who you could 
have confidence in.  
And so let's just talk about some of the 
things he said.  "Without doubt" -- these were his 
words.  "Without doubt, smoking was the cause."  It 
wasn't even based on reasonable medical 
probability.  "Without doubt."  
And as I said, 90 percent or something like 
that of all COPD cases are caused by smoking.  
Another percentage are caused -- there are some by 
industrial or environmental hazards, no doubt.  And 
then another bunch are caused by genetic 
deficiencies, which we know that John was tested 
for and did not have.  
We know that John was exposed to some issues 
at the railroad.  We know, by the way, that he had 
no asbestosis.  That was one of the things that 
their expert said, "Well, we just don't know."  
Well, that's not evidence in a court.  "We just 
don't know" is like saying we don't have anything.  
There is no mineral dust exposure, the dusts 
and all that.  She didn't seem to know, and I say 3152
that not critically, they decided to choose an 
expert who operates from a private office in Plant 
City, Florida.  
No criticism there except to say if you really 
wanted to get to the bottom of it, I think as a 
defendant, you would want to bring in somebody who 
has a lot -- 
MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor, this is 
improper attacking -- 
MR. FREIDIN:  I'll withdraw it.  
THE COURT:  Sustained.
MR. FURR:  I would move to strike it. 
THE COURT:  Sustained.  We'll move forward. 
MR. FREIDIN:  Okay, yeah.  
Here is the point.  We brought in a professor 
of pulmonary medicine, and they brought someone in 
who has a history of primarily primary medicine, 
working for the phosphate industry, working for -- 
doing workers' comp physicals, and who has 
testified to the tune of close to $900,000 for 
tobacco cases.  Over a hundred different cases they 
have called upon her to come forward.  
And, of course, you didn't hear any of that 
with Dr. Systrom.  So the real question is where do 
you want to put your beliefs? 3153
Now, going down this list, we have a smoker 
who smoked really -- it says 40 to 60 packs.  He 
could be 60 to 80 packs.  You know, it's hard to be 
clear.  That's an enormous amount of cigarettes.  
And Alex put up the chart earlier for you which was 
the millions of puffs and hundreds of thousands of 
cigarettes day in, day out; day in, day out.  
You know, it strikes me if someone was going 
to do something that much, I think any normal 
person -- any person would say that's an addiction. 
So in any event, he was diagnosed with 
pneumonia, that was something Dr. Systrom talked 
about.  And I'm going to get to it in a couple of 
minutes.  But I want to point out to you that I 
think that's one of the most important facts in 
this issue -- 
MR. FURR:  Objection as to Mr. Freidin's 
opinion. 
MR. FREIDIN:  Pardon me?  
THE COURT:  I didn't hear the objection. 
MR. FURR:  As to his personal opinions 
about -- 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. FREIDIN:  Well, it's an important fact, I 
think.  Can I say that? 3154
THE COURT:  That's fine.  But you can't say I 
think it's one of the most important facts. 
MR. FREIDIN:  Okay.  And then Dr. Systrom said 
he's never seen a patient with COPD from diesel 
exposure alone.  And again, no doubt.  And, of 
course, more likely than not, he will die from the 
COPD or the emphysema.  It's really emphysema is 
what he has.  
So let's play a bit from Dr. Systrom.  testimony of David M. Systrom, MD, played as follows:) 
The overwhelming majority of emphysema cases 
A.
are caused by smoking.  And I have testified several 
times in different ways, more than 90 percent.  The 
other reasons are minor.  They do include some 
occupational exposures as contributors.  
And I've tried to frame what our classic 
teaching is about fumes and gases contributing a tiny 
decrement in FEV1 per year, measure is 20 -- .25, a 
quarter of a percent per year. 
So even if we gave Mr. Hackimer 20 years of 
intense exposure, which I don't believe he had, from his 
deposition testimony, then even -- we're talking about 5 
percent over 20 years.  He realized about a 75 percent 
decline from normal lung function to what he has 3155
currently.  That was smoking.  That was not diesel 
fumes, in my view.   
stopped and the following is in open court.)  
MR. FREIDIN:  And let's compare that or 
contrast that with Dr. McGregor, who the Defense 
called. of 
testimony of can, played as follows:) 
BY MR. FREIDIN:  
Q.
Now, do you agree that COPD is overwhelmingly 
and predominantly caused by smoking? 
A.
Yeah, looking at the large population of the 
US and looking at the large number of cases of COPD, 
smoking is the number one risk factor.
Q.
A.
Q.
Give him 60 pack-years?  
Yes. 
Okay.  That's more than enough to cause COPD; 
correct? 
A.
Q.
A.
Q.
Yes. 
Way, way more than enough? 
Yes.  
A lot of patients have COPD, but don't know 
it; correct? 
A.
Correct.  They haven't been diagnosed by their 3156
primary care. FREIDIN:  I guess the argument they are 
making is if there is another contributing factor, 
they don't add up -- they don't add together, they 
don't -- you just can't tell.  
But clearly, the scientific evidence in this 
case is that the diesel fumes -- which, by the way, 
are -- it was Dr. McGregor who said -- she quoted a 
study that said 16 or more years of direct exposure 
to diesel fumes, as an engineer, which he had about 
4 years.  16 years, and she said that study -- 
that's a study she told us about. 
And let's compare, we have some comparisons 
between smoking versus diesel and we can just go 
through those.  
You've got 30-plus years of smoking.  It might 
be 35.  You have, again, 60 cigarette pack-years, 
438,000 cigarettes, it may be more than that.  And 
remember, he has COPD, but he also has -- what he 
had is emphysema, according to Dr. Seligman -- 
Seidelman, who was his treating doctor, and he also 
had -- and Dr. Seidelman said, and Dr. Systrom both 
said, you would not get emphysema from railroad 3157
fumes, you would get chronic bronchitis.  And John 
does not have chronic bronchitis.  
His treating doctor said he has emphysema.  So 
that would be that point.  
And, of course, his final opinion was it was a 
substantial contributing cause, he said he had no 
doubt about it.
And again, that point about the majority of 
time on the electric trains.  And the diesel 
exposure, if you multiply it out, you can take that 
20 to 25 percent of the time that John said and 
described when he was exposed to diesels -- and 
again, these are diesels from the '70s and '80s, 
not the diesels from the '30s and '40s that were 
part of the study that was referred to by 
Dr. McGregor.  So they were a lot worse.  
And if you multiply that either way with the 
2.5 -- .25 times 20 years or 1 year or 5 years, it 
comes out to a very insignificant amount.  
So let's talk about now -- so I think it's 
pretty clear, that part of the issue that -- in 
terms of causation is really very, very clear on 
this, there is not a lot to talk about.  
I do want to talk about the statute of 
limitations defense, which says, this is the second 3158
question, "State whether John knew or should have 
known in the exercise of reasonable care before 
May 5th, 1990, that he had COPD or emphysema and 
that there was a reasonable possibility that his 
COPD/emphysema was caused by cigarette smoking."  
So let me show you a chart that we prepared, 
kind of lays out the issues.  
These are all things the Defendant must prove.  
Why do I say that?  Because this is what we call an 
affirmative defense.  That means the burden of 
proof is on them.  
You'll hear, and you have heard, the Plaintiff 
has the burden of proving the case against R.J. 
Reynolds in all the other areas that we've talked 
about.  And you are going to hear it from Mr. Furr 
when he speaks, he's going to talk about the burden 
of proof.  
Well, the burden of proof on an affirmative 
defense is on them.  Very important.  
So if you're not satisfied -- John doesn't 
have to prove a thing about this defense.  And the 
answer to that question should be no, but first he 
has -- they have -- they must prove that he had 
COPD before May 5th, 1990.  
And while there was some speculation about 3159
whether he did or he didn't, we do know, and I 
mentioned this thing about pneumonia, we know that 
he had a diagnosis of pneumonia in 1991, and the 
doctor who diagnosed him did not diagnose COPD.  I 
think that speaks to that issue.  It's not 
dispositive, but it's a point. 
But let's get to the next thing.  Did he have 
symptoms before May 5th, 1990?  Well, what are the 
symptoms of COPD?  A productive cough of sputum 
three months in a row for two years in a row and a 
shortness of breath not based upon some exertion 
where you run bases or you sprint, but a regular 
shortness of breath.  And he had none of that.  
So the question is did he -- did they prove 
that he had emphysema before that, that he had 
symptoms from COPD related to that that were not 
related to either his age, his weight, or being out 
of shape?  Did they prove it?  
And the evidence is they did not prove it.  
What did they prove?  They proved that he had 
coughing in a 1973 camping trip.  They proved -- 
Put it down.  I'm going to -- I'm going to 
skip those things. 
They proved that he had shortness of breath 
running the bases maybe one time, maybe two times, 3160
in a sprint running the bases.  In what year?  
1983?  1982?  
They proved that he coughed when he laughed.  
Now, Dr. Seligman and Dr. Systrom both said -- 
Seligman.  I keep calling Dr. Seidelman Seligman.  
I'm sorry.  
So Dr. Seidelman said -- and I could put it up 
on the board, but I want to try to save time, save 
some time.  I've got a -- I don't want to use up 
Alex's remaining time.  
Dr. Seidelman said laughing and coughing is 
not necessarily anything, not necessarily COPD.  It 
might be, it might not be.  Dr. Systrom said that 
is not a COPD symptom.  
Shortness of breath when you sprint and you 
are 40 years old or 45 years old and you're out of 
breath, sprinting, that is not a sign of COPD.  
So let's go through the list.  I have a list 
of -- I do want to put up that list of -- well, 
I'll tell you what.  I'll go back to the plan for a 
minute.  Let's show what we have for -- what -- 
what was said.  Again, the irony of this or the 
inconsistency of this when you have Mr. Horrigan 
speaking. 
(Video clip played as follows:) 3161
MR. KOPPEL:  Cigarette smoking, no causal 
relationship between cigarette smoking and 
emphysema?  
MR. HORRIGAN:  Despite all of the research to 
date, there has been no causal link established. 
(Video clip stopped.) 
MR. FREIDIN:  So I think Alex said it to you, 
the inconsistency of them taking the position that 
while they're telling everybody in the world that 
there is no connection, at the same time, John 
Hackimer, who is a high school graduate and working 
on the railroad, is supposed to know what they're 
telling him is not true.  At the same time.  There 
is an inconsistency there.  There is also -- 
Let's go to this one.  
This is -- this is one of the documents, one 
of the internal documents.  "For nearly 20 years, 
this industry has employed a single strategy to 
defend itself on three major fronts:  Litigation, 
politics, and public opinion.  While the strategy 
was brilliantly conceived and executed over the 
years, helping us win," I think it should be "win 
important battles, it is only fair to say that it 
is not nor was it intended to be a vehicle for 
victory.  It was a holding strategy creating 3162
doubt."
Three major fronts:  Litigation, politics, and 
public opinion.  
So while they were -- 
THE CLERK:  Counselor, five minutes. 
MR. FREIDIN:  Okay.  While they were making 
the strategy of litigation and politics and public 
opinion, they are now saying he should have known 
better. 
MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor, I need to 
approach. 
THE COURT:  Sure.  Counsel, sidebar. 
(The following proceedings were had before the 
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) 
THE COURT:  Yes, Mr. Furr.  
MR. FURR:  I knew this was coming.  What 
Mr. Freidin has just done now is argue that the 
defense of this case, that our position that he 
should have known is a continuation of the strategy 
outlined in the document that's on the board which 
outlines what they called the planks of the 
conspiracy or the way the conspiracy was executed.  
So he has essentially just argued that the 
defense of this case is a continuation of the 
conspiracy.  That's expressly -- everyone knows 3163
under Gafney and other opinions, you can't do that.  
It's an attack on the Defense.  I move for a 
mistrial. 
THE COURT:  Well, that's denied.  I don't see 
that, Mr. Furr.  I didn't -- I just looked at the 
transcript as it was scrolling.  I didn't hear it 
and I didn't see that. 
MR. FURR:  He just turned around and pointed 
his finger at us and said, "And they say he should 
have known while they're doing this." 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  He's talking about the 
corporations at the time in the '80s and '90s, 
that's when he's talking about, when those 
documents were written.  That's what he's talking 
about. 
THE COURT:  We can even read it from the 
record.  It says litigation -- can you hear me, 
Nancy?  
Okay.  Litigation, politics, public opinion.  
The strategy back then is brilliantly conceived and 
executed over the years, helping us win.  
I think he's reading from the document.  It 
was not intended for legal victory.  It was a 
whole -- right now, he's just quoting from the 
document. 3164
MR. FURR:  It's the next statement. 
THE COURT:  Okay.  Three major fronts.  That's 
also from that document. 
MR. FURR:  Well, keep reading. 
THE COURT:  So while they were -- 
MR. FURR:  They are now saying he should have 
known better.  He turned around and pointed at 
counsel and said we are now here in this courtroom 
saying that he should have known better. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Judge, that's not -- 
THE COURT:  And I just don't think he's 
trying -- I think he's just saying that that's 
your -- he's just saying that your defense is he 
knew or should have known.  So I'm going to deny 
your motion.  And I don't think Mr. Freidin did 
anything -- tied it to current defense of the case.
MR. FREIDIN:  Right.
THE COURT:  And I'll just caution him. 
MR. FREIDIN:  Yeah, okay. 
THE COURT:  So the motion is denied. 
MR. FREIDIN:  How much time do I have? 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  She stopped it.  
THE COURT:  She stopped it.  
Correct?  
MR. FREIDIN:  Yeah, I just know -- how much is 3165
it?  
THE CLERK:  I stopped it. 
THE COURT:  Yeah, she stopped it.  
How much more time?  I'm sorry. 
THE CLERK:  Five minutes. 
THE COURT:  Five minutes.  
(The following proceedings were had in open 
court before the Court and the jury.) 
MR. FREIDIN:  So I'm going to pick and choose 
some of the things.  I am going to have to ditch 
some of my arguments because I'm running out of 
time. 
We had testimony that there was never -- by 
the witnesses that the Defense read, that's 
Nellany, Ivonne, the sisters-in-law, all of whom 
said they never saw a productive cough, all of whom 
said they never saw shortness of breath.  
And the only place you are going to hear that 
where those things happened is when you are going 
to hear with Dr. Klein, the expert that they hired, 
assumed things that weren't in evidence.  He 
assumed the productive cough.  He assumed that they 
were -- well, we can show that, yeah.  testimony of William P. Klein, MD, played as follows:) 3166
BY MR. FREIDIN: 
Q.
Doctor, is it your testimony that are you 
basing your opinion on these witnesses testified that 
there was coughing up sputum? 
A.
I'm basing it on the fact -- 
MS. LEHMAN:  Objection, Your Honor. 
BY MR. FREIDIN:  
Q.
A.
Yes or no, are you basing it on that? 
THE COURT:  He can answer. 
Go ahead, Doctor, you can answer. 
I'm basing it on the fact that these fact 
witnesses described his coughing incessantly, his 
panting when he tried to run the bases, and that he had 
a cough.  I have assumed that cough was productive of 
sputum.  
Q.
A.
You have assumed that? 
Yes.  
stopped and the following is in open court.)  
MR. FREIDIN:  Now let's play -- let's show the 
testimony of Jeanette White and Thomas White, 
please, and Dennis Nellany.  
Sorry to take you out of order. 
MR. PHILIPSON:  That's okay.
MR. FREIDIN:  You said -- this is Jeanette 3167
White.  "You said you don't remember John ever 
having any shortness of breath?  
"No, I don't.  
"You were asked questions about if you ever 
remember John having shortness of breath, and you 
said no?  
"Not back in the old days, no."  
Dennis Nellany.  "Describe for me the 
occasions he would get short of breath.  
"If he went from first to third playing 
softball.  
"Any other occasions?  
"No."  
And then he talks about they played golf.  He 
never had shortness of breath.  
"And do you ever remember him having shortness 
of breath?"  
And, of course, even Dr. Klein conceded there 
was no COPD in the 1970s.  
We have -- and then there's -- is there one 
more?  
Yeah.  
"Would you describe a productive cough, 
coughing up?  
"No." 3168
Let's show the one on Dr. Seidelman, please.  
"Is shortness of breath only a symptom of 
COPD?  
"No.  
"Could it be a symptom of just being out of 
shape? 
"Yes, being overweight.  
"You were also questioned about deep cough.  
Would that -- when he laughed.  Would that only be 
a symptom of COPD?  
"No."  
Could be others. 
"Many people don't know they have COPD until 
they are diagnosed?  
"That's correct, many don't.  They don't 
appear -- doesn't appear to be a chronic bronchitis 
component."  
He did not have chronic bronchitis.  That's 
the part about the railroad stuff.  
"And what kind of COPD would you expect to see 
due to diesel?  
"Same thing."  
So let's do the assumptions were wrong, 
please.  of 3169
testimony of William P. Klein, MD, played as follows:) 
BY MR. FREIDIN:  
Q.
We know that Thomas White testified that he 
never saw a productive cough and he never saw -- 
observed Mr. Hackimer coughing up anything; right?  
A.
Q.
A.
Q.
That's correct.  
You know that? 
Yes. 
We know that Dennis Nellany, his friend, never 
saw a productive cough; right? 
A.
No, but he's the one who saw him bending over, 
catching his breath. 
Q.
A.
One time running the bases? 
And told him to stop smoking and he could do 
it much faster.  FREIDIN:  Stop.  
So I want to go -- you are going to hear an 
expression in the charges about the words "some 
evidence."  I want to talk about the evidence in 
this case.  
No medical person was ever seen by John for -- 
John was never seen by a medical person during 
this -- up until he was diagnosed -- or actually 3170
pneumonia, 1991.  No one ever said to him that he 
had COPD or a disease.  His sister-in-laws and his 
friend Dennis never said to him that.  Neither of 
them had -- none of them had medical training.  
He never had a diagnosis.  He never missed any 
work.  He never had a sick day. 
THE CLERK:  Counselor, you have one minute 
left. 
MR. FREIDIN:  Oh, thank you.  
No shortness of breath outside of running the 
bases a couple times or one time.  No sputum.  And 
then in 1991, this pneumonia thing where a doctor's 
obviously examined him, obviously found him to have 
pneumonia, and did not find COPD. 
So those are the pieces of evidence. 
And let's go to manifested destiny.  You are 
going to hear the word when did it manifest itself.  
And that's in the charges.  I'm not all that 
familiar with that term "manifested" or "manifest".  
It's not a word that I hear used a lot.  
I only remember it from high school civics or 
history where the manifest destiny -- 
MR. FURR:  Interesting, but not relevant. 
MR. FREIDIN:  Pardon me?  
THE COURT:  Sustained.  Sustained.  Go on. 3171
MR. FREIDIN:  Because my history is wrong 
or -- 
THE COURT:  No, your history is perfectly 
fine. 
MR. FREIDIN:  Okay.  All right.  
Well, I think that the last thing I'm going to 
say before I sit down is this.  Just imagine 
this -- John consulting with a lawyer, because the 
whole context of this is it is a statute of 
limitations case defense.  
He should not be able -- they are saying he 
should not be able to make this claim, he's out, if 
you believe he should have made a claim before 
May 5th, 1990.  That's the claim -- 
MR. FURR:  Objection, that's not the legal 
standard. 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. FURR:  Move to strike. 
THE COURT:  Knew or should have known.  
Sustained. 
MR. FREIDIN:  Well, I am saying, he should -- 
they're saying -- can I say this?  That they're 
saying he should have -- should have known to make 
a claim before that time. 
THE COURT:  Just use the jury instruction, if 3172
you want to, if you have it handy. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Knew or should have known. 
THE COURT:  Knew or should have known. 
MR. FREIDIN:  Did he know or should have known 
enough to make a claim, not that he'd know or 
should have known -- 
MR. FURR:  Objection.  Not the standard. 
THE COURT:  Sustained.  Knew or should have 
known that he -- I'll get the jury instruction.  
MR. FREIDIN:  Well. 
THE COURT:  That's okay.  You can continue.
MR. FREIDIN:  Okay.
THE COURT:  I'll sustain the objection. 
MR. FREIDIN:  All right.  The last thing I'm 
going to say is it doesn't say he should have 
suspected.  It says he should have known.  
So I'm going to sit down now and let Mr. Furr 
begin.  


MR. FURR:  Thank you.  May it please the 
Court. 
THE COURT:  Please. 
MR. FURR:  Good morning, everyone. 
THE JURORS:  Good morning.  
MR. FURR:  The judge has told you, the plan is 3174
that I will find a breaking point when your lunch 
gets here, so we can take our break as usual and 
then we'll come back after lunch and I will finish.  
I am going to have to begin the same way 
Mr. Alvarez did and thank you for your service.  
You have been excellent jurors.  You've paid 
attention throughout the trial.  Nobody is going to 
sleep.  Nobody is playing with their phone.  
Everybody has been paying attention.  Everybody 
comes dressed professionally.  You have taken this 
matter seriously.  You have been diligent in every 
way, and it has been an honor to appear before you 
as a lawyer.  I know Mr. Alvarez feels the same 
way.  So thank you very much. 
Well, Mr. Alvarez and I agree on something, 
and that is you need to your eye on the ball in 
this case.  Because no matter what sport you like, 
one of the most important things that we teach kids 
when they first start playing sports is keep your 
eye on the ball.  It doesn't matter whether your 
sport is lacrosse or baseball or my favorite, 
football, you've got to keep your eye on the ball. 
Let's think about what that means for this 
case.  The class action is over.  This is not a 
case about smokers in general.  It is not a case 3175
about tobacco company conduct in general.  It is 
not a case about anything other than Mr. Hackimer.  
Anything other than Mr. Hackimer.  
The case is about his smoking, what he knew, 
when he knew it, what he did with that information, 
what diseases he developed, when he developed those 
diseases, whether he should have quit smoking 
sooner, whether he kept smoking because he enjoyed 
smoking.  Those are the types of issues that the 
evidence has been about in this case, and that's 
what I'm going to focus on in my closing. 
I will say that Mr. Alvarez made a lot of 
serious claims about tobacco company conduct in the 
past -- 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge, attacking 
the way -- 
THE COURT:  Sustained.  
MR. FURR:  We take very seriously the Engle 
findings.  We're not here to dispute those findings 
in any way.  
You were shown a lot of documents that said 
some stupid, awful things.  And I'm not here to 
defend those documents either.  Those thoughts 
should have never been thought, those thoughts 
should have never been written down, but that's not 3176
why you're here.  
You have to keep your eye on the ball, because 
what you're here for is to see whether the 
plaintiffs can prove their case and connect that 
historical conduct with Mr. Hackimer, utilizing the 
instructions that the Court has given you.  
Because, as you know, this case is about one smoker 
and one smoker only.  It's about Mr. Hackimer. 
So I'm going to focus all my time today 
talking about the evidence regarding Mr. Hackimer.  
And how do you know it's about one smoker and one 
smoker only?  As we've told you at the start of 
this case, you are going to get a verdict form.  
You have it now.  You saw it read and you saw -- I 
have condensed it into one page here.  You saw that 
every single question on the verdict form that you 
have before you asks you a question about 
Mr. Hackimer except for the last question, which 
actually uses his name twice. 
So the case is about Mr. Hackimer.  And 
plaintiffs have to prove their case.  How do they 
have to prove their case?  They have to prove their 
case with evidence about Mr. Hackimer.  They can't 
prove their case by playing on your sympathies for 
Mr. Hackimer.  I've -- 3177
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge, about 
playing -- you know, it's improper. 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. FURR:  We acknowledged up front that we 
and everyone else in this courtroom feel sorry for 
Mr. Hackimer.  He is very sick.  He is very limited 
in what he can do.  I'm sure he doesn't feel well 
most of the time.  And everybody here feels sorry 
for him, but as you are going to hear before you 
retire for your deliberations, you can't base your 
decision in this case on sympathy.  In fact, 
everybody promised us during jury selection that 
you wouldn't base your decision in this case on 
that.  
The case is not about lawyers' rhetoric.  It's 
not about argument.  You can't prove this case by 
raising your voice and yelling and pointing your 
fingers over at Defense counsel.  You can't prove 
your case about Mr. Hackimer that way. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Objection.  That's an 
inappropriate -- objection.
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. FURR:  You have to prove Mr. Hackimer's 
case with argument -- excuse me, with evidence.  
You can't prove it with argument.  You can't fill 3178
in the gaps in the evidence with argument.  You 
have to do it with evidence.  
And as I am going to show you, the Plaintiff 
has failed to meet his burden of proof with respect 
to the claims that Mr. Hackimer has in multiple 
ways throughout this case.  
In fact, what I'm going to do as I begin is I 
am going to show you some of the most significant 
ways that there are gaps in the Plaintiffs' 
evidence that prevents them from failing to meet 
their burden of proof.  
And, you know, we had a -- a lot was said 
about Dr. Proctor as a witness and how much he 
knows and how much time he spent studying tobacco.  
I'm not challenging any of that.  He could be a 
great witness in a case that he knew something 
about.  He could be a great witness in a class 
action case, or in a case about tobacco company 
conduct in general, or in a case about smokers in 
general.  But what kind of witness was he in this 
case about Mr. Hackimer?  
We had sort of a -- we had one of those 
moments in time that are extremely revealing in 
this case.  And that is when I asked Dr. Proctor 
how much -- excuse me, when I asked Dr. Proctor 3179
what the Plaintiff's name was in this case, and he 
didn't know.  And I had to tell him that the 
Plaintiff's name was John Hackimer. 
You know, a lot was said this morning about 
the amount of money that the Defense witnesses have 
been paid.  Well, when you live in a glass house, 
you shouldn't cast stones. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge. 
THE COURT:  Overruled. 
MR. FURR:  When you live in a glass house, you 
shouldn't cast stones. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Same objection.  
THE COURT:  Overruled. 
MR. FURR:  Dr. Proctor has been paid 
significantly more, almost twice as much as all the 
other witnesses in this case put together to 
testify in tobacco cases.  He's been paid $4.2 
million.  Most of it, as you saw during 
cross-examination, in the past five years, about $3 
million of that in the past five years to testify 
in these type of cases. 
He was paid $52,000 for his work in this case 
and he didn't know Mr. Hackimer's name.  He didn't 
know Mr. Hackimer's name. 
Same situation with Dr. Henningfield. 3180
Dr. Henningfield, the only addiction witness that 
the plaintiffs called, he didn't come live, you saw 
his video, was a generic witness.  He told you he 
was a generic witness.  He told you he didn't know 
the name of the smoker in this case.  
What is this case about?  This case is about 
Mr. Hackimer smoking, when he began, why he began, 
what he knew and what he did with that information 
and whether he was able to quit and whether he 
tried to quit and what his experience was when he 
tried to quit.  Those are the issues that you are 
going to be discussing when you look at the verdict 
form questions.  And you can't prove your case on 
those issues with witnesses who know nothing about 
Mr. Hackimer. 
Think about it.  Dr. Proctor and 
Dr. Henningfield knew nothing about when 
Mr. Hackimer started, what brands he smoked, how 
much he smoked, what he knew, when he knew it, what 
he did with that information, whether he tried to 
quit, when he quit, nothing.  They knew nothing 
about Mr. Hackimer.  
In fact, plaintiffs did not call a witness in 
this case other than Mr. Hackimer that even knew 
Mr. Hackimer.  No one who even knew Mr. Hackimer. 3181
The plaintiffs brought you zero witnesses in their 
case who knew Mr. Hackimer.  
The Defense, R.J. Reynolds, we brought you 
five different witnesses that either knew 
Mr. Hackimer from their personal relationship or 
had been his physician or at a minimum had 
interviewed him as part of forming their opinions 
in this case.  
We brought you two family members.  We brought 
you a friend and neighbor.  You know, these are the 
people that knew him best, these are people that 
loved him, who cared about him.  They certainly had 
no ax to grind against him.  They had no -- there 
is no reason they would have testified in a way 
intentionally to harm his case.  These were his 
friends and neighbors and family members. 
We brought you his treating pulmonologist, the 
doctors that Mr. Hackimer entrusts his health to, 
who he trusts, who he relies on, who in turn told 
you that he likes Mr. Hackimer, and he's proud of 
the job that he has done taking care of 
Mr. Hackimer.  That's Dr. Seidelman.  You might 
remember we read to you his deposition.  My 
colleague, Antonio, sat up there and read to you 
Dr. Seidelman's portion to you. 3182
And even Dr. Giakas, and we're going to talk 
about Dr. Giakas's credentials and why they are 
important in this case.  Dr. Giakas, before he came 
here and testified, conducted an independent 
medical examination of Mr. Hackimer.  You heard him 
discuss the couple hours of interview that he did 
with Mr. Hackimer so he could understand what?  
Mr. Hackimer's smoking before he provided you 
opinions about Mr. Hackimer.  
So, again, continuing to look at some of the 
gaps in the Plaintiffs' case and why they can't 
meet their burden of proof. 
The number of doctors that Plaintiff brought 
to you who had ever treated or examined 
Mr. Hackimer is zero.  We brought you his treaters.  
We brought you the addiction expert.  They brought 
you nobody.  
The number of his treating physicians who 
testified that his COPD was caused by smoking, 
think about this, his treating physician, 
Dr. Seidelman, who has been treating him for 
several years now, who sees him on an ongoing 
basis, again, the doctor that Mr. Hackimer trusts 
to take care of his health did not tell you that 
his COPD was caused by smoking. 3183
This is a case, as you know, the class 
membership case -- question, the class membership 
question has multiple parts.  One of the parts is 
medical causation.  That's what we just addressed.  
The second part is, has to do with addiction, is as 
to whether he was addicted and whether his 
addiction was a cause of his COPD.  
So whether he was addicted and whether his 
addiction was a cause of his COPD is front and 
center in this case. 
Let's look at the gaps in Plaintiffs' evidence 
on those issues.  
The number of doctors or medical records that 
diagnosed Mr. Hackimer as addicted in this case, 
zero.  Before this lawsuit, nobody ever said 
Mr. Hackimer was addicted, and Mr. Hackimer never 
told anybody that he was addicted.  That never 
happened outside of this lawsuit. 
The number of addiction experts who diagnosed 
Mr. Hackimer as addicted or found that his 
addiction caused his COPD, core parts of the class 
membership test, zero.  The Plaintiffs brought you 
no expert to tell you that he was addicted or that 
his addiction caused his disease.  
Instead, you've got Dr. Proctor.  Dr. Proctor, 3184
their main witness, spent almost two and a half, 
going on three days, of trial in this case, showed 
you over 170 exhibits from internal tobacco company 
documents during his direct examination, but did he 
even try to link those to Mr. Hackimer's 
decision-making about smoking?  No.  
The number of times that Dr. Proctor showed 
you a document and told you that it had any impact 
on Mr. Hackimer was zero. 
Now, one of the tasks you are going to have 
before you as you evaluate the evidence in this 
case and which part of the evidence you find most 
credible and most persuasive is you are going to 
have the opportunity to consider the source of that 
evidence and how that evidence came into being, was 
this evidence that existed outside of this 
courtroom independent of this lawsuit, or was this 
evidence that came to be only in the context of 
this lawsuit.  
And one of the things I'm going to suggest to 
you is that when you consider Mr. Hackimer's 
testimony in this case, that you think about that, 
because what you will see is when we compare the 
testimony he gave in this case compared to what was 
going on in the real world outside of this lawsuit, 3185
you will see that before this lawsuit, Mr. Hackimer 
never told anyone that he was addicted.  
You heard from his friends and family members, 
you heard from his doctor.  Before this lawsuit, 
Mr. Hackimer never told anyone that he had ever 
tried to quit before 1993. 
A lot's been said about Mr. Hackimer having 
doubts and becoming confused and relying on 
industry statements.  Where did that evidence come 
from?  
You heard the testimony of his friends and 
family members.  Before this lawsuit, Mr. Hackimer 
never expressed to anyone that he had doubts about 
the dangers of smoking or that he was confused 
about the dangers of smoking or that he was relying 
on something that the tobacco companies said in 
making his decisions about smoking.  
That evidence came into existence for this 
lawsuit.  And, in fact, on all those issues, he 
said almost the opposite outside of this lawsuit, 
and I'm going to show you that evidence. 
Before this lawsuit, when people would 
confront Mr. Hackimer about his cough, or the risks 
that he was taking about smoking, or his need to 
continue smoking, including when his mother looked 3186
at him while she was sick and on oxygen and told 
him he needed to quit, before this lawsuit, he 
never told anyone, no, I don't, it's okay for me to 
continue, because I'm smoking filtered cigarettes 
or light cigarettes. 
Again, that was a position that he never took 
with anyone anywhere before this lawsuit.  
Enough of those gaps in Plaintiffs' case.  
Let's look at the other side of the coin now and 
look at what the evidence that came into this case 
actually showed you. 
What did you learn about the evidence in this 
case about Mr. Hackimer?  
I've got a board here, I think.  
Is this on the board, Cliff?  
I'm going to put this up because we will refer 
back to it a couple different times as we go 
forward today. 
The same board as what you see on the screen, 
Your Honor, Mr. Alvarez. 
THE COURT:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Furr.  
MR. FURR:  You were told this morning to focus 
on what Mr. Hackimer believed.  And as I'm going to 
show you when I -- 
That's in your way again, isn't it?  Are you 3187
okay?  
I'm going to show you that Mr. Hackimer 
testified under oath in this courtroom that he 
believed that cigarette smoking was hazardous to 
his health in the late 1960s.  
And at that time, in this case about COPD, 
about his smoking and his breathing problems, he's 
testified to you under oath, and we're going to 
look at his testimony, that he was concerned that 
smoking would cause him to develop breathing 
problems all the way back in the 1960s.  
The evidence was that Mr. Hackimer enjoyed 
smoking.  He knew the risks that he was taking.  
But instead of deciding to quit, his plan was 
always to continue smoking until he got sick, and 
then stop smoking before the disease got too bad.  
That was his plan.  And we're going to show you 
that testimony.  Mr. Hackimer himself.  
By the way, you know we talked about 
Mr. Hackimer liking to gamble.  That's okay.  
Nobody is criticizing him for that.  It's a legal 
form of entertainment.  It's America.  He had the 
right to do that.  
Remember, we showed you he said, yeah, I knew 
that the cost of my entertainment might be that I 3188
might lose.  That, you know, sometimes you win, 
sometimes you lose.  I was willing to place my bets 
and take my chances.  
And he told you that that's the same way he 
felt about his cigarette smoking, because he knew 
that he was taking those chances and that he might 
lose.  
And you might remember what he also said was, 
"Yeah, but, you know, my view was if it happens 
when I'm 80, I'm 80 years old, I'll deal with it."  
The problem is it happened when he was younger in 
life.  That's really the main complaint he has. 
The evidence has demonstrated that 
Mr. Hackimer quit the first and only time that he 
got serious about quitting and was committed to 
quitting and was motivated to quit and went 24 
hours without a cigarette.  
The first time he did it, he quit smoking.  
And, yeah, he had a patch.  And, yeah, he decided 
to finish the pack of cigarettes that he already 
had at home.  He never bought another pack.  
He finished a pack of cigarettes that he had 
at home that had six or seven cigarettes in it.  
Once in a while, he would reach for one in that 
first week when he was quitting.  And then after 3189
that pack was gone, he never smoked another 
cigarette again, despite, and we'll talk about this 
at some length, despite living in a home with a 
wife who smoked every day and who had cigarettes in 
the house. 
And as you heard, Mr. Hackimer admits 
responsibility for not quitting sooner.  And we're 
going to talk about what that admission means when 
you parse it out in this lawsuit.  
Again, I'm going to say it multiple times 
because it's so important, you've got to keep your 
eye on the ball.  You've got to keep your eye on 
the ball in this case.  
Mr. Hackimer was not a smoker who smoked in 
the '20s or '30s or '40s or '50s, before the 
dangers of smoking were as widely publicized, as 
they began to be in the mid '50s.  
He wasn't someone who began smoking on a 
regular basis until the 1960s.  And when he began 
smoking on a regular basis in 1960s, very soon 
thereafter, not only had he heard that cigarette 
smoking was dangerous, hazardous to your health, 
but he believed it.  He believed it.  
Here was his testimony.   of 3190
testimony FURR: 
Q.
You first believed that cigarettes were 
hazardous to your health in the 1960s; right?  
A.
Q.
Late '60s, yes. 
And you recall when the warnings were put on 
cigarette packs in 1966, don't you?  
A.
I -- yes.   FURR:  The language matters.  He said he 
believed it in the 1960s.  And he believed it when 
the warnings went on the pack.  He didn't say I was 
confused about what the warning -- whether the 
warnings were correct, or I had my doubts, or yes, 
but the tobacco companies were saying it hadn't 
been proven.  
He didn't say, yeah, but I couldn't quit, or 
it was okay because I was smoking filters or 
lights.  He said he believed it.  He believed it.  
And, you know, one of the very important 
things to keep in mind in this case are the pack 
warnings and the warnings and advertisements.  
Because again, he's not somebody who smoked very 
much, if at all, on a regular basis before the 3191
warnings went on.  
And the warnings went on in 1966.  He had been 
smoking, on a regular basis, at the most, for four 
or five years by 1966.  And so he's really a smoker 
who spent his whole time smoking getting his 
cigarettes out of a pack that had a warning on 
them.  
Here is what the warnings said throughout his 
life.  From '66 to '70, it says, "Cigarette smoking 
may be hazardous to your health."  That's when he 
believed that statement, as we just saw.  From '70 
to '85, it said, "Warning:  The Surgeon General has 
determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to 
your health."  
From 1985 on, you got one of four rotating 
warnings, including the warnings "Surgeon General's 
Warning:  Smoking causes lung cancer, heart 
disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy" 
and the "Surgeon General's Warning:  Quitting 
smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your 
health." 
You might remember when we cross-examined 
Mr. Hackimer, he said, "Yeah, I knew that first 
warning was on there.  I never looked at them much 
anymore.  I knew what it said."  He didn't 3192
challenge it.  It told him all that he needed to 
know. 
And, you know, he made his decision to gamble 
with his health despite knowing that the warning 
was on the pack.  And from 1972 on, it was in every 
advertisement he looked at also. 
And as he told you, he knew that that same 
warning, that very same warning was on every pack 
of cigarettes, whether they were unfiltered or 
filtered, light, ultra-light, it didn't matter, 
they all carried the same warning, and he never 
thought any of them were safe, he told you he never 
thought any of the cigarettes were safe.  And we'll 
look at that. 
Not only did he tell you that he believed 
cigarettes were hazardous, critically important for 
this case, he knew and was concerned that his 
smoking would cause him, what, breathing problems.  
Here is his testimony. of 
testimony FURR: 
Q.
Question:  "And when you heard that cigarette 
smoking could be hazardous to your health, you didn't 
include lung cancer?" 3193
Answer:  "No." 
"As one of those things" -- question:  "As one 
of those things?"
Answer:  "No, I did not."
Question:  "What did you think that meant?"
Answer:  "Breathing problems of some sort."  
Did I read those questions and answers 
correctly? 
A.
Yes.  FURR:  That was one of those times when we 
went through that exercise that we all -- that 
lawyers refer to as impeachment, where a witness 
would say something that was inconsistent with his 
prior sworn testimony in his deposition and the 
Court would allow us to present to you his prior 
sworn deposition testimony so you would get his 
prior sworn answer. 
Despite believing that it was hazardous to his 
health and being concerned about cigarette smoking 
causing breathing problems, what did he do?  Did he 
try to quit?  No.  He told you, he never went 24 
hours without a cigarette, from the time he became 
a regular smoker until 1993. 3194 of 
testimony FURR: 
Q.
Sir, isn't it true that after you became a 
regular smoker, that you never quit for a period of 24 
hours or longer in an effort to quit smoking until 1993?  
A.
Correct.  
stopped and the following is in open court.)  
MR. FURR:  We're going to look next at 
Mr. Hackimer's sworn testimony where he agreed that 
his smoking cigarettes was no different than him 
gambling, knowing that he could lose.  
And the question he's asked is really 
important, because the question he's asked includes 
whether he believed that he was gambling with his 
health when he smoked filtered cigarettes.  
Filtered cigarettes.  
And here is the question and answer. of 
testimony FURR:  
Q.
You knew that you were taking a risk of losing 
when you were gambling, but you considered that to be 
the price that you paid for your entertainment; right? 3195
A.
Q.
Yes. 
Sir, you don't see any difference between the 
risks that you took when you were gambling at the casino 
and the risks that you took with your health when you 
were smoking even if you were smoking a filtered 
cigarette, do you?  
A.
Q.
A.
That's right.  Yes.  
You don't see any difference, do you?  
No.   FURR:  Think about where we are, members 
of the jury.  Mr. Hackimer knew that he was 
gambling with his health when he smoked.  It turned 
out badly for him.  And he's now asking you to 
compensate him for his loss.  That's where we are.  
And he's asking you to compensate him for his 
loss even though, even though he admits that he is 
responsible, that his choices are responsible -- 
that his not trying harder to quit is responsible 
for causing any smoking-related disease that he 
has.  testimony FURR: 3196
Q.
And you accept responsibility for your 
emphysema because you could have made a stronger attempt 
to quit; right?  
Yes.  
You accept responsibility because even after 
you knew that smoking was not good for you, you should 
have tried hard harder to quit smoking; right?  
A.
Q.
A.
Looking back, yes. FURR:  He knew that it wasn't good for 
him, he admits he should have tried harder to quit. 
Ladies and gentlemen, there has been a lot 
thrown at you the past couple of weeks, but it's a 
pretty simple case if you keep your eye on the 
ball.  It's a case about the choices that 
Mr. Hackimer made with respect to his smoking and 
his personal responsibility for the choices that he 
made. 
And, Your Honor, I think it's --
THE COURT:  Perfect timing. 
MR. FURR:  -- perfect time to stop for lunch. 
THE COURT:  Absolutely.  And lunch is here as 
well.  
So ladies and gentlemen, let's go ahead and 3197
take a lunch recess.  We'll take about 20, 25 
minutes.  Your lunches are in the jury room.  
Please I want to quick go over the 
instructions.  Do not start discussing the case 
during the lunch.  Enjoy your lunch.  Just leave 
your notes in the chairs as well.  
Thank you, everyone.  Enjoy your lunch.  
(The jury left the courtroom at 12:00 p.m.) 
THE COURT:  All right, thank you, everyone.  
We'll be in recess for about 25 minutes.  
(Recess taken from 12:00 p.m. to 12:33 p.m.) 
THE DEPUTY:  All rise, court is back in 
session. 
THE COURT:  All right, everybody ready?  
MR. FURR:  Yes. 
THE COURT:  Mr. Furr, are you ready?  
MR. FURR:  I am, thank you. 
THE COURT:  All right, let's bring the jurors 
in, please.  
THE DEPUTY:  Jurors entering. 
(The jury entered the courtroom at 12:33 p.m.) 
THE COURT:  All right, welcome back, everyone.  
Thank you so much.  Hope you enjoyed your lunch.  
Please take your seats.  And we are going to 
continue with Mr. Furr and his closing argument. 3198
MR. FURR:  Thank you.  May it please the 
Court?  
THE COURT:  Yes, thank you.  
MR. FURR:  Welcome back, members of the jury.  
Hope you had a good if a short lunch.  
You are on the home stretch.  One more 
afternoon of this.  But thank you again for your 
diligence. 
Before I go on, let's just boil this case down 
to the simple truth.  Mr. Hackimer was 100 percent 
in control of whether he smoked and whether he 
quit.  No one else had any control over those 
issues.  
Cigarettes don't light themselves and jump in 
your mouth.  Nobody held a gun to his head and told 
him to smoke cigarettes.  He knew they were 
dangerous by the late 1960s, but he chose to gamble 
with his health, knowing that he might lose.  He 
hoped it wouldn't be until he was 80.  
Unfortunately, and sadly, and I mean that, 
sadly, it happened much earlier than 80 years old.  
But now he wants you to compensate him with $15 
million. 
Use your common sense.  Use your common sense. 
I wish I could stop now, but I can't, because 3199
your verdict form has seven questions on it.  And 
my obligation as an attorney to my client is that I 
walk you through what the evidence shows and what 
we suggest to you your answer should be on each of 
those questions, even though, as you will see as I 
go through those questions, along the way, there is 
a couple times that when you answer that question, 
that should be the end of your deliberations and 
your foreman should sign the verdict form and 
return the verdict and we would be done with this 
case. 
But in any event, I'm going to turn to that, 
and I'm going to start with this threshold issue of 
class membership.  
As we told you in opening statement, the 
Plaintiff -- and remember, the Plaintiff has the 
burden on all these issues to prove class 
membership.  This is question 1 on your verdict 
form.  
And when you read the question, when you break 
it apart mentally, you will see, and as you saw 
from the Plaintiffs' presentation this morning, 
they agree with me that there are actually three 
separate elements or three separate things that 
they have to prove, they have to get over the 3200
hurdle to prove these elements. 
They can't prove one of them.  They can't 
prove two of them.  They have to prove all three.  
If they haven't proven to your satisfaction all 
three of these elements, then Mr. Hackimer is not a 
class member, and as you will see on your verdict 
form, you check no and you sign your verdict form 
and you return it and the case is completed. 
But those elements are as follows.  And I'm 
combining the verdict form question with some of 
the instructions you are going to get.  Because the 
instructions are really, really important, and I'm 
going to try to highlight for you as we go along 
some of those important instructions that we would 
suggest to you should be used to guide your 
deliberations. 
But the first part of class membership that he 
has to prove is that but for smoking cigarettes, he 
would not have developed COPD.  But for smoking 
cigarettes, he would not have developed COPD. 
Second, he has to prove that he was addicted 
to cigarettes containing nicotine.  
And finally, he has to prove, and this is kind 
of an odd concept, so I'm going to talk a little 
bit about what it means, he has to prove addiction 3201
causation.  And what that means, he has to prove 
that his addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of 
his COPD. 
And like I said, it's very important to 
remember he has to prove all three of those.  
Talk about the Engle findings for a minute, 
because we've told you the Engle findings were 
important.  They're serious, but you have to follow 
your instructions and use them in the way they are 
intended to be used in these cases, because they 
can play an important role, but it is a limited 
role.  
And the instructions will tell you the limited 
purpose for which the Engle findings are to be 
used.  And the first thing they will tell you in 
Instruction Number 6, you will see that you may not 
consider the Engle findings in determining whether 
Mr. Hackimer was a member of the Engle class.  Was 
a member of the Engle class.  
So this very first verdict form question you 
decide without reference to the Engle findings in 
any way.  
Okay.  Let's talk about the first hurdle on 
class membership, and that is, have Plaintiffs 
proven to you the burden that they took on, which 3202
is but for his smoking of cigarettes, he would not 
have developed COPD.  
And not only is this the first hurdle, this is 
the first part of the test where their claim fails, 
because they can't prove to you that it was the 
COPD. 
Mr. Hackimer had two independent risk factors 
for COPD.  
Smoking.  Nobody disagrees.  We all recognize, 
understand, admit that smoking is a risk factor for 
COPD, but so are railroad occupational exposures.  
And I'm going to suggest to you that one of the 
ways to understand the role that smoking played 
versus the role that railroad occupational 
exposures played is to make sure you focus on the 
timing and sequence of events.  Make sure you focus 
on when he developed symptoms, what he had been 
composed to at that point, and what happened when 
different exposures were removed. 
So if you follow the sequence of events, it's 
very informative as to what was actually going on 
with his COPD. 
First, his expert, Dr. Systrom, admitted that 
Mr. Hackimer had not smoked sufficient cigarettes 
in the 1980s to cause COPD.  He hadn't smoked 3203
enough yet to cause COPD.  But Dr. Systrom will 
also admit that Mr. Hackimer's -- excuse me.  I'm 
getting ahead of myself.  Let me go to the second 
point first. 
However, his 24 years of railroad occupational 
exposures would have significantly increased his 
risk for COPD.  
You're going to see that he developed symptoms 
at a time when he didn't have enough cigarette 
smoke exposure, but he had the occupational 
exposures.  
In addition, you might remember we talked at 
length about the different PFTs, pulmonary function 
tests, that were administered to him at different 
points in time.  When you look at the sequence of 
results of those PFTs, you will see the following:  
Everybody agrees that smoking causes a 
decrease in lung function, but that after you take 
that smoking away, within a couple years, that 
decrease in lung function from smoking returns to 
the same decrease that we all experience as a 
result of aging.  However, in this case, after 
Mr. Hackimer stopped smoking in 1993, his pulmonary 
lung function continued to decrease at an 
accelerated rate, faster than you would expect to 3204
see in a nonsmoker. 
What was going on in his life?  What was going 
on was he continued to be exposed to occupational 
exposures, continued to have those railroad 
exposures at his workplace, and that's what was 
causing his decrease in pulmonary function. 
Dr. Systrom, Plaintiffs' own expert, told you 
that he was experiencing symptoms consistent with 
COPD in the 1980s, but that he didn't have 
sufficient pack-years of smoking by the 1980s, so 
that begs the question as to what was causing that.
Well, Dr. McGregor provided the answer to you.  
Now, Dr. McGregor explained to you that not just 
diesel fumes, but the occupational exposures that 
Mr. Hackimer had of diesel fumes, vapors, gases, 
silica, mineral, and metal dust, asbestos and 
particulate matter, not that asbestos caused 
asbestosis, but all these things for 24 years were 
significant risk factors for COPD.  For COPD.  
Now, we've gone back and forth about was 
Mr. Hackimer exposed to fumes for a short period of 
time or a long period of time, and you've heard the 
lawyers argue.  
Forget what the lawyers say, forget what I 
say, forget what Mr. Alvarez says.  Look at what 3205
Mr. Hackimer said, look at what Mr. Hackimer said 
about his exposures. 
You will have in evidence his vocational 
records that spanned his entire employment history 
with the railroad in which in his own handwriting 
you will see Mr. Hackimer circling for each job, 
for each time period that he was exposed to fumes 
or noxious gases, and in most of these, he also 
wrote in diesel locomotives, et cetera.  Diesel 
locomotives, et cetera.  
So you can look to Mr. Hackimer's -- what 
Mr. Hackimer said outside this courtroom when he 
was filling out his vocational records as to the 
extent of his exposure to workplace exposures. 
It's also important, I would submit to you, to 
look at what his doctor said.  Not the experts that 
were brought here, but look at what his doctors, 
who were doing what?  Trying to treat him for his 
pulmonary disease, look what they said outside the 
context of litigation. 
Because you will see in the 1997 record the 
following:  
"Mr. Hackimer has persistent shortness of 
breath at times."  When?  "Especially when he is at 
work and he does work in the train yard."  Where? 3206
"With exposure to a lot of fumes from diesel 
engines."  
Remember, this is four years after he stopped 
smoking, four years after his decline in lung 
function from smoking would have returned to the 
same rate that we all experience as nonsmokers. 
Dr. Keller in 2011 wrote the following in his 
medical records, "He was a locomotive engineer and 
he was exposed to diesel fumes for some time."  
So the doctors who were treating him, who had 
no dog in this fight, what they wrote was unrelated 
to any litigation, were all concerned about his 
history of diesel fume exposure and how it related 
to his COPD. 
Both Dr. McGregor and Dr. Systrom told you 
that a few years after someone stops smoking, their 
lung function returns to -- the decrease in lung 
function we all unfortunately experience as a 
result of aging, seems a little bit more 
unfortunate with every year with me right now, but 
the decrease in lung function we experience will be 
the same as nonsmoker.  
You might remember this PSA from the American 
Cancer Society. 
(Video clip played as follows:) 3207
SPEAKER:  The moment you stop, in most cases, 
the effects of smoking will begin to reverse 
themselves until your lungs are nice and clear 
again. 
(Video clip stopped.) 
MR. FURR:  Okay, do you remember I suggested 
to you that it's important to try to keep in mind 
the sequence of events in this case as to what was 
happening to Mr. Hackimer's lung function and what 
was going on with him with respect to his exposure 
to cigarette smoke or diesel fumes. 
And what you'll see is that his lung function 
was decreasing and then he stopped smoking in 1993, 
when he continued being exposed to fumes in the 
railroad and his lung function decreased as 
measured by FEV1, which all the pulmonologists 
explained to you is the way to look at this thing, 
when measured by FEV1, continued to decrease at an 
accelerated rate above and beyond what you would 
expect in a nonsmoker.  Why?  Because he continued 
to be exposed to diesel fumes, and that's what was 
causing his COPD and his decrease in lung function. 
You have a -- one of the tasks you have before 
you is to sort out which expert to believe.  
Because on this issue, for example, both sides 3208
called in experts.  We called Dr. Klein, 
Dr. McGregor.  They called Dr. Systrom.  The 
experts had different opinions.  And you have to 
decide, it's a battle of experts, who do I believe.  
I think you should believe Dr. Systrom in this 
way.  You should believe Dr. Systrom when he tells 
you who he turns to when he has a difficult problem 
with an occupational exposure and whose advice he 
seeks out.  
He was asked:  "And you often call in a 
consultation from an occupational medicine expert 
if one of your patients has a significant 
occupational exposure?"
Answer:  "That's correct."  
That was during Ms. Lehman's cross-examination 
of Dr. Systrom.  
So Dr. Systrom tells you that with respect to 
evaluating this railroad exposure, who should you 
turn to?  An occupational medical specialist, and 
we had one, we had Dr. McGregor.  
You got to see Dr. McGregor.  Yeah, she's not 
a credentialed -- she is not someone who writes 
books and makes speeches and works at Harvard.  
What is she?  You saw she is a compassionate, 
caring doctor who spends her life helping workers 3209
with problems they've developed as a result of 
their occupation.  She tries to help them get well.  
She tries to keep them well.  
She gets consulted by the State of Florida, 
among others, to help them do that kind of job.  
She is a doctor who is devoted to improving the 
occupational health of workers in this state.  And 
Dr. Systrom acknowledged that's the kind of doctor 
you turn to to understand this type of issue. 
Here is what she said.  Even if Mr. Hackimer 
never smoked, his risk of developing COPD was 
increased for each of the 24 hours [sic] that he 
worked on the railroad.  
Take a step back.  You've got smoking, 
railroad exposure.  Both of them risk factors.  So 
we asked her which one caused his COPD?  Which one 
caused his COPD?  Because that's Plaintiffs' burden 
of proof.  
And she told you that the evidence does not 
support a determination of what caused 
Mr. Hackimer's COPD because you have two 
independent risk factors, two independent risk 
factors, and you can't tell which of them did what. 
Now, she didn't tell you that they both did 
it, that they were working together.  She didn't 3210
tell you that one of them caused the COPD and the 
second one aggravated it.  She didn't say anything 
like that.  She said you can't tell.  
You know what, forget all the experts, forget 
the lawyers, forget the experts.  Rely on his 
treater.  Rely on what Dr. Seidelman told you about 
whether you can tell what caused his COPD.  
Dr. Seidelman, the doctor he relies on, who he goes 
to when he has a problem, when he got that 
exacerbation.  
Who came and got him out of the woods?  Who 
took care of him?  Who sat up here when Antonio was 
reading Dr. Seidelman's testimony and told how 
proud he was of the good care he's given 
Mr. Hackimer?  Dr. Seidelman.  
Here is what he told you.  It would be purely 
speculation, purely speculation, to say if smoking 
or diesel caused Mr. Hackimer's COPD.  You can't 
meet your burden of proof with speculation.  You 
can't do it.  
So I suggest to you that the plaintiffs have 
failed on the very first element of the very first 
question.  And the answer to the question number 1 
on the verdict form should be no, and as the 
directive below tells you, that after you answer 3211
no, you sign the verdict form and don't go any 
further. 
But they also failed the other parts of the 
test.  Excuse me.  So let's turn to the second part 
of the test, which is addiction.  
The Plaintiff has to prove to you that 
Mr. Hackimer was addicted to cigarettes containing 
nicotine.  We submit to you that they should have 
to prove that he was -- 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.  Can you 
take that down?  
THE COURT:  Sure.  Counsel sidebar.  
(The following proceedings were had before the 
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) 
THE COURT:  What's the objection?
MR. FURR:  Can you keep it on the screen up 
there, Cliff?  
THE COURT:  Yes.  
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  I object to this.  
"Plaintiff have failed to prove that Mr. Hackimer 
was medically addicted to nicotine."  I don't have 
to prove that.  That's not -- that's not the 
instructions.  I don't have to prove that he was 
medically addicted to -- 
THE COURT:  Just use the jury instruction. 3212
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Right, that's -- 
MR. FURR:  No, no, no, Your Honor.  Whoa, 
whoa, whoa.  He was permitted to say, oh, you can 
do a self -- you can use a do-at-home diagnosis to 
decide what addiction is.  
I am permitted to argue to them they should 
require -- because they don't have a definition of 
addiction, I am permitted to argue to them that 
they should require him to be medically addicted.  
That's my theory of the defense.  That's my factual 
theory.  I got it right in -- on the law.  
THE COURT:  He has an issue -- 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  I have an issue with this 
because that's not the law that you gave them and 
that's not the requirement that I have that -- 
MR. FURR:  He can argue that.  
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  No.  You can't give them 
this -- you can't give an instruction that's wrong 
on the law, that says that I failed to prove -- 
THE COURT:  Just -- I'll sustain Plaintiffs' 
objection.  Just clarify that. 
MR. FURR:  Your Honor, that's not the 
instruction on the law.  I didn't say that. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  It says has failed because 
he -- 3213
THE COURT:  The jury might just be confused 
that that was part of the jury instruction.  I 
think that's Mr. Alvarez's -- 
MR. FURR:  I'll clear it up.  I'll say you 
won't see this in the instruction, but this is what 
you should require. 
THE COURT:  That's fine.  
MR. FURR:  Okay.
THE COURT:  That's your view of the evidence.  
That's absolutely fine. 
(The following proceedings were had in open 
court before the Court and the jury.) 
MR. FURR:  Can you put it back up, Cliff?  
Including the -- okay.  
The instructions will tell you that he has to 
prove that he was addicted to cigarettes containing 
nicotine.  And I will submit to you that in the 
case where you are asking for $15 million, because 
of an addiction-related injury, you should require 
they prove to you that he was medically addicted to 
nicotine.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.  Improper 
instruction. 
THE COURT:  Overruled. 
MR. FURR:  You should require that in a case 3214
like this.  
Dr. Giakas came to you and told you how you do 
that.  He's the only witness who came to you and 
told you how to evaluate whether he was medically 
addicted and he told you that you do it with the 
DSM-5.  
He told you -- I mean, this is not a case, 
this is not a -- this is not Ikea furniture, this 
is not a buy something and take it home and put it 
together yourself case.  
This is a case where the parties have an 
obligation to prove to you, Plaintiff has to prove 
to you he was addicted. 
In this case, Dr. Giakas told you that you 
can't prove someone is medically addicted without 
the training and education that he and other 
qualified psychiatrists have.  
It's not a checklist for deciding whether 
someone was addicted.  It's a medical diagnosis 
that requires training, experience, and expertise. 
And here, the plaintiffs remarkably, they 
failed completely to prove to you with evidence 
that he was addicted.  Think about it.  
Mr. Hackimer's treating doctors never diagnosed he 
was addicted.  Doctor -- you won't see it in their 3215
records.  In fact, you won't see in any medical 
record that Mr. Hackimer was addicted. 
Mr. Hackimer never went to the doctor for 
treatment of addiction.  There is no evidence in 
the case that before this lawsuit Mr. Hackimer told 
anybody he was addicted.  There is no evidence that 
before this case anybody ever told Mr. Hackimer he 
was addicted.  
And remarkably in a case where addiction and 
addiction causation are front and center parts of 
Plaintiffs' burden of proof on class membership, 
they brought to you no expert, no expert to testify 
that Mr. Hackimer was addicted.  They want to ask 
you for $15 million for an addiction-related 
injury, and they don't bring you an expert. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge, that's an 
improper argument relating damages to failure to 
prove a liability case. 
THE COURT:  Slightly clarify that.  Sustained.  
MR. FURR:  Okay.  In this case where they want 
for you to find whether he had an addiction-related 
injury, they didn't bring to you a medical expert.  
Instead, they want you to go do it yourself with 
common sense.  
Dr. Giakas told you it requires clinical 3216
judgment and expertise to determine whether someone 
is addicted to nicotine in cigarettes.  
And as I said, we'll keep going back to this, 
remember to think about where this fact came from, 
because before this lawsuit, Mr. Hackimer never 
told anyone he was addicted.  Never told anyone he 
was addicted.  
Okay, so it was suggested to you that all you 
have to know is that somebody is a daily regular 
smoker to know whether they are addicted or not.  
Well, here is what the evidence is, Dr. Jack 
Henningfield told you that not all smokers are 
addicted, and Dr. Giakas told you that more than 50 
percent of regular smokers are not addicted.  
So if all you do is know that somebody is a 
daily regular smoker and you are asked whether they 
are addicted, then you might as well flip a coin 
because that is not enough information, because 
people smoke for reasons other than addiction. 
You were told this morning that Mr. Hackimer's 
favorite cigarette was his first cigarette of the 
day and that that was an important factor for you 
to think about in deciding whether he was addicted.  
Let's look at what Mr. Hackimer told me on 
cross-examination. 3217
I asked him, "Sir, you didn't really have a 
favorite cigarette of the day.  Every cigarette you 
smoked was a" -- "was your favorite; right?"  
And he said, "Yeah."
He said, "Yeah."  
Dr. Giakas is the only addiction expert to 
testify in this case who knew anything about 
Mr. Hackimer.  And he didn't learn it just by 
reading the depositions and by looking at the 
interrogatories and the other information. 
Because you remember, he went and did, our 
request, an independent medical examination of 
Mr. Hackimer where one of Plaintiffs' lawyers was 
in the room, one of the Plaintiffs' lawyers was in 
the room while he conducted it, and Dr. Giakas 
asked him questions for a couple of hours so he 
would get the information he needed to testify in 
this case. 
Again, Plaintiff has the burden of proof in 
this case, and they didn't bring you an addiction 
expert, they didn't have anyone go talk to 
Mr. Hackimer about these issues.  They want you to 
rely on a do-it-yourself addiction diagnosis.  
Dr. Giakas was very clear that under the DSM, 
Mr. Hackimer was not addicted to cigarettes.  Not 3218
addicted to nicotine -- cigarettes containing 
nicotine.  Plaintiffs' position is you don't need a 
DSM diagnosis, that you should just use your common 
sense, that you should just use a common sense 
diagnosis of addiction.  
Let's think about that.  Let's talk about what 
that would tell you.  If you decided to evaluate 
whether Mr. Hackimer was addicted, just using a 
common sense definition, using your common sense, 
what would someone look like, what would a smoker 
look like who was addicted to nicotine.  I suggest 
to you that this is what an addicted smoker would 
look like. 
An addicted smoker would be tortured by their 
smoking.  They would hate their smoking.  Their 
smoking would be out of control, they would tell 
people that they're addicted.  They would seek 
help.  They would try multiple times to quit 
smoking.  
They would experience horrendous withdrawal 
symptoms and relapse and return to smoking over and 
over.  They would reach out and seek medical help.  
They would try quit aids.  
And ultimately, once they were free of 
cigarettes, they would avoid cigarettes at all 3219
cost.  They would stay away from environments where 
other people were using the substance they had been 
addicted to for fear of relapsing.  That's what an 
addicted smoker would look like using a common 
sense definition.  Is that what Mr. Hackimer looked 
like?  Of course not.  He was the opposite.  
Here is what Mr. Hackimer looked like.  He 
didn't want to quit.  He didn't want to quit, he 
enjoyed smoking, he liked the taste, he especially 
liked the taste of Winston and Winston Lights, he 
smoked because he wanted to, it was under control.  
When he was in an environment where he wasn't 
allowed to smoke, he would either leave that 
environment or not smoke.  Never told anybody he 
was addicted.  
And he quit the first time he was motivated.  
And he quit immediately after his diagnosis.  Never 
relapsed.  Smoked a few cigarettes, but never 
relapsed after he quit.  He didn't need any other 
aids.  You know, he chewed regular gum, apparently.  
He never smoked after 1993.  And, you know, he did 
use a patch when he was quitting, but after that 
was done, he never relapsed.  And think about it.  
Think, he lived in a house with a wife who was a 
smoker and who had cigarettes present. 3220
Now, if he had been addicted, he would have 
relapsed.  Now, can you imagine someone who was a 
serious heroin addict or serious opioid addict 
breaking their addiction and then going to a home 
and living in a home where someone else was using 
that same substance, heroin or opioids, living in a 
house with them, knowing what the substance was, 
and never touching it for 23 years.  Of course not.  
That defies common sense.  
And for those reasons, the Plaintiffs have 
failed on a second ground to prove class 
membership, because they haven't proven to you that 
he was addicted.  They just haven't proven.  Even 
if you thought they had proven it, they have to do 
a step further, they have to prove that addiction 
was a legal cause of his COPD.  
So let's look at addiction causation.  
Plaintiff has to prove to you that addiction to 
nicotine was a legal cause of Mr. Hackimer's COPD, 
but they have brought you no expert, they brought 
you no expert who told you that addiction caused 
Mr. Hackimer's COPD.  
The only expert in the case that knew 
Mr. Hackimer, that evaluated the facts of this 
case, Dr. Giakas, told you the opposite.  He told 3221
you that addiction did not cause his COPD. 
Let's take a step back and let's look at what 
we know about nicotine and smoking cigarettes to 
evaluate whether or not Mr. Hackimer's addiction, 
if he was addicted, was the actual cause of his 
COPD. 
Let's start with Plaintiffs' expert, 
Dr. Henningfield, who he didn't know anything about 
Mr. Hackimer, but he was able to tell you this.  
Nicotine addiction does not interfere with a 
smoker's ability to make an effort to quit.  
So all these years that Mr. Hackimer didn't 
want to quit, didn't try to quit, wasn't because of 
nicotine addiction, it's because that was his 
choice.  
He told you that nicotine addiction does not 
prevent smokers from quitting permanently and that 
nicotine addiction does not prevent heavy smokers 
or even highly addicted smokers from quitting.  
He told you that while he believes that a 
large percentage of the 60 million smokers in this 
country who have quit were addicted, they all quit 
anyway.  It didn't prevent them from quitting. 
Look further what the experts told you.  Not 
only can heavy smokers quit, Dr. Proctor did tell 3222
you that tens of millions of heavy smokers quit in 
the '50s, '60s, '70s, and '80s without 
pharmacologic quit aids during those same decades 
that Mr. Hackimer made no effort to quit.  
Dr. Giakas told you that anyone can quit. 
Let's look a little closer at the quitting 
that occurred in this country and compare it to 
what Mr. Hackimer did.  Because as Dr. Proctor told 
you, millions of heavily addicted smokers quit 
while Mr. Hackimer chose to smoke and not try to 
quit.  
Dr. Proctor told you that before Mr. Hackimer 
was a smoker, back in the 1950s, the mass quitting 
began because of all the publicity about the 
epidemiology studies and the animal studies, and 
that was all coming to light, and millions and 
millions of Americans were making the decision, 
that's it, I'm not going to gamble, I'm not going 
to take that risk, I'm done.  They put their 
cigarettes down.  
He told you between '60 and '65, 9 million 
people quit, which brought the total to 17 million.  
Between '66 and '70, another 13 million quit, 
brought to 30 million quitters.  And by the end of 
1975, when Mr. Hackimer had made no effort 3223
whatsoever to quit, 45 million people had quit in 
this county.  Thousands of smokers were quitting 
every day.  
Well, Mr. Hackimer was exercising the right 
that he had to choose that he didn't want to quit, 
that he wanted to continue gambling with his health 
by smoking.  That was his choice and his right to 
make that choice.  It's also his responsibility.  
Let's think about whether addiction to 
nicotine was a legal cause of Mr. Hackimer's 
disease.  And I'm going to suggest to you a 
commonsense way.  You won't find this in your 
instructions.  
I'm going to suggest to you a commonsense way 
to think about this question of addiction 
causation, because it's kind of an odd term.  
Before you came in here to serve as jurors, you 
probably never thought about this concept of 
addiction causation too much, but now it's before 
you on your verdict form, so you have got to think 
about it.  
I suggest to you a commonsense way to do it.  
You can think about it like this.  Was Mr. Hackimer 
a tortured smoker who was unable to quit despite 
desperately wanting and trying to do so?  If he 3224
was, that would be a very different case.  
Or did Mr. Hackimer enjoy smoking and plan to 
smoke until he got sick, plan to smoke until he got 
sick?  
Let's look at what the facts, the evidence of 
this case has told us about how to answer that 
commonsense way of looking at this question.
Again, before this lawsuit, Mr. Hackimer never 
told anyone he tried to quit before 1993, and that 
included his friends and family members, his 
buddies, his family members, people that loved him, 
the people that hung out with him, the people that 
certainly have no ax to grind about Mr. Hackimer, 
certainly would have no reason to want him to lose 
this lawsuit.  
We asked them all this and read the 
depositions to you.  They all told you, Ivonne 
Ervin, Mr. Nellany, Tom White, they all told you in 
the years they were around Mr. Hackimer, despite 
how much they were around him, that he never quit 
or even tried to quit.  
They all confirmed that.  Why?  Because he 
wasn't motivated to quit.  Because he's already 
made his decision, I'm going to smoke until I get 
sick.  As soon as I get sick, I'm going to quit. 3225
THE CLERK:  Counselor, one hour. 
MR. FURR:  Thank you. 
And that's what motivated him to quit.  
Here is what Mr. Hackimer told us. testimony of John Hackimer played as follows:)
BY MR. FURR:  
Q.
Sir, isn't it true that before 1993, you don't 
recall ever waking up in the morning and deciding I'm 
not going to smoke today and not have any cigarettes 
that day?  
A.
No, I did not.  
stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR:  On direct examination, Mr. Hackimer 
told you he tried many times to quit.  On 
cross-examination, he told us he never made the 
decision before 1993, he never woke up a single day 
and said I'm not going to smoke today.  
He told Dr. Giakas the same thing.  
Dr. Giakas, this is unchallenged, unrebutted 
testimony, Dr. Giakas told you that "In my IME when 
I examined him, it supported that he wasn't making 
quit attempts because he said to me very directly, 
'Before 1993, I never gave it a thought.  I never 3226
gave it a thought to quit.'"  
Unrebutted testimony.  Mr. Hackimer did not 
get back in here, up in the rebuttal case for the 
Plaintiffs and say, "I never said that to him."  
This testimony from Dr. Giakas was unchallenged.  
Unchallenged.  
Mr. Hackimer himself told you that he wasn't 
motivated to quit until 1993.  Here is what he 
said.  testimony FURR:  
Q.
Sir, when you quit smoking in 1993, you were 
truly motivated to quit, weren't you?  
A.
Q.
Yes. 
You were not as motivated to quit smoking 
before you were diagnosed with emphysema, were you? 
A.
Q.
No.  
When the doctor told you you had emphysema, 
that motivated you to quit; right? 
A.
Q.
Yes. 
And you became more motivated to quit than you 
had ever been in the past, didn't you? 
A.
Q.
Yes. 
And when you finally became motivated and 3227
serious about quitting, you put them down and quit, 
didn't you?  
A.
After two months.  FURR:  He wasn't motivated to quit until 
1993.  That's the only thing that changed.  
Dr. Giakas told you other than his motivation, his 
ability to quit in 1993 was no different from what 
his ability would have been in the 1960s, '70s, 
'80s.  
In fact, apparently, according to 
Mr. Hackimer, he was smoking three packs a day in 
1993.  If that's the case, he actually quit smoking 
when he was smoking the most cigarettes per day 
that he had ever smoked in his life.  But what 
changed is he became motivated to quit.  
Let's look at this issue of what his plan was.  
What was Mr. Hackimer's plan?  Well, we know what 
his plan was.  
Dr. Giakas told us that in his deposition, 
Mr. Hackimer said that his mother got ill as an 
older woman and that he was okay with that concept.  
And he said that "If I get -- if I get ill when I'm 
80, then I'm 80, and it's okay." 3228
He recognized that the gambling he was doing 
could result in a loss of his health, but his hope 
was it would happen when he was older, when he was 
80.  
I mean, it's sad.  It's awful he got sick at 
52.  It's awful.  But he knew it could happen.  He 
was hoping it would happen later.  He was hoping it 
would happen later.  
And let's look at what he told us about this 
conversation with his mother. testimony of John Hackimer played as follows:)  
BY MR. FURR:  
Q.
Later on in time, your mother told you that 
you should quit smoking, didn't she?  
A.
Q.
Yes. 
And you told your mother, "I'll know if I have 
to quit;" right? 
Yes.   
A.
stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. FURR:  Mom's sick.  She's on oxygen.  
She's looking at the son that she loves and tells 
him that he needs to quit.  He doesn't say, "Why?"  
Or "Smoking's safe.  Mom, you don't understand, the 3229
tobacco companies say it's not proven."  Or "I just 
don't think that it's quite right because I've got 
doubts."  Or "I'm confused."  
He doesn't say, "No, Mom, it's different, it's 
okay because I'm smoking filters," or "I'm smoking 
lights," or "I'm smoking ultra-lights."  
He doesn't say anything.  In this moment 
between mother and son, when they are sick on 
oxygen, and she is warning him about his health, 
imagine the gravity of that moment between them, he 
doesn't say any of those things.  He says, "I'll 
know if I have to quit.  I'll know if I have to 
quit." 
And what we know, as Dr. Giakas explained to 
us, that what he meant was if I get sick, then I'll 
quit.  If I get sick, then I'll quit. 
You know, an easy -- we talked about gambling 
a couple times.  We're going to talk about it 
another time or two because it's such an easy way 
to understand this case.  Gambling is sort of a 
metaphor for the whole case.  
Gambling was a way that the American Cancer 
Society described what a smoker is doing when they 
smoke cigarettes.  Gambling is a way that 
Dr. Proctor described what a smoker is doing when 3230
they smoke cigarettes.  Of course, you've now seen 
that's how Mr. Hackimer thought about it, too.  
Dr. Proctor told you that smoking cigarettes 
is like playing Russian roulette with your life.  
And you might remember this PSA where the American 
Cancer Society said the exact same thing.  
(Video clip played as follows:)
You lose.  
(Video clip stopped.) 
MR. FURR:  Easy way to understand the case, 
easy way to understand the case is when you smoke 
cigarettes, you know the dangers, you're gambling 
with your health.  
And Mr. Hackimer admitted that he was 
responsible and that he should have tried harder to 
quit smoking.  testimony FURR:  
Q.
Okay.  And you accept responsibility for your 
emphysema because you could have made a stronger attempt 
to quit; right? 
Yes. 
You accept responsibility because even after 
you knew that smoking was not good for you, you should 
A.
Q. 3231
have tried harder to quit smoking; right? 
A.
Looking back, yes.   FURR:  Let's think about what the 
underlying circumstances would have to be before 
somebody was willing to accept responsibility for 
having harmed their own health by not quitting.  
Number one, you would never accept 
responsibility for not quitting sooner if you 
didn't know it was dangerous.  So by admitting that 
you should have quit sooner means you knew that you 
were taking a chance. 
Number two, you would never accept 
responsibility for not trying harder to quit if you 
couldn't quit.  If you couldn't quit, then that 
would be a waste of time, and you wouldn't take 
responsibility for that.  So it's also an admission 
that, yeah, I could have quit. 
And last, you would never accept 
responsibility for not trying harder to quit if it 
wouldn't have made any difference in the outcome.  
The only time you accept responsibility for 
not trying harder to quit is if you knew you should 
and you could have and you could have quit at a 3232
time that would have changed the outcome, i.e., in 
this case that means no COPD.  If you didn't 
believe those three things, you would never accept 
responsibility for not trying harder to quit.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I assume -- that's the 
third strike of why this case should end with class 
membership.  They didn't prove medical causation.  
They didn't prove addiction.  They didn't prove 
addiction causation.  
And we only need one red X here for the answer 
to this question to be no, because they have to 
prove all three.  They failed to prove any of them.  
Okay.  Let's turn to -- I'm going to skip 
also, like Mr. Alvarez did, question 2 on your 
verdict form is the statute of limitations 
question.  
I'm going to skip to question 3 and 4, which 
are the concealment and agreement to conceal 
questions, just like Mr. Alvarez did, not for the 
same reason, however.  As much as Ms. Lehman would 
like to get up here and argue to you the statute of 
limitations, she is not going to do it today.  I am 
going to handle that issue.  
But I am going to skip it for this reason.  As 
you will see as I go forward, a lot of the evidence 3233
about concealment will have to do with what 
Mr. Hackimer knew at different points in time.  
And you'll see when we go back to the statute 
of limitations questions, as your jury instructions 
tell you, what he knew at different points in time 
is relevant to that question, also. 
So I'm going to do this question first so we 
will have the advantage of having looked through 
that evidence and have it in mind when we go back 
to the statute of limitations question. 
Okay.  What is the concealment and agreement 
to conceal?  And I'm going to do them together.  
I'm going to do them together, because Plaintiffs' 
claim fails for the same reasons on each of these 
claims. 
What Plaintiffs have to do is -- look, the 
findings say concealment and agreement to conceal.  
We're not contesting that, and we can't contest 
that.  We're not going to fight about that.  That's 
not what this issue is about.  
The issue is about whether Plaintiffs have 
been able to link with evidence the concealment and 
the agreement to conceal to Mr. Hackimer's COPD.  
And what they have to do to link that up is 
this.  They have to prove that but for his reliance 3234
on a statement by Reynolds concealing or omitting a 
material fact not otherwise known or available, 
Mr. Hackimer would have acted differently and 
avoided COPD. 
Well, that's a mouthful.  So we've broken that 
down into the elements or parts of that burden that 
they have assumed in this case.  
This is Jury Instruction Number 7.  When you 
go to the jury -- that's the jury instruction that 
relates to these claims.  When you work through 
that, you will see that they have to prove the 
following things.  
They have to prove that he relied on a 
statement.  They have to prove that the statement 
concealed a material fact, and this is really 
important, not otherwise known or available to 
Mr. Hackimer.  
Why?  Because you can't harm somebody by 
concealing information from them if they already 
know it.  You can conceal information from 
somebody, but if they already know it and believe 
it, you haven't harmed them by doing so.  
Third, they have to prove that had they 
concealed infor- -- if Mr. Hackimer had the 
concealed information, that he would have acted 3235
differently.  What's that mean in this case?  That 
he would not have smoked.  
And finally, that Mr. Hackimer developed COPD 
because of his reliance on that statement.  
That's the burden they've taken on to prove to 
you.  And this claim fails on the very first part 
also about him having relied on a statement. 
Now, he said different things at different 
times during his direct examination about having -- 
"I saw statements by tobacco companies.  I read 
them in the newspaper."
He said all that.  I'm not disputing he said 
all that.  But when we got up on cross-examination, 
we tried to get a little more specific to find out 
what he actually saw, what statements he heard or 
read and could have relied on.  
And here is what he told us.  He told us that 
he didn't hear or see any statements from Reynolds 
or anybody in the tobacco industry. testimony of John Hackimer played as follows:)  
BY MR. FURR:  
Q.
Other than advertisements, you never heard or 
read any statement by the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, 
did you? 3236
A.
Q.
No.  
And other than advertisements, you never heard 
or read any statement by the Lorillard Tobacco Company, 
did you?  
A.
Q.
No.  
Other than advertisements, you never heard or 
read any statement by the Brown & Williamson Tobacco 
Company, did you?  
A.
Q.
No.  
Other than advertisements, you never heard or 
read any statement by the American Tobacco Company, did 
you?  
A.
Q.
No.  
And finally, other than advertisements, you 
never heard or read any statement by the Philip Morris 
tobacco company, did you? 
A.
Q.
No.  
Okay.  Before you got involved in this trial, 
you had never heard of the CTR or Council for Tobacco 
Research, had you? 
A.
Q.
No. 
And you'd never heard or read any statement by 
the Council for Tobacco Research, did you? 
A.
Q.
No.  
Before you became involved in this trial, you 3237
had never heard of the Tobacco Industry Research 
Committee, the TIRC, had you?
A.
Q.
No. 
And you did not -- you had never heard or read 
any statement about the TIRC, had you?
A.
Q.
No.
Before you got involved in this trial, you had 
never heard of The Tobacco Institute or TI, had you? 
A.
Q.
No.
And you had never heard or read any statement 
by The Tobacco Institute, had you?
A.
Q.
No.  
You had never heard of or relied upon in any 
way something called the Frank Statement, had you? 
A.
No.  FURR:  He told you on direct that he heard 
or read something in the newspaper, but who -- 
those were all the tobacco companies and all the 
related entities.  He just told you that he never 
heard or read anything that any of them ever said 
other than advertising. 
Instruction Number 7 in your instructions is 
going to tell you the manufacturing, selling, and 3238
advertising cigarettes are lawful activities, 
therefore, Defendant cannot be held liable merely 
for manufacturing, selling, or advertising 
cigarettes.  That's -- that deals with the issue of 
whether he relied on a statement. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge, that's 
inappropriate. 
THE COURT:  Do you need to come sidebar? 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Yes.  
(The following proceedings were had before the 
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) 
THE COURT:  Mr. Alvarez. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Judge, you can't use it the 
way he used it.  This is to say that selling and 
manufacturing is a lawful activity.  He's trying to 
weave it, he's trying to weave it for -- of the 
fact of reliance.  Look what he said. 
THE COURT:  Sustained.  
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Okay.  
(The following proceedings were had in open 
court before the Court and the jury.) 
MR. FURR:  Okay, remember I told you the 
second part of this concealment test has to deal 
with whether the statement that he relied on, if 
there had been one, concealed a material fact not 3239
otherwise known or available to him, not otherwise 
known or available to him.  
So we need to look at what he knew and when he 
knew it to evaluate whether it was otherwise known 
or available to him.  
Dr. Proctor told you, I'm going to have to go 
a little quicker, because surprise, surprise, I'm 
behind on my time, Dr. Proctor told you, I won't 
belabor this, mass quitting started in the '50s, 
people were fleeing for their lives, they were 
scared to death that their smoking was going to 
kill them, all before he ever became a regular 
smoker and that people were quitting, they were 
being driven by people's fears and concerns about 
the dangers of smoking.
In 1964, the Surgeon General's Report came 
out.  This is actually a copy of an exhibit 
Mr. Alvarez showed you in opening statement.  "The 
relationship exists between cigarette smoking and 
emphysema."  
And then we have a Surgeon General's warning 
come on later in '85, smoking causes emphysema.  
All this information was known or available to 
Mr. Hackimer, and he knew it and he believed it, as 
he told you already, he believed. 3240
And the first time I showed you this, I showed 
you his answer, here is the transcript.
Question:  "You believed that cigarettes were 
hazardous to your health in 1960s?  
"Late '60s, yes."
Question:  "When you heard that cigarette 
smoking could be hazardous to your health, you 
didn't include lung cancer?
"No."  
We asked him what it meant, he said, 
"Breathing problems of some sort."  
So by the late '60s, he believed that smoking 
was hazardous to his health and he was concerned 
about breathing problems.  Exactly the issues in 
this case.  That information was available to him.  
He knew it and he believed it and any concealment 
of that information could not have harmed him 
because you can't harm somebody by concealing 
something from them that they already know.  Pretty 
common sense.  
And your instruction says so.  Your 
instruction says so.  You'll see it.  Look at that 
instruction.  
Okay.  Not only did he know it, all his 
friends, his buddies, the guys he hung out with, he 3241
played ball with, they knew it.  His relatives knew 
it.  
Dennis Nellany told you that news stories and 
public information about cigarettes being deadly 
and dangerous and addictive, it was known, 
everybody saw it on the TV or heard it on the 
radio.  Mr. Nellany told you it was common 
knowledge.  
His sister-in-law Ivonne Ervin told you, "We 
knew it was bad for us, we knew that smoking caused 
disease including emphysema.  I think we all heard 
that."  Obviously, Mr. Hackimer had heard that.  
Dr. Proctor told you that Dr. Daniel Horn, the 
guy in charge of the National Clearinghouse on 
Smoking and Health in 1968 said, "You could stand 
on a rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous at the 
top of your lungs' and you would not be telling 
anyone anything they didn't already know."  
Including Mr. Hackimer, who believed that 
smoking was hazardous to his health and caused 
breathing problems when he was a 22-year-old young 
man deciding to gamble with his health, even though 
8,000 Americans per day were making the opposite 
choice and choosing health instead of gambling. 
Mr. Nellany might have said it perfectly, 3242
better than anybody else could have said it.  
Mr. Nellany told you "You would have to be living 
under a rock not to have heard that smoking was 
deadly and addictive in the 1970s." 
Mr. Hackimer wasn't living under a rock, he 
was a smart man, he was a savvy man, he was an 
informed man.  His friends were telling him, he 
already knew by the late 1960s.  
But it went on.  His buddy, Mr. Vilary who 
worked on the railroads, who had also played 
softball with him, part of that neighborhood gang 
that they all drank together and smoked together 
and played ball together, had a good time together, 
told you that -- you heard that he told 
Mr. Hackimer, "It's a filthy habit.  It's going to 
kill you."  "It's going to kill you."  And 
Mr. Hackimer just laughed.  
Again, I won't go through the whole litany.  
He didn't deny it, but he didn't say he doubted it, 
he didn't say I was skeptical of it, he didn't say 
the tobacco companies say it's not proven.  He 
didn't say no, no, that's for other people, it's 
okay for me, I'm smoking lights or ultra-lights.  
None of that.  He just laughed.  
And again, I'm going back to this because it's 3243
said so well, Mr. White, his brother-in-law, 
testified, "Nobody can say no, they did not know 
that they were hazardous to your health."  And he 
asked a good question in his testimony.  He said, 
"How many warnings do you need?"  "How many 
warnings do you need?"  
Mr. White warned Mr. Hackimer that he was 
going to end up like his parents with emphysema.  
Mr. Hackimer said, "I know.  I know."  "I know.  I 
know."  That's what he told Mr. White.  He didn't 
say -- he didn't go through the litany of denials 
or explanations about the brands he's smoking or 
the tobacco company statements or anything else.  
He didn't say I'm skeptical.  He said, "I know.  I 
know."  His choice.  
And before this lawsuit, Mr. Hackimer never 
told anyone, there is no evidence that before this 
lawsuit he ever told anyone, when they confronted 
him about the dangers he was taking, the risk he 
was facing, and the need to quit, he never 
expressed any doubts about the dangers of smoking 
outside of this lawsuit. 
All right, you were told that several times, 
Mr. Hackimer told you that the advertisement for 
cigarettes said that they were safe or safer.  What 3244
Dr. Proctor told you on cross-examination was that 
no advertisement ever said that filtered cigarettes 
were safe or safer.  What Mr. Hackimer did admit 
was he knew that filtered cigarettes, all light 
cigarettes and ultra-lights all had the same 
warnings.  
These are warnings.  We've already looked at 
them.  He knew they were on every pack including 
the lights and ultra-lights.  It is important, 
though, to look at what Mr. Hackimer -- remind you 
what Mr. Hackimer told you about what he saw on 
advertisements because that was a focus of what you 
heard this morning.  Mr. Hackimer admitted on 
cross-examination with respect to Winston Lights 
that the ads never said they were safe and that he 
never thought they were safe.  
With respect to the Kent IIIs and the Kent 
Ultra-Lights, Mr. Hackimer told you that he does 
not remember even seeing any advertisements for 
those products before he started smoking. 
So this testimony about having relied on 
advertisements, you know, this is what he told us 
here.  He told you -- you might remember the story 
of why he began smoking Kent IIIs because his uncle 
was smoking Kent, he tried them, they were too 3245
harsh, and so he picked up a brand extension of 
Kent cigarettes, Kent III, found out he liked the 
taste.  
In fact, Dr. Proctor told you on 
cross-examination that Kent III advertising and 
Kent Ultra-Light advertising they never said they 
were safe or safer.  They never even used people.  
He told you they used light colors and pastels and 
clean imagery, but they never said anything like 
safe or safer.  
We've looked at this, but we're going to look 
at it one more time, because again, it's an easy 
way to understand the whole case. 
Dr. -- excuse me, during cross-examination of 
Mr. Hackimer, these questions and answers were 
given.  
"Sir, you don't see any difference between the 
risks that you took when you were gambling at the 
casino and the risks that you took with your health 
when you were smoking, even if you were smoking a 
filtered cigarette?"  "Even if you were smoking a 
filtered cigarette, do you?"
Answer:  "That's right."  
I wanted to make sure that the answer wasn't 
ambiguous.  I clarified with him. 3246
"You don't see any difference, do you?"
Answer:  "No.  No."  
It wasn't restricted when he was smoking 
unfiltered.  He thought about filtered cigarettes 
the same way.  The same way.  So again, go back to 
the second -- one of key ways that the concealment 
and agreement to conceal claims both fail, that is 
because you can't hurt somebody by concealing from 
them information they already know.  Let's remind 
ourselves about how Mr. Hackimer was bombarded with 
information about the dangers of smoking throughout 
his life.  This is a board we showed you in opening 
statement.  I'm not going to go through it all 
again.  But Mr. Hackimer certainly knew about the 
warning labels, he told you in '69, he believed 
that smoking was hazardous.  
You know, both his mother and father got sick 
from emphysema, and he knew it, and he believed 
that their emphysema was caused by smoking, he 
accepted that, he understood.  His friends, as we 
just indicated, were warning him all over the 
place, telling him things like smoking can kill 
you.  That was just the personalized, personal 
warnings he got.  
Like everybody else in society, he was being 3247
exposed to warning labels and public health things, 
newspapers and magazines and Surgeon General's 
warnings, TV news and media in New Jersey and 
Philadelphia, and PSAs.  
And as Mr. Nellany said it perfectly, you 
would have to be living under a rock.  You would 
have to be living under a rock not to have known 
all this.  
So because the Plaintiffs have not pointed you 
a statement -- you to a statement that Mr. Hackimer 
relied upon, a statement that concealed information 
not otherwise known or able to, a statement that 
had he just known that information, he would have 
quit.  Their claims on concealment and agreement to 
conceal failed.  Think about that final part of it.  
He knew they were dangerous in '69.  Tried 
to -- decided to gamble and not quit anyway, and 
Plaintiffs are here to tell you that if only he had 
more information, if only he had more information 
that hadn't been concealed from him, he would have 
quit and changed the outcome.  
What more do you need to know that it's 
hazardous to your health and that it may cause you 
breathing problems and that your mom and dad 
developed emphysema related from smoking, 3248
including, you know, it is an awful, sad fact, but 
his dad died in the early 1980s from 
smoking-related emphysema, and Mr. Hackimer 
believed that the death had been caused by his 
smoking.  
How could it conceal of -- how could any more 
information have made any difference?  It wouldn't.  
Because he decided to smoke until he got sick.  
That was his plan all along.  It wasn't lack of 
information.  He had all that he needed to know, 
but he decided that he was going to smoke until he 
got sick. 
So when you get to these last two questions, 
questions 3 and question 4, not the last two 
questions on the verdict form, the Plaintiff simply 
have not been able to link, they haven't been able 
to prove the elements that they have to prove to 
show that concealment and agreement to conceal 
caused Mr. Hackimer's COPD.  
They haven't been able to do that.  And so we 
submit to you the answer on both of these questions 
should be no because the Plaintiffs haven't met the 
burden of proving to you what they have to on these 
claims. 
Okay, now we'll go back to question 2, 3249
question 2. 
How much time do I have?  
THE CLERK:  You used a -- an hour and 29 
minutes used. 
THE COURT:  30 minutes, Gina.  
MR. FURR:  I have 30 minutes left?  
THE COURT:  30 minutes. 
THE CLERK:  31 minutes, actually. 
THE COURT:  31 minutes. 
MR. FURR:  31.  Let's go back on the statute 
of limitations.  Because this is an important 
question, question number 2, that also is another 
question.  We would suggest to you that the answer 
to this question should also be the end of the 
case.  Because his claim is legally barred if it 
falls outside the statute of limitations.  
Here is the test.  His claim is barred if he 
should have known that he had COPD before May 5th, 
1990, and that there is a reasonable possibility 
that it was caused by smoking.  That there is a 
reasonable possibility it was caused by smoking.  
So we're going to break that down, we're going 
to look at the evidence, both on what he was 
experiencing before May 5th, 1990, to answer the 
question should he have known.  Second, that's why 3250
we just we went through all the information we did 
about what he knew to answer the question of should 
he have recognized that there was a reasonable 
possibility that what he was experiencing was 
related to his cigarette smoking before May 5th, 
1990.  
And remember, this is a gentleman who both 
parents had emphysema that he believed was caused 
by their smoking.  He believed was caused by their 
smoking. 
The instructions will tell you that the 
critical event is not when he was actually 
diagnosed with COPD.  No dispute that happened 
later, in 1993.  But that's not the critical event.  
Instead, instructions tell you that it's when his 
COPD first manifested, manifested.  The 
instructions tell you what that means.  
So let's look at whether he was having -- 
whether his COPD was manifesting before 1990.  
And the instruction will tell you further than 
in the -- in Instruction Number 5, what you will 
see, is that "His COPD and emphysema manifested 
itself to him in a way that supplied some 
evidence," he didn't have to know with a hundred 
percent certainty, he just had to have "some 3251
evidence of a causal relationship to cigarette 
smoking."  
So the question becomes did he have COPD and 
did he have some evidence of a causal relationship 
to cigarette smoking.  The last part's easy, 
because we know that he already believed that 
smoking caused COPD/emphysema because of his 
parents' experience.  
All right.  So let's look at the -- let's look 
at what the evidence is with respect to what was 
going on with him.  Because before May 5th, 1990, 
he had symptoms of COPD.  And his friends and 
family members had connected those symptoms to his 
smoking.  And he had some evidence of a causal 
connection.  Let's look at that. 
Four fact witnesses testified in this case, 
Dennis Nellany, Tom White, Ivonne Ervin, and you 
also heard Jeanette White's testimony on some of 
this through the expert testimony.  All four of 
them, the only four fact witnesses who testified, 
said that he had symptoms of COPD in the 1980s. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge, 
mischaracterizes his statement.  He never said 
anything about COPD. 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 3252
MR. FURR:  I said he had symptoms, Your Honor. 
THE COURT:  Symptoms.  Symptoms.  Sustained. 
MR. FURR:  The number of fact witnesses who 
testified that he did not have symptoms of COPD was 
zero.  Nobody said that.  The experts in this case 
all agreed that he was experiencing what they 
called the linchpin symptoms of COPD in the 1980s. 
Klein, Seidelman and Systrom all told you that 
he had shortness of breath on exertion and that he 
had chronic cough.  But again, let's put the 
experts aside.  Let's look at Dr. Seidelman, the 
witness that had no -- nothing to do with this 
lawsuit, his treater, his caretaker, the guy that 
really likes him, the guy that Mr. Hackimer trusts.  
Let's look at what he said about when Mr. Hackimer 
had COPD.  Because here is his testimony. 
Question:  "Based on sort of rounding all that 
out, you expect that Mr. Hackimer had COPD, 
detectible COPD by the time he was 40 years old?"
Answer:  "Correct."
Excuse me.  Answer:  "Yes."
Question:  "And that's based on your training, 
education, and what you know about Mr. Hackimer?"
Answer:  "Yes." 
"Are you offering that testimony to a 3253
reasonable degree of medical certainty?"
Answer:  "Yes."
Okay, when was Mr. Hackimer 40 years old?  He 
was born in 1946.  He was 40 years old in 1986.  
And his treating physician testified with a 
reasonable degree of medical certainty based on not 
only his general training, but also what he knew 
about Mr. Hackimer, that he had detectible COPD by 
the time he was 40 years old.  Detectible COPD by 
the time he was 40 years old.  
I'll try to sum up the evidence in this case.  
The fact witnesses told you that he had shortness 
of breath, cough, including chronic cough.  There 
is testimony that he had chronic cough before 1990.  
Dr. Seidelman told you that he had detectible, 
diagnosable COPD.
In 1986.  And you might remember the 
back-extrapolation, that is, if you looked at how 
his lung function was decreasing and when he was 
diagnosed with emphysema -- which I shouldn't have 
skipped that.  Dr. -- Dr. Systrom testified that 
Mr. Hackimer had stage IV, the very severe stage of 
COPD, since at least 2001.  
And so we asked him a bunch of questions about 
how long people stay in those stages and how 3254
people's lung functions decline.  And here is what 
he told you.  You know, it varies.  Everybody 
agrees it varies.  
Stage III, people stay in that five to ten 
years, stage II, five to ten years, stage I, five 
to ten years.  
Even if you tighten it down like that, no 
matter how you look at it, Mr. Hackimer had COPD 
before 1990, because he would not have gone from no 
COPD to stage IV in the space of 11 years or less.  
And that's what Dr. Systrom, their expert, told 
you, that he had stage IV COPD in 2001. 
So if you look at what had to have happened in 
order for him to get where he was in 2001, he had 
detectible COPD before 1990.  And as we know from 
everything we just looked at -- well, here is your 
instruction that tells you, you may properly 
consider what he knew before May 5th, 1990, 
regarding the health risks of smoking.  
I won't belabor this.  We talked over and over 
about what he knew about his parents' experience in 
the '80s, how he knew smoking caused 
emphysema/COPD.  So of course he had some evidence 
that what he was experiencing was related to his 
smoking. 3255
He told you himself that when he knew that his 
parents had emphysema caused by smoking, he was 
quite concerned because emphysema was a serious 
disease.  Tom White told me he warned Mr. Hackimer 
he was going to end up like his parents.  And he 
said, "I know.  I know."  He didn't deny it.  So, 
of course, he had some evidence that what he was 
experiencing was from his smoking.  
His sister-in-law told you that everybody 
teased him, that among them all, he's the one that 
should quit because he was coughing so much.  And 
she's told him, "You in particular should quit 
among all of us."  "You in particular should quit 
among all of us."  
So he had detectible COPD before 1990, he had 
some evidence that he should quit before 1990.  And 
so when you get to this question on your verdict 
form, this question about the statute of 
limitations, the answer should be yes.  And if the 
answer is yes, again, that's the end of this case.  
You sign your verdict form, and the case is over.  
But as I've said before, my obligation is to 
go through all seven questions.  We've looked at 1 
through 4, so I'm going to continue going through 
the questions and talk with you about the evidence 3256
of all of them.  
And I'm next going go to the comparative fault 
question, question on your verdict form.  
The first point to make is like all other 
issues, the Plaintiffs have the burden of proof on 
this, on all of their case.  They have to prove to 
you each percentage point of fault.  It doesn't 
start at 50/50.  Reynolds starts at zero.  
Mr. Hackimer has admitted fault, but Reynolds 
starts at zero, and they have to prove to you his 
fault.  I mean, it's -- they have to prove to you 
1 percent, 2 percent, 10 percent, 20 percent.  They 
have to prove all of that to you with evidence. 
So let's look at what the evidence is about 
where responsibility lies for Mr. Hackimer's 
smoking.  The evidence is that Mr. Hackimer was a 
hundred percent responsible for any smoking-related 
injury he developed.  Here -- and these are just 
the facts.  
He knew that smoking was dangerous and could 
cause breathing problems no later than in the 
1960s.  He chose to smoke despite knowing that 
cigarettes were dangerous because he liked the 
taste of smoking and enjoyed smoking. 
He always planned to quit when he developed a 3257
smoking-related disease.  
He never tried to quit until he got sick. 
You know, we -- again, it's because it's so 
poignant and powerful way to understand the case.  
This gambling testimony of his is he knew he was 
gambling with his health.  And nobody made him do 
that.  I mean, cigarette smoking is a voluntary act 
that people engage in.  No one makes you do it, and 
no one can make you stop.  No one can make you 
stop.  That's a choice you get to make.  
There is really no evidence that R.J. Reynolds 
did or said any -- that R.J. Reynolds did or said 
anything that caused him to start or caused him to 
continue.  I mean, where is that evidence?  
You know, they've talked a lot about what R.J. 
Reynolds did, but where is the evidence linking 
that, linking that to the choices Mr. Hackimer made 
about whether to smoke and about whether to 
continue smoking?  
You know that Mr. Hackimer admitted that he is 
responsible for COPD.  He should have made stronger 
attempts to quit smoking, that he should have tried 
harder.  But that he enjoyed his smoking.  He told 
you he liked Winston and Winston Light especially.  
And, you know, the evidence is that his choices are 3258
the sole cause of any smoking-related disease he 
has. 
The only, only legal cause of Mr. Hackimer's 
COPD was his choice to smoke in the face of the 
knowledge that he had and his personal concerns 
about breathing and the consistent repeated 
warnings that he got from everybody starting in the 
1960s, but instead of heeding those warnings, he 
decided to gamble until he got sick, and nobody 
could have done anything to change the outcome of 
what he did because he knew what he was doing and 
he chose.  
He had the right, I'm not being critical, he 
had the right to make those choices.  Those choices 
also come with their responsibility.  Only he could 
have stopped.  I mean, you know, it sounds trite, 
like I said before, his cigarettes didn't light 
themselves and jump in his mouth.  
Nobody had a gun to his head.  He always had 
the choice.  Every time he had got a warning on the 
side of a pack of cigarettes or from any of his 
friends and family members, or when he started 
having symptoms, when his parents experienced 
disease, when he saw a warning in the advertising, 
every time he got a warning, that was another 3259
quitting opportunity for him.  
That was an opportunity for him to say I'm 
done, I'm tired of taking this risk, I'm going to 
make the same choice that 60 million other 
Americans made, and I'm going to quit smoking.  He 
did.  Each time he said, got it, understood it, 
believe it.  My choice is to gamble.  That was the 
choice he made.  
So in this extreme case where he chose to 
gamble and planned to smoke until he got sick, 
there is really no room for fault on anybody else, 
no room for fault on anybody else.  So I'm going to 
suggest to you if you get to this question, a 
hundred percent of responsibility in this case 
should be charged to Mr. Hackimer because ask 
yourself, who else could have changed the outcome?  
Who else could have changed the outcome?  Nobody.  
Only he could make the decision to quit.  
Let's talk about damages for a second.  Use 
your common sense.  Use your common sense.  $15 
million?  Use your common sense.  Because your 
instructions tell you that any damages must be fair 
and just in light of the evidence.  Fair and just 
in light of the evidence.  
And this is -- you know, plaintiffs have the 3260
burden to prove to you their damages.  They have to 
prove -- burden to prove to you every dollar of 
damages.  Their damages start at zero and they have 
to prove them.  Where is the proof of $15 million 
worth of damages?  
Use your common sense.  
And we said it before and I'm going to say it 
one more time.  Despite the fact that everybody 
here feels it, you can't let sympathy drive your 
decision.  You can't let sympathy drive any 
decision.  You can't let it inflate your damages 
because you feel sorry for him. 
And you have to remember what he is and is not 
seeking damages for.  What he is not seeking 
damages for.  And I'm going to point out to you, 
I'm going to remind you what he is not seeking 
damages for. 
He's not seeking damages for lost wages.  He's 
not seeking damages for medical expenses.  He's not 
seeking damages for services he couldn't perform.  
He's not seeking damages for any other disease.  
Mrs. Hackimer is not making any claim.  His 
children aren't making a claim.  Only he is seeking 
damages for the experience that he personally has 
had.  That's what you are being asked to award $15 3261
million for.  
In a case where Mr. Hackimer chose to gamble 
with his health, you are being asked to compensate 
him with $15 million.  Use your common sense.  
Now, there is a part of the instructions that 
has been mentioned, so I'll mention it, it's kind 
of complicated, it has to do with the aggravation 
of an existing disease or physical defect.  And 
this really relates to how you parse out damages, 
if you think that both smoking and occupational 
exposures contributed to disease, I'm just going to 
remind you that the evidence demonstrates that 
really this part of the instruction doesn't have 
any meaning in this case as the facts have been 
developed because no witness claimed that 
Mr. Hackimer had a preexisting COPD that was then 
aggravated by one of the exposures.  Nobody told 
you that.  
Okay, I'm going to turn to the last issue on 
this, which is the issue that Mr. Alvarez told us 
today this is what this case is all about.  He says 
this case is all about punitive damages and how 
they want to come here and ask you to award more 
damages on top of the $15 million they've already 
asked for.  He says that's what this case is all 3262
about.  
Well, punitive damages is different.  Punitive 
damages, of course, they are in addition to any 
compensatory damages.  If you say yes to the last 
question, then we'll come back, we'll have another 
opening statement, we'll have some evidence, 
another closing argument.  
The trial will continue, and we'll address 
that issue, but it's different because it's a 
higher burden of proof, it's a higher burden of 
proof.  And the burden of proof on punitive damages 
is clear and convincing evidence.  
They have to provide you clear and convincing 
evidence that convinces you without hesitation, as 
you will see in your instruction, without 
hesitation that under the facts and circumstances 
of this case, that punitive damages should be 
awarded.  That's what they -- that's the burden 
they have taken on on punitive damages. 
I'll go over the instructions with you for a 
minute because punitive damages is a concept not 
many people have dealt with before, but our 
instructions are really useful there because the 
instructions are like a funnel, that if you use the 
instruction, they can funnel your inquiry, the 3263
question before you down to make -- to help you get 
to the exact question that you have to answer in 
this case.  
And the instructions tell you the following.  
There is the burden of proof, but the instructions 
tell you that number one, the Engle findings do not 
establish that he's entitled to damages, punitive 
damages.  
So when you are addressing this last question, 
once again, just like class membership, you set the 
Engle findings aside, they can't be used in your 
analysis of the question, and they can't be used in 
any way in determining whether they are warranted. 
In addition, your instructions will tell you 
that you may not seek to punish Defendants for any 
harm suffered by any individuals other than 
Mr. Hackimer.  You know, other people can bring 
their case and seek punitive damages if they want 
to.  
In this case, the only conduct that you can 
punish for is conduct that you find to have been 
causally related to Mr. Hackimer's injuries.  See, 
it's not a -- it's not a decision of whether the 
company should be punished in general or whether 
you approve of their conduct or whether they have 3264
done things they shouldn't have done.  That's not 
the issue before you.  
The narrow question before you is whether they 
should be punished under the facts and 
circumstances of this case.  And that means for 
conduct that you find to have been a legal cause of 
Mr. Hackimer's injury.  
Let's think for just a minute about that.  
Because the very first slide that Mr. Alvarez put 
up today, and you saw it again later, was a picture 
from the 1994 Congressional hearings where its 
tobacco executives got up and testified about 
smoking addiction and smoking and health.  And as 
Dr. Proctor told you, they were ridiculed across 
the country for that testimony.  It actually caused 
more people to quit than anything else.  But in any 
event, it was when?  After Mr.  Hackimer had quit.  
After Mr. Hackimer had already quit.  
So that's an example of tobacco company 
conduct that could not possibly have been related 
to causing his disease because it occurred after he 
had already quit.  
The Court gives you another instruction that I 
want to focus you on as you look at the evidence, 
and that's this.  "In determining whether punitive 3265
damages are warranted, you may also take into 
consideration any mitigating evidence."  Mitigating 
evidence.  "Mitigating evidence is evidence which 
may demonstrate there is no need to impose punitive 
damages against the Defendant."  
How much time do I have?  
THE CLERK:  Ten minutes left. 
MR. FURR:  Thank you.  
Okay.  So let's look at what the evidence is.  
Look, if you consider punishing for the concealment 
and agreement to conceal, it is important to 
remember that Dr. Proctor told you, there has been 
no -- that Reynolds has admitted that smoking is 
dangerous and addictive for the past 16 years, 
since 2000.  There is no concealment, there is no 
conspiracy.  
Dr. Proctor also told you that, look, 
cigarettes can't be made safe.  They can't be made 
safe.  But he also told you the cigarette companies 
have spent a fortune trying to make less hazardous 
cigarettes, trying to make less hazardous 
cigarettes, mitigating evidence.  
He told you specifically about the billion 
dollar projects that began in the 1980s that 
produced the Premier cigarette and later the 3266
Eclipse cigarette, where R.J. Reynolds spent a 
billion dollars developing a cigarette that heated, 
but did not burn tobacco, less mutagenic, less 
carcinogenic.  
Dr. Proctor told you it was better for health 
from a cancer perspective, but that it was rejected 
by consumers because it tasted awful, tasted like 
burning rubber, old fish, something like that.  In 
any event, people wouldn't buy it, they wouldn't 
smoke it, they wouldn't switch from the product 
they were currently smoking to that.  
He told you as a result, it couldn't have 
possibly helped public health, it was just going to 
sit on a shelf and be a nonissue.  
Same for Eclipse.  They didn't stop.  When it 
didn't work, they brought it back in, spent several 
hundred million more dollars trying to fix the 
problem, but they just couldn't do it.  And nobody 
knows how to make a safe cigarette, even today, 
because why?  The problem is combustion. 
As Dr. Proctor explained to you, if you burn a 
tobacco leaf, you generate a smoke with thousands 
of chemicals in it, including carcinogens, and 
nobody knows how to produce a cigarette that is 
safe.  They can't do it.  The tobacco companies 3267
tried, and he's told you they spent a fortune 
trying to do it.  
Dr. Proctor also told you that R.J. Reynolds 
has a division that produces a smoking-cessation 
aid.  They told you that Niconovum is a division of 
R.J. Reynolds that produces a smoking-cessation 
aid, so R.J. Reynolds is helping smokers quit.  
Helping smokers quit.  That's mitigating evidence.  
That's trying to solve the problem. 
If the issue of youth smoking is one that you 
consider when evaluating this punitive damage 
entitlement question, some of the facts you might 
want to remember is that -- excuse me.  If the 
normalization of smoking, you know, you heard this 
morning again about normalization of smoking, how 
R.J. Reynolds made it normal, how there was a time 
in the '50s where a large percentage of Americans 
were smoking, those days are long gone.  Those days 
are long gone.  
Dr. Proctor told you that today, adult smoking 
is below 15 percent of adults, that we are in a 
period of collapse of the tobacco burning market, 
that he believes that cigarettes will become 
extinct, and that nobody will smoke tobacco-burning 
cigarettes.  You have to ask yourself, what is left 3268
to punish.  The product is on the way out.  He told 
you it's a horse-and-buggy technology, it's 
obsolete, it's on the way out, it's going to become 
extinct anyway.  
And as I got ahead of myself, if youth smoking 
is something that you are thinking about when you 
are considering punitive damages, you might want to 
remember that Dr. Proctor told you that youth today 
are rejecting tobacco-burning cigarettes even 
faster than adults are, that youth smoking is at an 
all-time low.  
It hasn't been this low since 1920s.  He told 
you it's decreased dramatically since 1997.  He 
told you that while it may have been normalized at 
one point, but today it is stigmatized and 
marginalized.  Youth are not picking up 
tobacco-burning cigarettes.  
So ladies and gentlemen, for all those 
reasons, under the facts of this case, as your 
instructions indicate, if you get to this question 
number 7, your answer should be no, this case will 
be over.  If you answer yes, we'll start up the 
next part of the trial in the next day or so. 
Okay.  I told you, despite the fact that it 
has taken Mr. Alvarez and I each two hours to talk 3269
to you about this case, we probably could take 
longer if we were given longer.  It's really a 
simple case, it's a case about freedom of choice 
and personal responsibility.  
I mean, come on, this is America.  In America, 
we believe in letting people make choices for 
themselves.  To each his own.  But along with that 
choice comes personal responsibility.  We all know 
that.  
Our parents taught us that we are responsible 
for the choices that we make.  We teach our 
children that they are responsible for the choices 
they make.  We expect our friends and our neighbors 
and our coworkers to take responsibility for the 
choices they make.  That's how this all works, and 
that's why we have the freedoms that we do, because 
people take responsibility for it. 
And that's how cigarette smoking is.  And 
that's how it's always been.  And that's how it's 
been viewed for a long, long time.  And let's begin 
by going all the way back to 1955.  
(Video clip played as follows:) 
DR. HAMMOND:  In my opinion, people should be 
warned of the dangers, and they are being warned.  
What they then want to do, whether they wish to 3270
smoke or not, is their own business. 
(Video clip stopped.) 
MR. FURR:  Dr. Hammond, famous cancer 
researcher in 1955, people are being warned.  They 
knew.  Millions quit.  Others continued smoking.  
It's their own choice.  It's their own choice.  
1964, the release of the Surgeon General's 
Report.  
(Video clip played as follows:) 
MR. RATHER:  In this kind of a country, it 
comes down to you, whether you like it or not.  No 
one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is 
now quite clear that no one is going to tell him 
it's good for him, either.  The decision is his, 
the decision and the health that may depend on it. 
(Video clip stopped.) 
MR. FURR:  Freedom of choice, personal 
responsibility.  That's how smoking has always been 
viewed in this country.  And before this lawsuit, 
that's how Mr. Hackimer viewed it.  testimony FURR:  
Q.
You knew that you were taking a risk of losing 
when you were gambling, but you considered that to be 3271
the price that you paid for your entertainment; right?  
A.
Q.
Yes.
Sir, you don't see any difference between the 
risks that you took when you were gambling at the casino 
and the risks that you took with your health when you 
were smoking even if you were smoking a filtered 
cigarette, do you?  
A.
Q.
A.
That's right.  Yes. 
You don't see any difference, do you?
In cont- -- no. FURR:  I'm about finished.  What happens 
next is Mr. Alvarez gets to get back up.  Because 
he has the burden of proof, he gets the last word.  
And I don't get to stand up and respond.  
I would ask only one thing of you.  And that 
is during his rebuttal, I would ask you to keep 
your eye on the ball.  And listen carefully to see 
whether he proves to you that Mr. Hackimer didn't 
know that smoking was dangerous.  
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge, I don't 
have to prove that. 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. FURR:  Listen carefully to see whether he 3272
proves to you that Mr. Hackimer couldn't quit 
smoking.  Listen carefully to see whether he proves 
to you that Mr. Hackimer would have quit smoking 
sooner if only he had more information.  
Listen carefully to see if he proves to you 
that Mr. Hackimer relied on a statement that 
concealed information that was not otherwise known 
or available to him.  Listen carefully to see 
whether he proves to you that addiction caused 
Mr. Hackimer's COPD, not his own personal choices.  
Think about it, if you would.  You know how we 
would respond to that.  You've heard our argument.  
And I would just ask you to consider the way that 
you know that we would respond. 
Let me end like this.  Mr. Hackimer did 
exactly what he wanted to do.  He chose to smoke, 
and he chose when to quit.  His plan was always to 
smoke until he got sick and then quit.  And that's 
just what he did.  
But unfortunately and sadly, that gamble went 
badly for him.  He got sick much sooner than he 
thought that he would.  And now he's asking you to 
compensate him with $15 million for the gamble he 
took. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge. 3273
THE COURT:  Overruled. 
MR. FURR:  Please, please, please, use your 
common sense.  
Thank you very much for your patience with me.  
That's all I have, Your Honor. 
