          MR. GUEST:  May it please the Court?
          THE COURT:  Yes, thank you, Mr. Guest.
          MR. GUEST:  Counsel, Ms. Haliburton.
          Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
          I would like to start off where Mr. Acosta and
     Mr. Gary started off and that is by thanking you
     for your time and your sacrifice and your service
     during this entire process.  I know it's been a
     long few weeks, but you've been, as Judge Sasser
     has pointed out numerous times, extremely attentive
     and patient and willing to listen to both sides
     present their case, and I think I can speak for
     everybody involved in this process that we thank
     you very much for your time.
          And how Mr. Persons and I are going to split
     our closing argument is I'm going to walk through
     some of the issues on the verdict form, and I'm
     going to use some of the jury instructions that the
     Court has provided you earlier today to kind of
     help you marshal through the evidence that you've
     heard over the past couple of weeks, and then 3889
     Mr. Persons is going to walk you through the rest
     of the verdict form and help you understand some of
     the evidence that you've seen in light of the
     instructions that the Court has given you.
          And perhaps at times during this case, it has
     been a little difficult to keep things straight in
     terms of the evidence you heard.  I know you've had
     a lot of things coming at you probably since
     opening statements, and it's probably been a little
     difficult to sort out.
          So that's what our job is to do during closing
     arguments, is to put everything in context and to
     put it in the context of the questions that you-all
     are going to have to answer that are on the verdict
     form.
          And to answer these questions on the verdict
     form, you're going to have to use the law that the
     Court has given you in light of the evidence that
     you've heard during this trial.
          And I would actually like to preview the
     verdict form for you.  Because as we told you in
     opening statements, this case is about
     Mr. Haliburton.  And that hasn't changed since we
     began evidence.  And it hasn't changed now.
          And if you look at the verdict form that the 3890
     Court's going to give you, you will notice that
     Mr. Haliburton's name appears on each of the
     questions on the verdict form.
          JUROR VANCE:  Sir, can you move that?  So she
     can see.
          MR. GUEST:  Yes, ma'am.
          THE COURT:  Thank you.
          MR. GUEST:  Sure.  Gosh, I didn't even notice
     this.
          THE COURT:  Thank you, Mr. Guest.
          MR. GUEST:  Sure.  Is that good?
          So as I was saying, every single question on
     this verdict form has to do with Mr. Haliburton.
     The first question that you-all are going to have
     to consider is class membership.  And I think
     you're pretty familiar with this concept.  And this
     is the question that I'm going to go through with
     you today.
          The second question is the issue of whether
     Mr. Haliburton knew or should have known before
     May 5th, 1990, that he had COPD/emphysema.
          And there are several other questions as you
     go through the verdict form that you may not
     necessarily get to, depending on your previous
     responses, but nevertheless, they all have to do 3891
     with Mr. Haliburton, whether there is a concealment
     claim and whether that's linked to Mr. Haliburton,
     whether there is an agreement to conceal, that is
     also linked to Mr. Haliburton.  Similarly, the
     apportionment of fault has to do with
     Mr. Haliburton, as well as the question of damages
     and punitive entitlement.
          Both of those have to do with this case and
     with Mr. Haliburton's case.
          And the reason why I'm pointing all of this
     out is because the plaintiff has presented a
     substantial amount of generic evidence that really,
     if you think about it, is not really going to help
     you answer the questions on the verdict form.
          And what I mean by that, is that plaintiff
     presented you a generic case on several issues.
     And I'm going to go through these four issues that
     I have selected to really explain why the evidence
     that they presented on these topics doesn't have to
     do with this case.
          Now, I know everybody has heard a lot about
     youth marketing.  And I'm going to go through that
     in more detail.  And I'm also going to discuss the
     addiction evidence that the plaintiff presented to
     you, the evidence on filter and low-tar cigarettes, 3892
     and some of the evidence on design issues.
          But the bottom line is, for the vast majority
     of the evidence that was presented on these issues,
     there just wasn't a link between the evidence and
     Mr. Haliburton.  In fact, there was a complete
     disconnect between what the plaintiff showed you
     and the issues that you're going to have to decide
     on the verdict form.
          Now, the first topic I would like to discuss
     with respect to these generic evid- -- these
     generic issues is that of youth marketing.  I know
     that Mr. Acosta throughout his closing statement
     today talked a lot about it and I know that
     Mr. Gary, when he was walking through his closing
     argument, probably spent about an hour on youth
     marketing issues.  But when we think about
     Mr. Haliburton, it's really important to consider
     what the youth marketing issues have to do with
     Mr. Haliburton.  There is no evidence about why
     Mr. Haliburton started smoking or became a regular
     smoker.  In fact, the evidence that the plaintiff
     showed you on youth marketing occurred before
     Mr. Haliburton was born.  I know Mr. Gary walked
     through a memo from 1927 in great detail.  That was
     ten years before Mr. Haliburton was born. 3893
          The other documents they went through occurred
     after Mr. Haliburton was born.  There is no
     connection to anything Mr. Haliburton was doing in
     South Georgia when he was growing up in the 1940s.
          And the plaintiff would have you think that
     somehow, the tobacco companies had infiltrated
     South Georgia, that they were trying to capture the
     youth market down in South Georgia, and that
     somehow, something they did affected Mr. Haliburton
     when he was an adolescent.
          But there is no evidence that anything the
     tobacco companies did occurred in South Georgia,
     let alone any evidence that anything the tobacco
     companies did influenced Mr. Haliburton's choices
     to start smoking.
          And in contrast, the evidence that you did
     hear in this case is that Mr. Haliburton was born
     and raised in a community that grew tobacco.  In
     fact, I think in South Georgia, the community's
     biggest cash crop was tobacco.
          And Mr. Haliburton's father smoked, and his
     uncle smoked, and other people around
     Mr. Haliburton smoked when he was growing up.  And
     you heard from Dr. Benowitz and you heard from
     Dr. Samuel that one of the most if not the most 3894
     important consideration for someone starting
     smoking is their social environment, who is smoking
     around them, their parents, their friends, their
     family members.
          So when you really think about it, it probably
     makes most sense to think that Mr. Haliburton
     started smoking and continued smoking because he
     grew up in an area that grew tobacco and he grew up
     around friends and family who smoked.
          And I want to point out, you know, there has
     been a lot of talk about whether Mr. Haliburton
     smoked for 40 years or 30 years or 35 years.  And
     that's all in the medical records and there is some
     discrepancies in there.  And I think Dr. Samuel
     said it really didn't matter, anyway.  But the
     first time anyone saw Mr. Haliburton smoke was when
     he was 19 years old.  And at this time,
     Mr. Haliburton had had a wife, he was a father, he
     was employed, he was a grown man making his own
     decisions at this time.
          And I guess I'll say a word about candy
     cigarettes.  Because there was a fair amount of
     discussion about candy cigarettes in the documents.
     Each witness who came and testified on behalf of
     Mr. Haliburton's -- of Ms. Haliburton, excuse me, 3895
     talked about candy cigarettes.  And what I thought
     was interesting about this is that when Dorothy
     Wilson testified and when Tressie Haywood
     testified, apparently they had tried or eaten candy
     cigarettes when they were kids, but neither of them
     became a smoker and they never tried cigarettes.
     So I think the suggestion that somehow candy
     cigarettes is a gateway product to becoming a
     regular smoker just doesn't really make sense in
     terms of the evidence that you've heard.
          But the bottom line is that there is no
     evidence that any of the youth marketing had any
     impact on Mr. Haliburton.
          And let me just be clear that I'm not trying
     to defend any of this stuff.  I'm sure some of you
     found it distasteful.  Maybe you found it shocking
     or appalling.  And I'm not here to justify any of
     the evidence that you've seen.  But the important
     thing is that it has to be connected to
     Mr. Haliburton.  And maybe you need to think about
     when you are back there deliberating why the
     plaintiff presented you this evidence when it had
     no connection to the case and no connection to the
     questions that you have to answer.
          The next topic I would like to discuss briefly 3896
     in terms of the evidence the plaintiff presented
     was the plaintiff's addiction case.
          Now, somehow the issue of genetics has become
     a part of this case.  And I'm really not sure what
     it has to do with the addiction issues in this
     case, but it's in the case.  And when you think
     about Mr. Haliburton, you have to think about what
     it has to do with him and his smoking decisions and
     why he smoked.
          And think about his family.  Because we know
     his father smoked.  We know his uncle smoked.  We
     know his son smoked.  And we know all four of them
     quit.  And we know that Mr. Haliburton himself
     quit.  So this issue of genetics and whether it
     makes it difficult or impossible for someone to
     quit smoking just doesn't bear out for
     Mr. Haliburton.
          And we heard from Dr. Benowitz and
     Dr. Feingold, and they talked a lot about whether
     nicotine was addictive, whether it changed the
     brain, whether it impacted dopamines and what it
     did to the brain.
          And essentially what Dr. Benowitz and
     Dr. Feingold did with respect to their opinions on
     addiction was re-prove the Engle finding that 3897
     nicotine is addictive.  But you-all heard in jury
     selection, when Mr. Persons was going through his
     questioning, not even considering the Engle
     findings, he told you that nicotine was addictive.
     So there really wasn't a reason to go through all
     this evidence and establish that when it was not
     disputed.
          Now, does nicotine make it harder to quit?
     You've heard from every expert that testified on
     addiction that it does.  And does nicotine in
     cigarettes cause some people to be addicted?  It
     does.
          But you also know that nicotine does not make
     it impossible for people to quit.  The experts told
     you that nicotine addiction does not interfere with
     the smoker's ability to understand the dangers of
     smoking.  And the experts also told you that
     nicotine addiction does not interfere with the
     smoker's ability to make an informed choice to quit
     or continue smoking.
          And the three experts who testified on
     addiction, Dr. Feingold, Dr. Benowitz, and
     Dr. Samuel, all told you that any smoker can quit.
          And nicotine addiction did not prevent the 60
     million smokers who have quit today from quitting, 3898
     nor did it prevent Mr. Haliburton from quitting.
          The evidence that the plaintiff presented on
     the filter and low-tar issue in this case, I'm only
     going to go through this briefly, but it came up
     during Mr. Acosta's closing statement today, so I
     do want to address it.
          Now, the evidence you heard about
     Mr. Haliburton and smoking light cigarettes and
     low-tar cigarettes, you heard evidence from his
     friends and his cousin that he did not like light
     cigarettes.  And that's what Mr. Acosta said during
     his opening statement.  So I'm not sure really why
     they spent time going through that because he never
     primarily smoked these kinds of cigarettes.
          Similarly, there is no evidence that
     Mr. Haliburton ever thought filtered cigarettes
     were safer and smoked them as a result.
          Mr. Haliburton smoked all different types of
     cigarettes, and it's unclear why he did smoke the
     brands he did, but there is no evidence that
     anything anybody said about filtered cigarettes led
     him to smoke filtered cigarettes.
          The point is is that the issue of low-tar and
     filtered cigarettes just doesn't have anything to
     do with this case. 3899
          Now, the final issue, ladies and gentlemen,
     are the issues on design.  Now, Dr. Proctor
     suggested that the tobacco companies made
     cigarettes more inhalable or at least inhalable and
     more dangerous.  But he also told you that since
     the 1800s, before the tobacco companies
     manufactured cigarettes, that cigarettes were
     already inhalable, and that it was observed that
     because of this characteristic of cigarettes, that
     cigarettes were uniquely dangerous.
          And also in the 1800s, 90 percent of the
     people who smoked cigarettes inhaled them.  And
     this is just one of the interesting things about
     cigarettes is unlike cigars and unlike pipes,
     people inhaled the cigarettes.  And that's been
     known since before Reynolds manufactured a
     cigarette, as Mr. Acosta said, in 1913.
          Now, we also know from the cross-examinations
     you heard of Dr. Benowitz and Dr. Proctor that
     natural tobacco as a plant is dangerous and
     addictive.  It comes out of the ground.  And if you
     pick it and roll it and burn it, it's going to
     release thousands of chemicals, and those chemicals
     include carcinogens and other harmful toxins.  And
     it also contains nicotine.  That's the inherent 3900
     nature of the plant.
          So the issue of the dangers of the cigarettes
     because of the tobacco in them, and the
     addictiveness of the cigarettes because of the
     tobacco in them, it's really a matter of nature,
     it's not a matter of design.  In fact,
     roll-your-own cigarettes are just as dangerous and
     addictive as manufactured cigarettes.
          And I know you-all heard a lot about
     additives, too.  Whether the cigarette companies
     added additives into cigarettes in order to make
     them more addictive or palatable or anything along
     those lines.  But Dr. Proctor told you that even
     additive-free cigarettes are not any safer or less
     addictive than cigarettes with additives.  So the
     key take-away here is that there is no such thing
     as a safe cigarette, that any type of cigarette
     that you smoke that has tobacco in it is going to
     be dangerous and it's going to be addictive.
          And I just want to break this down really
     quickly.  The plaintiff brought you two generic
     witnesses, Dr. Proctor and Dr. Benowitz.
     Dr. Proctor sat in that chair for about 15 hours.
     He was here for about four days.
          Dr. Benowitz, who you saw the video of, was -- 3901
     that video was played for about five hours.
          And during Mr. Persons's examination of
     Dr. Proctor, he admitted that he did not know
     anything about Mr. Haliburton.
          And you -- Dr. Benowitz, during his
     cross-examination on the video, said he did not
     know anything about the smokers who his -- where
     his videotape was being played.  He didn't know how
     much those smokers smoked, what those smokers knew
     about the risks of cigarette smoking, whether those
     smokers had tried to quit.  There was just nothing
     that they knew about the individual smokers.
          And this generic testimony that you heard does
     not help you answer the questions in the case.
          So why did the plaintiff spend so much of your
     time re-proving the Engle findings and going over
     all these issues that had already been established
     by a jury ten years ago down in Miami in a case
     involving issues of general corporate conduct and
     that did not involve any issues of individual
     smokers?
          Now, Mr. Gary, in his opening statement, he
     did not say that this case was about
     Mr. Haliburton.  He said that this case was about
     punishing Reynolds and that he was going to request 3902
     billions of dollars.  And maybe that's why they
     presented all this generic evidence to you.
          But I think another reason why the plaintiff
     presented this generic evidence to you is because
     they cannot meet their burden of proof in this
     case.  Their generic evidence does not make up for
     the specific evidence that they have to bring you
     for you to answer these questions on the verdict
     form.
          Now, except for one question on the verdict
     form, the plaintiff has the burden of proof.  And
     what that means is that the plaintiff has to bring
     you evidence that by the greater weight of the
     evidence, that's the only way you can find for the
     plaintiff.
          And like I said, the defense is bringing a
     defense to class membership, and we have the burden
     of proof on that.  But apart from that issue, the
     plaintiff must bring you evidence by the greater
     weight of the evidence to prove their claims.
          And this isn't just about tipping the scales a
     little bit.  This is about bringing you evidence in
     a manner that allows you to answer for them on the
     verdict form.
          And it's also not about the amount of the 3903
     evidence.  It's not about how long a witness
     testified.  It's not about how many documents or
     how many pages of documents are going to be in the
     jury room with you while you deliberate that the
     plaintiff introduced into evidence.
          The issue of the burden of proof has to deal
     with the quality of the evidence, not the quantity
     of the evidence.
          And the plaintiff, given the evidence that
     they presented to you and the quality of their
     evidence, has failed to prove her case.
          There has been a failure of proof as to
     whether Mr. Haliburton was a class member.  There
     has been a failure of proof that the information
     about the dangers of smoking were unknown or
     unavailable to Mr. Haliburton before May 5th, 1982.
          I think you-all know the evidence in this case
     that establishes that Mr. Haliburton was well aware
     of risks of smoking and the addictiveness of
     smoking before 1982.  And the plaintiff has failed
     to prove that she is entitled to money damages in
     this case.
          So I would like to go back, as we start going
     through the evidence, with where we started at the
     beginning of opening statements on December 3rd. 3904
          Mr. Persons showed you this board.  And what
     he explained to you was that these are the five key
     facts that you have to know to answer every single
     question on the verdict form.  And that's still
     true today.  These are still the five key facts,
     nothing has changed.
          Mr. Haliburton did not start or continue
     smoking because of anything the tobacco companies
     said or did.  Mr. Haliburton was warned about the
     dangers of smoking throughout his life.  Despite
     knowing smoking was dangerous, Mr. Haliburton
     continued to smoke and did not try to quit until
     1994.  Mr. Haliburton quit smoking permanently in
     1994, the first time he tried.  And Mr. Haliburton
     knew or should have known that his COPD/emphysema
     was possibly caused by his smoking before May 5th,
     1990.
          Again, these are the key facts.  This is what
     we showed you at the beginning and this is what
     we're showing you now and this is what you need to
     know to answer the questions on the verdict form.
          Now, the question I'm going to go through,
     like I said, is the class membership question in
     this case.  And that's kind of the threshold issue
     that you are going to have to consider to determine 3905
     whether Mr. Haliburton was a member of the Engle
     class.
          And this is the question.  "Was Andrew
     Haliburton addicted to cigarettes containing
     nicotine, and if so, was an addiction to cigarettes
     containing nicotine a legal cause of
     Mr. Haliburton's emphysema/COPD and resulting
     death?"
          Now, you may remember this from opening
     statements.  There is actually three components to
     this question.  There is a medical causation
     component, an addiction component, and an addiction
     causation component.
          Now, Mr. Acosta said during his closing
     argument today that there is no dispute that
     Mr. Haliburton died from COPD caused by smoking.
     And I agree with him, there is not a dispute in
     this case about that issue, so I'm not going to
     talk about that.
          What I'm going to focus on is the addiction
     and the addiction causation issues.  And for
     addiction, the plaintiff has to prove that
     Mr. Haliburton was addicted to nicotine.
          But the -- the plaintiff did not -- well, let
     me say that the -- the evidence you heard yesterday 3906
     from Dr. Samuel on the DSM-5 and his application of
     the DSM-5 to Mr. Haliburton established that
     Mr. Haliburton did not meet the clinical criteria
     used by psychiatrists today as being an addicted
     smoker.  And because of that, the plaintiff failed
     to meet her burden of proof on addiction.
          Now, the plaintiffs brought you Dr. Feingold.
     And I guess there was a little discussion earlier
     today about the money that experts have made.  And
     I think you-all may remember that overall,
     Dr. Feingold has made $40 million for his business
     testifying as an expert witness, and he doesn't
     really treat patients, he's basically an expert who
     testifies a lot.  And he went through a variety of
     criteria when he was testifying to determine
     whether Mr. Haliburton was addicted or not.  And he
     actually used criteria that aren't really
     diagnostic tools.  Instead, they just assessed the
     severity of addiction.
          So that's the testimony that he brought you,
     and he also walked through the DSM, and I'll talk
     about that in a little bit.
          Now, you heard from Dr. Samuel yesterday.  He
     was the only expert you heard from in substance
     abuse to testify in this case.  He's in the 3907
     trenches and he's treating people for addictions
     every day.  And he applied the American Psychiatric
     Association diagnostic criteria to Mr. Haliburton
     and found no clinically-significant impairment or
     distress.
          Now, Dr. Samuel was trained and educated in
     Nigeria in the British system.  And I think there
     was some questioning of his credentials today
     because he did not to go an American college.  But
     he certainly came to America and was trained in
     America and has been treating patients for about 30
     years in America, and I'll let you-all consider his
     qualifications without saying any more to that.
          But the bottom line is Dr. Samuel found that
     Mr. Haliburton was not addicted based on his
     application of the DSM-5 to Mr. Haliburton.
          Now, I would like to talk about the issue of
     consumption.  The plaintiff is suggesting to you
     that you can find a person is addicted simply by
     looking at the number of cigarettes they smoked.
     That's basically what Dr. Feingold's opinion was
     when he testified to you-all.  He went through the
     DSM, but his fallback position was always I don't
     know if I'm going to give him this criteria, but
     because he smoked a lot, I'll say he met it.  And 3908
     then he went through the Fagerström test which
     deals with how many cigarettes a person smokes.
     And Dr. Benowitz testified that if you smoke ten
     cigarettes a day, you are addicted.
          So basically, both of those experts testified
     that if you smoke a lot, you are addicted to
     cigarettes.  But addiction does not equal
     consumption.  It's a little more sophisticated than
     that.  And when Dr. Samuel methodically went
     through the DSM, the 11 criteria and the criteria
     as to whether someone was clinically significantly
     impaired, it was his assessment and his opinion
     that Mr. Haliburton was not addicted.
          And I would like to point out that
     Dr. Feingold, despite his opinions that most people
     are addicted, and Dr. Benowitz, despite his opinion
     that most people are addicted, had to acknowledge
     that quitting smoking is easy for some people.  In
     fact, Dr. Feingold said quitting smoking is
     surprisingly easy for 25 percent of smokers.  And
     Dr. Benowitz said the same thing for up to 20
     percent of smokers.  20 percent of smokers find
     quitting smoking easy.
          And if we look at the evidence in this case,
     and we heard what Dr. Samuel said yesterday, he 3909
     talked about Glendon Haliburton's testimony that he
     reviewed in preparing for this case, and he said
     Glendon Haliburton himself found it easy for him to
     quit.  When he quit smoking, when he had the
     motivation to quit, Glendon testified that it was
     easy for him.
          Glendon also testified that it was easy for
     Mr. Haliburton, that when Mr. Haliburton quit
     smoking, he didn't even notice that he had quit, he
     only noticed that he was smoking.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Your Honor, I have to object.
     Can we approach?
          THE COURT:  Sure.  Of course, Mr. Acosta. COURT:  Objection?
          MR. ACOSTA:  Glendon Haliburton's deposition
     was not published or read, it is not part of the
     evidence given to the jury.  So he's going beyond
     what he can do, he's telling the jury what he
     testified to, and that -- that was not in evidence.
          THE COURT:  It was the son, though, wasn't it?
          MR. GUEST:  It was the son, and that's what
     Dr. Samuel testified about yesterday and his
     testimony is evidence. 3910
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Anything --
          MR. ACOSTA:  He wasn't allowed to go that far,
     though, because I objected to him being a conduit
     for hearsay evidence.
          THE COURT:  Say Dr. -- I'll overrule the
     objection, just say Dr. Samuel concluded such.
          MR. GUEST:  Sure.
          THE COURT:  Okay?  Do it that way.  So
     Dr. Samuel concluded, because that was his
     conclusion --
          MR. ACOSTA:  Well, as long as he isn't just
     saying what Glendon testified.
          MR. GUEST:  I thought I said that.  I'm happy
     to say it.
          THE COURT:  Just say Dr. Samuel concluded.
          MR. GUEST:  Sure.
          THE COURT:  Okay. GUEST:  May I proceed?
          THE COURT:  Yes, of course.
          MR. GUEST:  As I was saying, Dr. Samuel
     concluded, based on his review of the record, that
     Glendon Haliburton found it easy to quit and so did
     Mr. Haliburton. 3911
          Now, I want you to consider Dr. Feingold's
     generic testimony, and I say generic because he was
     just testifying in general on his direct
     examination versus what he talked about on
     cross-examination with Mr. Haliburton.
          Now, when going through and describing what an
     addicted smoker feels when they quit smoking and
     those withdrawal symptoms, Dr. Feingold said that a
     smoker who is addicted and quits may feel stressed,
     jittery, nervous, they may crave a cigarette, and
     they may feel out of sorts.
          And during cross-examination, Dr. Feingold
     told us that at no time when Mr. Haliburton quit
     smoking did he feel stressed, jittery, nervous,
     that he ever craved a cigarette, or that he ever
     felt out of sorts.  And based on the depositions,
     Dr. Feingold arrived at this opinion.  He had
     reviewed excerpts of depositions.
          And Dr. Samuel also noticed that
     Mr. Haliburton did not have withdrawal symptoms
     after he quit smoking based on his review of the
     depositions.
          Now, Ms. Haliburton testified in trial, and
     she obviously had testified before trial, and her
     trial testimony was a little different than her 3912
     deposition testimony.  I think she recalled that
     Mr. Haliburton may have been a little jittery.  But
     the review of the record by Dr. Feingold and
     Dr. Samuel, they both noted that she did not notice
     anything when Mr. Haliburton quit smoking in 1994.
          And that's pretty consistent with the other
     witnesses who came into court and testified about
     Mr. Haliburton's demeanor when he did quit smoking.
          You heard from Dorothy Wilson that when her
     dad quit smoking in 1994, nothing had changed
     regarding his personality, he was the same dad.
          And Tressie Haywood basically said the same
     thing.  These are the people who knew
     Mr. Haliburton the best.  And when they saw him
     quit smoking in '94, they didn't notice any
     symptoms that were indicative of any withdrawal
     symptoms.
          And Dorothy Haliburton basically said the same
     thing, Mr. Persons had to bring out her transcript,
     but what was reflected in her deposition was that
     she did not notice any changes in his personality
     other than the fact that he was quieter.
          So Mr. Haliburton doesn't really show the
     hallmarks of an addicted smoker.  He may have
     smoked a lot of years, he may have smoked a lot of 3913
     cigarettes, but he did not have any cravings, he
     did not have any withdrawal symptoms, he did not
     have any trouble not smoking after he quit, and he
     had no impairment because of anything that
     cigarettes and the nicotine in cigarettes did to
     him.
          So based on all this evidence, it's clear that
     Mr. Haliburton was not addicted to nicotine in
     cigarettes.  And if you get to question 1 on the
     verdict form, which you will, because it's question
     1, and you find that Mr. Haliburton was not
     addicted, then your answer to question 1 should be
     no.
          Now, as I mentioned, there is a -- there is a
     separate component of question 1, and that's what
     I'm going to talk about now, and that's the
     addiction causation issue.
          Now, obviously, it's the defense position that
     Mr. Haliburton was not addicted.  But if you find
     him to be addicted, this is what you will consider,
     whether his addiction was a legal cause of his
     COPD/emphysema and resulting death.
          And this is kind of a confusing concept.  And
     it's a little complicated.  So I would like to show
     you a portion of the jury instruction.  And you-all 3914
     have copies of these.  But this is a portion of the
     jury instruction, it's instruction number 5.  And
     what it says is, "Addiction to cigarettes
     containing nicotine is a legal cause of
     Mr. Haliburton's emphysema/COPD and resulting death
     if it directly and in natural and continuous
     sequence produced or contributed substantially to
     producing such emphysema/COPD and resulting death,
     so that it can reasonably be said that, but for the
     addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the
     emphysema/COPD and resulting death would not have
     occurred."
          And obviously, I've highlighted the words "but
     for".  And the reason why I've done that is because
     that really puts into context this whole notion of
     addiction causation and what the plaintiff must
     prove.
          The plaintiff must prove that any addiction
     that Mr. Haliburton had was the but-for cause of
     his disease and death, his emphysema/COPD and
     resulting death.
          And this basically means that it must be the
     main reason, that it must be the primary reason,
     and that it cannot just be a minor reason.  And I
     think that's why the word "substantially" is in 3915
     this instruction, that it has to be pretty much the
     key reason why Mr. Haliburton continued to smoke.
          So I'm going to walk you through the evidence
     on this issue.  And where I would like to start off
     is the plaintiff admitted that Mr. Haliburton is
     partially responsible for his COPD/emphysema and
     death.
          And the reason why that's important is because
     this kind of puts into context some of the evidence
     and where it fits when you are thinking about this
     addiction causation issue.
          Now, Mrs. Haliburton testified in court that
     she thought her husband was responsible because he
     picked up his first cigarette and that she thought
     her husband was also responsible for not quitting
     sooner.
          And I think if you unpack her testimony and
     her admission, it kind of puts into context what
     this means.
          It means that Mr. Haliburton knew that smoking
     was dangerous while he continued to smoke.  That
     Mr. Haliburton was not confused about the dangers
     and addictiveness of smoking.  That Mr. Haliburton
     had the ability to quit smoking earlier.  That he
     could have tried to quit smoking.  And that he had 3916
     the ability to quit smoking in time to prevent his
     COPD/emphysema and death.  I think all these things
     are true if you are going to admit responsibility
     on behalf of someone.
          And I think what this means, is that it
     doesn't have anything to do about nicotine
     addiction, what this goes to are Mr. Haliburton's
     choices and his decisions with respect to his
     smoking.  So that's why I started off here with
     going through the addiction causation issue,
     because you have to determine whether something was
     related to nicotine as the but-for cause or whether
     something was related to something else like
     choices and decision-making and things like that.
          And kind of another reason -- or another way
     to think about this issue is to consider these two
     questions.  Did Mr. Haliburton have the ability to
     quit, but choose to continue smoking?  Or was
     Mr. Haliburton compelled to smoke or caught in some
     kind of addiction cycle, leaving him no choice, no
     matter how hard he tried, but to continue smoking
     until he developed COPD and died?
          Now, on the second question, those are not my
     words.  Dr. Benowitz testified that addicted
     smokers are wrapped up in some kind of addiction 3917
     cycle where they find themselves in the cycle
     because of their addiction to nicotine and they
     can't break out of it no matter how hard they try.
     They try to quit, they're back in the addiction
     cycle, they try to quit, they're back in this
     addiction cycle.
          Dr. Feingold testified that addicted smokers
     are compelled to smoke, that they have this some
     kind of compulsive behavior that they find
     themselves engaging and that they try to quit this
     behavior, but they can't, that they keep repeating
     the behavior, repeating the behavior, repeating the
     behavior, and that's because of their addiction to
     nicotine.
          So I'm kind of framing the addiction causation
     question like this, whether Mr. Haliburton was not
     compelled to smoke because of nicotine, but instead
     had the ability to quit smoking, but kept smoking
     because he chose to, or whether he was compelled to
     smoke and caught in some kind of addiction cycle.
          I would like to start off, as we go through
     this evidence, kind of in a big picture way.  And
     you heard about these quitting statistics from a
     couple of witnesses, like Dr. Proctor, I believe
     Dr. Benowitz, Dr. Feingold got into them a little 3918
     bit.  But we do know that over the course of the
     years up until this point, there has been 60
     million people who have quit smoking.  And we
     know -- you heard from Dr. Proctor about what was
     going on in the early 1950s.  There was the
     epidemiology studies.  I think he called it the
     four pillars of scientific research that was going
     on back in the 1950s.
          And at that time, between 1950 and 1965, there
     was basically 18 million people who quit smoking.
     And that was around the time that Mr. Haliburton
     was starting smoking.
          We know that from 1964 to 1970, there were
     about 30 million people who quit smoking.  And
     actually, that's supposed to be 1979, so that's a
     typo on our part.
          But between 1966 and 1970, from the time that
     the first warning was put on cigarette packs, until
     1970, 13 million people quit smoking.  13 million
     people.  It was the most significant period of
     quitting in the country's history even to today.
     And that's why Mr. -- that was when Mr. Haliburton
     was smoking.
          But the point is is that millions and millions
     of smokers, including heavily-addicted smokers, 3919
     were quitting smoking from the 1950s throughout the
     time that Mr. Haliburton smoked.
          And this quitting that you see, some of these
     people, as I mentioned, were heavily-addicted
     smokers.  Most of these people who quit smoking did
     so cold turkey.  In fact, I think 85 to 90 percent
     of these people quit without any type of
     assistance.
          So the question is why is Mr. Haliburton
     different from these 60 million people who did quit
     smoking?  Was he so addicted that he could not try
     to quit smoking?  Was he so addicted that he was
     compelled to smoke against his will?
          Were the cigarettes that Mr. Haliburton smoked
     more addictive than other cigarettes?  No.
          Was Mr. Haliburton's brain affected
     differently than smokers who quit?  Is that why he
     could have been different from these 60 million
     people who were quitting?  No.
          Was Mr. Haliburton exposed to advertising
     different than the smokers that had quit?  He was
     not.
          Was Mr. Haliburton exposed to tobacco company
     statements different than the smokers who quit?  He
     was not. 3920
          Did Mr. Haliburton smoke more or longer than
     smokers who quit?  No.
          Was he any different from John Haliburton, his
     brother; Glendon or Andrew Haliburton, his sons;
     who chose to quit smoking and successfully quit?
     He was not.
          But did Mr. Haliburton choose to continue
     smoking because he enjoyed it and he did not want
     to quit?  And that's what's differ about
     Mr. Haliburton from the 60 million smokers who did
     quit.
          And we're going to go through the evidence to
     explain this because I don't want you just to take
     that last sentence and my word for it.  Now you
     have heard what type of person he was.  He was an
     intelligent man.  He was a decisive man.  You've
     heard he was a successful business owner.
     Mr. Haliburton was a guy from South Georgia who
     came down to West Palm Beach and he started his own
     business and he worked hard and he eventually
     became a very successful business man in the area.
     He was able to provide for his family because
     that's what he wanted to do.  He was a hard-working
     man.  He was mentally strong.  He was independent.
     And he was the kind of guy who did what he wanted 3921
     to do.
          This is what the witnesses who knew
     Mr. Haliburton told us.
          And Mr. Haliburton, his smoking was his
     business.  And this is consistent with his
     personality and the evidence you heard about who
     Mr. Haliburton was.
          And when I say that his smoking was his
     business, this is not a criticism of Mr. Haliburton
     by any stretch of the imagination.  No one is
     criticizing him for doing what he did, for making
     the choices he did in his life, or for smoking
     cigarettes.  He had every right to do what he
     wanted to do, and nobody is talking bad about him.
          Now, Mr. Haliburton did what he wanted to do.
     He made his own decisions.  And if he set his mind
     on something, he would follow through and
     accomplish it.  If he was going to do something, he
     was determined to do it.  And you heard from his
     daughters that he did not like being told what to
     do and that nobody could make him do anything.
          This is basically the universal consensus that
     people had about the kind of person that he was.
          So turning to the cigarette smoking.  This is
     what we know.  That Mr. Haliburton smoked for 40 3922
     years, that's what the plaintiffs are saying, and
     never tried to quit.
          And again, the question is whether
     Mr. Haliburton had the ability to quit, but chose
     to continue smoking, or whether he was caught in an
     addiction cycle and compelled to smoke against his
     will until he developed COPD and died.
          You saw some documents from Mr. Acosta about
     whether addiction eliminates free choice.  This is
     what Dr. Feingold told us, the expert, on
     cross-examination.  "Well, the compulsion that
     you're talking about, sir, does not eliminate free
     choice from the equation?"
          And his answer was:  "Correct, it does not."
          Mr. Haliburton always had the choice to quit.
     No expert told you that nicotine addiction takes
     away that choice.
          But the first step to quitting is trying to
     quit.  And from 1994 back until whenever it was
     that Mr. Haliburton started smoking, he showed zero
     motivation to quit smoking.  He never used nicotine
     gum or patches.  He never took any medication to
     help quit.  He never cut down on his smoking.  He
     never threw out his cigarettes or his ashtrays.  He
     never sought assistance from anybody, from family 3923
     or friends or from doctors.
          But the key point is that when he did have
     motivation in 1994, he quit the first time that he
     tried.  Up until that point, he did not take any
     affirmative step to quit smoking.
          And even putting behavior aside, putting aside
     the fact that he did not take any affirmative steps
     to quit smoking, Mr. Haliburton never even
     expressed the desire to quit smoking.  He never
     told anyone that he wanted to quit.
          And the questions are, is this evidence of
     someone who is so addicted that they cannot stop
     smoking that they are so compelled to smoke because
     of their nicotine addiction that they can do
     nothing else, but smoke?  Is this evidence of
     someone who is caught in an addiction cycle that
     they can't get out of?  Is this evidence of someone
     whose addiction is the but-for cause of their
     disease and their death?
          Mr. Haliburton never was motivated to quit
     until 1994.  He showed no desire to quit until
     1994.  And he took no steps to quit until 1994.
          And you heard evidence that some people just
     want to smoke.  You heard evidence that some
     smokers just want to smoke and that's fine.  But 3924
     you cannot say that any addiction that
     Mr. Haliburton had compelled him to smoke or was
     the but-for cause of any disease, COPD, or death.
     Because continued smoking by itself, smoking for 40
     years without trying to quit does not equal the
     but-for causation question that you have to answer
     for class membership.
          Now, you heard evidence that Mr. Haliburton
     smoked because he wanted to smoke.  You heard from
     his wife that he was happy when he was smoking?
     You heard from his daughter that he enjoyed
     smoking.  You heard from Jerry Miller, his cousin,
     that he enjoyed the taste of cigarettes.  And
     Lucius Hamilton, his friend in the Florida
     Centralaires, said that to me, he enjoyed smoking.
          These are the people who knew Mr. Haliburton.
     Contrary to what Mr. Acosta told you during his
     closing argument today, enjoyment does not equal
     addiction.  Just because you like to do something
     does not mean you are addicted to it.
          These two concepts are separate and apart.
     Mr. Haliburton liked smoking, he enjoyed smoking,
     and that's what he did.
          And that's what his wife told you.  His wife
     told you, "He wanted to smoke and he was going to 3925
     smoke."
          She also told you that nothing prevented
     Mr. Haliburton from quitting or trying to quit
     smoking in the 1950s or in the 1960s or in the
     1970s or in the 1980s.  Assuming Mr. Haliburton had
     made a choice to quit smoking during any of that
     time period, there is no evidence that he could not
     have done it, because we know that the only time he
     tried, he did.  The only time he tried to quit, he
     quit.
          Now, Ms. Haliburton also told you that no one
     could have made that decision, but Mr. Haliburton.
     She was asked, "The bottom line is, no one else
     could have decided to quit smoking other than
     Mr. Haliburton; correct?"
          And her answer was:  "No, I couldn't decide
     that for him."
          And she was asked, "He had to decide that for
     himself, didn't he?"
          Her answer was:  "True."
          He was the only person in control of his
     decisions.  If he wanted to make the decision to
     quit, he could have tried to quit.  But he did not
     try to quit.  And the evidence is that's because he
     wanted to smoke.  The nicotine addiction that he 3926
     may have had, if you find that he was addicted to
     nicotine, did not prevent him from quitting.  He
     could have quit, and he could have prevented his
     disease had he opted to quit smoking.
          Now, this is the evidence.  Now, I'm about to
     sit down, but I would like to leave you with this,
     and I would like you to think about this.  Because
     what Mr. Haliburton said when people told him to
     quit smoking was, "Well, you got to die with
     something."
          And what we know is that Mr. Haliburton at
     this time knew about the risks of smoking, he had
     been warned about the risks of smoking, he was
     fully informed about what it was he was doing with
     his cigarette smoking.  And when people told him to
     quit and told him that he should quit if he wanted
     to help his health out, he responded with, "Well,
     you got to die with something."  He did not try to
     quit smoking when he was told not to smoke by
     people.  Instead, he laughed off remarks, he
     shrugged off remarks, and he made comments like
     this.
          Mr. Haliburton, and the evidence has shown
     you, he accepted the risks and he did what he
     wanted to do, and he was fully informed about what 3927
     he was doing.  And Mr. Haliburton is not someone
     who was compelled to smoke.  Mr. Haliburton was not
     someone who was caught in an addiction cycle.
     That's not what the evidence has shown you.  Maybe
     if Mr. Haliburton had repeatedly tried to quit,
     maybe if Mr. Haliburton had asked for help to quit.
     Maybe if he had taken a single step before 1994,
     when he quit permanently, to try to quit, that
     could be indicative of addiction being a but-for
     cause.
          But he did none of those things.  He continued
     to smoke.  And this is what he said when people
     told him to quit.
          What drove Mr. Haliburton's smoking decisions
     was his desire to smoke, his enjoyment of smoking,
     and it certainly was not an addiction to any
     nicotine in cigarettes.
          So when you get to the first question on the
     verdict form that asks you whether Mr. Haliburton
     is a class member, your answer to this question
     should be no.
          Ladies and gentlemen, that's all I'm going to
     talk to you about today.  I do very much appreciate
     your time and attention through this process.  And
     right now, Mr. Persons is going to walk you-all 3928
     through the rest of the verdict form.  Thank you.


          MR. PERSONS:  May it please the Court.
          THE COURT:  Yes, thank you.
          MR. PERSONS:  Counsel.  Mrs. Haliburton.
     Ladies and gentlemen.  Good afternoon.
          I'm going to talk to you, I'm going to start
     with question number 2 on the verdict form.  And
     that question is -- and can everybody see this over
     here?
          "Did Andrew Haliburton know or should he have
     known in the exercise of reasonable care before
     May 5th, 1990, that he had emphysema/COPD and that
     there was a reasonable possibility that his
     emphysema/COPD was caused by cigarette smoking?"
          The evidence to that, in support of that, is a
     resounding yes, that he knew or should have known
     through the exercise of reasonable care that he had
     COPD/emphysema before May 5th, 1990, and that there
     was a reasonable possibility --
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. PERSONS:  -- that it was linked to
     smoking. 3929
          MR. CHESTNUT:  There are no facts in evidence
     to support.  Their expert said the opposite.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  You may continue,
     Mr. Persons.
          MR. PERSONS:  And if the expert testimony
     answered that question, you wouldn't have to answer
     it.  And the expert wasn't --
          MR. ACOSTA:  Your Honor, objection.
          THE COURT:  Whoa, whoa, whoa just --
          Sustained.  Just rephrase that.
          MR. PERSONS:  This is a question you have to
     answer.  And you must answer it based on the
     evidence you have heard in this case.  And the
     evidence is overwhelming that Mr. Haliburton had
     all of the symptoms of the disease, he knew that
     those symptoms were linked to smoking, and he knew
     all of this prior to May 5th of 1990.
          We're going to talk about the jury instruction
     that's on this statute of limitations defense.  And
     the jury instruction doesn't say anything about you
     having to have a diagnosis prior to May 5th, 1990,
     in fact, it says just the contrary, but we'll get
     to that in a minute.
          Next slide.
          Mr. Haliburton knew or should have known 3930
     before May 5th, 1990, that there was a reasonable
     possibility that his COPD/emphysema was caused by
     smoking.  How do we know that?
          Next slide.
          MR. GUEST:  That's my fault.
          MR. PERSONS:  That's okay.  We're good.
          Oops.  Let me see.  Well, they shouldn't let
     me use this.
          "The defendant does not need to prove that
     Mr. Haliburton was actually diagnosed with
     emphysema/COPD before May 5th, 1990 in order to
     prevail on this defense.  For purposes of this
     defense," and we're looking at instruction number
     8, "the critical event" --
          MR CHESTNUT:  Objection, Your Honor, this is
     not Final Instruction Number 8.
          THE COURT:  Okay, Counsel, sidebar. COURT:  What's wrong, Mr. Chestnut?
          MR CHESTNUT:  I have "if you find".  I do not
     have as Final Instruction 8 "defendants do not have
     to prove."
          THE COURT:  Right here.
          MR. GUEST:  Sure, it is. 3931
          THE COURT:  It's right there in the middle.
          MR. PERSONS:  Yeah.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Yes, Your Honor.  He's omitted
     this entire paragraph.
          THE COURT:  I know.
          MR. PERSONS:  I can do that.
          THE COURT:  But they can do that.  He can
     focus on portions just like your counsel,
     Mr. Acosta and Mr. Gary focused on portions of the
     instructions.
          MR CHESTNUT:  Your Honor, it is my
     understanding that you can reference the
     instruction, but if you are going to publish it you
     have to publish the entire instruction.
          MR. GUEST:  No, no, no.
          THE COURT:  No, no, no, you can focus on the
     portions, so I'm going to overrule the objection.
          MR CHESTNUT:  Thank you. PERSONS:  Okay?
          THE COURT:  That last objection was overruled
     for the record.
          You may continue, Mr. Persons.
          MR. PERSONS:  Thank you, Your Honor. 3932
          Defendant does -- oh, I'm hitting the wrong
     buttons here.  Okay.
          "Defendant does not need to prove that
     Mr. Haliburton was actually diagnosed with
     COPD/emphysema before May 5th, 1990 in order to
     prevail on this defense.  For purposes of this
     defense, the critical event is not when his
     emphysema/COPD was actually diagnosed by a
     physician, but when his COPD/emphysema first
     manifested itself.
          "Mr. Haliburton knew or should have known that
     there was a reasonable possibility his
     emphysema/COPD was caused by cigarette smoking if
     his emphysema/COPD manifested itself to him in a
     way that supplied 'some evidence,'" "'some
     evidence' of a causal relationship to cigarette
     smoking.
          "In making that determination, you may
     properly consider what Mr. Haliburton knew prior to
     May 5th, 1990, concerning the health risks of
     cigarettes."  And so when something manifests
     itself, it becomes apparent.  Well, when was it
     apparent?  We know it was apparent long before
     May 5th of 1990.  The evidence demonstrates it.
          We know that both pulmonologists agree that 3933
     Mr. Haliburton had COPD and symptoms of COPD in the
     1980s.  Both Dr. Feingold said it and Dr. Cosmo.
          Family members and friends observed
     significant, progressive symptoms of COPD in the
     1980s.  Mr. Haliburton was surrounded by explicit
     warnings that smoking caused COPD.  The cigarette
     pack talked about emphysema.  In fact, used the
     word "emphysema" beginning in 1985.  It was on the
     pack itself.
          We know that Mrs. Haliburton attributed his
     cough to his smoking.  He knew that coughs were
     associated with smoking because she had coughs and
     shortness of breath when he smoked around her and
     she urged him not to do that and he persisted in
     doing it.  And we know that he watched the news,
     Jerry Miller told us that, and the news was replete
     with PSAs about the link between coughing, chronic
     bronchitis, and emphysema, which are forms of COPD.
          We know because of his symptoms and the
     information available to him in the 1980s
     Mr. Haliburton knew or should have known his
     smoking caused his COPD.
          Now, he might not call it chronic obstructive
     pulmonary disease.  People use the term
     "heartburn".  If you go to a doctor or medical 3934
     dictionary, it's described as gastroesophageal
     reflux disorder.  You don't have to know the
     technical term to know that you've got heartburn
     and the heartburn is associated with a given
     activity.  That's when something manifests itself,
     that's when it becomes apparent.  And that's when
     you know that it's linked to eating spicy food or
     whatever it is.
          There is no dispute that he had emphysema in
     the 1980s.
          Dr. Feingold told you, he was asked this
     question, "And you also think more likely than not,
     and I appreciate that clarification on the
     probability versus certainty, but you would also
     agree, sir, that based on the medical records that
     you reviewed and your experience and training, that
     it's your opinion that Mr. Haliburton probably had
     COPD in 1988?"
          He said yes, he said, answer, "I think he
     did."
          Both doctors talked about the manifestations
     of COPD, the coughing, and not just any cough, but
     it's a cough that's loud enough and persistent
     enough that people, they tell you you need to do
     something about it, you need to see a doctor about 3935
     it, you need to quit smoking.  It's not just a
     little cough, it's a continuous cough.  And it's
     not just a dry cough, it's a cough that produces
     sputum.  It's a cough that is, the doctors
     described it as a productive cough and he had such
     a cough.  He had shortness of breath, even in
     conversation, a long conversation, he had
     difficulty with breathing, symptom of the disease.
          He had wheezing, which is from the narrowing
     of those spaces in the bronchial tubes that
     Dr. Feingold and Dr. Cosmo talked about.  And
     Dr. Cosmo described it as someone whose breathing
     is audible.  Most people when you are sitting in
     proximity to somebody, even close proximity, you
     can't hear them breathing.  When somebody is
     wheezing, it makes an audible sound or whistling
     sound, another symptom of the disease.
          Manifestations of COPD, the symptoms can lead
     a person to know they are sick.  And that's
     basically what this instruction calls for.  You
     know something is wrong with you, you know you're
     sick.  You might not know the technical term for
     it, but you know that you're sick, you're not well,
     and you know that that condition is caused by your
     smoking, even if you have, as the instruction says, 3936
     some evidence.  Not a whole lot of evidence, but
     just some evidence that what you're experiencing,
     these symptoms are caused by your smoking.
          In 1975, Dr. Feingold would have thought of
     COPD/emphysema if a person -- if he saw a person
     with those symptoms.  A smoker can have the
     symptoms 20 years or more before he passes away.
     And there is testimony that Mrs. Haliburton said,
     it could have been in the '70s that he started
     having this cough and 20 years before would have
     been 1978.
          Here is what Drs. Haliburton {sic} and
     Feingold say.  Shortness of breath in the early
     1980s that the plaintiff attributed to smoking.  He
     had a cough in the 1980s.  Difficulty with
     activities of daily living because of breathing
     problems in the late 1980s.  We know that from
     Jerry Miller.  Jerry Miller can peg it to 1989 or
     1988 because Jerry Miller went into the Army in
     1989 and he was working for Mr. Haliburton up until
     the time he went into the Army and he had lived
     with Mr. Haliburton.
          Dr. Feingold, shortness of breath in the early
     1980s that plaintiff attributed to smoking.  Cough
     in the 1980s.  Difficulty working because of 3937
     breathing problems in the late 1980s.
          All of this is before May 5th, 1990.
          Thank you, Mr. Smith.
          Thank you.
          I put together this little chart.  And the
     line of demarcation is 1990.  And here is what we
     know from the witnesses who were around
     Mr. Haliburton.
          Betty Wright, his sister-in-law,
     Mrs. Haliburton's sister, ran the Mickey's
     convenience store and sold him cigarette.  She
     worked at Mickey's beginning in 1975 and worked
     there continuously until 1995.
          She noticed back in the -- in the early '80s
     cough and shortness of breath with Mr. Haliburton.
          Jerry Miller, who lived with the Haliburtons
     and worked for Mr. Haliburton for some 16 years,
     said that there was a cough, shortness of breath,
     and wheezing.  All this is before 1990.
          Belinda Thompson couldn't be precise, any more
     precise than saying it was in the '80s and '90s,
     whether it was the early '80s or not she couldn't
     say, but she did recall a cough and shortness of
     breath.  Just couldn't say when the shortness of
     breath was.  But she remembered a cough in the late 3938
     '80s.
          Lucius Hamilton, lead singer in the band,
     noticed cough and shortness of breath beginning in
     the '83, '84 time frame.  He could peg it to the
     time they cut the album.  They cut the album in '84
     and the band broke up.  And he certainly noticed a
     coughing, shortness of breath during that time.
          Tressie Haywood noticed a cough back in this
     time period and then shortness of breath in the
     '90s.  Mrs. Haliburton noticed a cough
     Mr. Haliburton had and shortness of breath, she
     said it was -- it could have been in the '80s, she
     wasn't sure whether it was the '80s, but certainly
     it was in the '90s.
          Glendon Haliburton said that he had a cough
     prior to 1990, that he had this persistent cough.
     He links the shortness of breath, he says that was
     in this time frame.  Can't say whether it -- when
     in the '80s or '90s, but in that -- in that time
     frame.
          Dorothy Haliburton's cough, shortness of
     breath in that time frame.  But you can see over
     here on this side, there is a -- just a
     overwhelming amount of evidence that Mr. Haliburton
     had these symptoms prior to 1990. 3939
          So Mr. Haliburton knew or should have known
     before May 1990 that he had COPD/emphysema and it
     was caused by smoking.  And, see, the legal
     instruction again, go to number 8, it just has to
     be a reasonable possibility that his COPD/emphysema
     was caused by cigarette smoking if it manifested
     itself to him in a way that supplied him some
     evidence of a causal relationship to cigarette
     smoking.  In making that determination, you may
     properly consider what Mr. Haliburton knew prior to
     May 5th, 1990, concerning the health risks of
     smoking.
          So let's talk about some of that.  We know
     prior to May 5th, 1990, that he would have seen
     this or had access to -- I'm sorry.  This thing is
     in your way.  Let me move it.
          Nancy, thanks for your help.  Let me get this
     out of the way.
          All right.  We know that they had the four
     rotating warnings beginning in 1985.  So on one out
     of every four packs of cigarettes that
     Mr. Haliburton would have purchased, one of them
     would have had, one out of every four would have
     had this warning on it.  And there is a specific
     reference to emphysema. 3940
          We know that the Haliburtons took the Palm
     Beach Post, and there was coverage in the local
     newspaper about the link between smoking and
     emphysema.
          And here is a story January 11th, 1964,
     "Smoking report seen linking many diseases,
     including emphysema.  Drop in cigarette smoking
     reported to health experts."
          Here is "emphysema deaths rise."  And we
     showed you this during Mr. Proctor's examination, I
     believe.  "Emphysema about 13 times more prevalent
     in smokers than nonsmokers, is more widespread than
     lung cancer and tuberculosis combined."  "It's
     first symptom is often a long, winter cold and
     lingering cough, or asthmatic-like wheezing, or
     just shortness of breath."  Emphysema.  And that's
     in 1968.
          Here is more coverage from The Palm Beach
     Post.  This is in 1971 and into the 1980s, all
     prior to 1990.  "Have emphysema?  Stop smoking."
     "Don't want emphysema?  Stop smoking."  And "the
     benefits of not smoking."
          While it can't cure emphysema, it can slow its
     progress, that was the testimony from both
     pulmonologists. 3941
          And then we know that Mr. Haliburton received
     personal warnings, not just the warnings from
     friends and family about you need to quit smoking
     because it's causing this bad cough you've got, but
     Mr. Haliburton had coughing, shortness of breath,
     and wheezing for years in the 1980s.  His health
     was getting progressively worse throughout the
     '80s.  Mrs. Haliburton told Mr. Haliburton that her
     bronchitis was affected by his smoking.  And
     Mr. Haliburton's family and friends told him that
     his health was being affected by his smoking.
          And Dr. Feingold.  "And you also remember in
     the facts that you reviewed and the materials in
     this case that Ms. Haliburton told her husband that
     he needed to quit smoking because of his cough and
     his shortness of breath in the 1980s?"
          "Yes, sir, I do remember that."
          So again, evidence in the 1980s that he would
     have known that the cough was associated with
     smoking.
          "But the bottom line is, there is testimony
     that you've reviewed where Mr. Haliburton said that
     his smoking was -- or that his smoking was
     dangerous and addictive in the 1980s?"
          Answer:  "I agree, there were testimony -- 3942
     there was testimony to that effect, or something
     like that."
          Where he knew not only that it was dangerous,
     but that it was addictive in the 1980s.
          "At the time of the Florida Centralaires," and
     we had this gentleman come and read Lucius
     Hamilton's deposition to you, and Lucius Hamilton
     testified as follows.
          Question:  "At the time the Florida
     Centralaires broke up, you told me that you decided
     that Mr. Haliburton wasn't doing well health-wise.
          "Uh-huh (affirmative)."
          Question:  "Did you notice at any -- at that
     time whether he had a cough?"
          Answer:  "He had a cough."
          Question:  "And because of your noticing this
     cough and these episodes of shortness of breath,
     you told him that he should go see a doctor;
     right?"
          "Yeah.  Many times."
          Many times.  Now, if your cough is so
     persistent and it's so bad that your friend in the
     band, and you've got shortness of breath, is
     telling you you need to go and see a doctor, then
     the symptoms are obviously, if they are apparent to 3943
     somebody else, they are apparent to you.  They
     manifest it from your standpoint and, therefore,
     you are on notice that you've got a smoking-related
     condition, something about smoking is making you
     sick.  You might not know the technical term for
     it, but you know you've got it.
          And Mrs. Haliburton warned Mr. Haliburton in
     the 1980s about the smoking.  "Do you think you
     heard Dorothy tell Andy that he needed to quit
     smoking while the Florida Centralaires were still
     in existence?
          "Oh, yeah."
          Question:  "Do you recall her telling him that
     he needed to quit smoking because smoking was bad
     for him?
          "No, she would say, 'You need to quit smoking
     because they are going to kill you.'"
          She wasn't very -- she wasn't subtle about it,
     no, not that it was just bad for you, but it was
     going to kill you, and this is in the 1980s.
          "When do you first remember Ms. Haliburton
     saying that he was" -- that he, referring to
     Mr. Haliburton, "was smoking too much or that his
     cigarette smoking was going to kill him?"
          Answer:  "It was probably in the -- like I 3944
     said, around '83, '84, somewhere around there, she
     was very concerned with him."
          Jerry Miller again.  "Did you ever hear any
     conversations like that between Mr. Haliburton and
     anyone else?
          "Yeah.  I remember hearing Glen", this is
     Glendon, his son, "tell him that, you know, 'Daddy,
     you need to go to the doctor and see about that
     cough.'"
          Question:  "And when do you recall hearing
     Glen telling Mr. Haliburton that he should go to
     the doctor about his coughing?
          "That was sometime around '85, '86, '86."
          Anyway, this is prior to May 5th, 1990.
          Here is Betty Wright, sister-in-law.  "So
     since the time that you started selling him
     cigarettes, you recall referring to the cough as a
     smoker's cough with him?
          "Yes."
          Smoker's cough.  Not using a technical term to
     describe it, but obviously a cough associated with
     smoking, caused by smoking.
          "When is the first time that you recall
     Mr. Haliburton not being able to work because he
     was having coughing problems? 3945
          "It was between '88 and '89, somewhere in
     there."
          He was having difficulty just laying sod,
     difficulty having a long conversation, difficulty
     walking 25 feet to his truck from the front porch
     to the truck on the side of the yard, without
     having to catch his breath.  All symptoms of this
     disease.
          So to sum up on this, we know the first pack
     warnings came out in the 1960s warning that smoking
     may be hazardous to your health.
          Second pack warning, a stronger warning,
     smoking -- "the Surgeon General has determined that
     smoking is hazardous to your health."
          Then in the 1970s, the mid 1970s through 1990,
     Betty Wright, sister-in-law, coughing and shortness
     of breath, "Them things are going to kill you," she
     told him.
          1980 to '89, Jerry Miller, coughing, shortness
     of breath, and wheezing that worsened during the
     1980s that got progressively worse, as Dr. Feingold
     and Dr. Cosmo said, it's a progressive disease.
          1980s, Mrs. Haliburton, she said he had
     developed a cough and shortness of breath that she
     attributed to smoking. 3946      Somewhere in this time frame, we know it was
     prior to 1982 because that's when Dorothy Wilson
     graduated from high school and left home, she said
     her father had a nagging cough that she attributed
     to smoking.
          Mid 1980s to 1990, this is Lucius Hamilton,
     said that Mr. Haliburton had a continuous cough,
     and that he told Mr. Haliburton to go to a doctor.
          Mid 1980s, Mr. Haliburton himself attributed
     his coughing and shortness of breath to smoking.
     He referred to cigarettes as cancer sticks,
     obviously knowing that they're harmful.
          Tressie Haywood, the daughter, father had a
     cough and she associated it with his smoking.  All
     of these people around him noticed his cough and
     attributed it to smoking.
          1985 or '86, it was somewhere in this time
     frame that Glendon said he told him to go to the
     doctor about his coughing and shortness of breath.
          And, of course, we discussed the rotating
     warnings, one of which specifically reference
     emphysema, that "Smoking causes lung cancer, heart
     disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy."
     And all of this is before May 5th of 1990.
          And of course Mr. Haliburton said, when he 30
December 18, 2014

     started coughing, smoking cigarettes, "They're
     killing me."  And that was in the early 1980s.
          All right, number 2, "Did Mr. Haliburton know
     or should he have known in the exercise of
     reasonable care, before May 5th, 1990, that he had
     emphysema/COPD and that there was a reasonable
     possibility that his emphysema/COPD was caused by
     cigarette smoking?"  The answer to that is yes.
          And if you answer question 2 yes, then your
     verdict is for the defendant, you don't go any
     further in this verdict form.  And the evidence is
     overwhelming that he knew or reasonably should have
     known prior to May 5th, 1990, that he had
     COPD/emphysema caused by his cigarette smoking.
          Let's talk about some of what Mr. Haliburton
     knew.  The next claim, questions 3 and 4 deal with
     concealment or agreement to conceal information
     after May 5th, 1982.  Not prior to that time, but
     after May 5th of 1982.
          But it's not enough to demonstrate that R.J.
     Reynolds or the Tobacco Indus- -- Institute or any
     of these other entities concealed or agreed to
     conceal, but there has to be a link between that
     conduct and Mr. Haliburton, and that's what we're
     going to talk about now. 3948
          Let me start with this premise.  You can't
     conceal something from somebody, something they
     already know.  If you already know that a given
     activity is dangerous and addictive, then I can't
     hide that from you.  No matter what I do, I can't
     hide it from you.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Your Honor, I have to make an
     objection to that, it's inconsistent with the
     finding, he can't go against that.
          THE COURT:  The reference to findings is part
     of that, then, sustain the objection.
          MR. PERSONS:  Mr. Haliburton did not develop
     COPD/emphysema and die because the information
     about the dangers of smoking were unknown or
     unavailable to him before May 5th, 1982.  And we're
     going to talk about that.  We knew that -- we know
     that he knew the risks of smoking.
     Mr. Haliburton's grandmother warned him not to
     smoke.  Since the 1960s, Lucius Hamilton, beginning
     in 1963, because they were in the band, that's when
     the band formed, Lucius Hamilton constantly warned
     Mr. Haliburton to quit smoking.  Mr. Haliburton
     would have punished his children if they were
     caught smoking because he knew it was bad for them.
          In the 1970s or 1980s, Mrs. Haliburton told 3949
     Mr. Haliburton not to smoke around her because it
     was affecting her bronchitis.  So he knew that
     smoking was bad, it's affecting your wife's health
     when you smoke around her.  That's pretty obvious.
          In the 1970s or the 1980s, Betty Wright told
     Mr. Haliburton to stop smoking because it was
     affecting his health.  And Mr. Haliburton, when he
     would ask somebody for a cigarette when he was out,
     he would say, "Give me one of those cancer sticks,"
     so obviously aware of the dangers associated with
     smoking.
          And this is from Jerry Miller.  "And what was
     Mr. Haliburton's reaction to when she told him that
     he was smoking too much or that his cigarette
     smoking was going to kill him?
          "He would make a joke.  'Oh, we're going to
     die with something anyway, you know, we all going
     to die with something, you know, cancer or
     something, you know.'  He would say that."
          So he knew that it could lead to death.
          "Did you ever say anything to Mr. Haliburton
     about his smoking when he was at the store?
          "Yes.
          "What did you say?
          "I said, 'Well, you need to stop smoking.' 3950
          "What did he say in response?
          "Well, he said, 'Oh, well.'  I said, 'Them
     things going to kill you.'  He said, 'Well, you got
     to die with something.'"
          Question, this is Lucius Hamilton, "Did you
     tell him that he needed to quit because you
     understood that smoking was bad for your health?
          "I didn't never -- you know, we talked about,
     I think a time or two when I guess them cigarettes
     came out with that little warning on the pack, you
     know.  You know, I would say, 'All you've got to do
     is read the pack, you know, they're going to take
     you out.'  And that was it."
          "And how would he respond when you said that?
          "The same way.
          "He would laugh?
          "Yeah, you know."
          "Stay away from them, they're dangerous and
     addictive," that's what he told Jerry Miller in
     1980 or 1981.  So he knew prior to 1982 that
     cigarette smoking was dangerous and that it was
     addictive.  Those were his own words to Jerry
     Miller.  He told Jerry Miller, "Stay away from
     them, they're dangerous and they're addictive," and
     this is before 1982. 3951
          Now, Dr. Proctor would have you believe that
     no one knew about the risks of smoking until 1964,
     and if they did, they forgot about it.
          Well, the evidence is to the contrary.  He had
     to admit that for hundreds of years, people have
     been writing and talking about the dangers of
     smoking.  The general public has known for over 100
     years that nicotine is in tobacco.  He concedes
     that.
          The general public has known that smoking can
     be difficult to quit for over a hundred years.  And
     for a hundred years, schools have taught that
     smoking is both dangerous and addictive.
          Question, and this is Dr. Proctor, "Now, there
     were hundreds of articles or studies where they
     found that smoking was dangerous?"
          Answer:  "That's right.
          "In fact, even thousands of articles were
     written about it; correct?
          "Exactly."
          And we're talking about the 1950s, we're
     talking about prior to the Surgeon General's
     Report.
          Here we are back in the 1950s, "Smoking blamed
     in lung cancer."  And they were talking about a 3952
     study that was done by three American science --
     three reports done by American scientists.  So not
     science that's done in Europe or somewhere, this is
     being done in the United States.
          "Surgeon General Warns Again on the Danger of
     Smoking."  This is back in 1959, The Palm Beach
     Post.  "Smoking Again Hit As Cancer Cause," this is
     the Palm Beach Post, 1959.  Palm Beach Times, 1959,
     "Nonsmokers Live Longer, Expert Holds."
          So the scientific literature was finding its
     way into lay publications like newspapers and
     magazines and things of that sort, that people were
     given ac- -- had access to.
          And here is Dr. Leroy Burney and Dr. John
     Heller.  They are charged with protecting the
     public health.  Dr. Leroy Burney was the Surgeon
     General of the United States.  1957, he testified
     in front of Congress and said that, "Our position
     is that we have informed the public through the
     excellent coverage of the press, radio, and TV
     about the dangers of smoking."
          And these people are testifying in real time.
     This is in 1957.  They are not looking back 50
     years later or more like Dr. Proctor.  These people
     were there.  They are charged with protecting the 3953
     public health and getting out information about the
     dangers of smoking.
          Here is what Dr. Heller said, "Newspapers,
     radio, TV, and other media have done an excellent
     job covering this problem, and a very objective
     job.  This is an exceedingly valuable way of
     informing the public."
          So they were getting the word out to the
     people about the dangers of smoking.  And this is
     back in the '50s, following the mouse skin painting
     studies and the epidemiological studies of
     Drs. Hammond and Horn had conducted on behalf of
     the American Cancer Society.  All of this is coming
     out.
          Here is the 1964 Surgeon General's Report.  It
     says, "Smoking causes lung cancer.  Smoking is
     associated with an increased risk of emphysema."
          And then, of course, we had warnings in the
     news. SPEAKER:  This is a CBS News Extra on smoking
     and health, the findings of the Surgeon General's
     Committee.
          MR. REASONER:  Almost from the moment that
     cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked. 3954
     But the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and
     culminated in today's report by the Surgeon
     General's Committee.  This, in summary, is what the
     committee says.  Cigarette smoking is a major cause
     of lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers
     points the same way.  Cigarette smoking is a
     significant cause of cancer of the larynx and
     probably the most important cause of chronic
     bronchitis.  Cigarette smoking may be related to
     other lung diseases.
          Male smokers have a much higher death rate
     from heart disease, although it's not proven that
     smoking is the cause.
          On the question of filters, the committee says
     there is no evidence that they do any good, but it
     didn't exclude the possibility that an effective
     filter might be developed.
          In short, the committee says if you smoke
     cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying
     early.  The sooner you start, the more you smoke,
     the more you inhale, the worse your chances are.
          In this kind of a country, it comes down to
     you, whether you like it or not.  No one is going
     to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite
     clear that no one is going to tell him it's good 3955
     for him, either.  The decision is his, the decision
     and the health that may depend on it.
          This is Harry Reasoner.  Good night. PERSONS:  And so that's how things were in
     1964 in this country.  Said we're not going to ban
     the product, people have a choice, they have the
     right to smoke if they want to, but their health
     will depend on that choice.
          Knowing that it's dangerous and knowing that
     it's addictive, some people chose to continue that
     activity, and the country decided they weren't
     going to stop them, what they did was put the
     label, the warning, the caution label on the
     cigarette pack.
          And there were warnings in other media.  Here
     is the Palm Beach Post-Times with coverage of the
     '64 Surgeon General's Report "Smoking, Cancer
     Linked."
          And here is an interesting piece.  This was a
     letter to the editor.  And this isn't a scientist,
     this is a citizen of Palm Beach County who wrote in
     and said that about -- and he's talking about the
     Surgeon General's Report in 1964.  He says it's
     "Very, very interesting, the quotes you give in 3956
     your news item regarding the smoking report.  But
     these reactions quoted are nothing new nor is a
     smoking report anything new.  In bygone years,
     cigarettes were referred to as coffin nails.  Were
     that today, with full knowledge, a person will say,
     'I'll never quit, I enjoy smoking.'"
          And so that pretty much summarizes how so
     people received this news of the Surgeon General's
     Report of '64, that it was very, very interesting,
     but it didn't tell them anything new because they
     knew even before this report came out, that smoking
     was dangerous and could kill you.  Hence, use of
     the term "coffin nails."
          And when I showed this to Dr. Proctor, he was
     unfamiliar with the name of the author because he
     assumed it was a scientist.  And, no, it wasn't a
     scientist, it was someone named Mr. Saunders, who
     was just a local resident.  But he knew enough to
     know that it was dangerous.
          And speaking of education, we know that
     Freddie Miller, who was raised by -- he and
     Mr. Haliburton were raised by their grandmother,
     Miss Carson, Miss Sally Ann Carson, he had a third
     grade education, but when he started coughing and
     associated his coughing with his smoking, he quit 3957
     smoking.  So you don't have to be a PhD to know
     that coughing associated with smoking, that it's
     bad for you and that you need to quit or that
     cigarette smoking is dangerous.
          Palm Beach Post.  Here are other warnings.
     1964, '66, '67, talking about the drop in cigarette
     smoking as a result of the information linking
     cigarette smoking to disease.  And then, "Smoking
     Report Seen Linking Many Diseases," and they go on
     this coverage of the report.  "Panel warns last
     puffs most dangerous to smokers."  So the
     information is out there.  Information is
     available.  And that's the standard.  The
     information has to be known or available, and this
     information clearly was available.
          Here is the first of the caution labels.
     "Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your
     health."  Lucius Hamilton told Mr. Haliburton on
     more than one occasion, "I would say all you got to
     do is read the pack, they are going to take you
     out."  And that's taking you out meaning they are
     going the kill you.
          Here is a PSA. SPEAKER:  We receive many warnings in our 3958
     life, and sometimes they can save our life.
          This message is brought to you by the American
     Cancer Society. PERSONS:  Powerful warning.
          And, yes, there was advertising, but there
     were also these public service announcements in
     pretty graphic terms describing the dangers of
     smoking.  And as a result of all of the coverage on
     all the media, TV, newspapers, magazines, public
     service announcements, public health officials,
     Dr. Daniel Horn in 1968 said, "You could stand on a
     rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous' at the top
     of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone
     anything they did not already know."  And he's in
     real time.  This is in 1968 in the United States.
          So the public health campaign continued and it
     was effective in getting the word out.
          Here is the 1970 warning, "Warning:  The
     Surgeon General has determined that cigarette
     smoking is dangerous to your health."
          Here is another public service announcement.
          Play that.
          This is in the 1978, '79 time frame.
          (Video clip played as follows:) 3959
          GIRL:  You see, most people have never even
     heard of chronic bronchitis and this pamphlet tells
     how a lot of people first think it is just an
     annoying cold.
          SPEAKER:  I'll see you and raise you.
          GIRL:  So if you have a persistent cough --
          MALE SPEAKER:  What did that kid say?
          FEMALE SPEAKER:  She said if you have a
     persistent cough --
          GIRL:  It may be a symptom of chronic
     bronchitis.
          FEMALE SPEAKER:  Hey, are we having a medical
     seminar or are we playing poker?
          MALE SPEAKER:  Yeah.
          GIRL:  Chronic bronchitis can also lead to
     other serious respiratory diseases, particularly
     emphysema.
          FEMALE SPEAKER:  Okay, what have you got?
          MALE SPEAKER:  I've got Queens and --
          FEMALE SPEAKER:  Chronic bronchitis, I would
     say.
          GIRL:  So don't ignore a persistent cough that
     lingers on particularly if you smoke cigarettes.
          MALE SPEAKER:  Now, what do you say?
          MALE SPEAKER:  First, see your doctor, and 3960
     second, learn how to play poker.  Full house.
          GIRL:  So don't gamble.  Write your lung
     association for the free booklet on chronic
     bronchitis.  They care about every breath you take,
     they really do. PERSONS:  And we know from
     Mrs. Haliburton's testimony that Mr. Haliburton was
     a Sammy Davis, Jr. fan.  Sammy Davis, Jr., did a
     public service announcement for the Great American
     Smokeout. MS. DAVIS:  You know giving up smoking comes
     easy for some people and hard for others.  If you
     are a smoker like me, try kicking the habit for
     just one day on Thursday, November 17th.  That's
     the date of the Great American Smokeout.
          This is Sammy Davis, Jr., inviting you to join
     me and along with a few million other Americans in
     making Thursday, November 17th truly a smokeless
     Thursday.  That means 24 hours, man, without one of
     these things. PERSONS:  So the word was getting out
     about the dangers of smoking and the need to quit 3961
     smoking.  And the Great American Smokeout resulted
     in a number of people quitting because the idea was
     you quit for one day and see if you can quit for
     another day and so on until you are no longer
     smoking.
          Now, there is no evidence that advertising had
     any impact on Mr. Haliburton, that's been the
     evidence in the case.  Mrs. Haliburton did not
     remember any advertising growing up in Georgia.
     Except for a Marlboro billboard, Mrs. Haliburton
     didn't remember any advertising from the 1950s to
     the 1980s.  No one testified that advertising had
     anything to do with this case.  Cigarette
     advertising, it was legal until it was banned on
     television and -- and in 1971.  And all advertising
     had warnings since 1972 because even on billboards,
     magazines, wherever you would see an ad for
     cigarettes, they would have to put whatever the
     warning was at that time.  That was the law.  And
     speaking of advertising we are talking about Tifton
     and Tift County, Georgia, and southwest Georgia and
     tobacco country, that's a tobacco culture.  You
     don't need Madison Avenue to tell you about the
     properties of tobacco and how it's cropped and how
     it's aired or cured and how it's used.  You don't 3962
     need a magazine to tell you that.  You don't need a
     radio or television to tell you that, it's
     something you grow up with.
          Interestingly, though, even though he grew up
     in that culture, because Sally Mae Carson -- Sally
     Ann Carson forbade smoking, he didn't smoke when he
     lived with her.  You remember Freddie Miller said
     he didn't see him smoking until he left to go to
     Florida to live with his daddy and his stepmother
     and that was when he first saw him smoking, and
     that was in 1956.  Well, in 1956, he had gotten
     married in 1955 and had a son, Andrew Haliburton,
     Jr.  So he's a father and a husband when he's
     smoking.  He's not a child.  He is not a young
     teenager, he's an adult, a grown man.
          In other words, the grandmother said, and
     Freddie Miller's testimony was you are grown, you
     can do what you want to, and grown can be when you
     get 20 or 21 years old or grown can be when you are
     out of the house and have a place of your own and a
     job of your own.  And you recall Freddie Miller's
     testimony when he was taken down to the sawmill
     because he didn't want to go to school anymore.  He
     was in third grade, said I don't want to go to
     school anymore like the rest of the children and 3963
     his mother took him down to the sawmill and said
     "Mister, do you need anybody to help you?"  And he
     said, the manager said, "Yeah, but that fellow's
     too -- he's too small to work here."  Said, "Well,
     no.  He's big enough to say he doesn't want to go
     to school, he's big enough to have a job."
          So if you have a job, much less having a
     spouse and a family, you're on your own.  You are
     adult enough in that culture to make your own
     decisions.  And he made his decision to smoke.  And
     nobody's faulting him for his decision, that was
     his right, but with that comes certain
     consequences.
          So let's look at like father like son.
          Before you play that -- go ahead.  Go ahead.
     Yeah, stop it just one second. SPEAKER:  Like father, like son.
          Like father, like son?  Think about it.
          SPEAKER:  For information on smoking and heart
     disease, ask your heart association. PERSONS:  That's a far more powerful and
     lasting influence on a child's behavior than
     anything Madison Avenue could do or any tobacco 3964
     company could do, because that's somebody that's a
     role model in their own house that they live with
     day in and day out.  And when they see adults
     engaged in certain activities, children want to --
     they want to emulate that.  They long for the day
     when they can do what they see adults doing,
     whether it's drinking, whether it's smoking,
     whether it's driving a car or whatever, they see
     adults doing it, they want to engage in an adult
     activity and that's why one of the strongest
     influence on whether or not somebody will take up
     smoking, whether they will begin to smoke is
     whether they've got a peer who smokes, whether
     they've got a parent who smokes, or they've got a
     sibling who smokes.  That's a strong influence.  In
     the case of Mr. Haliburton, I submit to you it was
     when he went to live with his father who was a
     smoker, and he emulated, he took up that activity.
          It wasn't because of anything R.J. Reynolds
     had in an advertising in a magazine, and the
     testimony was he didn't even read magazines and
     just looked at the paper.  But it wasn't anything
     about advertising.  He didn't need advertising to
     acquaint him with the experience of smoking, to
     engage in smoking. 3965
          Your Honor, could we take five?
          THE COURT:  Sure, let me ask.  Yeah, I see
     jurors are nodding their heads as well in agreement
     with you, Mr. Persons.
          MR. PERSONS:  Thank you.
          THE COURT:  Take a five-minute recess.
          MR. PERSONS:  Yes.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Yes.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Can you advise how long
     Mr. Persons has?
          THE COURT:  Sure, I'll find out.  Let me just
     give the jurors a break.
          (The jury left the courtroom at 3:58 p.m.)
          THE COURT:  Let me give counsel a break, that
     way you can check your notes and everything too.
     Five-minute recess.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  How much longer for
     Mr. Persons?
          THE COURT:  He is going to check his notes.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Oh, okay.
          (Recess taken from 3:59 p.m. to 4:16 p.m.)
          THE DEPUTY:  All rise, court is back in
     session.
          THE COURT:  Okay, is counsel ready? 3966
          MR. PERSONS:  Yes, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Okay.
          Ready for our jurors?
          MR. PERSONS:  Yes.
          THE DEPUTY:  You are all right.  Do I notice
     my paths are getting narrower and narrower.
          THE COURT:  We are piling stuff in.
          THE DEPUTY:  Jurors entering.
          (The jury entered the courtroom at 4:16 p.m.)
          THE COURT:  All right.  Welcome back, ladies
     and gentlemen, if you please take your seats.
     Mr. Persons, are you ready to continue?
          MR. PERSONS:  Yes, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Please.
          MR. PERSONS:  Ladies and gentlemen, especially
     during Dr. Proctor's testimony, there was a lot
     about the campaign of doubt and creating a
     controversy and so forth and the abundance of
     advertising.  But the public information campaign
     about the dangers ever smoking got through to the
     American public.  And we know that because we can
     look at the rate at which people started quitting.
     And we know that because we had this kind of
     information.  1953, scientific consensus tobacco is
     a major cause of death.  And we know that between 3967
     that time frame in 1953 and '57 we had 17.6 -- I
     mean -- yeah, million people quit by the time of
     the Surgeon General's Report came out.
          And the Surgeon General himself, Leroy Burney,
     said the public was informed through excellent
     coverage.  In 1966, the warning label goes on,
     remember Dr. Heller who said you could stand on a
     rooftop and you wouldn't be telling anybody
     anything they didn't already know, if you told them
     that smoking was dangerous, and the warning label
     in 1970 is a stronger label, the warnings go on all
     advertising, and we know that from '64 to '79, 30
     million people quit smoking, and so given those
     numbers, the message was clearly getting through.
          Mr. and Mrs. Haliburton told their children
     not to smoke because it harmed her health and it
     was a bad habit and that message got through to
     them.  We know that, Miss Dorothy Wilson testified,
     "And you did not smoke because you regarded smoking
     as a bad habit?"
          Answer:  "Addiction, I did, yes.  Bad habit,
     addiction, not good for you."
          The message got through.
          Question:  "And you would talk about this with
     your siblings, your brothers and sisters, when you 3968
     were growing about up about your father's smoking
     being a bad habit; right?"
          Answer:  "Right."
          Question:  "And your sisters also agreed, they
     agreed with you that it was a bad habit; right?
     And that was because it was bad for you and you had
     to inhale it as you've already said; right?
          "Yes.  Knew that it was bad for you, a bad
     habit."
          So we talked about the consensus in '53,
     smoking causes cancer, and that's when we see the
     people start quitting in significant numbers.  And
     we talked about the pack warning.  Oops.  There we
     go.
          And then we know in 1968, John Haliburton quit
     smoking, that's Mr. Haliburton's -- was
     Mr. Haliburton's older brother, John Haliburton, he
     quit in 1968, and that's two years after the pack
     warning goes on.
          Lucius Hamilton in the late '60s, constantly
     urging Mr. Haliburton to quit.  Late '60s, the
     Haliburtons forbid the children from smoking.
     Great American Smokeout is in 1977, the same year
     that Mr. Haliburton's father died of cancer, he was
     a -- and then in 1970s or '80s, we know that smoke 3969
     from Mr. Haliburton's cigarettes were bothering
     Mrs. Haliburton's bronchitis.  And you will recall
     that the testimony was late '70s, Mr. Haliburton
     has this cough, short of breath.  He tells people
     that his -- not to smoke because it's dangerous and
     addictive, and that's in the 1980s.  Early '80s,
     daughters pointed out his coughing, told him to
     quit.
          And so all of this is prior to May 5th, 1982.
     And it would have to be something that was
     concealed or there was an agreement to conceal
     after May 5th, 1982, upon which he reasonably
     relied to his detriment in order for there to be a
     concealment claim.  And we know from the evidence
     that he did not rely on anything that tobacco
     companies said or did.  All the witnesses were
     asked about this who came in and testified.
          "Your husband never said" --
          And even some by deposition.
          "Your husband never said that if he had known
     certain information, he would not have started
     smoking, did he?"
          Answer:  "He didn't tell me."  This is
     Mr. Haliburton.
          "Okay, he never said that if he had known 3970
     certain information, he would not have continued to
     smoke, did he, ma'am.
          "He didn't tell me."
          Well, of course, he knew information after
     1982 and he knew certain information before then
     and he knew that it was dangerous and addictive
     before then.  Now the plaintiff's case is Reynolds
     advertised and made public statements about
     smoking, that since Mr. Haliburton was in the
     information environment and exposed to advertising,
     and continued to smoke for 19 years, that
     establishes the concealment claim, and the
     agreement to conceal.
          But you didn't hear anything from any witness
     that said Mr. Haliburton relied on anything that
     the tobacco companies said or the Tobacco Institute
     said or the Tobacco Industry Research Committee
     said or the Council For Tobacco Research said.
          Here we have Dorothy Wilson.  "We've talked
     about advertising, and I just want to make sure
     that we're clear.  You're not aware of your father
     ever relying on any statement from a tobacco
     company?
          "I am not aware, no, sir."
          Tressie Haywood, "And your father also never 3971
     told you that he was tricked into smoking
     cigarettes; correct?
          "Correct.
          "He also never told you that anything a
     tobacco company ever did influenced his smoking
     decision; correct?
          "Correct."
          So here is what we have.  Mr. Haliburton did
     not rely on anything the tobacco companies said or
     did.  He did not hear, read, or see any statements
     by the tobacco industry.  He didn't see the Frank
     Statement, that was asked, no.  Did he see any
     statements from by the Council For Tobacco
     Research?  No.  Any statement by the Tobacco
     Industry Research Committee?  No.  Any statement by
     the Tobacco Institute?  No.  Any tobacco industry
     press releases?  There is no evidence that he saw
     any of those.  Tobacco industry white papers?  No.
     Did he see any tobacco industry interviews and/or
     statements?  No.  Tobacco company statements about
     smoking and health?  No.  Tobacco company
     statements about smoking and addiction?  No.
          None of those things, no evidence of any of
     those communications from the tobacco industry.
          As a matter of fact, Mrs. Haliburton 3972
     testified, she was asked this question, "And
     nothing you could have said would have made him not
     want to smoke or to quit smoking; correct?
          "Correct.
          "You can't think of anything anyone could have
     told your husband that would have made him quit
     smoking cigarettes, can you?
          "No.  Not as I know."
          Now, your wife suffers from bronchitis.  You
     smoke cigarettes in her presence.  It aggravates
     the bronchitis.  She has shortness of breath.  That
     doesn't stop you from smoking.  It doesn't even
     prompt you to call a smoking-cessation clinic.  It
     doesn't even prompt you to go see a doctor to try
     to get some medication or something to quit
     smoking.  It doesn't even prompt you to get
     nicotine gum or to get a patch or to take any
     measures to stop smoking.  In fact, you don't even
     throw out your cigarettes knowing that this is
     affecting your wife adversely in this fashion, in a
     palpable, very meaningful and significant way.
          Now, why on earth would anybody believe that a
     document from R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company would
     prompt you to do anything differently?  Here is
     someone you've been married to since 1958.  You've 3973
     known her since 1956.  You're married for 40 years.
     You have five children together.  Smoking -- your
     smoking aggravates her health.  Yet you take no
     steps toward cessation.
          So a letter from R.J. Reynolds would prompt
     you to do something differently?  R.J. Reynolds
     would change your behavior?
          A list of chemicals contained in smoke, the
     same smoke that came from the cigarettes when you
     were rolling your own, not just a commercial
     cigarette, somehow that's going to change your
     behavior, that you know that there is ammonia in
     smoke, that is going to change your behavior, or
     polonium in smoke, that is going to change your
     behavior.
          And don't lose your common sense.  No secret
     document, disclosure of no ingredients, nothing
     would have made a difference.  That's
     Mrs. Haliburton's testimony.  She lived with him
     for 40 years.  She knew him better than anybody
     else who gave testimony in this case, and she said
     in her own words, "Not that I -- as I know."
     Nothing would have changed his behavior.  He was
     intent on smoking and he continued to smoke despite
     the hazards associated with it. 3974
          And not to disparage him, but his comment was
     often -- his response was often cavalier, at best.
     "You got to die with something."  Knowing that the
     consequences of continued smoking was a premature
     death.  He didn't run away from it.  He confronted
     it and was rather dismissive of it.  But yet
     somehow, someway, something R.J. Reynolds or one of
     the tobacco companies, had they sent him a letter,
     it would have made a difference.
          And it -- it not only does there have to be
     reliance, and there is no evidence of reliance, but
     it also has to be something material.  It would
     have to be something that was concealed that was
     material.  In order for something to be a material
     fact, it has to be something that would have
     changed the outcome, something that would have
     caused him to stop smoking and thereby prevent his
     COPD and his resulting death.
          There is no evidence of any such thing.
          Dangers and addictiveness of smoking were not
     unknown or unavailable to Mr. Haliburton before
     May 5th, 1982; to the contrary.  In his own words,
     he described smoking as addictive and dangerous.
          Here is what he told Jerry Miller.  "Stay away
     from them, they are dangerous and addictive."  And 3975
     this is in '80 or '81, certainly prior to May 5th,
     1982.
          So when you get to that question on the
     verdict form, "State whether" -- and this is
     question -- oops, am I doing this right?  Questions
     3 and 4.  "State whether Mr. Haliburton reasonably
     relied to his detriment on any statement or
     omission by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company after
     May 5th, 1982, that concealed or omitted material
     information not otherwise known or available to him
     concerning the health effects and/or addictive
     nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, whether
     such reliance was a legal cause of his death."  The
     answer is no.  And if you answer no to that one,
     you can skip the next one.  So no on both of those.
          And question number 5, should you get that
     far, and I submit the evidence is such that you
     shouldn't get past question number 1, but should
     you get this far, "State the percentage of any
     responsibility for Mr. Haliburton's emphysema/COPD
     and resulting death," it should be 100 percent to
     Andrew Haliburton.  And this assignment of fault
     relates only to the actions that were a legal cause
     of Mr. Haliburton's COPD/emphysema and death.
     Defendants cannot be assigned fault for actions 3976
     that were not a legal cause of Mr. Haliburton's
     COPD/emphysema and/or death.
          And the shorthand for legal cause is but-for
     cause.  But for something, he would not have
     developed COPD.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Your Honor, I object, that's a
     misstatement of the law.
          THE COURT:  Use the jury instruction, so
     that's fine.
          MR. PERSONS:  All right, I'm going to turn to
     it, Your Honor.  I will.
          THE COURT:  Sustain the objection.
          MR. PERSONS:  And smoking cigarettes -- and
     here is Dr. Neal Benowitz, "does not cause a smoker
     to lose the ability to be responsible for their own
     actions; correct?
          "Correct."
          And here is what we're talking about.  A
     smoker responsible for his own actions.  Between
     1956 and 1957, out of the 12 months out of every
     year, 365 days a year, over the course of that
     time, from '56 to '90 -- up to '94, when he finally
     did quit, not one single quit attempt, unless you
     count asking for some chewing gum and not even
     saying you are trying to quit smoking when you ask 3977
     for the spearmint gum from your spouse.
          Mrs. Haliburton was asked did he make the
     choice to smoke that first cigarette?  Yes, he did.
     Did he make the choice to smoke each day when he
     lit the cigarettes?  Yes, he did.  Each time he did
     it, he made the choice.  Nobody could make the
     choice for him.
          MR. SMITH:  Uh-oh, dropped the whole wheel
     off.
          THE COURT:  Deputy, can you assist?
          MR. PERSONS:  Oh, lost a wheel.  Thank you,
     sir.
          MR. CRICKENBERGER:  Very welcome.
          MR. PERSONS:  Let's walk through this,
     Mr. Haliburton's choices.  We know he was warned
     throughout his life that smoking was dangerous and
     addictive.  We know his grandmother forbid him
     smoking.  Yet he became a regular smoker.  There
     were warnings from the Surgeon General.  One of the
     warnings was you need to quit.  It says, "Quitting
     now greatly reduces your chance of developing a
     disease."  He continued to smoke.  Warnings from
     television, newspapers, and magazines about
     quitting, good for your health.  He continued to
     smoke. 3978
          Warnings on the packages of the cigarettes.
     We know that he was aware of them because Lucius
     Hamilton even pointed them out to him, yet he
     continued to smoke.
          John Haliburton, his brother, quit smoking,
     1968, yet he continued to smoke.
          Lucius Hamilton said go see a doctor about
     that cough.  Did he?  No, he continued to smoke.
          Father dies of cancer in 1977.  Did he quit?
     No, he continued to smoke.
          Betty Wright, warning, "Them things are going
     to kill you."  Did he quit?  Not even for a day.
     Not even for an hour.  Continued to smoke.
          Mrs. Haliburton warning him, "I've got
     bronchitis.  Please don't smoke in my presence.
     You need to quit smoking, they're going to kill
     you."  He continued to smoke.
          Lucius Hamilton, "Just read the warning on the
     pack."  Did he quit?  No, he continued to smoke.
          Warnings from his own body, coughing,
     shortness of breath, wheezing, all the signs and
     symptoms of COPD/emphysema.  Did he quit?  No, he
     continued to smoke.
          Warning, multiple friends and family warned
     him of the dangers of smoking and the link between 3979
     his smoking and his cough and his shortness of
     breath and his wheezing.  Did he quit?  No.  He
     continued to smoke.
          And then tragically, he passed away from
     COPD/emphysema, all because he did not quit
     smoking.
          Only Mr. Haliburton had it in his power to
     attempt to quit.  R.J. Reynolds couldn't do it for
     him, spouse couldn't do it for him, children
     couldn't do it for him, friends couldn't do it.
     Only he had the power to refrain from smoking or to
     pick up the phone and to call the smoking-cessation
     clinic or to throw out his cigarettes.  Only he
     could do that for himself.  Nobody could do it for
     him.  But in order to do that, you've got to be
     motivated to do it, you've got to want to do it,
     and the evidence is it's not something that he
     wants to do.
          Interestingly, "He never said that he blamed
     the tobacco companies for getting sick, did he?"
          "No, he did not."  "No, he did not."
          He's carrying around oxygen that he's using,
     but not once did he blame the tobacco companies for
     what he chose to do.  He fully acknowledged that
     this was a distinct, a real possibility when he 3980
     said on numerous occasions to people, when they got
     on him about smoking, "You got to die with
     something."
          There is nothing that Reynolds could have done
     that would have prevented Mr. Haliburton's death.
     Only Mr. Haliburton had the ability to prevent his
     death, and he could have done that by stop smoking.
     Thus, Mr. Haliburton is 100 percent responsible for
     choosing not to discontinue smoking, but choosing
     to continue to smoke.
          Mrs. Haliburton said that Mr. Haliburton's
     choices -- Mr. Haliburton's choices are the only
     legal cause of his COPD.  "You blame your husband
     for not trying to quit sooner, don't you?"
          "Yes, I blame him."
          Can't blame anybody else for that.  Nobody
     else had it in their power to try to quit, just
     try.  Even if you're not successful the first time,
     try.  We know that when he did try, he was
     successful and he quit for good.
          So on number 5 on the verdict form, I submit
     to you it ought to be zero percent for Reynolds,
     100 percent for Andrew Haliburton.
          Now, I'm going to talk about damages because
     it's on the verdict form, not because I think 3981
     damages are warranted, but it's on the verdict
     form, so we need to talk about it.
          Any damages must be fair and just in light of
     the evidence, all of the evidence.  The plaintiff
     has the burden to prove each and every dollar of
     damages they are seeking.  And I submit to you
     plaintiff has failed to prove that Mrs. Haliburton
     is entitled to money because her husband chose to
     smoke despite knowing the dangers.
          The claim for at least $16 1/2 million defies
     common sense.  Plaintiff isn't seeking damages for
     lost wages, loss of support and services, medical
     or funeral expenses, Mr. Haliburton's children, or
     Mr. Haliburton's pain and suffering.
          No damages should be awarded.
          Let's talk about punitive damages.  "Under the
     circumstances of this case, state whether you find
     by clear and convincing evidence that punitive
     damages are warranted against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
     Company."  Punitive damages are different than
     compensatory damages in several ways, one of which
     there is a different standard on the burden of
     proof, it has to be proven by clear and convincing
     evidence.  And the punitive damages can be awarded
     only for concealment that was a legal cause of 3982
     Mr. Haliburton's death.  You may not punish
     Reynolds for any harm suffered by anyone other than
     Mr. Haliburton.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Your Honor, I have to object, I
     don't believe this complies with what the jury
     instructions say.
          THE COURT:  We'll reference -- why don't you
     read what the jury instructions say.
          MR. PERSONS:  All right, we'll do that.
          Can we get that instruction up?
          I've got it.  Clear and convincing.
          "Clear and convincing evidence differs from
     the greater weight of the evidence in that it is
     more compelling and persuasive."  This is what was
     instructed you.  "As I have had already instructed
     you, greater weight of the evidence means the more
     persuasive and convincing force and effect of the
     entire evidence in the case.  In contrast, clear
     and convincing evidence is evidence that is
     precise, explicit, lacking in confusion," -- oops,
     I keep hitting the wrong button.
          "Lacking in confusion and has such weight that
     it produces a firm belief or conviction, without
     hesitation, about the matter at issue."
          So if there is any hesitation whatsoever about 3983
     whether punitive damages are warranted, then the
     burden of proof has not been carried, because it
     says without hesitation about the matter at issue.
          Another important point, the Engle findings do
     not establish that Mrs. Haliburton is entitled to
     punitive damages.  They do not.  They come into
     play --
          MR. ACOSTA:  Your Honor, again, I'm going to
     have to object, I think it mischaracterizes what
     the instruction says.
          THE COURT:  No, overruled.
          MR. PERSONS:  No, that's right.  They don't.
     They do not establish entitlement to punitive
     damages.
          Now, Reynolds shouldn't be punished.  I'll
     tell you why.  Look at the Council For Tobacco
     Research.  They awarded more than $350 million in
     grants to fund independent scientific research
     projects.  They funded projects -- CTR grant-funded
     projects resulted in more than 7,000 published
     scientific or medical articles and reports.  More
     than 600 of them were cited in the Surgeon
     General's Report.
          Now, Mr. -- Dr. Proctor said, well, it was
     distraction research.  Well, if the Surgeon 3984
     General's Report is on smoking and health,
     obviously, 600 of these articles cited had to have
     something to do with smoking and health.
          They funded ten Nobel Prize winners.  They
     didn't get the Nobel Prize for the research that
     they did that was funded by CTR, but they were
     researchers of that caliber.  They funded research
     at virtually every major university in the country.
          One example of some research that was funded
     by the Council For Tobacco Research appeared in The
     American Journal of Psychiatry in 1963.  And in
     that article, the researchers reported that heavy
     cigarette smokers thus appear to be true addicts.
     This work was sponsored in part by grants from the
     American Cancer Society and the Tobacco Industry
     Research Committee.
          Reynolds should not be punished.  It tried to
     reduce the levels of carcinogens in smoke starting
     in the early 1950s.  It started developing heat,
     not burn, technology.  Spent over a billion dollars
     to develop heat, not burn, technology for Premier
     and Eclipse cigarettes.  Premier and Eclipse were
     less harmful than conventional cigarettes, a less
     harmful product.
          Unfortunately, the consumers rejected it.  You 3985
     can't force people to buy these products.  They
     have a right to buy what they want, what they
     prefer.  They preferred a product that burned
     tobacco as opposed to heating it, even though one
     that heated it was less harmful than the one that
     burned it.
          Even after spending all the time developing
     Premier and all the resources, they didn't give up,
     they went and invented the Eclipse, but neither of
     them has been commercially successful.
          Reynolds recognized that a certain curing
     process resulted in increased nitrosamines, a form
     of a carcinogen.  They published the information to
     the scientific community, and then they paid the
     farmers to retrofit the farmers' barns so that they
     would eliminate that process.
          Cigarettes have carried warning labels since
     1966.  Reynolds has not disputed the dangers of
     tobacco for almost two decades.  Punitive damages
     are not needed to prevent Reynolds from concealing
     the dangers of smoking.
          So on this question, whether you find by clear
     and convincing evidence that punitive damages are
     warranted against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company,
     the answer is no. 3986
          Best summarized by Dr. E. Cuyler Hammond, a
     researcher.  And this is back from the 1950s, 1954
     I believe it is.  And here is what he had to say. DR. HAMMOND:  It is now proven, in my opinion,
     beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking
     greatly increases the probability of developing
     lung cancer.
          In my opinion, people should be warned of the
     dangers, and they are being warned.  What they then
     want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not is
     their own business. PERSONS:  And smoking was Mr. Haliburton's
     business.
          Dorothy Wilson.  Question:  "You admit that no
     one made your father smoke, don't you?"
          Answer:  "No one made him smoke, no, sir."
          Question:  "It was his decision, wasn't it?"
          Answer:  "Yes, sir."
          Tressie Haywood.  "Ms. Haywood, you would
     agree with me that your father considered smoking
     to be his business, don't you?"
          "I believe so, yes."
          And Mrs. Dorothy Haliburton.  "During the 3987
     '60s, '70s, and '80s, your husband made the
     decision each morning he was going to smoke, didn't
     he?"
          Answer:  "Yes."
          "No one else made that decision for him, did
     they, ma'am?"
          "No."
          "Ms. Haliburton, you said no one else made
     that decision for your husband; is that correct?"
          "That's correct.  Yes, sir."
          "So, yes, he had full control?"
          "Yes, sir."
          He had full control.  He made the decision to
     smoke, and he was fully aware that smoking was
     dangerous, smoking was addictive, and yet he
     continued in that behavior.  He was fully aware of
     the consequences, that it could result in death.
     He told a number of people that.  But yet he
     continued to engage in that behavior.
          So there is nothing that Reynolds could have
     said or done that would have changed that behavior,
     because that behavior was in his control, and the
     evidence is overwhelming that it was in his
     control.  The evidence is overwhelming that he knew
     or reasonably should have known prior to May 5th, 3988
     1990, that he had a smoking-related disease,
     emphysema, that he knew this because of all of the
     symptoms, and he knew it was caused by smoking.
          I submit to you that once you go back and
     deliberate, you weigh all the evidence, consider
     all the testimony, that the verdict should be
     rendered in favor of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
          I thank you for your kind attention.
