          MR. ACOSTA:  Good morning, ladies and
     gentlemen.
          JURORS:  Good morning.
          MR. ACOSTA:  It's been a privilege to present
     this case to you.  Willie Gary, Mr. Gary, is going
     to follow me and talk to you after I am finished.
     On behalf of our whole team, we want to thank you.
     We know you have been paying close attention to all
     the evidence, taking notes, and so now is the time
     that you have to start thinking about the end of
     the case, that's where we're at.  And you will
     decide who's right, who had the most persuasive and
     convincing evidence in the whole case, was it us or
     was it Reynolds.  Reynolds claims they don't have
     any responsibility at all, zero.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained. strike.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Reynolds claims -- they deny
     everything that we claim.  They deny it all.
     Reynolds does not want you to find in our favor. 3762
          This is a company that lied to the public for
     years and years and years.  They created a culture
     of smoking cigarettes that wouldn't have existed
     without what they did, wouldn't have happened
     except for Reynolds and the other companies in the
     conspiracy that they put together back in 1953.
          But they knew long before that.  And I'm going
     to go through some of the evidence with you and
     explain it.  But I did want to finish my thank you,
     because this is Mrs. Haliburton's day in court.
     And you saw her testify.  You can decide for
     yourself what you think of her credibility and her
     believability and what happened to her.  But we are
     proud to have represented her before you.
          In this country, we rely on companies,
     corporations, to tell us the whole truth about
     their products, the whole truth, not just little
     bits and pieces of it.
          We rely on companies to tell us the truth
     about dangerous products even more.  We rely on
     companies to tell us the truth about company --
     about drugs that they sell.  Even more than that.
     In this case, their cigarettes are defective.  They
     were found to be defective, and we presented you
     with the evidence of the defects in them. 3763
          They put so many chemicals in them to change
     the form of the nicotine, while people were trying
     to stop smoking back in the '60s and '70s, when
     those warnings went on, what is Reynolds doing?
     They're making them more addictive, that's what
     they're doing, making them more addictive, making
     it harder for people to stop.
          They never did anything at all to try to help
     people to stop smoking.  What they did is tried to
     keep them smoking so they could keep making more
     money.  They created this culture of cigarette
     smoking in this country that dates way back to when
     they started in 1913.
          Now, I'm going to go through some slides, and
     I'm going to show you just some of the evidence.
     I'm going to focus more on the documents that you
     saw in the case.  And Mr. Gary I think is going to
     focus more on some of the testimony.  So there will
     be some similarities, but differences between the
     way we approach this and what we're going to talk
     about.
          But for all the time, for all the time that
     Mr. Haliburton smoked, Reynolds denied that smoking
     caused cancer.  Reynolds denied that cigarettes
     were addictive.  They denied the things that they 3764
     knew.
          And what did people do, what did smokers do?
     They relied on the company to tell them the truth,
     and they kept buying cigarettes because of that
     reliance.  They relied to their detriment.  They
     relied to their detriment just the way the company
     wanted them to.  That's one of the Engle findings,
     and we're going to go over those again near the end
     of my -- my talk.
          Mr. Haliburton, I'm going to -- was -- met his
     wife Dorothy in the early 1950s and they got
     married.  He was born in 1937.  Now, he died at age
     60.  By age 56, in 1994, -- he died in 1998, you go
     back four years, obviously 1994, he is 56 years
     old.  And he is 56 years old with severe emphysema.
     He has to go on oxygen.  He can hardly breathe.
     Dorothy is there to take care of him.  She has to
     carry his oxygen bottle.
          Mr. Gary is going to talk to you about the
     damages as well.  I'm not going to go into all the
     damages in the case, that's something that he's
     going to do.  But that's just a little bit about
     it.
          You saw this, he was a gospel singer.
          I want to talk to you for a second about 3765
     comparative fault.  We've admitted some fault.
     We've admitted some.  So the question is really
     going to be how much do you assign to
     Mr. Haliburton and how much do you assign to
     Reynolds.
          And I'm going to show you the verdict form in
     a minute when we get to the end of my discussion.
     But basically, there is going to be two lines, and
     there is going to be Mr. Haliburton at the top and
     I'm going to just abbreviate this RJR for Reynolds
     at the bottom.  And then there is a percentage
     sign, and you put a percentage for each, it has to
     add up to a hundred percent.
          Now, we have a number of claims in the case.
     Some of them are what we call intentional tort
     claims.  Those are the fraudulent concealment claim
     and the conspiracy to commit fraud through
     concealment claim.
          And what that involves is the failure of
     Reynolds to tell people what they were really
     doing.  What they were really doing.  And you saw
     some of the reasons why, and I'm going to go over
     that, why they did that.  They did it for one
     reason only:  To make more money at the expense of
     the health of the American public, including 3766 Mr. Haliburton.  He was one of those caught up in
     this whole scheme.  He was a smoker that got so
     addicted, he could not stop.
          You saw the witness yesterday, the
     psychiatrist, who just denied everything.  He
     wanted to answer his own questions.
          If you think about somebody that had smoked
     over two packs a day for over 40 years, finally so
     sick with severe emphysema, have to go on oxygen,
     you can't -- you can't breathe.  When you can't
     breathe, you can't smoke.
          He had tried to quit smoking twice.  Now, if
     you think about it, if you went back 20, 30 years,
     who would remember what somebody else was doing
     when there was no reason at the time to remember
     it?  I mean, if somebody tried to quit smoking --
     it's hard to remember stuff like that.
          But we know he smoked because a lot of people
     told Mr. Haliburton, "Hey, you ought to quit.  You
     ought to quit."  In fact, a couple of them were
     telling him just about every time they saw him, it
     seemed like.
          Well, what does that tell you?  When you have
     to constantly tell somebody, "Hey, listen, you've
     got to stop smoking," you know they're addicted. 29
December 18, 2014

     You know that they're -- that they're -- that
     they're not able to quit.  He said he couldn't
     quit.  That was undisputed.  He said to one of the
     people, "I can't quit."  He said, "I tried.  I'm
     trying."
          So, you know, this is a man that we don't have
     tons of information.  He died in 1998, got sick in
     1994.  You know, it's a long time back.
          It's taken a long time for Mrs. Haliburton to
     get here, and here we are.
          I want to tell you one thing, and that is
     these percentages do not reduce any -- if you make
     a -- a finding of -- of fraud on the verdict form,
     if you find that there was reliance on the
     concealment because he purchased his cigarettes
     after 1982, and you find that there was a
     conspiracy in which he relied upon and continued to
     buy cigarettes as a result of that --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor,
     misstatement of the law.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. ACOSTA:  As a result of that, then there
     won't be a reduction along these percentage lines.
     I just want you to understand that.  That reduction
     applies to the other claims that we have in the 3768
     case that don't involve fraud.
          Okay.  We put this up before.  That's just
     showing you some of the brands that he smoked, some
     of the advertising that we had.
          I do want to talk to you for a second about
     the statute of limitations, which you heard in
     that -- explained some of the evidence and the
     position that the defendant took.  They don't seem
     to dispute that Mr. Haliburton had COPD.  They just
     claim that he should have known that he had COPD
     before 1990.
          Basically what they're saying is he should
     have brought his lawsuit back before 1990 and
     didn't do it, so, therefore --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
          MR. ACOSTA:  -- they are off the hook.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection.  Misstatement.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. ACOSTA:  The statute of limitations is
     based upon the time that you file your lawsuit.  So
     he would have had to known that he had something
     called COPD or emphysema, you will see that on the
     verdict, he -- he would have to have known that he
     had COPD or emphysema because you can't -- you can
     have a -- you can have a cough -- back then, people 3769
     were saying, well, if you quit smoking, it will go
     away.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. ACOSTA:  It will go away.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PERSONS:  Misstatement of the law.
          THE COURT:  Use this instruction, membership.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Well, actually I'm just arguing
     that --
          THE COURT:  Okay.
          MR. ACOSTA:  -- people would have known, I
     mean, that -- that --
          THE COURT:  That's fine.  I'll just sustain
     the objection if you just want to put it in the
     context of the instruction.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Okay.
          People -- people were being told if you
     stopped smoking, your lungs clear up and this,
     that, and the other.  The fact that you have a
     cough or you have some shortness of breath, that's
     not the same thing as knowing that you have a fatal
     disease.  That's not the same thing as knowing you
     have COPD.  It's not the same thing.
          So this -- the statute of limitations defense
     that they have, you should mark no on the verdict 3770
     form when you get to that.
          Let me go back to that for a second.
          Dr. Cosmos {sic}, the doctor that the
     defendants put up on the stand two days ago, I
     think, the guy from Tampa, Mr. Chestnut examined
     him, and Dr. Cosmo said he wouldn't have known, he
     wouldn't have known he had COPD or emphysema.
     Dr. Feingold said he wouldn't have known he had
     COPD or emphysema.  Just remember that testimony.
          He didn't go to a doctor.  He didn't get a
     diagnosis.  To manifest COPD, you have to have a
     manifestation that you know about.  What is the
     manifestation?  If it's COPD, you have to know you
     have COPD.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor,
     misstatement of the law.
          MR. ACOSTA:  I disagree, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Just put it in the
     context of the jury instructions.
          MR. ACOSTA:  I will.  I'm going to go over the
     jury instructions with you at the end.
          Should RJR be punished for lying to people?  I
     mean, that's really essentially what this is about.
     What did this company do for so many years to
     children, including Mr. Haliburton when he was a 3771
     kid?
          1937, I showed you a lot of advertising, I
     showed you a lot of advertising back in the 1920s
     and '30s and '40s, '50s, just -- I showed a lot for
     a reason, and the reason was so you would get the
     idea of how much there was.  It wasn't -- it's not
     like today.  I mean, back then, about the only
     thing people had in terms of media were radio and
     newspapers and some magazines.  That was it, you
     know.  No iPads, no cellphones, no televisions.
     That's what they had.  And he grew up in rural
     Georgia, you know.
          So what -- what was going on was all this
     advertising was trying to tell people how good it
     is to smoke, that "Camels don't cut your wind."
     That this cigarette is less irritating because it
     has menthol in it.  That this cigarette is less
     irritating because it has some other chemical in
     it.  That's what the advertising was doing.  They
     were saying "More doctors smoke Camels than any
     other brand."  We'll get to that in just a second.
          So going all the way back, we had these laws
     in 13 or so states saying no cigarettes.  And what
     happened was cigarette companies worked hard, they
     got those things repealed through their mass 3772
     marketing and advertising, convincing people it was
     okay to smoke.
          Now, what do they do in 1906?  Here is the --
     something from the Florida Health Notes that's in
     evidence, and --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor,
     misstatement of that article.
          THE COURT:  Is this reading straight from the
     article, that clause right from the article?
          MR. ACOSTA:  No, that's just paraphrased.
          THE COURT:  That's fine.  I'll overrule the
     objection.  That's fine.
          MR. ACOSTA:  What that says basically is that
     cigarettes addict kids and are the worst form of
     addiction.  Well, the companies never said that.
     They didn't agree with that.  This got buried.
          But if you remember Dr. Teague, he did some
     research in 1953, and he found all these studies --
          Oops.  All of these studies there on the left
     there, going -- by 1923, cancer researchers had
     really discovered tobacco tar caused cancer.
     Cigarette companies didn't warn.  Reynolds didn't
     warn people.  They didn't say anything about that.
     They should have known that.  They're the expert.
     The smoker is not the expert.  The cigarette 3773
     company is the expert.
          What do they do?  1927, 1927, they say "School
     days are here.  That means big tobacco business for
     everybody."
          All of these documents we put on, just
     examples of the things they did.  This is just an
     example of their marketing to high school kids back
     in 1927.
          And this is the way they did it.  They had
     billions of advertisements every year.  I mean,
     they had football players, baseball players, pros,
     you know, the ones the kids looked up to.  Kids
     looked up to baseball players.  Kids looked up to
     professional athletes.  Little -- little girls
     looked up to glamorous movie stars.  That's what
     that was all about.  And it was all aimed at youth.
          It was all aimed at youth.  Hardly anybody
     starts smoking after they're 21 years old, hardly
     anybody.  It's all done before then.  You get
     hooked -- not everybody gets hooked, we know that.
     But some people get hooked so badly that they're
     unable to stop, and the companies knew that.
          This is what the advertising for cigarettes
     did.  That white line is cigarette sales.  It just
     kept going up and up and up, until around the 3774
     1980s, 19 -- late 1970s, somewhere in there, but
     for -- for kids, Dr. Proctor said it kept going up
     for youth.  Sales kept going up for youth until the
     '90s.
          In 1953, Reynolds knew smoking caused cancer.
     They knew it did.  It wasn't something that they
     were just guessing about.  They had this guy, a
     PhD, go out and do this research, and they knew
     that it caused cancer, and if you see that -- that
     top line there, number one, basically, that's the
     line where he says that cigarette smoking induces
     lung cancer.  Induces means cause.
          So instead of -- instead of saying, man, we've
     got a problem here, because our cigarettes may be
     causing this epidemic of lung cancer and other
     diseases, what should we do, well, instead of
     telling people the truth, they lied to them.  They
     flat out lied to them.
          That should be unacceptable in this country,
     and you have to do something about it.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor, improper
     argument.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. ACOSTA:  And that's what we're here for,
     to do something about it. 3775
          Mrs. Haliburton had the courage to come to
     court and do this.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, improper.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. ACOSTA:  They committed a conspiracy for
     fraud.  They lied about the danger.  They lied
     about the health problems.  And they lied about
     research.  There is hardly anything they told the
     truth about.  It was just a pack of lies, a
     cigarette pack of lies, that's what it was.
          Okay.  So I'm going to show you about a
     minute -- I have cut some of the clips that we
     showed you during the trial to only a minute or so,
     so it's not going to take as much time. SPEAKER:  What cigarette do you smoke, Doctor?
     More doctors smoke Camels than any other cigarette.
     Next time you buy cigarettes, be sure you call for
     Philip Morris.
          SINGER:  Don't miss the fun of smoking, don't
     miss the fun of smoking, it is a pleasure with Pall
     Mall.
          SPEAKER:  Try them, I think you'll dig them
     the most.
          FRED FLINTSTONE:  Winston is the one filtered 3776
     cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack.
          SPEAKER:  The Flintstones has been brought to
     you by Winston.
          SPEAKER:  Freshens your taste.  Smoke Salem
     cigarettes.  Salem is a pure modern filter.
          BANKER:  Would you like a Winston cigarette?
          SPEAKER:  The Beverly Hillbillies has been
     presented by Winston and we hope you will try
     Winston.
          SPEAKER:  After the lobster, after the corn,
     you know what tastes great?
          SINGER:  Yeah, me and my Winston, we've got a
     real good thing. ACOSTA:  So on television in the 1950s and
     1960s, this is when Mr. Haliburton, now, he started
     smoking in the early 1950s, he's starting at the
     time some of those ads started coming on television
     about the doctors, more doctors smoke Camels than
     any other brands, Camel was one of his brands.
          What they're doing is they're basically using
     these kinds of advertisements to make people think
     that it's safe to smoke.  They reassure them that
     it's safe to smoke.  You know, supposed to taste
     good like lobster or corn on the cob. 3777
          And many of those shows are seen by kids.  And
     I'm going to show you some documents in a minute.
     We -- we have a lot of documents in evidence that
     you get to take back with you.  There is no way for
     us to show you everything that is in every
     document.  But you can skim through them when you
     go back to deliberate, and you'll be amazed at the
     things that you find in these documents, some of
     the FTC reports.
          These Surgeon General's Reports are in
     evidence.  And there are certain pages, you'll find
     some stuff in there that is very interesting about
     what the Surgeon General says these companies did
     and how they fooled the public health officials in
     this country for so many years and how they did it.
     That's in those reports.
          This is another part of their lie, back in
     1955, this fellow, Clarence Cook Little. SPEAKER:  Dr. Little, have any cancer-causing
     agents been identified in cigarettes?
          DR. LITTLE:  No.
          SPEAKER:  Suppose the tremendous amount of
     research now going on were to reveal that there is
     a cancer-causing agent in cigarettes. 3778
          DR. LITTLE:  It would be made public
     immediately and then efforts would be taken to
     attempt to remove that substance or substances.
     Because we can't possibly eliminate an agent that
     hasn't yet been identified or the presence of which
     hasn't yet been proved. ACOSTA:  Reynolds had identified it in
     1954, a year before.  And their researcher, Teague,
     had identified a whole bunch of them in 1953.
          You know, the thing is, there were little
     anecdotal things stated here and there in
     newspapers and magazines.  Reynolds didn't admit
     it, that's what the secret was, is the companies
     that made the product are saying those other people
     are wrong, we're right.  We're right.  Smoke our
     products, it's okay.  It's okay.  And they make it
     look cool, they make it look terrific for young
     people to get started.  It's a social thing.  They
     made cigarettes socially acceptable.
          A person that smokes a cigarette is almost a
     walking advertisement for others, especially when
     you're young, when you're in high school.  And
     that's -- that's the way it gets started.  And they
     know that.  And they take advantage of that. 3779
     They're taking advantage of kids knowing that one
     out of two of them that keep smoking are going to
     die.
          And I'm not making the one out of two up,
     that's in these reports.  One out of two.
          This is from 1959.  Here, this scientist at
     Reynolds had proved that smoking caused cancer.  He
     even -- he talked about animal studies in this.
     That's in evidence.  But he -- he writes, he knew
     that they couldn't remove them.  He knew that they
     couldn't remove them.
          And they also knew that smokers were addicted
     because they required for their physiologic, not
     psychologic aspect, but their physiologic need for
     nicotine, that need is addiction.
          When you need a chemical and when you need a
     drug and it compels you to use it, it pulls you to
     it, that's addiction.  You have to pull yourself
     away from it to get away from it, and most people
     that smoke feel that pull.  A lot of people are
     able to overcome it, but as we saw in some of the
     documents, half or more are not able.  That's a lot
     of people that have -- that have died from
     cigarette smoking.
          Yeah, 60 million have quit.  How many of those 3780
     died?  One out of two?
          So this is another thing they did.  So they
     formed this Tobacco Institute in 1957 to take over
     because apparently, the Tobacco Industry Research
     Committee that they invented in 1954 as part of
     their Frank Statement just wasn't doing a good
     enough job fooling people, so they got the Tobacco
     Institute together to fool them some more.
          So they gather up all these newspaper
     articles, and there is a thick -- nice, thick
     little pile of them in evidence that you can flip
     through, and you'll see articles from all around
     the place that say the opposite of what some of the
     articles that the -- that the defendants put up and
     showed you from let's say the local paper here in
     West Palm Beach and The New York Times and some
     other papers.
          They put -- they put out the opposite.  And
     the reason they did it is to create in the minds of
     people a controversy about smoking.  They wanted --
     they wanted people to think, hey, it hasn't been
     proven, just keep smoking.  And, you know, by the
     way, we put filters on them.
          The filters are just put on to reassure
     people, they didn't make them any safer.  But 3781
     people didn't know that.  They thought it did.
     They thought -- if you look in these Surgeon
     General's Reports, you'll see that the filter had
     nothing to do with making the cigarette safer.  It
     didn't make it any safer.  That's what the Surgeon
     General says.
          And they've done a lot of research on it.
     You'll be amazed at all the information that's in
     there.
          There was some question about when he started
     smoking.  You know, we take the -- the medical
     record that's an objective record, it's not
     anything created after litigation began, it's not
     anything as a result of lawyer questions or
     anything like that.  This is in the record, it's
     been there since 1998.  And it said that he started
     smoking more than two packs a day of cigarettes for
     more than 40 years.  It's in this record from that
     doctor and it's in evidence.
          And the reason we do that is because when you
     take a history of somebody, sometimes they write 30
     years, sometimes they write 20 years, sometimes
     they write he's been a smoker for a long time.  But
     this doctor wouldn't have written that one if that
     isn't what he was told by Mr. Haliburton.  That's 3782
     where that comes from.  That's where it comes from.
          So when you back that off, he's 13 or 14,
     according to Dr. Feingold, because to get up to two
     packs a day, you don't -- you don't just do that
     overnight.  When you first smoke a cigarette, it
     tastes awful.  It makes you nauseous.  Makes you
     feel light-headed, dizzy.  Nobody, the first day
     they pick up a cigarette, can smoke a whole pack of
     cigarettes.  It can't be done.  Your body won't --
     won't allow it.  It rejects it.  It's the drug
     nicotine that changes that.  It changes it slowly,
     because your body develops tolerance to that drug.
     Now you can inhale all you want.  In fact, you've
     got to inhale.
          If you quit smoking for ten years, you go
     back, what happens, you just start smoking again
     like -- like it didn't -- you never missed it.
     That's because your brain has figured out how to
     deal with nicotine.  Because it needs it.
          Okay.  This is a follow-up to what Dr. Little
     said.  And after Reynolds is -- we've got about
     four or five of their papers in evidence from 1956
     through 1962, I believe, that show all -- some
     research they did indicating that they, in fact,
     thought smoking caused cancer. 3783
          And by the way, there is another paper, and
     Dr. Proctor testified about this, they had a
     visitor from across -- overseas come to the United
     States, talk to all the CEOs of the companies, what
     did the CEOs say?  Yeah, we think it does cause
     cancer.  Well, why didn't they tell people?
          There were 11 or so times where the cigarette
     company executive said, you know, "If we find out
     it really does cause cancer, we'll go out of
     business."  Well, they didn't.  If they had,
     Mr. Haliburton would still be here, so would
     millions of other people.
          This is not a trivial thing.  It's not a
     trivial thing.  It's important.  It's very
     important.  You can't let companies get away with
     doing stuff like this.  And we may be the only ones
     that can do something about it.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor, improper
     argument.
          THE COURT:  Sustained. strike that last
     comment.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Okay.
          (Video clip played as follows:) 3784
          SPEAKER:  This is CBS News Extra on smoking
     and health.
          HARRY REASONER:  Mr. Cullman is a third
     generation member of a company family.
          MR. CULLMAN:  There is very little evidence,
     if any, on the effect, if any, of filter
     cigarettes.  I think we need a little more
     research.  I'm convinced that eventually they will
     find some elements, through a filter that will
     eliminate the mysterious thing they are looking
     for.  I don't think the industry admits there are
     any bad elements.  If there are bad elements and if
     they are found, they will be removed.
          HARRY REASONER:  Among scientists one of the
     prime movers in the issue has been Dr. Cuyler
     Hammond.
          DR. HAMMOND:  From a practical standpoint it
     means a number of agencies, government agencies who
     had been delaying taking any sort of action until
     this report came out can now develop a real program
     to do something about it.  It can lend great
     impetus to the tobacco industry itself to intensify
     their research in order to try to develop a
     cigarette, which I hope can be developed, which is
     relatively safe. 3785
          SPEAKER:  Do you feel that the only practical
     solution is the development of a cigarette that is
     not harmful?
          DR. HAMMOND:  I have tremendous confidence in
     the ability of American scientists to solve almost
     any problem of a technical nature.
          HARRY REASONER:  Through the lifetimes of a
     lot of us, cigarettes have been an intimate and
     reassuring companion.  The familiar slogans, the
     familiar packages have been a part of our lives.
     It's like being told that an old friend has all
     along been betraying you.  In a case like that you
     give the old friend every possible chance before
     you finally decide to believe what you have been
     told, and maybe even then you give them a chance to
     reform. ACOSTA:  So what's going on there, Harry
     Reasoner is saying, hey, we have heard now from the
     Surgeon General that cigarette smoking is a cause
     of lung cancer and it's a cause of emphysema and
     COPD.  So what is he saying, he's saying, well,
     maybe we give the cigarette companies a chance to
     fix it.  We give them a chance to fix it.  That's
     what they wanted. 3786
          That's what Mr. Cullman on there was telling
     people, too.  He says, you know, we don't -- we
     don't -- for one thing, we don't agree with the
     Surgeon General, for another thing, we haven't
     found anything harmful in cigarette smoke, but if
     we find it, we'll remove it.
          That was a lie.  They knew it was in there,
     and they couldn't remove it.  And you'll see in one
     of these Surgeon General's Reports, if you look,
     the first part of this one has a discussion, this
     is 2014 Surgeon General's Report on smoking and
     health, there is a discussion about what the
     companies did and what people thought.  And there
     was a survey done in 1966, I think, HEW, and in it,
     most people, it says most people needed to hear
     from the company before they were going to believe
     that cigarette smoking was harmful.  It's in this
     report.
          They didn't hear from the company.  What
     instead they got was more advertising.  More
     marketing to kids.  And then they started
     manipulating the cigarette to make them more
     addictive, that's what they did.
          This is the Federal Trade Commission report to
     Congress in 1967.  What do they say?  That warning 3787
     label that was put on there was ineffective.  It
     was ineffective.  It was overcome by cigarette
     advertising.  And the ads targeted teens.  This is
     in the report.  It's in evidence.
          "The cigarette advertising denies health
     problems and overwhelms any concern that people
     have."  That's what was going on.
          "Due to ads, advertising, youngsters believe
     smoking is a socially-desirable activity."  That's
     what people thought in the 1960s, according to the
     Federal Trade Commission, which is the commission
     that sort of oversaw the advertising of all
     companies.
          "The ads," it says, "are a strong force in
     getting kids to stop smoking."  I didn't -- I guess
     there is a spelling error there.  But getting kids
     to start smoking.
          The cigarette ads prevent teens from making an
     informed choice.  You can't make an informed choice
     if you don't have all the information.  The
     cigarette companies are telling you it's safe.
          And they -- they -- they knew -- this is --
     this is like 15 years later, ten years later, 1981.
     This is a letter on R -- you can see the letterhead
     is R.J. Reynolds, and it's a letter indicating that 3788
     they knew that people were believing their
     advertising.  That people were believing it.
          And it lured many teenagers to smoke and die.
          And this is the sales graph that we showed
     you.  It worked.  Their lies worked.  They're
     selling more cigarettes.  They just kept selling
     more and more.  It worked.
          And then you saw this in 1968 about how there
     was a controversy. MR. WALLACE:  Good evening, I'm Mike Wallace
     the question of whether to smoke or not to smoke is
     one of the most hotly debated controversies in the
     country.
          SPEAKER:  From CBS News national smoking test.
          MR. WALLACE:  Smokers tend to believe
     statements which say the case is not proved.  The
     Tobacco Institute, an industry association, says
     there is no biological proof, either experimental
     or clinical, that smoking is the cause of diseases.
          MR. BENTI:  Next, breathing the polluted air
     in our major cities is more dangerous than smoking
     a pack of cigarettes a day.  The smokers tend to go
     along with the Tobacco Institute which says that
     certain chemicals which may be harmful are more 3789
     prevalent in some polluted air than in cigarette
     smoke.
          MR. WALLACE:  Next question 3, being 50 pounds
     overweight is more dangerous to health than smoking
     a pack of cigarettes a day, but the Tobacco
     Institute believes that obesity, not cigarettes is
     a major factor in heart disease.  It says several
     studies have not shown any association between
     smoking and heart disease.
          MR. BENTI:  Finally that you run a greater
     risk crossing busy streets every day than smoking a
     pack of cigarettes every day.  The Tobacco
     Institute says there just isn't any documentation
     available and they add until we know of any way in
     which cigarette smoking is, in fact, harmful to
     health, there is no way one can say this is
     anything more than just speculation. ACOSTA:  So if you are an addicted smoker,
     Mr. Haliburton had been smoking since early '50s,
     this is the late '60s, you know, does he see it?
     We don't know.  We don't know what he saw or didn't
     see.  But this is such a pervasive issue across the
     whole country, you couldn't walk around without
     seeing or hearing cigarette advertising back then, 3790
     without seeing other people smoking.  These --
     these Surgeon General's Reports that tell you that
     it took decades, decades for the public health
     community to turn that around, to turn it around.
     It was very difficult.
          Here is another one, very short. SPEAKER:  From CBS Washington, in color, Face
     The Nation, a spontaneous and unrehearsed interview
     with Joseph Cullman, III, and chairman of the
     executive committee of the Tobacco Institute.
          MR. CULLMAN:  I do talk to the question of
     whether or not cigarettes are hazardous.  We do not
     believe that cigarettes are hazardous.  We don't
     accept that.  And that this industry can face the
     future with confidence because when, as, and if,
     any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as
     being injurious to human health, we are confident
     that we can eliminate that ingredient. ACOSTA:  That's 1971.  That's a lie.  It's
     a lie to the whole country, including
     Mr. Haliburton.
          So when people have funny attitudes about
     smoking and -- they really didn't know what to 3791
     think, a lot of people.  Is the cigarette companies
     right?  Are these other people right, telling us
     that, you know, it's harmful, can cause cancer?
     They're saying it doesn't or they'll fix it, that
     they haven't found anything harmful in a cigarette.
          They've got to share this, at least, with the
     smoker.  That's what that is for.  That's what
     that's for.  They've got to at least do that.  But
     you should punish them for what they did, as a
     deterrent to others, that's what this is about.
          So here are some of their documents.  This is
     one by that Dr. Teague, that PhD that's in the
     research and development department, doing some
     planning for the company.  In the 1970s, "We must
     continue to get kids to smoke with youth brands."
     That's what he calls them in this memo.  "We must
     show kids how to get addicted to cigarettes."
     That's what that's saying right there.  He knew
     that they would need nicotine.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. ACOSTA:  That's addiction.
          MR. PERSONS:  That's --
          MR. ACOSTA:  That's argument.
          THE COURT:  No, I'm going to overrule the
     objection.  You may continue, Mr. Acosta. 3792
          MR. ACOSTA:  You know, he's saying that it is
     needed, that the nicotine is needed by the smoker
     once they learn to smoke.  How do we get more kids
     to learn to smoke.  They were trying to addict kids
     "We must appeal to the fragile, developing
     self-image of the young person."  This paragraph
     talks about how they are going to take advantage of
     them.
          You saw this during the presentation.  They
     start down at age 12.  And that's a graph at the
     top that shows the ages that people start smoking.
     And vast majority of them start before they're 18.
          And here is another one, this is called "The
     Crucial Role of Nicotine."  And up there, it says
     "Happily for the tobacco industry."  Happily.  It's
     happy for them because they make a lot of money
     doing this, but it isn't happy for the smoker that
     wants to stop smoking.  And they knew that most
     people did.
          And they played down the role of nicotine.
     And it isn't just Reynolds.  There is another
     document that's in evidence, just to show you,
     Brown & Williamson says the same thing.  They made
     Kools.  Now they're part of Reynolds, but back
     then, they were a separate company.  And Reynolds 3793
     is responsible for the companies it merged with.
          They put ammonia in there to freebase
     nicotine.  That's how they're making it more
     addictive.  If you read -- if you look at this
     book, it tells you that they were making cigarettes
     more addictive by putting ammonia in them.  If
     you -- if you -- if you write down -- I think it's
     page 33, any of the -- all through the first 35, 40
     pages of this book, it talks about that.  That's
     what they were doing, they were making it more
     addictive trying to get kids to smoke.
          This is more proof.  This is one of -- a
     Reynolds document.  They manipulate the nicotine to
     addict and increase sales.  They knew it did.  And
     they knew they couldn't take the bad stuff out.
     And they kept lying about it.
          They knew that freebase makes the nicotine
     absorb more quickly.
          And there is a graph that you saw from
     Dr. Benowitz.  And by the way, if you look -- and
     we didn't put these -- we put copies of these books
     in.  But if you look at the beginning of this one,
     Dr. Benowitz is one of the first names listed.
     He's the editor, senior editor of this book.  That
     shows you how quick the cigarette gets the nicotine 3794
     to the brain compared to other things.  And it's
     the speed that it does that that makes it so
     addictive.
          The Tobacco Research Industry Committee was a
     lie.  They did not do honest research.  This is
     their own document from 1978 where a bunch of their
     lawyers got together in New York, and they say it
     was a front, it was a shield to protect them and to
     help them win lawsuits.  That's what these
     companies did.
          And look -- look at -- this is just a document
     that shows how they knew that cigarettes --
     cigarette smoke and nicotine worked like cocaine
     and heroin.  They still deny that today.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustain. strike.
          THE COURT:  Sustain.
          MR. ACOSTA:  I think this doctor that was here
     yesterday said it didn't work that way.  The doctor
     they put on the stand.  But yet look back in 1978.
     And look at what the Surgeon General says about it,
     that cocaine and heroin do work the same way.
          And then he says we've got to hide it in it if
     it looks like it's going to hurt us from a legal 3795
     point of view.  They didn't want anybody to know it
     was addictive.  And that's because it impairs the
     choice that smokers make.  It makes it very
     difficult to get out of the trap that they're in by
     being addicted.  They know it affects choice.
          The Surgeon General said that it does in
     these -- in these two Surgeon General's Reports
     that are in evidence.  Says that it does.
          Their own documents say it does.
          And what are they doing back in 1969 with
     their legal department?  Their research department
     is saying we'll destroy any of the research reports
     that you want us to, for purposes of the lawsuit
     defense.  They didn't want anything to get out that
     would affect their sales and prevent them from
     addicting people like Andrew Haliburton and others
     and keeping them smoking for as long as they could.
     They were slaughtering Americans and they didn't
     care.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PERSONS:  Inflammatory, improper, move to
     strike.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. ACOSTA:  This is one of the ways they did 3796
     it.
          1981, another FTC report to the Congress, it's
     a staff committee report.  $1 billion was spent on
     cigarette advertising in 1980.  A billion dollars
     in 1980.  "Unlike the liquor industry, cigarette
     manufacturers have never discouraged the use of
     cigarettes by young people."  It's just the
     opposite.  It continues to attempt to assure the
     public that smoking is safe.  That's what this
     says.
          Half of all the highway billboards -- there
     used to be billboards everywhere that had cigarette
     ads on them.  Half.  And they're all -- they're all
     seen by kids.
          1980, Reynolds was the largest in magazines.
          60 percent of smokers did not know cigarettes
     were the major cause of lung cancer in 1980.
          The majority of people did not think smoking
     was an addiction.
          1981, millions of Americans did not believe
     cigarettes caused lung cancer.
          Philip Morris said that all those figures were
     accurate.
          Your DNA explains why some people can't quit
     smoking.  Some people have genetic set of genes 3797
     that makes it really hard for them to stop.  The
     problem is, you don't know if you have it or not.
     No way to find -- and back then, they didn't have
     any kind of DNA test.
          RJR knew most smokers wanted to quit.  This is
     the Nordine Study.  They knew most smokers wanted
     to quit, and knew most smokers could not quit.
     That is their words, not our words.
          And this is -- this is the graph that shows 70
     percent want to quit.  He said 80 -- I think he
     said 80 percent, but each year, 17 million try to
     quit, only 3 percent succeed.  When you add up 3
     percent a year for many years, you get 60 million
     people.  That's how that works.
          And, of course, the people keep trying,
     eventually about half of all smokers do quit, they
     eventually keep -- keep trying and trying.
          If a smoker could find a way to quit smoking,
     RJR might have to go out of business.  He says we
     can't be comfortable selling cigarettes to
     customers that don't want to smoke them.  So what
     are we going to do about it?  One of the things
     that they could do about it was to figure out ways
     to stop smokers from quitting.  That was one of
     their responses. 3798
          They knew that hundreds of thousands of
     addicted smokers were dying each year, and they
     want -- but they wanted to sell cigarettes for as
     long as they could.  They knew that their day would
     come.  Maybe this is it.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained. strike.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PERSONS:  And I -- well, may I approach?
          THE COURT:  Sure, of course.  Of course,
     Mr. Persons. before the
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
          MR. PERSONS:  That kind of argument has no
     place in a courtroom.  It's highly inflammatory, an
     appeal to prejudice, and I move for a mistrial.  I
     don't know that any instruction would cure that
     type of inflammatory, improper, highly-prejudicial
     argument.
          THE COURT:  Response?
          MR. ACOSTA:  I don't think it's inflammatory
     at all.  They -- they knew that this would catch up
     to them, and it has.  This is why we're here.  I
     don't see anything wrong with that argument at all. 3799
     I think it's a perfectly fair argument to make.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  I'm sustaining the
     objection, I'm going to deny the motion for
     mistrial, and I'm going to tell the jury just to
     disregard the last sentence.  It was fine up to
     they wanted to sell cigarettes as long as they
     could.  Okay.  All right? in open
court before the Court and jury.)
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, defendant's
     objection was sustained.  For the record, please
     disregard the last statement.
          You may continue, Mr. Acosta.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Okay, this is what they're telling Congress in
     1978. SPEAKER:  Do you agree that people are dying
     prematurely as a result of smoking cigarettes?
          SPEAKER:  No, sir, I do not.
          MS. BROWDER:  Cigarette smoking, we just don't
     know.
          SPEAKER:  I don't know.
          MS. BROWDER:  Don't know what causes the
     elements that have been attributed to cigarette 3800
     smoking.
          SPEAKER:  I am saying that the science to date
     and over a hundred million dollars of our industry
     indicates that there is no causal link.
          MR. WYDEN:  I heard virtually all of you touch
     on it and just yes or no, do you believe nicotine
     is not addictive?
          (Video clip paused.)
          MR. ACOSTA:  This is 1994.
          (Video clip resumed.)
          MR CAMPBELL:  I believe nicotine is not
     addictive, yes.
          MR. WYDEN:  Mr. Johnston?
          MR. JAMES JOHNSTON:  Congressman, cigarettes
     and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic
     definitions of addiction.  There is no
     intoxication.
          MR. WYDEN:  We'll take that as a no.  And
     again, time is short.  If you could just -- I think
     each of you believe nicotine is not addictive and
     we just would like to have this for the record.
          MR. TADDEO:  I don't believe that nicotine or
     our products are addictive.
          MR. TISCH:  I believe nicotine is not
     addictive. 3801
          MR. HORRIGAN:  I believe that nicotine is not
     addictive.
          MR. SANDEFUR:  I believe that nicotine is not
     addictive.
          MR. DONALD JOHNSTON:  And I too believe that
     nicotine is not addictive. ACOSTA:  They were all lying, every one of
     them.  They're under oath and they're lying to
     Congress, 1994.
          This is Dr. Feingold, a couple pictures of him
     in his office looking at CT scans and through his
     microscope.
          He talked about -- in fact, this is from
     Dr. Benowitz's -- Dr. Benowitz's deposition, it's
     one of the exhibits, but Dr. Feingold talked about
     the same thing.  The Surgeon General pronounced
     nicotine addictive more than 30 years after
     Reynolds knew it was.  Took a long time for public
     health to catch up.  It would have caught up a lot
     sooner had the cigarette companies told the truth.
          I put this up there just so you can see,
     nicotine has plusses all the way down.  Caffeine
     over on the far right doesn't, caffeine is not
     addictive like nicotine.  Nicotine is addictive 3802
     like heroin and cocaine.
          He showed you this graph, how the receptors
     are.  And talk about proof that nicotine causes you
     to have receptors that light up with nicotine, this
     is it.
          This is the cycle of addiction that he talked
     about, that a smoker goes through every day, every
     cigarette.
          These are all of the hormones that are
     released when a smoker smokes.  The problem is when
     you don't have a cigarette, your brain shuts down,
     it doesn't release the hormones that it normally
     releases, so the smoker doesn't feel right.
          So to get these going again, you've got to
     smoke.
          Mr. Haliburton had to do it for over six hours
     a day straight in time -- in terms of time.  He
     would -- at times, he would chain smoke.  You heard
     all that evidence.  You know, 40 cigarettes a day
     or more?  That's every few minutes you're smoking a
     cigarette.
          Here is a comparison of the DSM.  Dr. Feingold
     talked about that.  Here is the Fagerstrm test
     that he applied.
          He did apply the DSM, by the way.  I mean, 3803
     that's why I put that up there to make sure that
     that didn't go unsaid.  Dr. Feingold applied it as
     well.  He found him to be severely addicted.
          Showed you this picture of the lungs.  And
     look at the heart, you know, the -- poor
     Mr. Haliburton's heart, got what's called cor
     pulmonale, where the right ventricle swells up
     because it can't pump the blood through the lungs
     due to the damage to the lungs that's caused by
     cigarette smoking.  He had coronary artery disease
     caused by smoking.
          There is a pulmonary function test he showed
     you.  He had 6 million doses of nicotine.  Now, how
     does a person who takes 6 million doses of
     nicotine, how is it that they are not addicted to
     nicotine?  How can that be -- how is that possible?
     Somebody that says they can't quit, they try to
     quit, can't do it.
          He used the Heaviness of Smoking Index.
          We saw the death certificate.  He had cardiac
     arrest.  His heart stopped.  Lungs stopped working
     due to COPD.
          This is that Surgeon General's Report I was
     telling you about.  I'm not going to take the time
     to read to you from it right now, but there is a 3804
     lot of valuable information in it.
          Now, I want to talk to you for a second about
     Engle class members, because Engle class members
     are people who on or before November 21st, 1996,
     suffered or died from a disease or medical
     condition legally caused by an addiction to smoking
     cigarettes containing nicotine.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor,
     misstatement.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Counsel. COURT:  State your objection on the
     record, Mr. Persons.
          MR. PERSONS:  It's a misstatement of the Engle
     finding, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Response?
          MR. ACOSTA:  I don't think it is.  I think I
     took it -- I took it from jury instructions I've
     used before.  That's fine.
          THE COURT:  What's missing?
          MR. GUEST:  There is no clear indication that
     the smoker has to be addicted, instead it just
     seems to suggest that --
          THE COURT:  I can't see it. 3805
          MR. ACOSTA:  It says, "Class members are
     addicted smokers who on or before November 21st,
     1996, suffered or died from a disease or medical
     condition legally caused by an addiction to smoking
     cigarettes containing nicotine."
          THE COURT:  Where does it say addicted smokers
     in the first sentence?
          MR. ACOSTA:  It's in the bottom sentence.
          THE COURT:  No, no, but in the first sentence.
          MR. GUEST:  That's the problem.
          THE COURT:  That's the problem.  Addicted,
     they have to be addict -- addicted -- has to be
     addicted to smoking cigarettes, but they also have
     to be addicted cigarette smokers.  So just --
          MR. ACOSTA:  No, they don't.  That's an
     accurate statement of what class membership is,
     Judge.
          MR. GUEST:  It presupposes addiction just
     because they smoke cigarettes.  It does not say
     that they are addicted and that's one of the
     elements of class membership.
          THE COURT:  All you need to do is just modify
     the first part with addicted cigarette smokers,
     that's all.  Addicted cigarette smokers.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Okay.  All right. 3806
          THE COURT:  Okay, that's all.  Just a slight
     modification. in open
court before the Court and jury.)
          THE COURT:  All right, that last objection
     sustained for the record.
          MR. ACOSTA:  I have to put it in there at the
     top, class members are addicted cigarette smokers
     who on or behalf of -- or who on or before November
     21st, 1996, suffered or died from a disease or
     medical condition legally caused by an addiction to
     smoking cigarettes containing nicotine.
          Smokers would only be -- have a disease or
     medical condition caused by an addiction if they
     are addicted smokers.  So that's what that says.
     And that's what happened to Mr. Haliburton.  He was
     an addicted smoker who got a medical condition
     before November 21st, 1996, that was caused by his
     addiction.  Addiction causes people to smoke more.
     That's what addiction is.  You -- people that are
     addicted to things enjoy it.  Enjoyment and
     addiction are the same thing.  That's what it is.
     You don't get addicted to things you don't enjoy,
     that you don't like.  The problem is is that it
     makes you like it so much that you can't stop 3807
     liking it.  That's the problem.
          Dr. Feingold signed this board, which I had up
     here somewhere.
          MR. CRICKENBERGER:  Howard.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Acosta.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Oh, here we go.
          These are the class membership requirements.
     Did Andrew Haliburton have COPD/chronic obstructive
     pulmonary disease, it's the same thing, caused by
     smoking?  Yes.
          Was Andrew Haliburton addicted to nicotine?
     Yes.
          Was Andrew Haliburton's addiction to
     cigarettes containing nicotine a medical cause of
     his COPD?  Yes.
          Was Andrew Haliburton's addiction to
     cigarettes containing nicotine a medical cause of
     his death?  Yes.
          That makes him a class member.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. ACOSTA:  That makes him a class member.
          MR. PERSONS:  Same objection.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. ACOSTA:  That makes him a class member. 3808
          MR. PERSONS:  Same objection.
          MR. ACOSTA:  These are the findings that
     apply.  "Smoking cigarettes caused aortic aneurysm,
     bladder cancer, cerebral vascular disease, cervical
     cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, COPD
     slash emphysema, coronary heart disease, esophageal
     cancer, kidney cancer."  All these other diseases
     are all caused by smoking.
          The defendants concealed or omitted
     material -- this is one of the core findings that
     apply if he's a class member, so you'll know what
     we're talking about here.  You have to accept these
     as true.  They've been established in this case.
     Okay?
          THE CLERK:  Counsellor, you have used one
     hour.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Thank you.
          "The defendants concealed or omitted material
     information not otherwise known or available,
     knowing that the material was false or misleading,
     or failed to disclose a material fact concerning
     the health effects or addictive nature of smoking
     cigarettes or both."  Now, this says that they
     failed to disclose information that -- it's the
     omission that we're -- and concealment that we're 3809
     really talking about that was not otherwise known
     or available.  They concealed -- they concealed
     stuff that he couldn't have known, that he could
     not have known.  That's what this is about.  He
     could not have known they were putting ammonia in
     the cigarette to freebase the nicotine to make it
     more addictive while he's trying to stop, or while
     he's smoking, finds that he's smoking more and more
     and more, when he goes from one pack a day to three
     or four packs a day.
          Defendants agreed to conceal or omit
     information regarding the health effects with the
     intention that smokers and the public would rely on
     it.  They intended for people to continue to buy
     their cigarettes as a result of not telling them
     the truth.  Mr. Haliburton kept buying their
     cigarettes.  And he kept buying them after 1982,
     which is a date that means something.
          The cigarette companies placed cigarettes on
     the market that were defective and unreasonably
     dangerous.  Well, people might have heard or -- or
     actually thought, well, they're dangerous.  But if
     you are addicted to it, what do you do?  But he
     wouldn't have known they're unreasonably dangerous.
     Didn't say that.  That's the Engle finding. 3810
     They're unreasonably dangerous.  They're not just
     dangerous, they're so dangerous, it's unreasonable.
     That's what that means.  So dangerous it's
     unreasonable to have that product on the market.
     That you have to accept as established in the case.
     That's what was found.
          That's what these books say.
          All of the cigarette companies, including
     Reynolds, were negligent.
          480,000 Americans die prematurely.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. ACOSTA:  That's in these books.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Counsel, sidebar. COURT:  The Surgeon General's were in but
     they're in for notice, so if you want to use that
     for notice purposes.
          MR. ACOSTA:  It's notice, but it was also said
     by Dr. Proctor, and Dr. Feingold said it also.
          THE COURT:  I don't have an issue with that.
     But just don't say it's from the Surgeon General's.
     Because it's -- they're in for notice.  Okay?
          MR. ACOSTA:  Okay. 3811 ACOSTA:  So this is what they look like up
     close.
          Now, think about this.  Reynolds had choices,
     too.  They had choices.  It's not just a smoker
     that may have a choice.  Reynolds had a choice.
     They chose to deny the truth.  They chose to deny
     the truth about lung cancer and addiction.  They
     chose to manipulate the nicotine.  They chose to
     use ammonia.  They chose to commit negligent
     conduct.  They chose to make cigarettes not just
     dangerous cigarettes, but they chose to make them
     unreasonably dangerous.  They chose to falsely tell
     smokers they would cure any hazard which their
     research revealed, which they never did.  They
     chose to fraudulently conceal material information.
          They knew that smokers didn't have a free
     choice about smoking.  "We can't defend continued
     smoking as free choice if the person was addicted."
     That's from 1980.  That's a Tobacco Institute
     document.  It's in evidence.
          These are letters to kids at school.  This one
     on the left is in 1963.  The one -- there is
     another one on the right -- I think I got it wrong 3812
     there.  But there is another one that's in evidence
     that is the form letter for children.
          Then we have one from 1990, the 1990 one says
     basically we haven't been able to determine that
     cigarettes cause any disease.  Please tell your
     students.  That's what they're doing in 1990.
          They never told Mr. Haliburton the truth.
          We saw that.
          I'm almost done.  I want to talk to you just
     for a second about the verdict form.
          Can we put that up?
          And while he's doing that, I'll tell you a
     little bit about the instructions, because some of
     these instructions are a little complicated.  There
     is an instruction that talks about what legal cause
     is.  And there is two instructions on that.  And
     the second one is the one that we put our trust in.
     The second one says that a --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor, that's
     improper.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. ACOSTA:  -- that a -- strike.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. ACOSTA:  The second one says that a legal 3813 cause can be a substantial contributing cause.  In
     other words, you can have something that is a
     substantial contributing cause be a legal cause.
     So if addiction was a substantial contributing
     cause, then it's a legal cause.
          It can be a cause with other things.  It
     doesn't have to be the only cause.  It can be one
     of many causes, as long as it is a substantial
     contributing cause, then it is a legal cause.
          Okay.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection to that.  That's a
     misstatement of the instruction.
          THE COURT:  Go from the instruction, so
     sustain.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Okay, I don't think that's a
     misstatement of the law, Your Honor.  Sorry.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection to the commentary.
          THE COURT:  Just read from the -- the
     instructions are what count.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Okay.
          "Was Andrew Haliburton addicted to cigarettes
     containing nicotine, and if so, was his addiction
     to nicotine a legal cause?"  So we ask that you
     check yes.
          The second question -- if you check no on the 29
December 18, 2014

     first question, then you've decided that Reynolds
     wins the case and you go home.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Well, Judge, I think that when
     your verdict is for the defendant, they win the
     case.
          MR. PERSONS:  It's the way it was stated.
          THE COURT:  Just rephrase.  Sustained.
          MR. ACOSTA:  "Did Mr. Haliburton know, or
     should he have known in the exercise of reasonable
     care, before May 5th, 1990, that he had
     emphysema/COPD?"  Well, we know there is no
     evidence that he knew he had COPD before 1990.
     None.  That should be marked no.
          Then the next -- next question, please.
          The first question has to do with whether he
     relied.  The second, number 4 there, has to do with
     conspiracy and whether he relied on the omissions
     that they made.  And I'm suggesting to you that
     every smoker relied on what they had heard over the
     years about smoking.  Doesn't have to be a direct
     statement to them for them to rely on it.  Plus we
     know that he continued to buy cigarettes.  That is
     reliance. 3815
          Please state the percentage of any negligence
     that was a legal cause.  You will fill in those
     percentages.
          Then we have damages down there, the next --
     if we keep going down, the total amount of damages.
     There is a line there with a dollar sign.  Mr. Gary
     is going to talk to you about the damages.
          And let's go to the last question.
          And the last question is decide whether or not
     punitive damages are warranted.  If you say yes,
     we'll come back for a very, very brief, short bit
     of evidence, and then you'll decide how much, if
     any, to award in punitive damages.
          At this point, I'm going to stop.  I'm going
     to ask Mr. Gary to talk to you about some of the
     other issues that I didn't -- I didn't cover and
     damages in the case.  And I thank you very much for
     your -- your attention.  Thanks.


          MR. GARY:  Good morning.  Let me just take a
     moment, members of the jury, to say thank you for
     your service.  We don't take it lightly.  This
     ain't a contest, it's about justice.  And the only
     way that lady, who has been waiting for a lot of
     years just to get justice, and honorably, who
     walked into this courtroom and said my husband is
     somewhat to blame.  That's honor.  You don't even
     have to figure that out.  She took the oath and she
     told the truth.
          Members of the jury, we thank you and I think
     I speak on behalf of everybody here, because we
     watched you.
          And this is not only a day of justice being
     rendered for Ms. Haliburton, but this is -- this
     trial has been a good thing.  I've watched you-all. 3818
     You've made friendships that's going to last
     forever.  You made connections that will last
     forever, because you have been here.  And you've
     been here for a lot of days now.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection.  It's one thing to
     say thank you, it's --
          THE COURT:  Okay.  I'm going to overrule.  You
     can continue, Mr. Gary.
          MR. GARY:  Thank you.
          You been here for a lot of days.  And not one
     time have you failed to answer the bell.  So on
     behalf of everybody here, and surely on behalf of
     our client, Ms. Haliburton, we want to say thank
     you.
          Members of the jury, you know, she said -- she
     didn't understand, she doesn't understand the legal
     system, she said I want to say something to --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor, he's
     testifying.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Just rephrase how
     you're saying it.
          MR. GARY:  She wanted to say thank you, and I
     told her she couldn't.  But you just need to know
     she said it.  That's what she said.
          Now, members of the jury, nothing you will do 3819
     in this trial will bring back the millions of
     people --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor, it's
     improper.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Just say in terms of
     the death, don't say bring back.  Just in terms of
     the way it was phrased, Mr. Gary, that's all.
          MR. GARY:  Okay.  In terms of your service,
     what you going to do in this case is render a
     verdict, but nothing else beyond that, because you
     can't bring back, a verdict can't bring back, those
     who died because of their lies.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.  May we
     approach?
          THE COURT:  Of course.  Counsel, sidebar,
     please. at the
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, the last 3824
     objection was sustained for the record as well.
          MR. GARY:  Please the Court?
          THE COURT:  Yes, thank you.
          MR. GARY:  Ladies and gentlemen, what I'm
     saying is that the defendants, not the lawyers, and
     I want to make that clear, the defendants,
     Reynolds, who lied and lied and lied and lied to
     the American people about their product, Reynolds
     knew, members of the jury, that they had a product
     that they were killing people.
          This is no play matter.  And guess what.
     Rather than them living up to what they said, they
     said that if we find something in our product
     that's not right, we'll take it out, and they lied,
     and you know they lied.  There is no question about
     it.
          The defendants, not the lawyers, but the
     Defendant Reynolds in this case, they've been all
     about money, billions and billions of dollars on
     the backs --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, misstates the
     evidence.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Rephrase that last --
     just that last comment.
          MR. GARY:  They've been all about the dollar, 3825 the almighty dollar.  And they talked about it
     after the -- after they met in New York.  And some
     of their workers were interviewed.  And -- and I'm
     going to show you the board in a minute, but from
     one of their documents, they said that, boy, we
     can't afford to lose any smokers.  If one -- we
     lose one smoker per day, if everybody stopped
     smoking just one cigarette per day, that's 40
     million -- 40 billion.
          What they've done, these defendants, these
     tobacco people, is not right.  Their negligence,
     and when I say "they", I'm talking about -- please
     know I'm talking about Reynolds, that's who I'm
     talking about, whoever they are over there, they
     lied, members of the jury, and you know they've
     lied.  And we've proven this case.
          And we think the damages in this case, yes, I
     want you to look at it, try to be clear about it,
     for taking this woman's husband of 40-plus years.
     One story, one mistruth after another, on and on
     and on.  Give him a chance to live.  Tell him the
     truth.  And then if he makes that decision, that's
     fine.  But members of the jury, way back in 1927,
     and I'm going to show you the board in a minute,
     they were lying then.  It was September.  You 29
December 18, 2014

     remember the board.  September.  They're licking
     their chops.  School is about to start.  And they
     sent out an all-point bulletin, go get the kids.
     That's what Reynolds did.  Go and get the kids.  Go
     to the schools.  Go to the park.  Go to the
     playground.  Just get them.
          Members of the jury, this is candy cigarettes.
     They lied to our children.  Our children wrote them
     a letter --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Need to come sidebar, Mr. Persons?
          MR. PERSONS:  Yes, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Certainly. COURT:  Yes.
          MR. PERSONS:  "Lying to our children" is a
     violation of the Golden Rule.  It -- when you say
     "our children," you are implying that these are the
     children of members of the jury, children of the
     community.  This is tantamount to a conscience of
     community kind of argument which is clearly,
     clearly impermissible.
          They can say that they lied to children, but
     then the reference to "our children" is highly, 3827 highly improper and prejudicial.
          THE COURT:  So you want to say they lied to
     children since the 1920s, since 1927?
          MR. PERSONS:  Right.
          MR. ACOSTA:  But I wouldn't think that's
     objectionable.  It's okay to say our children.  He
     didn't connect them to the jury's children.  They
     may not have any children.
          THE COURT:  Well, you know we know they do
     because of Christmas pageants, so.
          MR. ACOSTA:  But I don't think that
     was intentional.
          THE COURT:  Just so there's no -- just so we
     don't cross any -- just say "the children since
     1927".
          MR. GUEST:  I have another objection.
          THE COURT:  Yes.
          MR. GUEST:  I notice one of Mr. Gary's boards
     that the jury can see right now has a picture of
     Mr. Persons on it.  I don't know what is going on
     with that, but I want that removed from the jury's
     presence.
          MR. GARY:  Well, I'm going to put it up.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Mr. Persons' picture?
          MR. GARY:  His picture, what he said. 29
December 18, 2014

          MR. PERSONS:  You can't do that.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  That's a demonstrative aid.
          THE COURT:  As long as you don't say anything
     negative about what Mr. Persons did.
          MR. GARY:  I'm not going to say anything --
     I'm showing them what he said.
          THE COURT:  Just what he said during
     opening -- probably what you said during opening.
     It's probably what you said during jury selection.
          MR. GARY:  It is.
          THE COURT:  I'll allow it, but just caution
     you about that. in open
court before the Court and jury.)
          THE COURT:  All right, the last objection was
     sustained for the record.
          MR. GARY:  Candy cigarettes.  Why are they
     making candy cigarettes?  Why?  They are making
     candy cigarettes, members of the jury, because they
     referred to it as children in training become
     customers.  Start them -- start -- go after them
     early.
          Same color, same pack, same everything.
     That's what they were doing, members of the jury,
     going after our children. 3829
          And let me just stop for a moment to show you
     a clip that I think is really interesting and will
     shed some light on what this whole case is about.
          Would you play, Chris, please.
          (Video deposition of Neal Benowitz, MD, played
as follows:)
     A.   Nicotine causes more deaths than all of the
drugs of abuse combined by a long shot.  Youths start
smoking early by age 14 or 15.
BY MR. UITERWYK:
     Q.   Did you make a determination whether or not
youth are informed smokers?
     A.   They are not.
     Q.   Why?
     A.   Because I think most know that smoking is bad,
but they don't understand the magnitude of risk so they
underestimate the force of addiction.  Adolescent brain
is not fully developed, it's more vulnerable to
permanent changes from drugs, including nicotine.  The
earlier you start, the harder it is to quit.  They think
that they're immune, but, in fact, by the time they are
ready to quit, they are addicted and they can't quit.
     Q.   Did tobacco companies inform the public in any
way that people would underestimate the threat of
addiction? 3830
     A.   No.
     Q.   Did the tobacco companies publish the findings
that you-all had in 1994?
     A.   No.
     Q.   Are you aware of anything the tobacco
companies did to disclose this?
     A.   No.  While most smokers would like to quit,
they have great difficulty quitting.
     Q.   Why is that?
     A.   Because they are addicted to nicotine.  It's
difficult to stop.  It also requires multiple attempts.
Some people, it might take years, some people never.
     Q.   Does the level of addiction affect the loss of
control of drug use?
     A.   Yes.  If you are addicted to nicotine, you may
say I shouldn't smoke, but if you are compelled because
nicotine has an effect, you have an intense craving for
that cigarette.
     Q.   When people start to smoke, do they realize
more likely than not they are going to develop
addiction?
     A.   No.  People don't smoke cigarettes without
nicotine.  They smoke as a way to get nicotine.  And so
if you took nicotine out of cigarettes, people would
smoke none or smoke very few. 3831
     Q.   Did smokers in the '50s and '60s make an
informed choice to smoke cigarettes?
     A.   I do not believe so.
     Q.   So, Dr. Benowitz, ultimately, does the
cigarette smoker, with addiction to smoking cigarettes
that contain nicotine cause his illness?
     A.   Absolutely.
     Q.   Is the cigarette the quickest means of putting
nicotine in the body?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   A person who smokes ten cigarettes a day or
more for ten years goes through that nicotine addiction?
     A.   Yes.  Many people who, after not having had a
cigarette for six months or a year or ten years, and a
week later are smoking a pack a day again.  Nicotine
causes addiction.
     Q.   Does he have a free choice?
     A.   Nicotine addiction undermines free choice.
     Q.   Does their addiction to cigarettes cause their
diseases, such as COPD, et cetera?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   Did you determine whether or not for many
years, defendants knew that nicotine was addictive and
that nicotine is the reason that people smoked?
     A.   Yes. 3832
     Q.   Did they publish this information to the
public?
     A.   No.
     Q.   "The Nature of the Tobacco Business and the
Crucial Role of Nicotine Therein," RJR document from
Mr. Teague.
     A.   "We have deliberately played down the role of
nicotine."
     Q.   I want you to read the last paragraph of
Exhibit 2015?
     A.   "I am told that the entire matter of addiction
is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can
have.  We can't defend continued smoking as free choice
if the person was addicted."
     Q.   Some people have quit in the morning and by
the time the afternoon comes on, they can't take it
anymore?
     A.   Right.  Some people can't last even 24 hours.
Smoking is harder to quit than alcohol or heroin or
cocaine use.
          (Video deposition concluded.) there is no
     question Dr. Proctor told you that nicotine is
     dangerous.  It's killing people.  It's killing
     people. 3833
          The sad part about all of this, members of the
     jury, is from New York, when they were in hot
     water, their sales were going down, they weren't
     making as much money, they decided to concoct a lie
     to the American people, to fool them, sucker punch
     them to keep buying their cigarettes.  Why would
     you lie to someone on something that is detrimental
     as this.
          Members of the jury, look, this is a -- this
     is a Supreme Court finding.  R.J. Reynolds --
          MR. PERSONS:  Your Honor, may we approach?
          THE COURT:  Okay, Mr. Persons. before the
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
          MR. PERSONS:  I want to show you these.
          THE COURT:  Okay, let me take a look.  Yes?
          MR. PERSONS:  I object to this.  For one
     thing, this was during jury selection.  This is not
     in evidence.
          THE COURT:  Okay.
          MR. GARY:  I admit, it's argument, Your Honor.
          MR. PERSONS:  Yeah, but.
          MR. GARY:  This is argument.  I should have a
     right to say what he said.
          THE COURT:  Okay, but -- 3834
          MR. GARY:  And it's exactly what he said.
          THE COURT:  You can do that, but you can
     indicate it's not evidence.
          MR. GARY:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  And it is not evidence for you to
     consider.
          MR. GUEST:  Why should he show it, Your Honor?
     It was during jury selection.
          THE COURT:  I'm going to allow you to do it,
     but you have to caution the jury this is not
     evidence.
          MR. GARY:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  Okay?  And again just be very
     careful about any disparagement of defense counsel.
          MR. PERSONS:  Just for the record --
          THE COURT:  I know you are objecting.
          MR. PERSONS:  Okay.  All right. GARY:  Members of the jury, Engle
     findings, if you determine that Mr. Haliburton met
     all the requirements of the Engle class, then our
     judge, Judge Sasser told you, she read the
     instructions to you, did anybody maybe could have,
     should have that, this is the law, this is the law. 3835
     And I remember when you-all raised your hands and
     you took the oath and you said that it meant
     something to you.  You -- you -- that your oath to
     tell us -- or give us true answers, you gave us
     true, and we are okay, we are happy with them.  But
     Reynolds raised their right hand, even before
     Congress, under oath, and they lied.  They lied --
     would they lie about something that's nonchalant?
     No, they lied about something that's killing
     people.  It's killing people.
          The buck stops with you.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained. R.J. Reynolds
     and others, the whole group of them concealed or
     omitted material information not otherwise known
     or -- it wasn't even available to laypeople, to
     common people.  If it had been, you would say,
     yeah, you are right, you've made your choice, you
     do it.  But you can't lie to people about what's in
     your product.  And then you blame them for
     believing your lie.
          They were spending billions of dollars
     advertising, every time something good came out
     about don't smoke, don't smoke, you know what they 3836
     did?  Override it.  They suppress it.  See, they --
     they -- in the presentation of their case, they
     showed you those little newspaper clips, you know,
     Reader's Digest and -- that's giving a story once a
     year maybe.  But they didn't tell you that.
          They were spending billions and billions of
     dollars to offset all of that, people like
     Mr. Haliburton, you know, overwhelmed, on
     television, on TV, where you didn't prove that he
     watched TV.  Come on, please.  You know better than
     that.  TV is in your home, three televisions in the
     house, you are going to see that John Wayne was his
     favorite hero.  Died from smoking.  Sammy Davis,
     Jr., died from smoking.  These young people looked
     up to the ball players.  They looked up to the
     movie stars, young men and women.  They looked up
     to them.  And they just lied and lied and lied to
     them, members of the jury.
          Don't take my word.  This is Supreme Court
     ratification here.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PERSONS:  Misstatement of the law, I ask
     that that be stricken.
          THE COURT:  Sustained. 3837      MR. GARY:  Members of the jury, what does it
     say?  Knowing that the material was what?  False.
     Misleading.  Failed to disclose.  Material fact
     concerning not just anything, but the health
     effects of addictive nature of smoking cigarettes.
          Our cigarettes are great, they don't hurt
     anybody, they don't kill anybody, that's what they
     were saying.  That's what they were saying.
          And members of the jury, this was said, no
     offense to Mr. Persons, good lawyer.  Good lawyer.
     But he just told you, he was telling you the
     truth --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained, and that was during
     jury selection, not evidence.
          MR. GARY:  During jury selection, it's not
     evidence.  I want to make that clear.  It's not
     evidence.
          MR. PERSONS:  For a curative.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Ladies and gentlemen,
     that is not evidence.  What's stated in jury
     selection is not evidence.  What's stated in
     opening statements is not evidence.
          MR. GARY:  Okay.  May I --
          THE COURT:  Of course. 29
December 18, 2014

          MR. GARY:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          It's not evidence.  It's not evidence.  But
     that's just what he said.  I read it, "I want you
     to think about something for a minute.  Even though
     my client sells cigarettes, a legal product, it's a
     dangerous product, it's a product that can," what?
     "Kill people."
          "I want to know, how many of you would say
     that the nature of the tobacco business, large
     company making and selling dangerous and addictive
     product that can kill for profit, does it rub you
     the wrong way?"
          THE COURT:  Again, ladies and gentlemen,
     that's not evidence in this case, that was during
     jury selection.
          MR. GARY:  Right.  Well, and I'll echo it,
     that wasn't evidence, that was just during jury
     selection.  You-all remember that, during jury
     selection.
          Now, members of the jury, we've proven our
     case.  There is no question about that.  We have
     proven our case that the defendant, Reynolds
     Tobacco Company, among others, created a conspiracy
     that they knew if people believed them, that it was
     going to kill people.  And they set it up so they 3839
     could replace the ones that would die.  They called
     it replacement smokers.  They said, look, we've got
     to get busy.  They said if our business is going to
     stand, if we're going to stay in business, we've
     got to go get the kids.
          And I want to talk to you about that for just
     a minute.  Members of the jury, just one after
     another.
          Now, here, they getting the figures on the
     kids, the teens.  All of this was confidential,
     never thought they would see the light of day, but
     they had to give it up.
          It says here, members of the jury, -- these
     general industry figures, they've gone out and done
     their research, they've checked on the kids,
     they've interviewed them.  "These figures indicate
     that 47 percent of the population, 15 years later,
     had smoke cigarettes."
          They smoked cigarettes during that -- 15 -- 47
     percent of the population, that's really what it's
     saying.
          "School days are here."  Now, this will go
     back as far as 1947.  "And that means big tobacco
     business for somebody."  They sent this letter out,
     this is R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.  Members of 3840
     the jury, I'll say this, if you want to say an
     adult makes their own choice, that's all right.
     Don't touch the kids.  Don't go after the children.
     That's not right.  And they know it's not right.
     But it's where they make their profits.  It's where
     the big money is.
          Here it is in September, school starts a
     little earlier there, in September, "School days
     are here, and that means big tobacco business for
     somebody."  Let's go get it."
          And this is a memo now that is sent out to
     their marketing people.  "Give every school a good
     work" -- "working just as quick as possible after
     it opens."  If that ain't targeting children.  I
     want to see what their answer is going to be for
     going after the kids.
          "We will probably use one or more of the
     student," that's high school, "magazines."  These
     people were -- it was all about profit.  It was all
     about money, members of the jury.
          And it goes on and on.
          They tell them, try to not give -- "try to
     sell one of the Prince Albert 8-ounce and cork
     Jimmy pipe combination to every student who you and
     your men find is not already smoking.  Get 'em." 3841
     These are children.  High school students.
     Freshmans in high school.  Sophomores in high
     school.  Juniors in high school.
          Then they say attached is a list.  We won't
     show you where the most important prep schools are
     so you won't make -- won't waste any time, just go
     and get them.
          In 1973, members of the jury, here it is in
     1973, warnings on the packs, and they claim --
     they've ran in here with all of these exhibits
     talking about books in the high school said don't
     smoke, talking about The Palm Beach Post, don't
     smoke, Reader's Digest, don't smoke.  Well, where
     was Reynolds with something that said don't smoke
     to the kids?  Where were -- where was Reynolds?
     Not one single time -- he's going to get up here
     and talk about yeah, they had to know, information
     was coming from everywhere.  But where was
     Reynolds?  Reynolds was spending billions and
     billions of dollars saying it's good for you.
     "Winston tastes good like a cigarette should."  You
     heard it.  That was one of the things that
     Mr. Andrew Haliburton said.  "Winston tastes good
     like a cigarette should."
          But why in 1973, you've got warnings on 3842
     cigarettes, and they say -- this is R.J. Reynolds,
     interoffice memo.  "Let's develop a new R.J.
     Reynolds youth appeal brand."  Go out to the kids.
          That was after, members of the jury, after a
     fifth grader, a fifth grader who saw the candy
     cigarettes, had wrote them a letter, and this is a
     reply to Willow Ridge School, a reply to the fifth
     grader through their professor or through their
     principal.  It said -- writing -- after they had
     got a letter, the fifth graders said, look, why are
     you-all going after kids, you've got these candy
     cigarettes, you've got kids in training to be
     smokers, and you know -- you have research,
     in-house research that says that your product kills
     people.  They kill people.
          Members of the jury, this ain't about no --
     like no rear-end accident or who ran the red light.
     These people knew.  The Defendant Reynolds knew
     that their product was defective, it was defective,
     and it was killing people.
          They wrote back to the principal, saying, "A
     number of your fifth grade students have written."
     These are students writing these letters.  This is
     bad, members of the jury.  It's real bad.  "A
     number of the" -- "have written letters to R.J. 3843
     Reynolds Tobacco Company commenting that they do
     not feel our company should allow the use of our
     brand names on children's toys and candy
     cigarettes."  They were saying, in other words, why
     are y'all letting these companies use your name,
     use your patent, use your brand, use your
     everything to sell cigarettes.  They wanted to
     start them early, that's why they let them do it.
          And they write them back, write them back and
     they say, "Our advertising is directed to adult
     smoking and not youth people."  Members of the
     jury, that's a lie.  You just saw a board said they
     set up a whole committee to go after the kids.
     They sent letters out in September, when school
     started, to get 'em, to get 'em.
          And go a step further, and I'm going to move
     as fast as I can, because time is of the essence,
     and I appreciate your time.
          High school and college students in '60.
     Youth, what, research.  They developed an
     institute, an institute to target, to target young
     kids, children.  And all they want to do is come in
     here and put down Mr. Haliburton.
          This man didn't --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor. 3844
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  The defendant, Reynolds --
          MR. PERSONS:  Same objection.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PERSONS:  It's improper.  And move to
     strike that comment.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Disregard the last
     comment. it just goes
     on and on.  Even late as '58.  This is during the
     time when Mr. Haliburton is young.  They are --
     they -- they -- they targeted an age of students,
     of kids between the ages of 15 and 22 years of age.
     A survey, they took a survey of high school
     students and college students.  Most college
     students are still teenagers, at least their first
     year or two in college, regarding cigarette
     smoking.  They did a study.  And they didn't just
     do it in one place, members of the jury, they did
     it all over the country, it says here.  You read
     it.
          They interviewed.  1,050 interviews were
     conducted among young smokers.  And now this was in
     1974.  You already had warnings.  If you had
     warnings on the pack, why are you messing with 3845 these children?  Why are you out there trying to
     lure these children into your private projections?
          It was all about billions and billions of
     dollars.  That's why, members of the jury, $16
     million, $16.5 million based on his life, what he
     meant to her, and the fact that, members of the
     jury, this was a time when they were making
     trillions of dollars.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor, no
     foundation.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  I'm going to move right through
     this.  Their research, again, after the children.
     You know, they're going to get up there and talk
     about everything about Mr. Haliburton, try to
     sleaze him out, all kinds of stuff.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor, and move
     to strike.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Disregard the last
     statement.
          MR. GARY:  Okay.  But I want them to take --
     and I'll let them have this board.  Let them
     explain how they were out going after eighth
     graders.  When they get up here talking all this
     other evidence and all of that, in your mind say 29
December 18, 2014

     why don't you explain why you were going after
     eighth graders.  That's just two years -- two years
     beyond elementary school, three years beyond
     elementary school.
          High school graduates smoke, 41 percent are
     smokers.  They knew that.  They preyed on it.  They
     even talk about it in their documents that the only
     way we are going to make the big bucks or keep
     making the big bucks is to get the kids, get the
     kids.
          They did surveys.  They did surveys.  This is
     bad, members of the jury.  This is real bad.  R.J.
     Reynolds, not only are they liars and they're
     conspirators, but they knew what they were doing.
     They knew that ultimately, they knew their
     cigarette was a cancer stick, and they were lying,
     telling people that it didn't cause cancer when
     they knew that it did.
          Give me a chance to make an informed decision.
     They didn't do that.  They took that away.
          And then you've got to remember at one date in
     time, Mr. Andrew Haliburton was a teenager.  Now he
     only made it to the seventh grade.  Ms. Haliburton
     told you she made the eighth grade and she didn't
     finish it so she got through with the seventh 3847
     grade.  And I said, well, why didn't you stay in
     school?  She says I had no choice, because I had to
     work.  How old were you when you got your first
     job?  I was in the sixth grade.
          These are just hard-working people, members of
     the jury.  Mr. Haliburton was a reserve officer,
     worked the job for ten years without a dime.  It
     didn't even matter to him because he wanted to
     serve his people.
          And that's what he gets.
          Seventh grade education, but he worked hisself
     up.  Didn't look for no free rides, didn't ask for
     something for nothing, sent his kids to school,
     worked hard.  He wasn't perfect.  None of us are.
     Nobody is.  But he was a reserve officer, working
     every night for nothing, for free, not knowing
     whether he was going to come home or not.
          But he did it because of the love for his
     country.
          Then, well, they make a big deal of -- he
     didn't go to church.  Now, the man in a singing
     group, going -- singing in different churches every
     Sunday, but you put him down because he didn't go
     to church.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor. 3848
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  This defendant, members of the
     jury, they preyed on high school kids, starting
     their freshman year, high school.  Why would they
     go out and talk to almost 300, 279 kids that were
     boys, 212 that were young ladies, just for -- and
     freshman, that's in ninth grade.  You have no
     business there.  They shouldn't -- they had no
     business doing that, none.  They had no business
     doing it, members of the jury.
          And Reynolds and those tobacco companies that
     purposely concealed, that purposely used false
     information, that purposely lied about what they
     were doing shouldn't get away with it.
          Here it is -- members of the jury, what year
     is that?  The warnings are already out there.  Are
     they saying to students, wait a minute, don't
     smoke, don't do this?  All they coming in telling
     you is, well, they should have known because there
     was a lot of stuff in the newspapers and there was
     stuff in the TV and there was this and there was
     that, and they show you books from high schools
     that out of a thousand pages almost had one or two
     paragraphs about don't smoke, and they want to take
     the credit for that.  They don't deserve no credit 3849
     for nothing, zero.  No credit.
          This is August 1983, warnings out there.  Now,
     if the warnings are out there, why would you be out
     there, what, the executive committee has asked that
     we develop with a great sense of, what?  Urgency,
     appropriate programs on four specific issues.  And
     the number one issue was what?  You're going to
     have those documents back there.  Don't take my
     word for it.  You'll have them.  You can go through
     them.  You can look at them.  You can read them for
     yourself again and again.
          I wanted to show you this, members of the
     jury, because it's one thing for me to say it, but
     you need to see it.
          I talked about profit.  That's what they are
     out there to do.  This is their document from R.J.
     Reynolds.
          Young adult smokers are critical to our
     long-term performance and our profits, in essence.
     You read it.  "We should make a substantial
     long-term commitment of manpower and money
     dedicated to young adult smokers' programs."  And
     they were talking about the kids, members of the
     jury, when they talked about young adult -- they
     were talking about the kids.  And then they didn't 3850
     stop there, that wasn't enough.  They had to go at
     our boys and ladies and girls that served in the
     Armed Forces.  And let me tell you what they did
     there.  You read the documents, and you going to
     read some letters that came from the Veterans
     Administration.
          They gave them -- this was the sucker punch
     here.  They gave them free cigarettes, because our
     young men and women were out on the battlefields
     fighting for their country.  Sometimes -- no
     restaurant, no kitchen, no nothing.  They had to
     have -- take their food with them.
          Chesterfield.  Cigarettes.  Cigarettes.
          They in a foxhole fighting.  Cigarettes.  Free
     of charge.
          They lied to -- they lied to our men and women
     in the Armed Forces, and I'm going to show you how
     they flat out did it, don't take my word.
          This is a letter from the Veterans of Foreign
     Wars.  This was in 1954.  Mr. Haliburton was a
     young lad then.  It says here, this is -- these men
     and women that come back home realized that they
     were having problems and they heard about the fact
     that smoking can kill people, and then tobacco
     people were lying about that, trying to suppress 3851
     that.  "No, don't worry about it, you're okay,
     you'll be all right, just keep buying the
     cigarettes, it's okay.  It's okay.  Believe me,
     trust me."  And they were lying through their
     teeth.
          Right after the war, this is a letter to the
     tobacco people.  When we got home, and I'm going to
     paraphrase it, you can read it, we discovered that
     something is wrong with these cigarettes and we
     need you to write us and tell us.
          And that's because we all remember, we all
     remember that during the war that we were given all
     the cigarettes we needed, and given, now, not sold,
     given, because they knew if they got them hooked
     during the war, when they come home, they would be
     customers.  They knew that.  That was their MO to
     do that.
          We all remember that during World War II, we
     were given all the cigarettes we needed and many
     young men and women starting the smoking habit who
     has never -- who have never smoked before.
          And this is the -- really the sad part,
     members of the jury.  They had never smoked before
     and who never intended to smoke.
          And all they wanted was for them to write them 3852
     back and tell them that it was okay.  We've got
     your back.  We ain't going to lie to you.  We would
     like to have a full report from the research --
     from the research men of the tobacco companies who
     are familiar with the testing and all of that
     stuff.  Tell us, we want to know that we're okay.
          What, all of a sudden, no talking.
          Doctors lost their jobs.
          And members of the jury, let me just take a
     moment.  You've probably heard Dr. Proctor talked
     about the Mouse House Massacre.  The Mouse House
     Massacre.  They were complaining about the tests
     that were done on the mouse and other animals that
     showed that it caused cancer.  But they did their
     own.  They did their own testing.  That's where you
     get the Mouse House Massacre.
          That was when they found out that their
     scientists that they had hired to shade the issue,
     to lie about the issue, came up with proof that
     that cancer, which they already knew, they had
     known it for a long time that cancer was killing
     people and they kept selling a product that killed
     people, but they got more proof, and it came out of
     the Mouse House Massacre.  And, boy, after they
     found out what was going on, man, they moved in 3853
     like gangbusters, shut down the mouse house,
     laboratories, they fired all the scientists, they
     lined -- they killed the mouse.  I mean, it was
     like whoa.  The nerve of you coming up with
     something that validates what the public has been
     saying and not what we have been saying.
          That's the way they do business, members of
     the jury.
          Now, these boys that fought and died, and
     members of the jury, boys, men, and women that
     fought and died for their country.
          We trust that you will favor us with a reply.
     "We do not want" -- "just come back to us and tell
     us that everything is okay, because we want to know
     do cigarettes really cause cancer."
          Well, guess what, they never even got a
     response from them.  They never even got a response
     from them, members of the jury.
          And then it gets --
          During all of this time and long before -- and
     let me say this about the veterans before I move on
     from it.  You know, we all are important as
     Americans.  I said something special about them
     because they off at war, some of them never made it
     back home, some of them did.  Some of them were 3854
     lucky.  They dodged the enemy bombs and bullets to
     come back home.  Were honorably charged, but they
     died a dishonorable death, and it ain't right.  It
     is not right.  That's why we're seeking punitive
     damages in this case.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor, improper
     argument.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PERSONS:  No evidence of it.
          THE COURT:  Sustained. from one of
     their documents marked, what?  They never thought
     this would see the light of day.  It's marked
     "Confidential.  There are biological materials
     present in cigarettes tobacco.  These are cancer
     causing."  Who gets a chance to get away with
     putting a product on the market that you know is
     unreasonably dangerous and above that, you know
     that is flat out killing people.  And your only
     defense is, well, Mr. Haliburton should have known
     that it was going to kill him.  He should have
     diagnosed his case.  Here this man with a seventh
     grade education, just a hard worker, pulled himself
     up by his bootstraps, taking care of his family,
     not asking anybody for anything, but, you know, 3855
     carrying his own weight.  And then they blame him.
     Well, you should have known that we had a bad
     product out there, and you should have known in the
     '80s that it was bad, and if you were going to sue
     us, you should have sued us then.  Ha, ha, ha, you
     didn't do it.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained. strike.
          THE COURT:  Sustain. you read it
     for yourself.  Their product was unreasonably
     dangerous because they knew it caused cancer, and
     they were hiding it, hiding it, banking on the fact
     that they could defend this litigation and blame
     the smoker.  They blame the smoker.  That's what
     they were doing.
          Members of the jury, a good example of that
     was Mr. Samuel, Dr. -- forgive me, I'm sorry, I
     don't want to disrespect anybody and I don't mean
     to disrespect him.  Dr. Samuel.  You-all remember
     he testified as late as yesterday?  When that man
     came in here, and he would say anything, he would
     say anything to help their cause.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor, that's 3856
     highly improper.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Counsel, come sidebar,
     Mr. Persons. COURT:  Yes, Mr. Persons.
          MR. PERSONS:  Your Honor, that's highly
     improper, disparaging a witness or a party is
     impermissible.  And that's been found to be grounds
     for -- has been found to constitute reversible
     error.  We -- we object to that.
          THE COURT:  I'm going to sustain the
     objection.  You can say he was hired by Reynolds.
          MR. GARY:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  He certainly was an expert for
     Reynolds.  But you can't say that he was hired
     to --
          MR. GARY:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  -- come in here to say anything.
          MR. GARY:  Okay.
          MR. PERSONS:  Your Honor, I move --
          MR. CHESTNUT:  We can argue the credibility of
     a witness; correct?
          THE COURT:  Yes, but that wasn't, that was
     basically saying he was lying. 3857
          MR. GARY:  I'll get him on the credibility.
          MR. PERSONS:  And I'll add to that, motion for
     mistrial.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  I'll deny, but grant a
     curative.
          MR. PERSONS:  Thank you. in open
court before the Court and jury.)
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, I sustained
     the last objection.  Please disregard the last
     comment.
          MR. GARY:  Please the Court?
          THE COURT:  Of course, Mr. Gary.
          MR. GARY:  Ladies and gentlemen, Dr. Reynolds,
     Dr. Reynolds {sic}, I want to talk about those in a
     second, because, you know, the things that he said,
     you could ask him what color were the sky, and he
     qualified it, you know, he would take an hour to do
     it.  But that was his style.  But the thing that --
     that you need to keep in mind is something that he
     said, even his PowerPoints he didn't prepare.  Who
     prepared them?  R.J. Reynolds did.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor, that was
     not the evidence.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Sustained, rephrase. 3858
          MR. GARY:  Okay.
          Who prepared the documents?  Listen to what
     you recall the testimony.  You know what the
     testimony is.  And then R.J. Reynolds sent people
     out to train them.  If I didn't -- if I'm getting
     it wrong, disregard what I'm saying, because I want
     you to go by what was the truth.  He said it under
     oath, he said R.J. Reynolds sent people out to
     train its whole staff.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PERSONS:  No evidence and move to strike
     that comment.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  That wasn't consistent
     with his testimony.  Sustain the objection.
          MR. GARY:  Well -- well -- well, you recall
     what he said, members of the jury.  But there
     was -- there was discussion about his testimony.
     And you recall what he said.  I'll leave it just
     like that.  Just recall what he said about how he
     put together -- as a matter of fact, he didn't even
     put together all those slides and all that he was
     talking about.  He didn't to that.  And just rely
     on your recollection as to who did it.
          I want to talk about nicotine a little bit, 3859
     because they tried to make it seem like nicotine
     was nothing, that's what he did.  Members of the
     jury, do me one favor, if nothing else, when you
     get back there, look at the Surgeon General's
     Reports.  You're going to have them.  Just make
     mental note of that.  But look at that report and
     see how many people are dying every year.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor, violates
     a ruling.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  They go to notice, not
     for the --
          MR. GARY:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  Sustain the objection.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Your Honor, could we approach on
     that?
          MR. GARY:  Every year --
          THE COURT:  Sure. before the
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
          MR. ACOSTA:  The '84 -- I mean the '88 and the
     '89 Surgeon General's Report --
          THE COURT:  That has no relevancy.
          MR. ACOSTA:  That does too, and so it wasn't
     in there for notice, those were in evidence, so --
          THE COURT:  No, I understand.  But that's the 3860
     current, how many people have died a year.  That
     was the objection.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Okay, well, I just wanted to make
     sure that there was an understanding that --
          THE COURT:  No, no, no.  The other ones are
     not in just for notice, the other ones were in
     substantively, but the comment was done as in the
     present.  So that was in reference to the 2014 was
     my --
          MR. PERSONS:  Right.
          THE COURT:  Okay.
          MR. ACOSTA:  All right. GARY:  May I proceed, Your Honor?
          THE COURT:  Of course.
          MR. GARY:  Thank you.
          This is a serious matter, members of the jury,
     this is a real serious matter.  And I know you
     won't take your responsibility lightly.  I feel
     that I have watched you.  You've shown interest
     beyond what you could expect or imagine.  And do
     the right thing.  It ain't about winning or losing,
     it's about doing the right thing.  A lot of people
     are dying.  It doesn't have to happen. 3861
          Mr. Haliburton ain't coming back.  He's not
     coming back.
          But they should have to live up to the
     agreement, the pact they made with the American
     public.  They said, and you saw it, you saw them on
     TV, if we find anything in our product that's
     harmful, y'all remember what they said, they said
     we'll either take it out or if we can't get it out,
     we'll stop making the cigarettes.
          They don't have to stop making cigarettes,
     they just can take the nicotine out and stop
     getting people hooked.  They can still make money.
     They won't make as much.  But what's more
     important, them making -- them keeping their
     profits up or saving lives?
          5 -- 480,000 people a year, you heard
     Dr. Proctor testify to that.  480,000 graves.  Put
     the grave diggers out of business.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained. strike that comment.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Disregard the last
     comment. what they're
     doing is not right.  And they want you to allow 3862
     them to continue to do it.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.  That's
     not appropriate.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PERSONS:  And move --
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PERSONS:  Same motion, move to strike.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  We trust --
          How much time do I have?
          THE COURT:  Nancy?
          THE CLERK:  You have 20 minutes.
          THE COURT:  20 minutes.
          MR. GARY:  Okay.  Charity is a nuisance.
     Don't give Ms. Haliburton nothing, don't give her
     nothing.  Nobody deserves to be given anything
     unless it's to help them save their lives, whatever
     the case may be.  We don't come here seeking
     charity.  We want justice.  And this ain't just
     about Mr. Haliburton.  This is about what they've
     done to him.  It just so happened they've done it
     to millions of other people.  They really have.
     And they've been getting away with it.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor, and move
     to strike that. 3863
          THE COURT:  You need to come sidebar,
     Mr. Persons?  No?  I'll sustain the objection.
          MR. PERSONS:  Okay, thank you, Your Honor.
          MR. GARY:  Your verdict can say no more, we're
     not going to be a part of it, that's what your
     verdict can say, members of the jury.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Sustained. strike that.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  Now, members of the jury,
     Dr. Proctor told you, you remember him, --
          Put Dr. Proctor up for me for just a second.
          Take this down.
          They broke their word, they didn't keep their
     word.  You know, back -- you know, if you give your
     word, your word should be your bond.  We teach our
     children that.  Don't lie.  Tell the truth.  Tell
     the truth.
          They lied and they lied and they lied to the
     detriment, you saw the Engle finding, to the
     detriment, that people relied on what they said,
     they said to their detriment.  That's the law if
     you find that he is a member of the class.  They
     believed it to their detriment.  They'll say well, 3864
     there is no proof that Mr. Haliburton heard
     anything, he believed anything.  Members of the
     jury, through 20 years they want you to believe he
     never heard about their lies, cigarettes are safe,
     don't worry, don't believe those other people who
     say cigarettes can cause cancer.  They lied and
     they had in their own files information for
     research that they had done that said they were
     lying.  You know they were lying, and then killing
     people.  For profit.  Killing people for profit.
          Nicotine is not addictive.  The year that they
     went to Washington, DC, all of those owners, the
     big guys, they went to Washington, DC, raised their
     right hand before man and God.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  And, members of the jury, they
     lied.  They lied about nicotine being addictive.
     But we know now that nicotine kills people.  And
     they knew it.  They had done the research.  They
     had the documentation.  And it was in 1994 when
     they were in Washington, DC, lying through their
     teeth, Mr. Haliburton found out, 1994, in essence
     that he was going to die from their lies.
          That's not right, members of the jury.  They 3865
     knew that Dr. Samuel was going to -- and let me say
     about Dr. Samuel.  I ain't putting nobody down, but
     this is the only time I get a chance to talk to you
     and you've got to know the truth about everybody.
     If you are going to believe him and not Dr. Proctor
     and not Dr. Benowitz, Dr. Benowitz wrote a part
     of -- a chapter in the book published by the
     Surgeon General.  That's the top medical doctor in
     the United States of America.  Credentials like you
     wouldn't believe.  Earn his stripes.
          But Dr. Samuels {sic}, when we -- he came in
     here knowing everything.  And that's okay.  But we
     said, wait a minute.  Wait just a second.  Have you
     written any papers?  No.  Have you done any
     research?  No.  And then we find out the man didn't
     even have a bachelor's degree.  That came out
     through the evidence.
          But he knows more than the people who wrote
     the Surgeon General's Report.  And we went a step
     further.  Because he was asked by my partner, well,
     do you have hospital privileges?  If doctor
     retired -- he's a fairly young guy.  You would have
     hospital privileges because if one of your
     patients -- he sent all his patients, all his
     patients, if one of them tried to commit suicide or 3866
     something happened and he said, Doctor, meet me at
     the hospital, he couldn't even show up.  He doesn't
     have hospital privileges.
          That's who they brought in here.  $40,000 to
     read the depositions.  $40,000 to read the
     depositions.  That's why, members of the jury, 16.5
     million for over 30-some-odd years for
     Ms. Haliburton is -- may not be enough, and you may
     decide that $16.5 million is not enough.  He got
     $40,000.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  Then he want to say nicotine had
     nothing to do with Mr. Haliburton's addiction.
          Was he addicted?  Members of the jury, if we
     proved anything, and I know we proved a lot, here
     is a medical record.  None of us were around.  How
     on God's earth can he come in here and say this man
     was not addicted when he smoked for 30 years or 40
     years, take your -- whichever one you want.  Like
     30 years, even like 30 years was a big deal, like
     somebody was lying about it.  Say you had a mix-up
     with 10 years, but 30 years or 40 years, it really
     doesn't matter, you smoked two packs of cigarettes
     every day, 20 in a pack, and like my partner said, 3867
     some 400 minutes a day you're smoking?  And you do
     it for 40 years and he gets up there and says, no,
     that ain't no addiction.
          Now, you can blame Mr. Haliburton for the
     addiction, whatever you want, but you know he was
     addicted.  And maybe it was -- he shouldn't have
     been.  That's not the point.  Even after all of
     their lies and everything else, maybe he shouldn't
     have been, but he accept some -- his wife accepts
     some responsibility.  She is an honorable lady.
          And he said no, not -- none whatsoever.
          It's clear, members of the jury, he didn't
     know how in -- how in the world he's going to know
     that he had COPD or emphysema?  He could -- he --
     there is no way.  He's not a doctor.  Even their
     own expert doctor said there is no way this man
     could have known that he had COPD.  Their expert,
     the defense expert, Reynolds' expert said that.  No
     way he could have known it.  Because they knew, why
     were they pressing that?  They knew that if you
     find that he should have known, he should have
     diagnosed his case, he's a doctor or he close to
     one, or whatever, none of that, he just had a
     seventh grade education.  But they say -- if they
     get you to believe that, there is no case. 3868
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor, to get
     you to believe something, and move to strike the
     comment.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  If the Defendant R.J. Reynolds can
     get you to believe that it's his fault, that he
     knew or should have known, seventh grade education,
     just a hard-working fellow that try to do the best
     he could, take care of his family, sing in the
     church group, gospel group, and help his country,
     his community, and his city by being a reserve
     police officer.
          Dr. Feingold, do people without medical -- do
     people without medical training have that kind of
     expertise?  No, they don't.  And a lot of these
     diseases that people have, for example, emphysema,
     most patients or people, regular non-doctor people,
     they don't even know what it is.
          And he goes on to say that that's right.  And
     I'll show you that board in just a second.
          THE CLERK:  Counsel, ten minutes.
          MR. GARY:  Thank you, ma'am.
          I'm just going to let you browse through some
     of his testimony, because I've got a few minutes.
     Just to remind you. 3869
          Two packs a day for 40 years.
          And here he talks about the kids again.  In
     the United States, the great majority of people try
     their first cigarette at age 14.  That's no
     accident, members of the jury.  That's no accident
     that these kids, these minors, these children, some
     at 13.  He could buy cigarettes out of the stores
     at 8, 9 years old.  The tobacco industry had it
     going.  And you remember when Dr. Proctor was here
     and you-all asked him a question when was it the
     law against kids buying cigarettes.  And it was --
     the questions by Reynolds, the defendant, that
     suggested, oh, that was a law back in the '30s and
     the '40s.
          Well, if that was a law, why were they setting
     up youth, children institutes all over the country
     to get children to smoke?  That's violating this
     law.  You know it.  It's not right.  Not right,
     members of the jury.
          Here it is, I was looking for it.
     Dr. Feingold.  "In your experience and medical
     training, required diagnosis of these diseases."
     Now, if I have -- God forbids it, but if I have
     lung cancer, COPD, and I'm just an average person,
     well, even with a law degree, how can you expect me 3870
     to know or should have known because I've got a
     cough?  He was taking cold medicine for it.
     Because I've got a cough.  I should have known that
     I had a heart disease.  I should have known that I
     had emphysema.  He probably couldn't even spell
     emphysema.
          Just like his wife, she was in the cotton
     field, picking cotton at age six, cropping tobacco
     a little bit later.  Did you want -- I -- why did
     you drop out?  I had to.  Well, why did you have to
     drop out of school?  Because I had to go to work.
          Some lady.  What a lady.
          And then he goes on to say, "A great deal of
     medical training is required to even identify two
     or three diseases that the person probably has.
     And even more medical training is required to
     narrow that down to the most likely diagnosis."
     And they want to tell you we win because he should
     have known that he had COPD, that he had emphysema.
          First time he went to the doctor, he found out
     he had COPD, think about what he did.  He stopped
     smoking.  The rule is sometimes you can, sometimes
     you can't, you just do the best you can.  But
     everybody ain't the same.  You just can't say
     because one person could do it, everybody can -- he 3871
     had tried, he had tried, he had tried, but when the
     doctor told him the truth, that you going to die,
     which is what Reynolds should have told him, they
     knew that was the truth, they knew they were
     killing people, and they lied about it, but the
     doctor didn't lie to him, he trashed the
     cigarettes.  He could have done that 40 years
     earlier if they had been telling the truth.  But
     they were lying to the public.
          And they just didn't lie to Mr. Haliburton,
     they lied to millions of people.  They set 'em up.
     And then they -- you remember one of the exhibits,
     and you may ask for it if you get back there and
     think about it, but one of the exhibits, the
     lawyers were telling them, say, look, man, this
     choice stuff ain't going to fly.  This choice stuff
     is not going to make it.  We ain't going to be able
     to look somebody straight in the face and say it
     was choice when you got nicotine going to the brain
     every ten seconds, you puffing that cigarette, you
     getting a jolt to the brain.
          Members of the jury, Dr. Feingold testifies
     most of the time in other type cases for the
     defense.  He testifies for the defense.
          His nicotine addiction, his smoking, and his 3872 cause of death, those were his opinion, smoking.
     And, members of the jury, if you find that
     Mr. Haliburton was responsible to some degree, say
     it.  That's okay.  We're not coming in here asking
     you not to blame him.  But what we are saying is
     that we've proven that the greater majority of the
     fault and the blame in this case are on these
     people because they are more concerned about
     stuffing their pockets with profits than about
     saving people.  And they go after the children.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, misstatement of the
     law.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PERSONS:  Move to strike, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  Just one second, I'm getting ready
     to close.
          THE CLERK:  Counselor, two minutes.
          MR. GARY:  How much?
          THE CLERK:  Two minutes.
          MR. GARY:  Two minutes?  Okay.
          THE COURT:  Do you want to use some of your
     rebuttal time?  Would you like to use some of your
     rebuttal time?
          MR. GARY:  No. 29
December 18, 2014

          THE COURT:  Okay.
          MR. GARY:  I'm -- Mr. Chestnut is going to do
     the rebuttal.
          THE COURT:  Okay. I don't know
     whether you got a chance to meet Mr. Chestnut.
     Stand up so they can see you.  He's going to do the
     rebuttal when the case comes down to that point.
          And I have just two minutes.
          These people were so concerned about money
     until when they were up in New York, they were like
     bragging and boasting about, isn't it great that
     our customers have a habit that they can't break.
     Why are you rejoicing over having somebody hooked
     on something and you glad about it because they
     can't break the habit?  You go and almost like
     having a party.
          Just bear with me one second.
          Here it is.
          Now, members of the jury, this was after the
     Frank Statement.  You remember the Frank Statement
     basically said we're going to -- if we find
     anything in it that's not right, we're going to
     take it out, and if we can't take it out, we're
     going to shut down cigarettes, because we're not 3874
     going to kill people.  Well, they lied about that,
     they didn't do that.  Well, at the same time, they
     had -- this is -- this is their people saying this.
     They had this big, powerful media group that were
     interviewing them.  And one of them slipped up and
     said, one of the men said, "It's fortunate for us
     that cigarettes are a habit that they can't break."
          Fortunate?  What is this world coming to?
          And another one said, "Boy, wouldn't it be
     wonderful if our company was the first to produce a
     cancer-free" -- that mean they knew that the
     cigarette, members of the jury, was -- had
     carcinogens in it, it caused cancer.  And then
     lastly, "Suppose everybody smoked just one
     cigarette less a day.  That would be maybe 40
     billion a year."  40 billion a year.
          THE CLERK:  Counselor, time.
          MR. GARY:  Okay, I'm going to take just a
     couple of minutes, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Okay, you can take it out of
     rebuttal, that's fine. the word came
     that Mr. Andrew Haliburton had died, Ms. Haliburton
     went to his bedside.  They had been together a lot
     of years.  Some ups and some downs.  But through it 3875
     all, they withstood the test of time and all the
     problems that life going to throw your way.
     Because if you haven't had any problems, just keep
     on living.
          But in the final analysis, she said -- I'm
     not -- I know I'm crying, but I'm not worried
     because I know he's going to meet his maker and
     he's going to be all right.  He's going to be all
     right.
          I don't know what your verdict is going to be,
     but right now, it doesn't really matter, because I
     can tell you this, I know it's going to be the
     right thing.  You're going to do the right thing.
     You're going -- justice is going to roll.  You're
     going to do the right thing because it is right to
     do the right thing.
          And, members of the jury, you know, this is
     a -- this is a -- you've had a wonderful two, three
     weeks, we've seen some important things happen,
     we've seen the birthday of -- of Pearl Harbor when
     our boys were bombed.  And you seeing birthdays,
     you've celebrated a birthday together here among
     yourselves.  So a lot of good has come out of this.
          But don't let him die in vain.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor. 3876
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PERSONS:  That's improper.  And move to
     strike that.
          THE COURT:  Sustained. in years to
     come, you see, I just want -- I don't know what the
     verdict is going to be.  And like I said, that's
     okay.  I'm okay with that.  But whatever it is,
     give it from your heart.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  Whatever it is, members of the
     jury, base it on the evidence.  You know, we have
     tried to prove our case, and you know it.  These
     people kill people with their cigarettes.  That's
     dangerous, it's unreasonably dangerous.  They hide
     the truth, they lie about the truth.
          You have an opportunity to make a difference.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor, that's
     improper.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PERSONS:  Move to strike that comment.
          THE COURT:  Sustained. do what you
     think is right, because in years to come, you want 3877
     to be able to say that I was there, Palm Beach
     County, and I did the right thing, with all my
     heart, I tried to see that justice, that's right,
     justice, the heart and soul of the American dream,
     I tried to see that justice finally came for
     Dorothy Haliburton.
          MR. PERSONS:  Object to that comment.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  Thank you, members of the jury.
         

          MR. CHESTNUT:  25 minutes, I'll move.
          May it please the Court?
          THE COURT:  Yes, thank you.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Members of the jury, again, I'm
     Christopher Chestnut, you've been thanked, I think
     three times now, but I am going to thank you a 3989
     fourth because you really have been attentive and
     astute in the questions, it lies in the questions
     that you have asked.
          And I'm going to try to answer some of those
     questions, but first I just want to share this
     because I've been sitting here all day and I keep
     remembering this story.  I'm from Gainesville
     originally, and so my dad used to tell me the story
     about the floods, there are a lot of creeks in
     Gainesville, and there is a story about a scorpion
     and a frog.  And so there is this flood and the
     scorpion and the frog are in the low land and the
     water is rising, trying to get to high land where
     it's dry and where they can be safe.  Four lily
     pads in between them.  And so the scorpion comes up
     to the frog, the frog is about to leap off.  He
     says, "Listen, can I get a piggyback ride to
     safety, to dry land?
          And the frog says, "You know, I don't know
     about that, man, you just killed my brother last
     week, I really don't know about that.  I don't know
     if I can trust you."
          And the scorpion says, "No, no, no, no, it's
     good, I'm a new person, I don't do that anymore.
     That was last week, this is this week." 3990
          And scorpion is like -- I mean the frog is
     like "I just, I don't know, I don't feel good about
     this."
          And the scorpion says, "Well, how could you
     live with yourself if you leave me to here to die?"
          So the frog finally capitulates and he says,
     "You know what, okay, fine, get on my back."
          So he hops on, and they hop, first lily pad.
     He says, well, okay, maybe the scorpion is okay.
     The second lily pad.  Looks back, all right.
     Third, fourth.
          The fourth jump, pop.  The scorpion stings
     him.  Frog gets paralyzed, and in midair they are
     suspended and they land on dry ground, the frog
     looks back and says, "I thought you said you wasn't
     going to kill me?"
          The scorpion says, "What can I say?  I'm a
     scorpion, that's what we do."
          And, members of the jury, I think that's
     really what we are dealing with today.  There is a
     scorpion in this courthouse.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  I didn't point to anyone, Your
     Honor.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, improper. 3991
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Okay.  Sustain the
     inference. strike.
          THE COURT:  Sustain.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  So there are half-truths in
     this courtroom, ladies and gentlemen, and we'll get
     through them.  Because in one instance, Reynolds is
     saying we took responsibility, in the next
     instance, they are not, they are pointing the blame
     at Mr. Haliburton.  In one instance, they endorse
     the Engle findings, in the next they don't.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  So let's go through it, ladies
     and gentlemen.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Your Honor, this is argument.
          THE COURT:  Go ahead.  You may proceed.  Go
     ahead.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Thank you.
          So the first question is -- okay.  Are we up?
          Thank you.
          The first question is was Andrew Haliburton
     addicted to cigarettes and did that cause his
     death.  And I just want to go through this so when
     you go back to the jury room, just recall this, he 3992
     had COPD, respiratory failure, and cardiac arrest.
     And Reynolds' own expert testified that the COPD
     clogs your lungs, puts weight on it, which then can
     cause respiratory failure.  As the lung fails,
     there is respiratory failure, it puts more pressure
     on the heart which causes cardiac arrest.  So his
     cause of death is due to COPD.  And it's been
     established and unrefuted, they admit that COPD is
     caused by Reynolds' cigarettes.  So the answer to
     number 1, ladies and gentlemen, is yes, by their
     own admission.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. PERSONS:  We haven't admitted anything.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Did Mr. Haliburton know or
     should he have known in the exercise of reasonable
     care that he had emphysema/COPD, that there was a
     reasonable possibility that his emphysema and COPD
     was caused by smoking.
          Now, members of the jury.
          MR. PERSONS:  May we approach, Your Honor?
          THE COURT:  Of course.  Of course,
     Mr. Persons.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  And the time stops, correct?
          THE COURT:  Yes. 3993 before the
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
          MR. PERSONS:  This is the correct verdict
     form, I think he's got the wrong one up there.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Yeah, let's use the right
     one.  Okay.
          MR. PERSONS:  That's all.
          THE COURT:  Okay. in open
court before the Court and jury.)
          THE COURT:  All right.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Now, members of the jury,
     what's important for us to first recognize is that
     Mr. Haliburton had COPD.  He had a seventh grade
     education.
          Now, their own expert, members of the jury,
     came up and testified on their behalf, Dr. Cosmos.
     Dr. Cosmos went through extensively what he
     reviewed, what everything he reviewed, and he
     says -- initially they come to you, ladies and
     gentlemen, and they say -- I tell you, we'll come
     back, let me just go to what they say.
          They said Mr. Haliburton knew or should have
     known before May 5th, 1990 that there was a
     reasonable possibility that his COPD and emphysema 3994
     was caused by smoking.  This is their board, they
     showed you this.  Okay?  Two of them.
          Now, let's go back.  Now, you recall I asked
     Dr. Cosmos three times, Dr. Cosmos, are you here to
     testify that Mr. Haliburton knew or should have
     known before 1990 that he had COPD.  He says no.  I
     asked him three times because I was shocked.  I
     was --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PERSONS:  And ask to --
          MR. CHESTNUT:  So then I asked whether he
     should have known.
          THE COURT:  Disregard.  You may continue.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  So I asked whether he should
     have known.  He says, I'm not here to testify to
     that.  Well, let's talk about what he testified
     really, and why these are half-truths and
     inferences, ladies and gentlemen.  Everything he
     reviewed is after 1994.
          And then he then relies on these deposition
     testimonies, ladies and gentlemen.  Now, you recall
     all these depositions of all these people.  None of
     these folks are doctors that they deposed.  And
     they read all these depositions to you about 3995
     coughing and wheezing, et cetera, et cetera, but
     they were all non-doctors.  The only two doctors
     says he has COPD, but after '94.  There is no
     evidence whatsoever that Mr. Haliburton knew or
     should have known --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  -- before 19 --
          THE COURT:  Counsel, sidebar?
          MR. PERSONS:  Yes, Your Honor. before the
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
          MR. PERSONS:  He's got Dr. Rattinger on his
     slide and Dr. Rattinger did not testify in the
     case.
          MR. CRICKENBERGER:  We have seen two slides
     from them plus boards that were -- that were
     testimony from depositions that were --
          THE COURT:  But I corrected that based upon
     Mr. Acosta's objection.  So just indicate Rattinger
     did not testify at all, so.
          MR. ACOSTA:  But Feingold talked about what
     Rattinger said, so.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  But then you need to --
     I'll sustain the same objection you had.  So I'll
     sustain your objection, Mr. Chestnut, so he 3996
     needs -- because he didn't testify, he needs to say
     based upon Feingold's testimony but Rattinger did
     not testify, so.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  Okay. CHESTNUT:  So Dr. Rattinger was the only
     doctor who diagnosed Mr. Haliburton with COPD,
     that's in 1998.
          Here are the factors that Dr. Cosmos
     references, patient history, symptoms, physical
     examination, pulmonary function tests, radiology,
     pathology.  Members of the jury, all of these are
     after 1990, yet they are here trying to convince
     you that he knew or should have known before 1990.
     It doesn't add up.
          Here is a consultation report, this is their
     doctor, they put it in, here it says, "Chronic
     pulmonary obstructive disease in 1994."  That's
     what the medical record says.  So this is a 1998
     record referencing back to 1994.  Now, this
     corroborates our position, this supports what we're
     saying.
          Ladies and gentlemen, you see this?  "Peptic 3997
     ulcer disease in the 1980s."  So, members of the
     jury, if there were any medical evidence that
     Mr. Haliburton knew before 1990 that he had COPD,
     it would have been here, just like they put the
     peptic ulcer.  But they didn't, because he didn't.
     He didn't know.
          Members of the jury, they also kept referring
     to family diagnosis, and they relied upon
     deposition after deposition after deposition of
     family members who eventually came in and said that
     Mr. Haliburton knew or should have known he had
     COPD.  But if we really look at it, ladies and
     gentlemen, what those deposition and testimonies
     really said was they listed symptoms, cough,
     wheezing, shortness of breath, and then they want
     you to make a leap, but there is no nexus.
          So just because someone -- he -- counsel said
     it best, heartburn.  He said, well, it could have
     been heartburn.  So is it now -- what happens when
     somebody has heartburn?  They take Pepto-Bismol.
     You don't immediately associate heartburn with
     smoking, so just because Mr. Haliburton had
     heartburn prior to 1990 does not mean he had COPD.
     There is no prima facie demonstration.
          And, ladies and gentlemen, sometimes you have 3998
     to look at how the evidence comes to you.  So they
     read all these depositions in.  They were asked
     leading questions, which means a lawyer --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Your Honor, I think I can
     comment on how the questions were posed.  That's --
     the method of examination is relevant is argument.
          THE COURT:  Just slightly modify that
     question.  Sustain the objection for the record.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Okay.  So there were deposition
     questions, and there are two types of ways a lawyer
     can answer a question, and you can answer, hi, how
     are you, what time is it today.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Need to come sidebar? before the
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, he is suggesting
     there is something improper with the deposition
     process, and the Court has already instructed this
     jury that that testimony is to be received and
     given the same weight as though the person were
     here.
          This is a denigration or derogation of that 3999
     instruction.  And I object to it.
          THE COURT:  And that's fine, suggested change
     in terms of anything wrong with leading questions,
     and that was perfectly fine, so.
          MR. CRICKENBERGER:  How about if he just
     states that it's -- it's permissible for them to
     ask a leading question.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  That's fine, say it was
     permissible.  Okay. CHESTNUT:  So earlier, Mr. Guest was
     talking about quality of evidence, and a lawyer can
     ask a leading question, but a leading question is
     when a lawyer puts forth a positive statement and
     asks the witness to agree with him.  You saw it
     happen a lot to Mrs. Haliburton, they put -- kind
     of put forth an affirmative statement and then she
     responded.  Well, that's a leading question versus
     what time is it.  So that's an open-ended question.
     It's 4 o'clock, isn't it?  That's a leading
     question.  Well, all the deposition testimony they
     read were leading questions.
          Ladies and gentlemen, here is what I invite
     you to analyze.  Of all the -- all of the relatives 4000
     they brought, all the depositions they read, they
     didn't ask one relative, did he have COPD?  Did you
     ever tell him he had COPD?  Did Mr. Haliburton know
     he had COPD prior to 1990?  No.  No.  That's why
     they didn't call them in, ladies and gentlemen.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection.  And ask for a
     curative.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Disregard the last
     question and statement.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  So, ladies and gentlemen, there
     was no relative who came in here who testified that
     I told Mr. Haliburton that he had, Andrew
     Haliburton, he had COPD prior to 1990, or Andrew
     Haliburton told me he knew he had COPD prior to
     1990s.  They read a lot of depositions, they didn't
     come.
          And, ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Guest talked
     about quality of evidence, but let's talk about it.
     I mean the only two people that came here and
     testified for the defendants were paid.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  They didn't have one --
          THE COURT:  Sustained. 4001
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  May we approach, Your Honor?
          THE COURT:  Yes, Counsel. COURT:  They read multiple family members
     who were not paid.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  That did not come in.  They
     read their depositions, but they did not physically
     come in, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  But deposition testimony is the
     same thing under the law.
          MR. ACOSTA:  You have to say -- just say live
     testimony.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Your Honor, can I say live?
          THE COURT:  Yeah, and the instruction I gave
     the jurors is you are to consider and weigh -- I
     mean, I basically said you have to consider the
     deposition testimony as the live testimony, that's
     what the standard instruction said, we do not
     denigrate deposition testimony.
          MR. PERSONS:  I mean that's precisely --
          MR. ACOSTA:  Right, he has actually already
     talked about deposition testimony in a
     non-denigrating way, so I think that was just kind 4002
     of a --
          THE COURT:  Okay.  I'm sustaining the
     objection.
          MR. PERSONS:  And I move for a mistrial
     given --
          MR. CHESTNUT:  How much time do I have?
          THE COURT:  Nancy, how much time do we have
     left?
          THE CLERK:  It's 49 so 5:15.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  About 18 minutes left.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  18.
          THE COURT:  18 minutes.
          Okay.  I'm going to sustain the objection.
     Okay, and I'm going to reserve on the motion. in open
court before the Court and jury.)
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, the
     objection was sustained for the record.
          And, Mr. Persons, I am reserving on your
     motion.
          MR. PERSONS:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Okay.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Just one last thing on
     diagnosis, ladies and gentlemen.  Let me just go to
     diagnosis. 4003
          They talked about diagnosis, so let's just
     talk about diagnosis.  For you to have COPD, ladies
     and gentlemen, a doctor has to diagnose you with
     COPD.  Now, how do we know that and how does the
     medical evidence confirm that?  Well, one of the
     treatments for COPD is oxygen.  Well, you can't get
     oxygen without a prescription from a doctor.
          The most reliable method of determining
     whether someone has COPD is a pulmonary function
     test.  Well, there was no pulmonary function test
     prior to 1998, arguably '94, but there was
     certainly none in the 1980s because if there were,
     it would have been no.  Moreover, ladies and
     gentlemen, there were no prescriptions.  So there
     are a list of prescriptions that are prescribed
     that are written by a doctor to address the
     ailments of COPD.  There were none in the 1980s.
          Ladies and gentlemen, there is no evidence
     whatsoever of Mr. Haliburton knowing that he had or
     having, in fact, COPD in the 1990s.  So the answer
     to number 2 is no, the statute of limitations.
          And what's most important, ladies and
     gentlemen, is their own expert came in here,
     Dr. Cosmos, and testified to you to just this, the
     guy they paid to come in and testify, the guy they 4004
     paid to read depositions, when I asked them, are
     you saying that Mr. Haliburton knew or should have
     known, no, I'm not saying that.  Well, are you
     asking that -- are you saying that he definitively
     had it?  No, I'm not saying that.  Then he tried to
     kind of bootstrap and say, well, maybe since he had
     severe in 1994, he probably would have had COPD in
     1980s.  Well, there is no medical literature, there
     is no factual basis upon which he relied.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  There is no evidence.
          MR. PERSONS:  Your Honor, that's a
     misstatement of the evidence.
          THE COURT:  Sus --
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Your Honor, Your Honor, there
     is no medical evidence.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  That part is fine, but the
     second part I am sustaining the objection to.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  He didn't cite to you one piece
     of literature from the New England Journal of
     Medicine, from other speeches, other doctors who
     said you can calibrate, or there is a formula that
     is accepted in the medical industry that calculates
     dating back severe chronic pulmonary disease from
     1994 to the 1980s.  That was guesswork, ladies and 4005
     gentlemen.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, because --
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Your Honor, I can argue --
          MR. PERSONS:  He couldn't bolster --
          MR. CHESTNUT:  -- the credibility of the
     witness.
          THE COURT:  Counsel, sidebar. COURT:  You can't do that on direct
     because that would be bolstering, he's an expert,
     you can't -- that would be in violation, and I
     would sustain the bolstering objection.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  However on cross, I asked him
     is there any literature to support that, he says
     no.
          MR. ACOSTA:  He's talking about methodologies,
     he's not really talking about opinions in a --
          THE COURT:  And that was fine.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  And I thought I was following
     your instruction because --
          THE COURT:  And I'm happy to -- I'm happy to
     have you address his methodology, not whether his
     opinion was confirmed in any literature.  That's
     the basis I'm sustaining the objection.  Okay. 4006
     That's fine. CHESTNUT:  Thank you, ladies and
     gentlemen.
          And in closing, they addressed that
     Mr. Haliburton didn't exhibit any symptoms or
     distress from withdrawal as it relates to
     addiction.  Let's just talk about addiction, that
     he didn't say he was stressed or jittery or nervous
     or craved cigarettes or felt out of sorts.  But,
     ladies and gentlemen, Mrs. Haliburton came to you
     and told you just that, that when he quit smoking
     in '94, he had all the -- he was stressed, he was
     jittery, he was nervous, he was quiet.  They quoted
     the children, ladies and gentlemen, who said the
     same.
          Now, here is what's -- as relates to addiction
     and was Mr. Haliburton addicted to cigarettes,
     frankly, ladies and gentlemen, I won't deal with it
     much because I can't argue it any better than
     counsel for Reynolds.  He had a very compelling
     argument that, in fact, Mr. Haliburton was addicted
     because he said to you his wife had problems,
     respiratory problems consequent to smoking, but 4007
     Mr. Haliburton couldn't quit, that people told him
     he had a cough, but he couldn't quit, that he would
     cough and wheeze, but he couldn't quit.  He went
     through a laundry list of symptoms that
     Mr. Haliburton exhibited, counsel did, and then
     said he didn't quit.
          Now, he tried to couch it in terms of
     Mr. Haliburton was very selfish and it was a
     choice.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Your Honor, this is argument, I
     can comment on his argument.
          THE COURT:  Just don't reference it to
     counsel.
          MR. PERSONS:  There are limits.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  That's fine.  Just don't
     reference counsel.  So that's fine.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  And it's not personal, ladies
     and gentlemen.  I respect counsel very much.  I'm
     just also respecting the fact that he made a very
     compelling argument that Mr. Haliburton was
     addicted yet they're saying he wasn't addicted.  He
     just argued that to you.
          Moreover, ladies and gentlemen, Jerry Miller
     says, he says, question, "What was Mr. Haliburton's 4008
     response when you would say, hey, you need to
     quit -- stop smoking because you are experiencing
     shortness of breath?"
          Answer:  "Man, I'm going to quit one day.  I'm
     trying.  Or, you know, it's just hard, you know,
     something like -- like what they told him, I'm
     going to try to quit, you know, but he just never
     did."
          Here it is in deposition testimony where he
     admits he is addicted.
          Let's talk about reliance, ladies and
     gentlemen, number 3.  Now, members of the jury,
     this is America.  You want to talk about, "Did
     Mr. Haliburton rely to his detriment on statements
     or omissions made by a tobacco company that were
     otherwise known or available to him concerning the
     health effects or the addictive nature of
     cigarettes and, therefore, whether those were the
     legal causes of his death."
          Ladies and gentlemen, this is America.  We all
     love America.  This is the land of opportunity.
     And we're not here saying that Reynolds shouldn't
     capitalize on the opportunity.  You want to drive
     your stock price up through the roof, go for it.
     You want to become a multibillionaire, go for it. 4009
     It's the land of the free, free to vote, free to do
     what you want, you are free to open a business.
     But you cannot do it at the expense of safety to
     the American public.  And, ladies and gentlemen,
     that's what Reynolds has done.
          There are safety rules here.  You can be all
     that you can be, but there are safety rules.  You
     cannot endanger the public.  And when a cigarette
     company has a defective product that they know is
     harming and killing people, that company must
     either recall the product, cure it, or remove it
     for the market -- from the market.  When they fail
     to do that, they are responsible for the harms and
     losses to the public, including Mr. Haliburton.
          And, ladies and gentlemen, that is where we
     are with Reynolds today.  Think about it.  Car
     manufacturers do it.  When there is a defect --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor, there is
     a motion --
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Your Honor, may I respond?
          MR. PERSONS:  There is a motion in limine on
     that.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  May I respond, Your Honor?  I
     believe case law says --
          THE COURT:  Counsel, sidebar, please. 4010 COURT:  Mr. Persons.
          MR. PERSONS:  Comparison of other
     industries --
          THE COURT:  We're not going to be talking
     about Ford Pinto or any of these --
          MR. CHESTNUT:  It's not direct, I didn't say
     Ford or Chevy, I just said --
          MR. ACOSTA:  No, he's not comparing them to a
     bad company and saying they're just as bad as --
          THE COURT:  Okay.
          MR. ACOSTA:  -- Ford is or they're just as bad
     as Enron, he's just saying what another company
     would do, that's different, it's a totally
     different thing.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Just be real careful
     because red flags go up when you start doing that.
     And Mr. Persons is correct, we do have an order on
     that issue.
          MR. PERSONS:  We got an order on that.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Okay.  Thank you. CHESTNUT:  So car companies, they have a 4011
     defect in their cars, they recall it.  Drug
     companies, pharmaceuticals, they have a recall,
     they have a drug -- they have a defect, they recall
     it.  But, ladies and gentlemen, in this instance,
     tobacco has a defective product, it's the
     cigarette.
          Now, here is how this works.  What we're
     saying is the defect in this product, the defect
     that tobacco knows about are these chemicals.  So
     people may know that smoking isn't good, that it's
     unseemly, that it stinks, that I probably shouldn't
     do it, that it may make me cough, but what
     cigarette companies didn't tell them was that all
     these chemicals are in there.
          And here is the issue, ladies and gentlemen,
     it doesn't have to be in there.  Why is this in
     there?  Cigarettes, nicotine causes addiction.
     These chemicals cause death.
          This is your lung cancer right here, ladies
     and gentlemen.  These -- you would never inhale
     formaldehyde knowingly, carbon monoxide, ammonia,
     acetone.  Wouldn't do it.  They hide it from the
     public.  This is the breach, ladies and gentlemen.
     This is what we're saying.  They're going to
     come -- they argued individual responsibility. 4012
          Well, you know what you're doing, but you
     don't know about this, Mr. Haliburton never knew
     all this was in cigarettes, and it doesn't have to
     be in cigarettes.  But you want to know why it's in
     cigarettes?  Because you saw the quote earlier
     today, one less cigarette a day is $40 billion.
     Why is this?  Money.
          This allows a cigarette to be lighter so that
     you can smoke 20 of them in a day.  A cigar is
     natural tobacco, you can't smoke 20 cigars in a
     day, it's too heavy, it's not palatable.  This
     makes cigarettes palatable, it also makes them
     deadly.
          This is greed, ladies and gentlemen.  They
     could take this out and still survive, but it's
     greed, that's why we're here, ladies and gentlemen.
     So did Mr. Haliburton rely to his detriment?
     Absolutely, because anybody with common sense, as
     counsel says, it's a common sense decision, well,
     anybody with common sense would just know that
     there is no way any company in America would have
     me smoking lighter fluid or household cleaner or
     rat poison.  It's greed, ladies and gentlemen.  So
     let's talk about the conspiracy.
          May I have time, please? 4013
          THE COURT:  Nancy?
          THE CLERK:  You have five minutes left.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Whoa.  Time flies when you're
     having fun, I guess, huh?
          Okay.  So, ladies and gentlemen, let's go to
     the videos that we saw.  You-all recall seeing the
     videos, they showed about three videos a minute ago
     about knowledge in the '60s?
          Ladies and gentlemen, again, these are
     half-truths.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PERSONS:  And ask to strike that.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Videos.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Your Honor, can I not comment
     on the evidence?
          THE COURT:  You can comment on the evidence,
     but not in the way it was presented.  So that's why
     I sustained it.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  The evidence, you can talk about
     the evidence.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Well, here is the most
     important part of the videos out of the all the 4014
     videos you saw, right, not one of them was from
     Reynolds.  They were all, what, lung association,
     heart association, they were from public interest
     groups, people who have to raise money to raise
     awareness yet they're trying to take credit for it.
     It's like the referring to the office pool where
     you're secret santa and somebody brings in the best
     gift and then they take credit for it, but you
     didn't bring in the gift.  Somebody else did.
     They're taking credit for the lung association, the
     heart association.  They didn't tell smokers that.
     And you can think about it.  They were spending
     billions of dollars in advertising.
          Look at the quality of those videos.  That's
     not a tobacco product video.  That's not a Joe
     Camel.  That's not Virginia Slim lady.  That's not
     the man Mr. -- oh, man, I forget his name, but he's
     really cool, though, with the hat and the brim.
     I'm sure you know who I'm talking about.
          Ladies and gentlemen, let's just look at what
     they're saying.  They have anticipated this
     litigation back in '72.  "We have employed a single
     strategy to defend ourselves on three major fronts:
     Litigation, politics, and public opinion."
     Litigation, they flip it on the person who is 4015
     smoking, which is what they are doing today.  Blame
     it on --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PERSONS:  And I've got a motion.
          THE COURT:  Counsel, sidebar. before the
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
          MR. PERSONS:  That's the --
          THE COURT:  That's the --
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Well, it is the
     responsibility --
          THE COURT:  Hold on.  Hold on.
          MR. PERSONS:  I'm sorry, Nancy.
          THE COURT:  You can go ahead and say
     responsibility, but not in terms of them defending
     themselves today.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Just say "Reynolds", not "they".
          THE COURT:  Yes.
          MR. PERSONS:  That's the objection, attacking
     the defense.
          THE COURT:  Just change it to Reynolds that's
     all.
          MR. PERSONS:  And move for a mistrial.
          THE COURT:  I'll reserve.  Let's move forward. 4016 CHESTNUT:  Reynolds is your defendant.
     Politics and public opinion.  Again, here is the
     politics piece, members of the jury.  They create
     doubt with the health change -- charge, advocating
     the public's right to smoke without actually urging
     them to take up the practice.  "On the litigation
     front for which the strategy was designed, it has
     been successful."
          1972, this is their strategy, seems a lot like
     what we are hearing today.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Reynolds. strike.
          THE COURT:  Just refer to Reynolds, okay?
          MR. PERSONS:  And renew.
          THE COURT:  Reserve, sustained, Reynolds, move
     forward.
          MR. PERSONS:  Thank you.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Reynolds, ladies and gentlemen,
     Reynolds.  Can I just have a standing Reynolds for
     today, Your Honor?  No?
          THE COURT:  Just move forward.  In the last
     three minutes, let's finish up. 4017
          MR. CHESTNUT:  "We must in the near future
     provide some answers."  I've got three minutes, but
     I really want to show you, ladies and gentlemen.
     Earlier, they talked about the studies that they --
     that they funded.  Let's talk about the studies
     that they funded, ladies and gentlemen.  They were
     funding studies that only supported their tobacco.
     And if they didn't, ladies and gentlemen, the CTR
     that they told you about, if they didn't support
     what tobacco was saying, here is the executive
     committee, they are giving money to schools; right?
     Well, here is a scientist who has told the truth,
     said, look, smoking is dangerous.  What happened?
     The CTR that they just referenced terminated his
     grant June 20th, 1984.  This is their document, not
     ours.  Freddy Homburger, smoking inhalation in
     hamsters, and it shows that cancer due to smoking
     caused inhalation by hamsters caused cancer in
     hamsters, they terminated his grant, ladies and
     gentlemen.
          Did Mr. Haliburton rely?  America relied.
     They made the argument, well, Mr. Haliburton grew
     up in South Georgia, we wouldn't do it in South
     Georgia.  Of course, it was in South Georgia.
     South Georgia is pennies, they were targeting 4018
     America.  "I believe the current movement toward
     contract research is a violation of our advertised
     pledges to the public."  This is somebody who has
     got a guilty conscience in 1977 saying they were
     lying to the public and the public is relying on
     them.
          And here is the kicker, ladies and gentlemen,
     an admission by the industry that excessive
     cigarette smoking is bad for you is tantamount to
     an admission of guilt --
          THE COURT:  Mr. Chestnut.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  -- with regard to the lung
     cancer problem.
          THE COURT:  Time to wrap up.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  So this could be an open door
     to litigation.  Members of the jury, I'm sorry I'm
     running out of time, but here is the issue.
     Counsel took issue with the $16.5 million, but you
     know what they couldn't show you one instance where
     Reynolds even spent a fraction of $16.5 million to
     educate the public to the truth.
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor, that's
     improper.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  And we're out of time.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Thank you. 4019
