CLOSING ON PUNITIVE DAMAGES
MR. AVERA: Yes, sir.
Good morning, folks. This is a different part of the trial because this morning you're here to talk about -- or we're here to talk about R.J. Reynolds' inability to control their corporate behavior over a half a century.
You're back this morning, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the community. You are their representatives. You're here to tell R.J.
Reynolds that their conduct is not acceptable in American society.
You're here on behalf of 14 to 17 year olds and their parents to let R.J. Reynolds know that their choices over a period of a half a century, to not tell the truth, mislead the American public will not be tolerated in our society.
I am not going to put up any exhibits this morning, save one demonstrative aide. I am not going to go back over the testimony. I know you folks are all tired of hearing us talk, and it has been a long couple weeks. Seems like it has been longer than two weeks that we've all been here.
But what you're about to do is to do something very important in the American jurisprudence system and that is you're going to speak as the conscience of the community. You have the ability to send a message in response to the question of who am I, posed by Ms. Faulkner in voir dire, you are that part of our civil justice system of our society that has the power that no individual has, that Congress does not have, and that is, to send a message to an American corporation who engaged in the most obscene conspiracy in the 20th century to mislead Americans about the safety of their
product and the adverse health effects.
What have they learned, should be the question that you ask yourselves when you go back. What have they learned as a result of this case, because they will not be able to stand up in a Court of law and look to Jean Hall and say to her, Ms. Hall, we're sorry; we lied over that period of time; we made horrible choices; it was wrong to the American people; it was wrong with respect to Lamar Hall; we're sorry.
They won't say that.
What they will say is we're sorry for your loss, Ms. Hall. Ms. Hall cares nothing for their sympathy this morning. She's here for a jury in Alachua County, Florida to send a message to a corporation on behalf of her husband that what they did was wrong.
They will not tell you that they lied. They will not tell you that they misled. So what have they learned?
Well, further proof of what they have not learned is the fact that Lamar Hall, a boy at the age of 14 who began to use their product, and use their product for almost his entire life did exactly what they wanted him to do. Those
marketing and advertising dollars over the years,
250 billion were well spent, they blame him. They take not one ounce of accountability, not one.
Now, they may tell you that things are different today. Maybe they are. Maybe they aren't.
But Noah didn't start building the ark after the rain started. They started in 1999, 2000, thereabouts, long after any of that time would have been any benefit to Lamar Hall and all of those hundreds of thousands of Americans have died over a span of 50 or 60 years.
Their inhumanity to their fellow man is unparalleled. You now know. You know that when we had voir dire, you remember the number of people that had such strong feelings about personal choice and smokers bringing a lawsuit against a tobacco company that makes cigarettes. But those folks didn't know what you now know.
You've seen what 99 percent of the Americans have not seen and do not know. And that's what went on in corporate boardrooms of R.J. Reynolds and the tobacco industry over a period of 50 years.
So now you get to send a message. You get to
send a message in a punitive verdict form that applies solely to the harm caused in this case.
But you can consider the reprehensibility of their conduct across the country, across the state and across this community.
Mr. Murphy had a comment about the compensatory damages yesterday. The comment simply demonstrates that they have no concept of the harm they caused American families. They have no concept of what families are going through on a daily basis dealing with disease caused by cigarettes.
They either have no concept, ladies and gentlemen, or they don't care, or both. R.J. Reynolds' net worth in fiscal year 2006 was $7.2 billion.
In 2007, 8.88 million -- sorry, $8.8 billion, and in 2008, $7.9 billion.
There are 400 dollar signs on that slide.
Each of those dollar signs represents $20 million. 400 times 20 is 8 billion. About almost a bill dollars less than their net worth in 2007. And the net worth is what you consider in terms of what would be appropriate.
Folks, speak on behalf of your community.
Speak on behalf of the kids, their parents and all the people that were misled over a period of 50 years, but apply that harm solely in this case as it relates to Lamar Hall and his wife Jean Hall.
I'm going to ask you to determine the sum of $20 million would be an appropriate punitive damages award in this case, and to send a message to that corporate boardroom never again in American corporate world will we ever, ever tolerate such obscene behavior ever again.
Thank you very much.
