MR. DENNEY: Thank you, Your Honor. May i please the Court.
Good morning, everybody.
THE JURY: (Collectively.) Good morning.
MR. DENNEY: Let me get situated here. All right.
I want to start out by thanking each and every one of you for taking the time away from your families, your job responsibilities and your lives to be here. I'm sure when you all were sitting out there during jury selection, you did not think that you were going to be one of the ones that were going to be picked for the jury, but you were, and you showed up and you listened intently.
We all -- that hasn't gone unnoticed.
You've been taking good notes. And so on behalf of Mr. Hallgren, Hardee, Baron, our whole team, we thank you very much for your time and attention.
And what you've seen throughout the trial, I think by now it's pretty clear that Ted Hallgren, Claire Hallgren, they have an entirely different set of values, morals than RJ Reynolds and Philip Morris.
The only thing that he and Claire have in common with them is that they're sharing a courtroom with these defendants. That's it.
You heard about, I think it's fair to say,_
they had a very good marriage. They raised two well-adjusted, good kids. You got to hear testimony from them from the witness stand. We had to read Sally, but you heard that evidence.
I think it's fair to say that things like hard work, family and service were very important to both of them.
And their lives started, as you heard, in 1938 when Ted met Claire and they went on their first date, he called it, where they were riding in the car together.
And he went to World War II in the early 1940s. And just like many of the wives and husbands of the day, Claire waited for him patiently and faithfully until he got back in 1942, when they got married.
And he went back, finished up his service and, of course, they lived out their lives together and had two wonderful children.
They would do -- you've heard the evidence, they would do everything together. They raised their kids together, which is a huge job, as most of you probably know. They enjoyed their lives.
Unfortunately for Claire, these defendants,
RJ Reynolds and Philip Morris, didn't look at her that way. They looked at her like they did the majority of their customers, all of their customers, really; a number, a statistic, another person using their highly addictive, highly engineered -- make no mistake about it, highly-engineered product just as they intended, over and over and over again, every day, millions of times over the course of her life, for 57 years.
And, of course, you heard the evidence in the case, and we told you on jury selection that we would be bringing you evidence, and we brought you a lot of it. You heard that cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting, and this is right out of the 1988 Surgeon General report that we've heard so much about.
Nicotine is a drug that causes addiction, and, of course the pharmacologic and behavioral processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those of heroin and cocaine.
Make no mistake about that. Nobody took the stand and told you that when you take a drag off
a cigarette you get high as a kite like you do
with cocaine or heroin. That's not what this evidence is about. It's about the addictive properties of nicotine.
And we know that nicotine addiction, which causes disease, kills more people in this country every single year than heroin, cocaine, alcohol, car accidents, AIDS combined. Almost half a million people every year.
And we know that once an addicted smoker or any smoker, for that matter, takes a drag off a cigarette, the smoke is inhaled into the lungs, and it's a very efficient delivery system, and it reaches the brain in about seven seconds.
And we talked about all of those things that happen once that occurs; all of the dopamine that gets released, all of those chemicals, all of the nicotine receptors.
And really, this was from the 2010 Surgeon General report, and it sort of sums up what this case is about, really, and that is that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason -- not a reason -- the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases described in this
report.
And that's why I think the first words out of Mr. Bass's mouth on opening statement, nicotine isn't the reason why people start to smoke, but it sure as heck is the reason why they keep on smoking. And this is from the top doctor in our country, you've heard all about that.
So let's get right to it. The first question on the verdict form, and this is the Engle class membership question that we talked about in jury selection and that Judge Langford just read to you.
Was Claire Hallgren addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?
So that's really a two-part question, and I'm just going to show you what the evidence was.
And by the way, the standard you apply in this case is the greater weight of the evidence. And we talked about that on jury selection, and that means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the
case.
So really, like we talked about, if you imagine scales, if it just tilts even slightly our way, then we carry the day on that issue.
I submit to you, we brought you a mountain of evidence to do a heck of a lot more than that.
So, in court, Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds tell you that it's not about nicotine. They take the focus off nicotine, just like Mr. Bass said they would, and they did. But out of court, they say something entirely different.
The younger people are when they start smoking, the more likely they are to become strongly addicted. You heard that from Dr. Benowitz, who they played in their case.
We talked about the young brain and changes that happen. Two kinds. Remember that, two kinds. Neuroplasticity is one. It always stays permanent. The second one was the nicotine receptors, and those do go back to normal.
So if it's suggested to you in closing argument that all the changes go back to normal, remember that.
Symptoms of addiction can appear in teens or
preteens within weeks or only days after they become occasional smokers. This is what they say outside of court.
In court, they bring you Dr. Rosman, who they found working in Colorado in 2004 that, I think it's very fair to say his experience of nicotine addiction was limited. That's an understatement.
They come into court and tell you otherwise.
In their own words outside of court, nicotine is addictive, and they're in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug, effective in the release of stress mechanisms. Nobody in this case disputed that when someone smokes a cigarette that nicotine doesn't relieve stress, that's not the issue in the case.
If you dig deep into the core of why Claire Hallgren smoked, it's nicotine.
Here they talk about how they perpetuated cigarette habit, reside in the pharmacological effect of smoke. That's one of the first documents you saw.
And here it is: "No one's ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without
nicotine " That's the evidence in the case
That's their own words outside of court.
The product is nicotine. We talked about that.
The cigarette that does not deliver nicotine cannot satisfy the habituated -- the euphemism for addicted -- smoker and cannot lead to habituation and would therefore almost certainly fail.
And you've seen a plethora of documents which talk about how addiction was key to their strategy. What a great product. You make it, it's got an addictive drug in it, and people just keep right on using it. You make a lot of money.
Unfortunately, one of the negative side effects is, in their own words, lung cancer.
"Without any question -- " this is outside of court -- "without any question, the desire to smoke is based on the effect of nicotine on the body."
So you remember when Dr. Rosman sat on the stand and said, oh, Claire Hallgren smoked because she -- for recreational purposes. Think about when she would walk away from her husband go into that bathroom, go inside, shut the door,
turn on the fan, sit on the toilet and smoke her cigarette all by herself, if she was having fun doing that. That's what they're trying to tell you.
Their industry may be thought of as a specialized, highly ritualized and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry, and the tobacco products contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug. You heard all that evidence.
So we brought it to you, and we brought you the evidence from the public health community. We brought you some of the foremost authorities in the world on this issue, in this case.
Dr. Michael Cummings has 30-plus years in nicotine addiction and disease, and he's not sitting off in a jail somewhere seeing people one time. He was running the New York State Quit Line, helping smokers try and get off nicotine.
He's won numerous awards. He's been a reviewer for the Surgeon General's reports that these guys attacked over and over again over the years. He's counseled thousands of people to try to get them to quit smoking. His qualifications really speak for themselves._
And Dr. Burns, same thing. He's been a -he used to work for the Surgeon General. He was a senior reviewer on many of those reports, and he teaches medical students, medical doctors on nicotine addiction.
He wrote the book, the chapter in the book, Harrison's Internal Medicine, that they teach medical students at Harvard about nicotine addiction.
This is who we brought you. We tried to bring you the best evidence there is.
And Dr. Cummings, he really laid it out and you got to ask yourself if this makes sense. He used the DSM-IV, too. I will get to that in a minute. Don't worry. But Dr. Cummings said that persistent daily use -- not a hundred cigarettes and everybody's addicted like Dr. Rosman tried to suggest to you. That's not what he said. That would be insulting to your intelligence if he came and told you that.
MR. GERAGHTY: I would object, Your Honor, to the comment.
THE COURT: Let's move to another comment.
MR. DENNEY: He told you persistent daily use, every day, in combination with -- not
alone. In combination with the time to first cigarette in the morning, that is when someone rolls out of the bed, what do they do first. Do they go eat breakfast, or do they get their nicotine?
She would smoke first thing in the morning in the bathroom, and we know that because Ted, you heard both he and Dr. Burns tell you that Ted would get up in the morning, and he would smell smoke in the bathroom, and the ashtray would be in there before breakfast.
She smoked a half a pack to one and a half packs a day, and there's been a lot of debate on the exact number of that, but I think it's fair to say it's somewhere in that range every single day.
The early age of initiation, because like Philip Morris said when they're not in court, she started in 1938 -- I'm sorry. In 1938, she was already smoking a half a pack of cigarettes every day, so she started young, and those changes were already developing in her young brain.
Difficulty refraining from smoking. Does this mean that the only way she can be addicted
is if she rides in her husband's car, smokes and blows it in his face or around her son that had asthma? She needs to be sitting down next to him, blowing it on him? Ridiculous.
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Your Honor. I object to comments like ridiculous.
THE COURT: Overruled. Go ahead.
MR. DENNEY: It's ridiculous.
She was a respectful smoker because she loved her husband. He said don't smoke around me, so she tolerated in the car. Get out of the car, light up a cigarette. So there were many instances where she would have difficulty refraining from smoking, and she had to excuse herself from various situations and go out and smoke.
Failed quit attempts. We talked about that ad nauseam in this case. The evidence in this case, this case, is that Claire Hallgren regretted smoking. She tried to quit. She was embarrassed because she couldn't overcome her addiction to nicotine because, yeah, some of her family members did describe her as a strong-willed person. So she was embarrassed by that. You heard Peter Hallgren say that it was
a personal defeat for her, that she couldn't stop.
You heard about the withdrawal symptoms and cravings upon trying to quit. She felt like she was crawling out of her skin. She told her kids and Ted that they would get a divorce if they quit at the same time.
And then, of course, used despite knowledge of harms or actual harm.
You heard about the cough that she had over the years which then developed into chronic bronchitis in 1991. It was right there in the record, and even Dr. Rosman admitted what the word "chronic" means. It means going on for some time, and then it got worse and worse.
And when you look at the records, you will see that in 1995, she was diagnosed with severe COPD. So there's a progression. The cough, chronic bronchitis and then severe COPD.
So I'm not going to read every line here, but Dr. Burns, same thing. He reviewed all the records in this case, all the testimony. He said there's no question in his mind she was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. She used it at the beginning, early in life, every
day.
He told you about how much, used it when she was sick. She wanted to quit, tried and was unsuccessful. And she was one of the 70 to 80 percent of smokers who say they want to stop smoking.
She was irritable, couldn't function, all of these things we've just talked about.
And then we had the treating doctors. These are the people who actually had a doctor-patient relationship with Mrs. Claire Hallgren when she was alive, who eyeballed her, had her in her office, asked her questions and came to thoughtful conclusions, "chronic cigarette addiction." Period, there it is.
"Positive history of tobacco abuse." A longstanding history of tobacco use. Dr. Olson,
Dr. Bansal and Dr. Sollacio. And you heard Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings discuss what tobacco abuse means. That's another waive of saying nicotine addiction.
Ted. Who knew Claire better than Ted?
"Do you believe from your perspective that she was addicted?"
"Oh, yes she was addicted."
"Why do you think that?"
"Because she could not quit."
Was Ted a doctor?
No.
Does Ted know her better than anybody?
You bet. That's what he thought.
Peter, and I'm not -- this is a long quote.
I'm not going to read it all, but he watched her attempts. He said she was a strong-willed person. He didn't come in here and try and retreat from that and say, well, she was a weak person. No, she was a strong-willed person.
She worked hard at stopping at least in the '70s or '80s and that was the best he could recall.
Once she got it in her head she was going to stop smoking, she was a person who did what she said she was going to do. She'd get purpose in her mind to do things. That's how she brought us up too, and that's why it was such a personal defeat for her that she couldn't do it.
Because, as you know and as all the witnesses said, addiction affects everybody differently. It just makes common sense.
Did you think she did everything she could
do to try and stop smoking?
Yes.
Sally Hallgren. Not only was Sally Claire's daughter, but she was also a doctor.
"Did your mother meet your professional definition of addiction?"
"Yes."
"Specifically, was she addicted?"
"Yes." More evidence. All the witnesses in the case, Cummings, Burns, Sally, Dr. Olson, Bansal, Sollacio, Ted, Peter, Claire, all testified in this case that Claire Hallgren was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes.
If you look at the greater weight of the evidence, that's a landslide. The one guy they brought you, Dr. Rosman, you heard -- it's impossible or extremely difficult for anybody, using his definition of addiction, to ever be addicted. He didn't follow the definition of tolerance that was right there in the book. He would retreat from that. You got to ask yourself, why would he do that in court?
When they get up and tell you that Claire Hallgren wasn't addicted and smoked for recreational reasons and she just wanted to, remember their own words. I'm not going to read
this all to you, but this is where they compare people like Claire Hallgren who have families to rats. Rats in cages hitting pellets for food. Remember that when they get up here and talk about that? They want to call it wrong-headed and things like that.
Consider the smoker smoking the cigarettes is the lever press. The effect of that smoking act on his person is the reward. That effect reinforces the smoking act. He comes to push the lever 10 to 60 times per day.
And here's another one. A cigarette is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure. It is exquisite and it leaves one unsatisfied. What more can one want? Let us provide the exquisiteness and hope that they, our consumers, continue to remain unsatisfied. All we would want then is a larger bag to carry the money to the bank. There it is, in their own words outside of court.
It was suggested to you that this case, ironically, by counsel for the defendants, that this case was about money on opening statement. Well, here it is. Bags of money that they took to the bank year after year after year after
year after year.
Legal cause. I blew this up because as Judge Langford just instructed you, the only law you're to follow in this case is what he gives you, and this comes directly from the jury instructions.
And it's an addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of loss, injury or damage if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such loss, injury or damage so that it can be reasonably said -there's a typo in there -- that but for addiction in cigarettes containing nicotine the loss, injury or damage would not have occurred. That's the law in the case, and nobody can tell you any different.
So really, what that question is asking is how did Claire Hallgren get from here, normal cells in her lungs, to here? Well, we know that people don't smoke to get all of these chemicals in their lungs, as Dr. Burns explained to you. They smoked for nicotine. That's the lynchpin, in his own words.
So if you think about it, the Engle class
membership, you've got nicotine addiction out here. You've got millions of exposures over the course of 57 years of smoking, which, of course, lead to cancer, and then her early death.
That's really what this is asking.
And if you take the nicotine addiction away, would you have exposure? Maybe minimally. If someone wasn't addicted, maybe they wouldn't smoke 20, 30 cigarettes a day. Why would you? That isn't what the evidence was in this case. People smoke for nicotine. And you certain wouldn't develop cancer and you certainly wouldn't develop death. It just makes sense, if you think about. And that's how addiction causes disease.
And the Surgeon General weighed in on it. Showing this again; because again, this is the fundamental for this question. It's the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products. And this persistent use contributes to many diseases described in this report, just like in this case, lung cancer.
But we brought you the evidence anyway.
This is Neal Benowitz. They played his
deposition in their case He said nothing
different than nobody else did. People smoke to get nicotine, and it's the cigarette smoke that carries the nicotine that cause the diseases.
And if they weren't getting the nicotine from the cigarettes, they wouldn't smoke. They wouldn't be exposed to the tobacco smoke toxins, and they would not get the disease. It just makes sense. So nicotine is really the root cause of smoking-related diseases.
Then he's asked: "So, in your opinion, does a cigarette smoker, the addiction to smoking cigarettes that contain nicotine cause illness?"
"Absolutely."
"No issue, no question?"
"None."
Michael Cummings, same thing.
"In your own personal experience, is nicotine addiction the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using products?"
"Yes, I don't think there's any doubt about that."
He says the same thing that the Surgeon General does.
"In your own experience, does that use contribute in a substantial way to things like
people developing lung cancer?"
"Yes. It's nicotine addiction, persistent use of the product that's characterized by compulsive use of the product over decades to the diseases that are linked to smoking."
Dr. Burns: "It's the nicotine that makes you repetitively dose yourself seven to ten puffs, 10, 20, cigarettes every day of the year,
10 years, 20 years, 30 years or the length of time it takes those cancer causing substances to work on your lungs, damage the lungs, change the cells themselves so they become cancer. It's all about nicotine."
Without it -- without nicotine, without the need to repetitively expose yourself to the nicotine, you never would have the repetitive exposure to all of these cancer-causing substances over a long enough period of time to result in lung cancer.
So as a result it's the nicotine that is the lynchpin, the key connector between the addiction and the smoking behavior and the occurrence of cancer, and they didn't bring anybody in here to tell you any different.
So nicotine addiction caused the exposures,
caused the cancer, caused the death, and it was a substantial cause.
So Claire Hallgren specifically. We asked everybody first, how does this work? Then we asked, did this work the same way with Claire Hallgren? And of course it did. Her addiction to cigarettes contributed substantially to her lung cancer. That's what Dr. Cummings said.
Dr. Burns, he said but for her addiction, she never would have continued to be exposed to the toxic and carcinogenic substances in the cigarettes that led to her lung cancer. So but for it, her addiction there would not have been lung cancer.
And then he says: "What we all know and what the industry was saying behind closed doors for decades, if you take the nicotine out, you remove the addictive component and people stop smoking."
In the jury instructions, right underneath the legal cause instruction is this one, and it's called -- we call it concurring cause instruction.
And it says: "In order to be regarded as a legal cause of a loss, injury or damage, an
addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. An addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause, even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause, if the addiction to nicotine contributes substantially to producing such loss, injury or damage.
And in this case, we've admitted since day one that Claire Hallgren had a part to play in this. She tried to quit. She had a responsibility to try and quit. She met that responsibility the best she could, but she does have some responsibility because she couldn't d it. That is an example of the kind of thing that can contribute to causing disease.
But if you think about it, but for her addiction to nicotine, she wouldn't have tried to quit in the first place, we wouldn't even be here. It's about the nicotine.
The issue is not whether addiction robbed Claire Hallgren of her free will. That's not the issue in the case. You won't see that anywhere in any of the jury instructions.
The issue is not whether Claire Hallgren had
a complete loss of self-control. You won't see that anywhere in the judge's instructions.
The issue is not whether addiction took over Claire Hallgren's life completely. That's not the issue in this case.
The issue is whether the nicotine addiction was a substantial contributing cause to her lung cancer and death. And the overwhelming evidence in this case should tell you that it was.
We talked about -- I will talk about this some more later, but the quit methods of Claire Hallgren. She tried cold turkey. Worked for, depending on the testimony, six months. But as you may remember Dr. Benowitz saying when you start that young the neuroplasticity changes in the brain, which are permanent, cause people to crave cigarettes, dream about them for even years down the line.
She switched to light cigarettes because she thought they'd be better for her. She cut back on the amount she smoked. She tried nicotine gum and patches, and those were the pharmaceutical aids available at the time.
All right. Some of the things you've heard from the defense in this case to support why it
is Dr. Rosman can say that Claire Hallgren wasn't addicted are things like she learned how to fly an airplane, you know. If you're going to look at the photos they put in evidence, there's a picture of her standing by the plane.
I submit to you, so what? She was a member of the Ninety-Nines. Good for her. She had a cocktail or two at night at dinner time. You heard them mention that a whole lot. Again, so what?
I asked Ted about it. He said, yeah, I think it's healthy for me, and he's 92. She respected Ted enough not to smoke in his car. Okay. That doesn't have to do with any of the issues in this case. They enjoyed their time together. You heard a lot about them going on cruises and golfing. All right, well, she would walk off on the golf course and smoke. You heard Ted talk about that.
These are the kinds of defenses they brought you. They also told you that she could have quit and she tried her best. She did. She had a responsibility to try, and she tried. She just wasn't able to do it.
She was one of the group of smokers in this
country, and there are many of them, that for whatever reason, whether it's the way they're made up, we don't know, she just couldn't do it. But we know she tried, and the people who knew her the best, her kids, her husband, they all came in and told you that. And there's no evidence that she told a doctor anything different in this case.
So question one, it's really the Engle class membership jury question. I submit to you that there's an overwhelming cascade of evidence in this case that that should be checked yes.
So then once that -- if you get that far, based on the evidence in this case, these Engle findings apply. And the Court will instruct you that the following matters have previously been determined, and we all talked about that in jury selection, and all of just said you'd be okay with that.
And that smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer, I think we proved that anyway.
Nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, we've proven that anyway.
The defendants placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably
dangerous.
The defendants were negligent.
They concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false or misleading. We brought you that evidence anyway.
Or failed to disclose a material fact concerning or proving the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes.
Defendant agreed with other cigarette manufacturers to conceal or omit information regarding health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes with the intention that smokers and members of the public would rely to their detriment.
And you're to apply these as law in this case. And we brought you the evidence anyway. And it really starts with the product.
What is the product that they were selling? They were selling a highly engineered, unnatural product. There's been a suggestion in this case that smoking cigarettes is the same as walking into a tobacco sun-drenched beautiful field, picking off a leaf, drying it out, rolling it up
and smoking it
Nothing could be further from the truth.
There are a host of additives and chemicals in cigarettes to make it much easier for the smoker to tolerate the smoke in their lungs.
You heard the witnesses that know about this talk about how people don't like inhaling cigar smoke because the pH isn't altered in cigar smoke like it is in cigarettes, and they use ammonia to do that. It's got high fructose corn syrup, licorice, all these things, you heard about that.
We showed you some of the ingredients from their own website. Believe me, they didn't always share this with the public. You know that, too. These same ingredients are in Virginia Slims. They talk about this earlier than 1959. And even earlier, the physiological requirements of the smoker with respect to nicotine can be met by the application -application of the optimum amount of nicotine to the extracted tobacco.
The evidence in this case that you've heard is that yes, nicotine grows naturally in a normal nicotine seed that has not been engineered. But during the manufacturing
process, they take it out, they take out the nicotine. And then they spray with sprayers the optimal amount of nicotine onto the plant.
That's what they do, and they do it on purpose and for a reason, to keep smokers unsatisfied so they can keep making a bunch of money.
And here's Claude Teague in 1972. He's saying if what we know about the habituated smoker is true, products designed for him should emphasis nicotine, nicotine delivery, nicotine satisfaction and the like. What we should really make and sell would be a proper dosage form of nicotine with as many other built-in attractions and gratifications as possible. And that's what they did.
And here he's talking specifically about altering the pH. And you heard about that from Dr. Cummings and also Dr. Burns.
So the modern day cigarette is not a natural product, folks, it's a highly-engineered product purposefully designed to make it addictive so that people keep buying them.
So who's the target of this product? We brought you this evidence too. The youth of this country. This is 1953, Philip Morris
talking about down here, it would seem increasingly important from the point of view Philip Morris regular size cigarettes do everything possible to increase the trend in young people toward Philip Morris. These are the kids of the nation that they're going after with this product.
Here's RJ Reynolds. "Realistically, if our company is to survive and prosper over the long term, we must get our share of the youth market."
So what do they mean by that? Well, why do they need the youth market, first of all?
Because they needed them to replace the smokers that were either dying or were able to quit.
And here they're tracking it, and they say more than two-thirds of male smokers start by age 18. And only five percent start after age 24.
People like Claire Hallgren are no different. Although women of the early 1900s started to smoke at later ages than men, there's little difference in recent decades. Again, this is '84.
It's hard to see, but the median age there is 16.7. So what does this have to do with
Claire Hallgren? She started when she was 16 years old. She was square in the middle of their target market. And we talked about, you heard the evidence about the billions of dollars they pumped into on the airwaves, television when they were allowed to, magazines, print to make smoking attractive looking for kids.
And it worked. The evidence is -- look at their own documents. They're tracking smokers as early as age 12, 13, 14. Here's 20 percent
starting at age 14, 15, 16. This is 1984. It's
not that long ago.
Here we go. First let's look at the growing importance of the young adult in the cigarette market. What's a young "adult"? 14 to 24 age group? 1928. RJ Reynolds. This is a letter to their marketing folks, encouraging them to go out into high schools, prep schools, colleges and universities to line up students for our brands.
And, of course, 1990, not that long ago, this is -- you may have learned some things in this case. Maybe this is one of them. "Despite all the research going on" -- this is a letter to fifth graders, okay -- "the simple and
unfortunate fact is that scientists do not know the cause or causes of the chronic diseases reported to be associated with smoking."
That's directly from the source, and the target is fifth grade students. That is disgusting.
"We would appreciate you passing this information on to your students."
Here's the FTC. And again, they were in charge of looking at the airwaves and advertising that was going on. They lay it out. Cigarette advertising reaches virtually all Americans who can either read or understand the spoken word.
The defendants came into court and said, oh, this didn't have an affect on anybody. It's not true. So pervasive is cigarette advertising that it is virtually impossible for Americans of almost any age to avoid cigarette advertising.
And we showed you a snippet of examples, there are -- and you heard Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns tell you there's legions more documents out there that talk about all the advertising they did.
Cigarette commercials continue to appeal to
youth. Of course, their target market, and continue to blot out any consciousness of the health hazards. To allow the American people, and especially teenagers, the opportunity to make an informed and deliberate choice of whether or not no start smoking, they must be freed from constant exposure to such one-sided blandishment and told the whole story. This was a conclusion of a report to Congress.
And, of course, we -- you learned all about the 50-year cover-up that they said made no difference, and I'm going to talk to you about that now.
In the early 1950s, there is no question that there was a legitimate dispute in this country about whether or not cigarettes were bad, whether or not they caused lung cancer, because that was the first thing people suspected.
Before the 1950s and even during, a lot of people in this country smoked. I think the evidence was about 80 percent of men smoked and something like 50 percent of women, because women caught the habit a little later.
There was a legitimate question out there in
the '50s when people started. You saw the mouse painting studies and all that. That's all true.
That happened.
And as a result this, cigarette consumption -- and remember the blue line is cigarettes consumed, the red line is our lung cancer death rates. This started going down. It was headed down in a free-fall.
And so the public health community was marshalling their resources, getting their things together to try and educate the public, kids, everybody in this country about smoking. And the cigarette companies were very worried about that, and they had a choice to make.
And this document in 1982, decades later, pretty much sums it up. It says, "we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our consumers would stop using if they could. That is to say, if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight." This is in '82.
They're worried about money.
"If and when that occurs, our options are one, go out of business, lose money. Two, find a way to eliminate the desire of smokers to stop
smoking."
So in 1954, when these guys got together at the Plaza Hotel, that's what they were talking about, what do we do? Here's the public health community, you know. You saw some of the quotes. "Wouldn't it be great if we can make a cancer-free cigarette."
They knew as early as 1953 -- of course they did, because they were the ones making the product -- that there were agents in cigarettes that caused cancer and killed people.
They decided instead of cooperating with the public health community to get a consistent, uniform message to the public that they were going to fight it. They were going to fight it.
And they released, you remember this, The Frank Statement. And they told everybody: "We accept an interest in health paramount over everything else. We believe the products we make are not injurious to health. We always will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the health."
1954, you remember this. This is George Weissman, he's saying: "If any one of us
believe the product we were making or selling
was in any way harmful, we would voluntarily go out of business." And doesn't that make sense? Why would you want to kill half a million people a year?
1959, what they were saying behind closed doors was very different than what they were telling the public. "Cigarette smoke should contain as little as possible, preferably at the zero level of the polycyclic hydrocarbons."
This is a clear-cut cancer-causing agent that they knew about.
Down at the bottom they say -- it's hard to read, but "we consider the zero level for impossible to achieve as long as the combustion temperature of the cigarette is greater than 700 degrees Celsius." And, of course, when you light it, it is. So they knew that. And they're saying "carcinogens are found in practically every class of cigarette smoke."
And here's the deal on filters. "Present technology does not permit selected filtration of particulate smoke." They knew in 1961 that filters didn't do a doggone thing. That's not what they told the public.
This, I think, sums up whether or not --
you've heard some suggestion that what they did made no difference, that it was okay for them to lie and try and mislead the public and fight this Surgeon General for decades. And then, hey, you know, bring them into court and say that didn't make any difference.
What were they saying at the time? That is Darr to Paul Hahn. "You took a bold and courageous action in December 1953 when you called for a meeting of manufacturers and other industry groups to discuss ways and means of presenting a united front against the claims that were being made that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. The formation of the Tobacco Industry Research Committee was the result."
And here's the kicker. "There is absolutely no question in my mind that if this committee had not been formed, the cigarette industry by now would have been in a deplorable position." Those are his own words.
And what is he talking about? He's talking about the fact that people were starting to get scared. The jury is still out. But people were getting worried, and they were putting down the
cigarettes, but these guys came out and they marshalled their huge resources and started pumping it into the public to convince people otherwise.
Did people hear the information? Of course, nobody came into this courtroom and told you that Claire Hallgren didn't hear things. We're not going to suggest that to you. That would be ridiculous.
There was information out there, but the information they were pumping out there was drowning it out and reassuring addicted smokers.
You heard Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns -- I think it was Burns -- talk about when an addicted smoker is trying to quit and they see an advertisement that shows someone happy-go-lucky, they know that's how they'll feel if they just pick up that cigarette and take a drag off of it. These guys knew that better than anybody.
So here's the graph. They would have been in a deplorable position because just like Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings, who were fighting them over decades, they were fighting them not on behalf of money, on behalf of the public
welfare. They knew that if they hadn't done what they did, that this would have kept going down, down, down, down, down, down, down, dowr
They knew that. That's why they got together and made sure that it went up. And it didn't just go up. It went way up to historic levels, and it took decades before people finally stopped smoking as many cigarettes. And we can probably attribute this to not as many people starting because there was information out there.
So when they come up and say it wouldn't have made any difference, remember that. They knew it made a difference. The evidence in this case from Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings is that it would have made a difference and they didn't bring anyone from their companies in here to tell you otherwise.
Dr. Burns gave you perfect example of how that works, because no one came in here and said that all corporations are bad, because that's not true. They're not. The aspirin companies, when there was a public health scare about moms giving their babies aspirin when they had fevers, there was the -- the public health
community said, wait a minute, there's something called Reye's Syndrome, and it causes their organs to shut down.
And did the aspirin companies get together and say we're making a lot of money on this. There's a lot of babies that get fevers, because all babies do, let's tell them it didn't cause fevers. Let's fight this. Let's pump resources into this, information. Of course they didn't do that.
They linked arms with the public health community. They educated the public with a consistent, uniform message. And guess what? Moms quit giving their babies aspirin, and that problem was eradicated. That's an example of corporate responsibility.
Here they talk about it again, that the CTR was set up as an industry shield. Here they admit, their basic position in this, quote, "controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes." And of course they were.
One of those things was this business about filters being able to make cigarettes more
healthy than other cigarettes. They describe it in 1966. This is when filters were really skyrocketing. And I will show you a graph in a second. They say, "the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration."
And what's the evidence in this case?
There's direct evidence in this case that Claire Hallgren switched to filters for that reason. Peter, who she confided in, said she told me somewhere along the line that they were supposedly healthier for you, and he's talking about filtered cigarettes.
And many Americans switched to filters for that exact reason. They want to come in here and tell you Claire is some anomaly. Here he says -- did she tell you anything else about the lady cigarette, or the Virginia Slims, as to why she was smoking those?
He says: "Well, she indicated to me they were skinnier, and they held less tobacco, so she was under the impression that they would be less harmful to you."
"That's the evidence in the case."
"Do you know why she switched to lights?"
"Answer: Yeah. She was trying to cut down
on the tars."
"Did she tell you that?"
"Yeah."
Sally Hallgren. You read that before.
That's testimony in this case. The defense is, well, Ted, who's 92, said in his deposition that he doesn't -- I forget exactly what it was, something to the effect was he doesn't remember filters or something to that effect.
Well, you know, he did the best he could.
He didn't remember the reason why she switched to filters. I think the testimony was she liked them better. Well, she confided in her kids as to why she liked them better.
Here's Sally again. She says: "I don't recall, but we talked about her smoking, and she felt that she was doing better by switching to light cigarettes. She felt they were less harmful than regular cigarettes."
So did millions of Americans. That's why they marketed them as light cigarettes.
So here's the chart I was alluding to earlier. This shows, and it sort of coincides with that other chart. This kind of interrupted red line here are filter cigarettes, and you can
see right here in the mid-1950s when the controversy, the real controversy on smoking and health started, nobody was really smoking filters.
Then the industry got together, they started marketing filtered cigarettes to reassure people that, you know, yeah, there's some stuff out there, but this will take care of it. And sure enough, everybody -- it made a difference. I mean, just look at the graph. Everybody started smoking filtered cigarettes. And of course, we know that they know that it made no difference.
As time went by, in order to reassure addicted smokers, they embarked on a campaign o doubt. That is, let's say we don't know just to give smokers, what, a psychological crutch to continue smoking. These were their words:
"We must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking." This is in 1964, and it's stamped confidential because they didn't want anybody knowing about that.
And here they are again bragging about how good of a job they were doing. They talk about
"in '72, for 20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy, to defend itself on major fronts, politics and public opinion.
"While the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us win important battles, it is fair to say it was not, nor was it intended, to be a vehicle for victory. On the contrary, it's always been a holding strategy, consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it." And we saw a whole lot of examples about that.
Here's where they talk about it again. They started the cigarette controversy. And you saw this video, I'm not going to play it again, but remember this guy, Bill Dwyer, Ed Horrigan, An Browder, Horace Kornegay. They had a media blitz and would go on TV and tell the public about this kind of stuff.
You remember Dr. Cummings' cross-examination. He talked about the event he went to in the '80s. Well, of course he did.
They needed to learn how to fight these guys, these are well trained, highly-financed P.R. folks. And so they were talking about ways to
go on programs and debate them.
And you remember during my redirect examination, when we looked at the whole document, their reason for that wasn't motivated by anything sinister. One of the quotes in there was that Philip Morris was spending billions a year to market death, and they only were spending hundreds of thousands a year to market life. So, of course, that's why they did that. There was no nefarious reason for that.
It was to help people.
This is in 1981. I showed you, it was in evidence from the '60s, what the advertising was like. And here's fast forwarding a few decades. FTC report, "cigarettes are the most heavily advertised products in America." It's hard to believe. It's not the case today, but that's the way it was.
The National Commission on Smoking and Public Policy reported in 1978 that the tobacco industry spent more on advertising cigarettes in one day, one day, than the then National Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health -the government's primary agency working in this area -- spent in one year. And of course, the_
National Clearinghouse that's like the Surgeon General.
That's why Dr. Cummings attended that seminar, 'cause they were going out and spreading their message, and they had a legion of resources to work with.
So what was Claire Hallgren's response to the tobacco advertising? It's hard to have somebody come in and remember every little ad somebody saw. I mean, that's -- most people wouldn't remember that. Sally remembers, though, the Virginia Slims ad and you heard it, it was pretty catchy. "You've come a long way, baby."
It shows a young woman who was slender and smoking a cigarette. That ad appealed to women, it showed them -- I think one of them showed, you know, women in -- back in the '20s, and it took advantage of the women's liberation movement so it makes sense that they would remember this one. And of course, she switched to Virginia Slims.
Remember in The Frank Statement they would and always will cooperate with the public health community. Well, you know they didn't do that.
Every time the Surgeon General, people like Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns would release a statement or a Surgeon General report, they would act, and they would say, that insults the scientific community.
"The number one health problem is not cigarette smoking but is the extent to which public health officials may knowingly mislead the American public."
That's just amazing to think that they would have the gall to say something like that based on what they were doing.
"The claim that cigarette smoking is a drug addiction similar to cocaine, heroin or alcohol is irresponsible. The message to the American public, and in particular youth, is that using illegal drugs such as crack or heroin or alcohol has the same risk of addiction as smoking. To convey this message is to invite disaster and to trivialize a serious drug problem faced by society."
That's what they said in 1988 report on the addiction. And of course, you know the evidence in this case is that cigarette smoking causes more deaths per year in this country than all of
these things combined.
And Dr. Cummings told you it was something like 16 million in this country have died since 1964.
"This report is a shockingly intemperate defamation of an industry which has led the way in medical research to seek answers to the cigarette controversy."
And you remember, you were shown the -- I think it was during cross-examination, they held up the green book and said, see, look what we did. We gave you guys these articles,
Dr. Cummings, and then they put on the screen all of the Surgeon General reports that they contributed to to try and suggest what, that they were partners with the public health community? Because it just wasn't true. They were withholding information about filters.
Do you remember Dr. Burns said that the Surgeon General actually took their advice in one of their reports, it was in the '80s, I think, '81, and wrote in there, hey, something like if you can't quit, then switch to a filter.
That was misleading. They misled the Surgeon General of this country on that issue,
and they recommended that to the public.
And here's this guy -- I'm not going to play the video again, but you remember him. And as a result of this news conference with -- you know, they want to make you think that this didn't reach anybody. Look at all these microphones.
The Surgeon General's media event was preempted -- they did this first -- preempted by Institute First Strike News Conference. "For the first time in the history of the cigarette controversy, the secretary of HEW had to share the spotlight. In fact, we won top billing that night on all networks."
And, of course, unfortunately, what they did continued all the way through 1999 when not voluntarily out of the goodness of their sweet hearts did they come forward, but they were forced to.
They lied to Congress. There's no other way to say it. They just lied. They took an oath before this country, before the lawmakers. They walked into Washington, DC, through those doors, sat down and lied. And they said, "I believe nicotine is not addictive" and we played the video for you.
Philip Morris in 1994, do you remember this one? I'm not going to play it again. "We don't know what causes cancer."
Well, there's been a suggestion in this case that all of these things, all this evidence had nothing to do with Claire Hallgren and had no impact on this country. And I'll submit to you that that's just bologna. It's not true.
Claire Hallgren -MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, I object to the commentary.
THE COURT: Well, leave out words like that, like bologna.
MR. DENNEY: That's not true. Claire Hallgren was in their target market. She was young. She did exactly what they wanted her to do. She switched to filters. She did exactly what they wanted her to do. She switched to lights. And what they're really telling you, that Claire Hallgren wasn't worthy, wasn't worthy of hearing from the source, from these guys that their product caused cancer and was addictive.
That's what they're telling you, and it's -MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, that
mischaracterizes anything we've said.
THE COURT: Overruled. Go ahead.
MR. DENNEY: That's what they're telling you. She wasn't worthy to hear it, and that their lies and misinformation was okay. And that's just not true, because we know if they'd have just linked arms -- and there's examples of that. If they had just linked arms right there when they had the chance, we would not be here today and the terrible health problem in this country caused by cigarette smoking would have been virtually eliminated, because it wouldn't have taken this long for this line to go down.
It would have gone down right here.
And they were motivated by one thing and one thing only. And in their own words, money. Money.
And they come into court and they tell you that she wasn't addicted, even though they made their product harder to smoke, she wasn't addicted and here we know why. "I'm told the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette smoking case. We can't defend
continued smoking as free choice if a person was
addicted."
So there's three more questions, and I've dealt with the evidence. This is the Engle finding up here, just to follow along. The Engle finding, if you answer question one yes, is that these guys were negligent. And whether its negligence was a legal cause of Claire Hallgren's lung cancer and death. The answer is yes for both of these companies.
Whether they -- I'm sorry. The top part again is the Engle finding, and that's that they placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous, yes and yes.
That was also a legal cause of her death.
They made it more addictive. They highly engineered it. They put filters on it, they called them lights and they marketed them to public and she took the bait, just like a lot of people did.
Whether they concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing it was false or misleading, or failed to disclosed a material fact concerning or proving the health effects of addictive nature, we know
they did that. We brought you the evidence anyway.
They want to tell you it would have made no difference to Claire Hallgren, and we beg to differ. The evidence tells you it would have, because we wouldn't be here if they just would have linked arms with the public health community, like they said they were going to do, and kept their promise to this country.
They agreed with other manufacturers to conceal or omit information. We know that's true regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes with the intention that smokers or members of the public would rely on them to their detriment. And we know they did, and I submit to you that the answer to that question is yes.
The next question on the verdict form will be the percentages of fault in the case.
Admitted right from the get-go that Claire Hallgren had responsibility to try and quit.
She did. But nevertheless, she is partly responsible for that. I'm going to put this up on the Elmo. It's sort of hard to see, and I'm
terrible at this, but let's give it a shot here.
All right.
And this basically says, "please state for each party the percentage of any responsibility that you charge to that party for legally causing Mrs. Hallgren's lung cancer and death."
It says, "because plaintiff has admitted that Mrs. Hallgren's own acts or omissions were at least a partial cause of her lung cancer --" and that's true, we did admit that -- "and death, you must assign at least some percentage of responsibility to Ms. Hallgren."
If you answered no to all questions two to four for defendant, then you should enter a zero for that defendant. The percentage you enter in answering question six must total a hundred percent.
If you think that this was all Claire Hallgren's fault and that Philip Morris USA,
RJ Reynolds and everything they did in engineering their product, it was all Claire Hallgren's fault, pin the blue ribbon on them and send us home.
But if you don't, I submit to you that Claire Hallgren 20 percent, Philip Morris 40
percent and RJ Reynolds 40 percent for the things they did.
You can take that down, Baron, I don't know how to do it. I will just take it off.
And this is -- I'm sorry, I should have read this. This is the comparative negligence instruction that applies to that question. It says what I read to you, that we admitted that the acts of Claire Hallgren relating to the duration and frequency of her efforts were a partial legal cause of loss, injury, or damage in combination with the acts or omissions of the defendants, Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds. That's basically what I read to you.
And then in regard, you determine the extent to which Claire was herself negligent in the use of one or more of their cigarettes and the extent to which such negligence was also a contributing legal cause of her lung cancer.
You should then determine and write on the verdict form what percentage of the total fault which is chargeable to Claire and what percentage of the total fault -- it's a mouthful -- is chargeable each of the
defendants Philip Morris and RT Reynolds I
just wanted to read it so there's no mistake.
So on this issue of fault, Claire Hallgren tried to quit. She tried cold turkey. She tried switching to lights. She tried cutting back. She tried nicotine gum.
You heard Peter testify that she would tell him about the nicotine gum and the patch, and she would present it to him in a hopeful way.
She would say here's this gum that will enable me to stop smoking. And it didn't work.
And he says, yeah, again she called me up and told me about it. And while we were here, she showed me the patch. She showed me how sh put it on her arm and she was extremely hopeful that that would enable her to stop smoking, and it didn't, and it's pretty sad that it didn't, if you think about this exchange.
When she was unable to quit, she would confide -- she didn't talk to Ted about this, but she confided in her kids about it. She said she came to the point where the discussion would be she would be ashamed of herself for not being able to quit and she was embarrassed to be seen smoking by other people.
She used the words ashamed of herself
because she couldn't stop smoking. And at other points, she would say she was embarrassed to be seen smoking by other people because she took it as a personal defeat.
She made no bones about the fact that she smoked, that she wanted to quit, and she was usually embarrassed at herself for not being able to. Why wouldn't she be, if she had to walk into her bathroom and close the door and smoke by herself? It's frankly kind of pathetic, if you think about it.
And we know -- I'm not going to go through all these all over again, but you heard a lot of evidence about the severe withdrawal and cravings that she would undergo and when she would try to quit.
And you heard Sally say that she hated smoking, but her body would not function without nicotine. She told me it was a dirty filthy habit and her body needed nicotine to function, it wouldn't work.
Dr. Rosman sat on the stand and told you that really, in so many words, that she was wrong to feel that way. She was exaggerating it. But that's the way she felt. Whether her
body truly was shutting down or not, that's the way she felt about it. That's how it felt to her. And he would never know that.
Again, she developed irritability. She gained weight. She felt like she was crawling out of her skin, and these are known symptoms of nicotine withdrawal.
So the next issue in the case is damages.
And it says, again, in determining any damages to be awarded to plaintiff Theodore Hallgren, you shall consider certain elements of damage for which there is no exact standard of measurement for fixing the compensation to be awarded.
And we talked about that in jury selection, how there's no exact standard. You guys, part of your job if you get this far is to determine that.
Any such award should be fair and just in light of the evidence regarding the following elements: Theodore Hallgren's loss of Claire Hallgren's companionship and protection, and his mental pain and suffering as a result of Claire Hallgren's lung cancer and death.
In determining the duration of such losses,
you may consider the joint life expectancy of Ted Hallgren and Claire Hallgren together with all the other evidence in the case.
And I believe the mortality tables, that's what they call them, for life expectancy for Claire were around 14 years. And you'll see there's another instruction that you can consider those. You can reject them. You can come to the conclusion she would have lived longer or not lived that long. But that's your choice to make.
So as far as damages, you also heard there's some evidence in this case about Dot. And the law is you're not supposed to consider that when determining damages. If you think about it, that makes sense because why should he be punished for trying to make the best out of a horrible situation? If he didn't do that, defense would be in court saying he's not trying hard enough.
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained. Disregard that last point.
MR. DENNEY: So in determining damages,
there are two kinds One are the funeral
expenses in the case. We talked about that in jury selection. Those are the receipts. And those, I think, are $9,471.88. That's the very easy part.
The harder kind of damages to come up with are the loss of companionship, pain and suffering and those kind of damages. So you have to look at the evidence in this case because there's no exact standard to measure it
by.
And you have to think about the kind of life that they had together. They were married for over 50 years. They raised two good kids, we talked about that. They did everything together. They enjoyed themselves. They enjoyed their company, which is rare.
When they would travel, they would travel by themselves. They just had a great life. It was not over at the time she passed away. Most of us are comfortable with the concept is that the golden years are perhaps some of the most precious years we have because there's not that many more left.
You know, you heard about Ted and how he today -- and he tried to tell you, the best he
could, about how every day he gets up, opens the drapes up that she made. When he gets up in the morning, he opens the drapes that she made, and he looks over the lake and thinks about her.
And when he goes to sleep at night, he does the same thing.
You heard how he was scared to death, in his own words, when he found out that she was diagnosed with lung cancer. He followed the ambulance all the way to Orlando and sat with his wife. You heard those things. So there's no exact standard, but one way to think of it is like this.
If you picture Ted and Claire sitting in their home together and Ted opens the paper and sees a want ad that says we're going to pay you an amount of money, but here's what you're going to have to go through. We're going to give your wife a grapefruit-sized lung cancer in her lung. You're going to watch her die. She's going to be taken from you early. All of those plans that you had together are now erased, and your marriage to her is going to be over. She's going to be out of your life.
Now, I submit to you that it's pretty_
evident that there's not an amount of money in the world, tens, hundreds of millions of dollars that he would take that deal. He would crumble the paper up and throw it in the corner.
We got to put a number on it. It's not easy to do, but the law requires it. I suggest that for the last 14 years or so of Claire's life that it's worth at least four million dollars to Ted. I'm sorry. That was funeral expenses.
The funeral expenses, as I read, are $9,471.88. But you can award more, less.
That's a call. It's your call. It's just a suggestion. Thanks, Baron.
The last question you're going to see on the verdict form is under the circumstances of this case, it's going to say state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against each defendant, Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company.
And the standard for punitive damages is not the same as the standard for all those other questions we talked about. It's a higher standard. Those other questions are the greater weight of the evidence.
Under the clear and convincing standard, we
have to prove more than that. That makes sense if you think about it, because if you're going to punish someone, they better deserve it.
And it says the conduct causing injury to Claire Hallgren was so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life or of the safety of persons exposed to the effects of such conduct. You can consider the effect of other smokers.
The conduct showed such an entire lack of care that the defendant must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences, or The conduct showed such an entire lack of care that the defendant must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public, or
The conduct showed such reckless indifference to the rights of others as to be equivalent to an intentional violation of those rights.
And clear and convincing evidence, which is different, like I said, than greater weight, is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation
about the matter in issue.
That's our burden, and I submit to you we've proven that.
Here's the -- this is just a visual aid here. All of these guys over here were for the tobacco industry. They said a whole bunch of things. That's really hard to read, but they had 40 -- you got the Engle findings.
It's fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they can't break. We need to give smokers a psychological crutch, all of those things we talked about. I'm not going to rehash it all.
But we presented an avalanche of evidence on this issue, and it just keeps right on going.
I submit to you that in this case, there are -- in the history of this country, there is no corporate case of wrongdoing, I submit to you, this bad and this deserving -MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, I would object 1 that comment.
THE COURT: Overruled. Go ahead.
MR. DENNEY: And more deserving of punitive damages than what these guys have done. And you all have probably seen Lady Justice, and she's got the scales in one hand that talk about the
burden of proof, she's got a blindfold on because justice is blind.
And you're supposed to treat these defendants like a person. And she's also got a sword in her other hand, and the sword is to punish defendants just like this and deter them.
You can send them a message that that kind of behavior is not tolerated in Sebring. It's not tolerated in Florida.
MR. GERAGHTY: I would object to that comment, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained. We will have to move away from that.
MR. DENNEY: We can send them a message tha this kind of behavior should not be tolerated in this country or anywhere else. And nobody's more deserving of it than these defendants.
With that, I thank you for your time.
That's all I have.



MR. BASS: Thank you, Your Honor.
May it please the Court.
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. BASS: Counsel, and good afternoon, members of the jury.
As you know, this is the last word, so to speak, the last time you're going to get to hear from the lawyers in the case talking about what we think the evidence shows, what we think it means, and what we think it means in the context of the law.
I have limited time, but you sat through all the evidence. You've heard all the evidence.
We saw you taking notes. We saw you listening attentively. You asked questions of the witnesses. So we know that you heard it all.
I'm not going to rehash everything. I'm not going to rehash everything that Mr. Denney said on opening statement where he laid out the mountain of evidence that we brought you. I'm not going to talk about everything that defense lawyer for Philip Morris and defense lawyer for RJ Reynolds talked about. I'm just going to talk about some of the things that are the big
picture issues; some things that I think that we think you should think about when you are looking at the verdict form, the nine numbered questions that you're going to get; some things you should think about; some things that are important; some things that aren't so important; maybe some things that don't fit under the questions that are posed to you. So I'm not going to rehash everything and I'm not going to talk about everything that was said.
Almost two weeks ago, two weeks ago tomorrow, which was, ironically, as some of the lawyers mentioned to you, the 48th anniversary of the issuance of the 1964 Surgeon General Report, this trial began. It began with opening statements. And I stood before you in opening statements and I told you right away that this case was about three things. I told you it was about nicotine. I told you it was about cigarettes. And I told you it was about addiction.
And if you think about all the evidence that you've heard and the questions that you have to answer and you strip away everything else, took away everything else, those are really the three
things that everything comes back to; nicotine, cigarettes, addiction.
The beginning, nicotine; the middle, cigarettes; and the end, addiction. That is what the case is about. Every single question for your determination has a basis in those three things.
Nicotine, the defendants' weapon, the beginning of the cycle.
I told you when talking about nicotine that the defendants were going to try and minimize the power of nicotine. And that's what they did. In trying to do that, Mr. Geraghty spoke to you about Dr. Benowitz. And, yeah,
Dr. Benowitz, reviewer, senior scientific reviewer 1988 Surgeon General's Report on addiction, research, years, experience, just like Dr. Cummings and just like Dr. Burns. And they all said the same thing about addiction. They said, there are two important changes in the brain with respect to nicotine.
Mr. Geraghty just focused on one.
So I'm going to tell you the full story.
I'm going to show you some of Dr. Benowitz's testimony.
Bless you.
The full story. We talked about the two changes. And all the witnesses talked about when nicotine gets into the brain, it releases dopamine, it binds to the receptors. You all know that. I'm not going to rehash it.
Nicotinic receptors, they upregulate, there's more of them. And when the nicotine goes off those receptors, that's when the body starts to go through withdrawal and you need more. You know all about that.
And you know that once the nicotine leaves the system, 72 hours it's out of the system, two, three, four weeks those things, the nicotine receptors, go back to normal. But that's only half the story.
As I say, Dr. Benowitz, the full story. I'm just going to go ahead and read from it. I know you'll remember it.
"All right. And you mentioned there is two types of changes in structures. What is the second type of change in structure?
"Answer: Okay. I would say for these, at least based on animal studies, these kinds of changes, nicotinic receptors last for a couple
weeks after a person quits smoking.
"All right.
"The other kind are changes in brain circuits or pathways."
Think about that, this drug, nicotine, the beginning, the root of all of this death and destruction, it changes brain circuits or pathways.
"And here animal studies show that when you give nicotine to animals, they start to develop new brain connections, new pathways, new sort of memory tracks that are permanent that are long-lasting for as long as the animal lives.
In people there has been a lot of genetic research showing that some of the factors that predict if you're going to become addicted or not are genes that control cell communication that are involved in laying down new memories and new learning tracks. So there is great evidence for nicotine as well as other drugs of abuse, there are permanent changes in brain pathways. And that's what's called neural plasticity. It's called neural plasticity, which means that the nerve networks or nerve connections can really change over time in
response to different exposures."
I know you all heard that because I saw you watching the video. That's the second part of the story. That's why addicts, once you're an addict, always an addict. That's why addiction is a chronic relapsing disease. And that's why the defendants only want to talk about the first aspect when the nicotinic receptors go back to normal, but that's not the full story.
The full story is that. Neural plasticity.
So when you're thinking about the evidence in the case, when you're thinking about Claire Hallgren and why she struggled so much with smoking, even though she was able to stop for a period of time, the defendants say, oh, she quit, she relapsed. Why did she relapse? Right there. Neural plasticity, permanent changes in the brain that exist for as long as a person lives.
The defendants want you to believe that we came in here and started talking about nicotine as the same as heroin and cocaine.
No one ever said that nicotine is as stimulating as cocaine. That's not the issue.
No one ever said that nicotine is akin to heroin
and cocaine. That's not the issue. What the Surgeon General said in 1988 is these -nicotine, heroin, cocaine -- these drugs, exhibit the same type of pharmacological behaviors in the brain. They lead to an addiction in the same way. Obviously they have a different affect on people. People that smoke, you don't see them running around, as Mr. Denney talked about, you know, like you might see someone high on cocaine. They're different drugs with different affects on people, but the addictive process in the way they get there is the same. And that's what's important. We weren't trying to overstate to you and say that nicotine is like cocaine or heroin, but in the way it's addictive it is.
They talked to you about the stimulating effects, and Mr. Geraghty proudly showed Dr. Benowitz's testimony about the stimulating effects. That has zero to do with the issue in the case, addiction to nicotine, nothing. Don't get sidetracked.
Mr. Burton talked about taking your eye off the ball. Don't get sidetracked when thinking about, well, nicotine, it's not intoxicating so,
you know, it really can't be addictive. It doesn't do the same thing that heroin does to a person. It doesn't do the same thing that cocaine, no, that's not the issue. The issue is, was Claire Hallgren addicted to nicotine?
And what do we know about nicotine? It's a powerfully addictive drug and the behavioral and pharmacological processes of addiction are similar to that of cocaine or heroin. That's the issue.
I talked about cigarettes, the middle, the second big thing that this case is about. And I told you in opening statement, make no mistake, cigarettes, and I showed it to you, they're a highly engineered drug delivery device, and that is the evidence that you heard and saw. Defendants want you to believe that it's a natural product. But we can't be held responsible for a natural product. There's no defect because it's -- it is not a natural product. It's highly engineered. It's highly controlled. It's manufactured. There are additives and ingredients not natural to it.
That's what the case is about.
It's about the nicotine that's in there
that's powerfully addictive that resides in this highly engineered highly controlled drug delivery device manufactured by them, that if you find Claire Hallgren is a member of the Engle class, the law binding on you is that that product, the cigarettes that they manufactured and put on the market, are defective and unreasonably dangerous. That's going to be binding on you. That's the law of the case.
And what could be more defective and unreasonably dangerous than a highly controlled, highly engineered addictive product that will kill you?
If that's not the definition of defective and unreasonably dangerous, I don't know what is.
And that's why they want to downplay what the cigarette really it. But you saw what the cigarette really is, a drug delivery device that kills 450,000 Americans a year, including Claire Hallgren.
Did the defect in the product -- was the defect in the product a legal cause of her death? You bet it was. Absolutely.
Mr. Geraghty talks about control and
responsibility. What more control over a product do you need to see than what you saw in the defendants' own documents? Everything about nicotine and the smoker they studied. That is control. That is control. They were in control of the product. They controlled what went into it. They controlled how much nicotine went into it.
And what was the amount of nicotine that went into it? The optimum, the optimum amount of nicotine to keep the addicted smoker smoking. Just enough for the addict to get their fix and then 20, 30, 40 minutes later need another fix.
That is called perfect control. And they had it and they exhibited it over their product.
So is this case about control and responsibility? You bet it is. You bet it is.
We saw in the documents how much control these defendants had over their product.
And finally, I told you this case was about addiction. Nicotine, cigarettes, addiction.
The end result of those two, addiction. The end result of addiction, death. The end result of Claire Hallgren's addiction, her death. The foundation that the defendants built their
business model around was nicotine, cigarettes and addiction. That was their business plan; yet they come in and say, it's all Claire Hallgren's fault.
We walked through the verdict form. You know that question 1 is addiction. Plaintiff brought you a mountain of evidence. We talked about our burden of proof. We embraced it from jury selection on. It's greater weight of the evidence. It's an ever so slight tipping of the scale. We brought you a mountain of evidence on addiction. You all know from the defendants' own mouths, excuse me, and you've heard from leading experts on the field, you heard from Claire Hallgren's treating -- some of her treating doctors, you heard from family members and you heard from Claire Hallgren herself. But the defendants think otherwise.
Who did they bring you? Mr. Denney touched on who Dr. Jonathan Rosman was, but they brought you someone who uses a manual that is flawed. Every witness, besides Dr. Rosman, who was asked about it, even Dr. Benowitz, who they brought you, Dr. Cummings, Dr. Burns, all talked about it's flawed. Even the book itself says it
shouldn't be used in forensic setting.
Well, Dr. Rosman tried to dance around that one, didn't he? Well, you know, I use it to make a medical diagnosis, so it's not in the forensic setting. This is the forensic setting.
This is the exact place where he's not supposed to use it, but he does.
He admitted that he would have liked to have spoken to Claire Hallgren. And that's what the DSM is all about. It's meant and designed to be used by a practitioner, reasonably, by a practitioner when the patient or the subject is in front of them interviewing them. That can't happen here. And that's exactly why they used it, because it can't happen here.
So Dr. Rosman can come in and say things, well, gosh, I don't know, I need more information. Of course you do. Applying this criteria you need to talk to the subject yourself.
Mr. Geraghty said that plaintiff's definition was some mathematical formula.
Nobody came in here and put math before you and said, if someone smokes this amount of cigarettes they're addicted. No. Dr. Burns,
Dr. Cummings -- Dr. Cummings, for example, gave you multiple definitions. And the common theme among those definitions was, do you lose control of your use for the next -- do you lose control over it for your next use of the product?
It's not a mathematical formula. It's a not a numbers game. Did Claire Hallgren need to smoke? Yes.
You heard about her withdrawal symptoms.
You heard about the fact that she didn't like smoking. Everything you heard about supports the fact that she needed to smoke. It's common sense, and Dr. Burns really said it best when he said, would anybody anywhere question someone who used heroin multiple times of day for 60 years, would anyone question whether that person was addicted? Would anyone question whether that person was addicted? No.
Why? It's common sense. You do not have to check your common sense and your life experiences at the door. The defendants hope you will, but you don't have to.
MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, I object to that comment.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Go ahead.
MR. BASS: Common sense.
And going back to the DSM-IV, what Dr. Benowitz said about it, is it written for nicotine there at the bottom?
No, it's written more for other drugs of abuse rather than nicotine actually.
And I think that when Mr. Denney was cross-examining Dr. Rosman and he asked him about the criteria, I think that highlighted just exactly how inappropriate the DSM-IV criteria really is for nicotine.
So question 1, Part A of question 1, "Was Claire Hallgren addicted to nicotine?" Yes.
Part 2 of that, "Was her addiction a legal cause?"
Now, during opening statement,
Mr. Geraghty's opening statement, and during closing he showed you a board, his interpretation of legal cause. I don't know exactly what it said, direct, substantial impact, something like that. What he didn't show you was the jury instruction on legal cause.
"Legal cause, an addiction to smoking
cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of loss, injury or damage if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such loss, injury or damage, so that it can be reasonably be said that but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the loss, injury, or damage would not have occurred."
That's the first part of the instruction.
So this is one way to look at legal cause, not this direct -- okay, does the word "direct" appear? Yeah. So Mr. Geraghty, you know, he got one word right in there. "Substantially," that's two. I don't see "impact," but nonetheless, this is the legal cause instruction. Okay. "But for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the loss" -- in this case lung cancer and death -- "would not have occurred." Okay, that's one way. Take away the nicotine addiction, would Claire Hallgren have died? No.
There's also another way. And you need to know about these. The judge read you the instruction. And what this is, before I talk to you about it, it's the other way, the second
avenue, the second path to victory, so to speak, for the plaintiff, the second way plaintiff meets their burden of proof under legal cause. Well, concurring cause, Mr. Denney touched on it, but it's very important.
In order to be regarded as a legal cause, that's what we're talking about, a legal cause, doesn't have to be the legal cause, doesn't even have to be the but-for cause. It can be a legal cause of loss, injury or damage, an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. "An addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause of loss, injury or damage even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause, if the addiction to nicotine contributes substantially to producing such loss, injury or damage."
So Mr. Geraghty talks about our admission. And we did, from the beginning of the case we talked about and we admitted that Claire Hallgren bears some responsibility for what happened to her here. Why? Because her acts regarding her frequency and duration of her efforts to quit, so it centers around her
efforts to quit smoking, we know she tried, you've heard that evidence. They dispute what the evidence really is, but you all heard it all. You're told ways to judge the credibility of witnesses, so you all can go in the back and figure out what all that means, but what the evidence, the greater weight of the evidence shows is that Claire Hallgren wanted to quit.
She tried to quit. She used the means that were available to her at the time. But even though she couldn't quit, even though she tried, it was her responsibility to try. And she did.
The defendants say that that admission means that we're admitting that she's a sole legal cause of her death. That's not what the admission means. The admission, what it says is, she bears partial responsibility for her efforts to quit smoking in combination, in combination with the acts and omissions of the defendants. And that's what this case is about, does Claire Hallgren have some responsibility? Yeah. Do the defendants as well for what happened to her? Yes.
So if you go back to the concurrent cause instruction please, Baron.
Bless you.
This is important. "A legal cause, it need not be the only cause, it may be a legal cause of death if it operates in combination with the act of another."
And that's what we have here, right, that's what we have here, this. If the addiction to nicotine contributes substantially to producing such loss, injury or damage.
The focus, regardless of anything else, is on addiction. It has always been on addiction, which is why the defendants want to take it off of addiction and talk just about Claire Hallgren and talk about all the people that have quit.
We don't deny that. We don't deny that. That's why we admit she has some responsibility. She was certainly motivated. That was the evidence in the case. She certainly tried, for whatever reason she couldn't. And that's why she's partially responsible.
But that isn't the sole legal cause of her death. The focus is on addiction. Dr. Burns told you how addiction is a substantial contributing cause of death. So if you think about it in the proper context and keep the
focus on addiction, there can be multiple other causes, but as long as addiction was a substantial contributing cause, which it definitely was, then plaintiffs have met their burden of proof. So when you're in the back, think about that, read that instruction, it doesn't say direct, substantial impact. It says this.
Was it the but for cause? Take away the addiction, would this have happened? We submit to you, no, it wouldn't have. But if you think there are some other causes, like her inability to quit, those types of things, you still think about addiction. Addiction is a substantial contributing cause, if you keep the focus on addiction, you'll know the answer to that question.
The defense stood up here and they tried to tell you that, and they want you to believe that this case is only about Claire Hallgren. After you saw all the evidence, you know that this case isn't only about Claire Hallgren. It's about the tobacco industry as well. That's why it's appropriate to apportion fault in the case.
They want to tell you it's only about her
decisions and they don't want to talk about the decisions or choices that they've made. They want you to overlook that. They want you to take your eye off of that ball, so to speak.
They want you to focus on Claire Hallgren so you don't think about them when you're in the back thinking about the evidence.
They want you to go in the back and every time anyone says something they want you to say, well, personal responsibility, personal responsibility, personal responsibility. It was her choice, it was her choice, it was her choice. That's what they want you to do. They don't want you to consider, though, the choices that they made. They don't want you to think about their responsibility. The judge told you that you're to treat corporations like individuals, you're not to discriminate between corporations and natural people, they're both people in the eyes of the law. Yeah, exactly, that's why this case is about personal responsibility. It's about the choices that they made as well.
Claire Hallgren tried to quit, and she paid an awful price for her inability to quit. The
defendants profited from her inability to quit.
This case is about the choices that they made. If none of their conduct mattered to Claire Hallgren, none of their conduct mattered, then why spend billions on their message, if everybody knew, if everybody knew? Then why did they spend billions on their message? Because everybody didn't know.
We showed you there was doubt. It's hard to think about that now as we sit here in 2012, it's really hard. We did our best to try to show you evidence from what it was back there.
It's hard. But there was uncertainty. That's why filters -- what other explanation for the rise in filters than the defendants' message?
What other explanation for the rise in cigarette consumption than the choice the defendants made to get together in 1954 and link arms?
But what if they didn't do that? What if they didn't get together and issue The Frank Statement? What if they didn't get together in 1954 and form the TIRC? What if they didn't in 1958 form the Tobacco Institute? What if they didn't attack the Surgeon General? What if, as Mr. Burton was proud to point out, 500 million
dollars in grants, what if they didn't spend 200 billion dollars on their advertising? Think about how different things would be now. Think about how different things would be now.
And think about the fact that, are we seeing modest gains now? Yeah, Dr. Burns talked about that. We're seeing modest gains now.
Remember, the defendants had a 50-year head start.
You saw the chart in 1951 or '2, the numbers were going down. There's no reason to think that wouldn't have continued to go down in 1954. They're going down now, ever so slightly, but that was a 55-year gap. That's a lot of years and a lot of time to make up. Are things going to improve and continue to improve? Yeah. But just think if they had started that in the 1950s.
Mr. Geraghty, the last thing he said was, one of the last things he said before he sat down was, what has this got to do with Claire Hallgren? What does it have to do with Claire Hallgren? This has everything to do with Claire Hallgren. The defendants made a defective and unreasonably dangerous product, one that was
highly engineered to deliver the optimum amount of nicotine to the smoker's brain. And Claire Hallgren used that product. She got the optimum amount of nicotine delivered to her brain.
The defendants targeted youth. Why?
Because they knew that kids don't know any better. That's why. And once nicotine was introduced to the young brain, they knew the chances of getting them hooked were greater than if people started smoking later.
Claire Hallgren started smoking as a youth.
We know she was smoking 10 cigarettes a day by the time she was 16. We know it takes time to build up to that. She was smoking before she was 16. That's what common sense tells you.
She was a child, a teenager, their target audience. That's what this has to do with Claire Hallgren.
By the time word first started to trickle out about potential hazards of smoking, Claire Hallgren had been smoking for 20 years, 20 plus years. Her brain had been dosed with nicotine multiple, numerous times, repetitive daily.
When they introduced filters, smoking rates went back up. Claire Hallgren smoked filters.
What does the evidence that you heard have to do with Claire Hallgren? It has everything to do with Claire Hallgren. Later on when lights were introduced, light cigarettes, Claire Hallgren smoked light cigarettes.
That's what the case has to do with Claire Hallgren. She started trying to quit at a certain point in time and what do you know, just like they knew she would, as we saw in the documents, she had a difficult time. Remember the document that says, something to the effect of most people would stop using our product if they could. Her inability to quit was exactly what they knew it would be, from their own words. And she died just like they knew she would.
So what does this case have to do with Claire Hallgren? It has everything to do with Claire Hallgren. Claire Hallgren got a smoking-related illness, just like they knew she would. She had circulatory problems, she had COPD, just like they knew the end result would be. And she got lung cancer, just like they knew she would get if she continued to use their product.
450,000 Americans die each year from smoking-related illnesses, and Claire Hallgren was one of them. That's what this case has to do with Claire Hallgren. That's what their conduct has to do with Claire Hallgren.
Mr. Geraghty said, you know, we have freedoms in this country. We do, but that freedom doesn't allow people, corporations to treat consumers the way that they do. Freedoms in this country are not a license to do and treat people however you want to treat them.
It's not a license to make a product and manipulate it so that smokers get addicted to it. Just because a product is legal doesn't mean they can do those things.
Mr. Burton talked to you about there's only eight years of known RJR smoking. Well, think about RJ Reynolds' product Camel, that's what she was smoking when she was young. And we know how important it is for them to get people when they're young.
Salem, first filtered cigarette that she smoked. Those are important and critical milestones, if you will, in her life that led her to the point.
And maybe while she smoked more Philip Morris brands and maybe that's what Mr. Burton is trying to suggest to you, that if you're going to lay fault on them, it should be more on Philip Morris than RJ Reynolds, remember, these two defendants were right there together linking arms. Remember that every cigarette that Claire Hallgren smoked, whether it's RJ Reynolds or Philip Morris contributed to her addiction, every cigarette she smoked made by RJ Reynolds and Philip Morris contributed to her lung cancer and death.
THE COURT: Plaintiff has used 35 minutes of your allotted time.
MR. BASS: Thank you, Your Honor.
And finally, I just want to touch on something that Mr. Burton was talking about, punitive damages. And that's something that you're going to need to consider in the case. Under the circumstances of the case, the question is going to be, are punitive damages warranted? And Mr. Burton said something about that we are suggesting these defendants should get punished for not taking the nicotine out of cigarettes or suggesting that more nicotine
should be in cigarettes. They should be punished for what you saw in this courtroom under the standards that the judge is going to give you. Was their conduct gross? Absolutely. Was it intentional? Absolutely. That's what they should be punished for. Frankly, I don't know what he's talking about when he's talking about we said you should be punished for taking nicotine out.
What they should be punished for is the evidence that you heard and the evidence that you saw. And I submit to you if ever there was a case where punitive damages are warranted, if ever, it's this case right here.
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Go ahead.
MR. BASS: The defense has talked to you about reliance. What did Claire Hallgren know? What didn't she know? What did she know about their product? What didn't she know? And they hung their hat on this incident where Sally Hallgren testified that her mother gave her a demonstration, talked about filters.
There's no evidence in that demonstration
that Claire Hallgren knew exactly what was getting into her body. She said, these filters, look, they don't block it. Of course they don't block all the smoke. She thought it blocked some. She thought it kept out some of the bad things.
And how do we know that? Because she told Peter Hallgren about it. You heard him testify about it. She told him, I thought I was doing better. And that's exactly what the defendants wanted smokers to believe. They never said smoking isn't bad for you. They said smoking these filters, it's not so bad. It's going to protect you from the harmful things in there. These filters we have, it can selectively filtrate.
So does that mean that she knew all about the 70 or so carcinogens that were in smoke? Does that mean she knew all about the way the defendants manipulated their product to keep her smoking? No. It just means that she saw that some smoke was still getting into her body.
Did there come a point in time where she knew most likely that cigarette smoking was dangerous? Of course. No one has suggested
otherwise. That's not what this case is about.
We never came in here and said, the tobacco industry pulled the wool over Claire Hallgren's eyes, they duped her. They didn't dupe her.
They took advantage of her vulnerability and many other millions of other people's vulnerabilities. They gave them that glimmer of hope to keep smoking. If you can't quit, it's okay, smoke filters. If you can't quit, it's okay, smoke light. That's what the case is about. It's about intercepting people on their way to quitting. It's about not giving people the whole truth that they're entitled to.
Mr. Denney said it best, these defendants didn't think she was worthy at any time in her life.
MR. GERAGHTY: I would object to that comment, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BASS: These defendants never told Claire Hallgren the truth about their product.
And we learned all about the truth of their product in this trial over the course of the past two weeks. Claire Hallgren was addicted. Her addiction was a legal cause. The defendants
were negligent, and their negligence was a legal cause of her death.
The defendants manufactured an unreasonably dangerous product, and that was a legal cause of her death.
The defendants concealed information from Claire Hallgren, withheld information from her and she relied on that. They got together and they agreed to do that, and that had an impact on her.
Members of the jury, my time is almost up.
I didn't think I was going to use it all. We appreciate you taking time from your lives and listening to the evidence. Thank you very much.
