MR. GERAGHTY: Thank you, Your Honor.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
THE JURY: (Collectively.) Good morning.
MR. GERAGHTY: I'll make a promise to you. I promise you I don't have as many boards as I did the last time I gave my closing argument on Tuesday. I've only got two.
I want to thank you as well for your time
and attention and your service. I told you on Tuesday that at that point it had been a long trial, and here we are two days later, so it's been an even longer trial, so long that at least one of the lawyers needs a haircut at this point. So I just want you to know on behalf of everybody we thank you for your time and your service.
Much of the first part of this case focused on the Philip Morris of long ago, of things that happened 50, 60 years ago in the 1950s and the 1960s. And I did tell you, I told you the very first time that I addressed you in my opening statement two weeks ago on Wednesday that I would not try to defend those statements. I told you that 30, 40, 50 years ago Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds made statements and expressed ideas that today neither you nor I would express. That's what I told you two weeks ago.
And at the close of the first stage of the trial I also told you that I did not believe that the plaintiff had proved that any of those statements or any of those ideas were the legal cause of the reasons why Claire Hallgren smoked
cigarettes or continued to smoke cigarettes
But by the verdict you delivered on Tuesday, you decided differently. Philip Morris, Mr. Harris and I, respect and recognize that.
And after we received your verdict, we looked at it, we looked at the verdict so that we could try to understand what evidence would be important to present to you in this second phase of the case.
And during the first phase you heard a lot of evidence about a lot of different issues, no question. And because of the way the questions on the verdict form are answered, and candidly, because you answered yes to every single one of those, I don't know exactly what particular evidence you found to be most important.
But what I tried to do in this phase of the case was to understand what evidence was important to you and to address that with you directly, succinctly and without repeating myself.
What you learned about in the second part of this case is the Philip Morris of today, what Philip Morris is like today in 2012, and what it has been doing since the people who currently work there made a decision 13 years ago to take
the company in a different direction.
You've seen what Philip Morris says today about the health risks of cigarette smoking and the addictive nature of smoking and what it has said over the last 12 or 13 years. You heard what Philip Morris is doing and has tried to do to reduce the health risks of cigarette smoking.
And, of course, you heard about the changes and the regulations that govern and restrict the way Philip Morris conducts its business today in significant ways. You heard all about that yesterday.
And one last thing I'd like to mention before I move on to discuss the Judge's instructions is that in your verdict you apportion fault between RJ Reynolds,
Philip Morris and Claire Hallgren. And I'm taking from that verdict that what you believe or what you meant by that is that you believe smoking is a shared responsibility.
There is some responsibility on the companies that manufacture cigarettes, like Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds, and that there is some responsibility on the smoker. And I think you probably did that because of what you heard
during the first phase about Claire Hallgren and how she lived her life.
Now, in this phase of the trial you will determine, based on everything you've heard, whether there is a need to award additional money to Mr. Hallgren to punish and deter Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds. It will be up to you to decide whether awarding Mr. Hallgren more money is necessary under the law that Judge Langford is going to give you.
The instructions will tell you that you do not have to award any money in punitive damages, unless plaintiff has met his burden, unless the plaintiff satisfies you or persuades you that today, in 2012, punitive damages are necessary for punishment and to deter future similar conduct.
Now, during what Mr. Bass told you a few moments ago, he spent most of his time talking to you about some of the evidence from Phase I.
In this phase, the plaintiff's evidence consists only of numbers. Philip Morris brought you a witness, Mr. Richard Jupe. You saw him testify yesterday. Mr. Jupe told you about the work that he has done at Philip Morris over the
last 15 years. He told you about the work that they have done to try to reduce the health risks of smoking. He told you about things like the Master Settlement Agreement. He told you about Philip Morris' public website and the message on that website that the American public should hear one and only one unified voice about the health risks of smoking.
And, of course, he told you about the Food and Drug Administration and the fact that they now regulate and have regulated the cigarette industry since 2009.
Remember what I said just a moment ago.
Mr. Hallgren has the burden of proof to establish that it is necessary today, in 2012, to award him money to serve the purpose of punitive damages. And the purpose of punitive damages is to punish and to deter future similar conduct.
And for the reasons -MR. DENNEY: Judge, it's also to punish past conduct. I object, misstating the law.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Go ahead.
MR GERAGHTY: And for the reasons I'm goin
to explain, the restrictions that have been imposed on the way Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds do business today, giving Mr. Hallgren additional money will serve neither of those purposes, neither of those purposes.
And one more thing I want to note, although you've heard about the Engle class action during this trial, Mr. Hallgren's case is an individual case. I told you at the very beginning this case is about Mrs. Hallgren, and it still is.
Right now you're being asked to award money to Mr. Hallgren, not to any other individual smoker or any other member of the class. You heard Mr. Denney say yesterday that other smokers have the right to bring their own lawsuits against these defendants for compensatory and punitive damages, and you also heard that many people are doing that.
So although you've heard several references to a class action, please keep in mind that in this phase of the case, just like the early phase of the case, this case is about Mr. and Mrs. Hallgren. And the Court has instructed or will instruct you on that point.
Now, the Judge's instruction says very
clearly, and I know that you take your oath very seriously and you will follow the Judge's instructions. The Judge's instructions say that in determining the amount of punitive damages, if any, you may not seek to punish the defendant for any harm to any person other than Claire Hallgren.
So, as I move into the evidence, while I don't know precisely what particular conduct you found harmed Mrs. Hallgren, what I do know is that most of the evidence you heard in Phase I happened many years ago. And right here and right now we are here about what needs to be done today, in 2012.
Let me ask you to think about it like this.
You are standing here today in 2012, and what we did in that first phase of the trial was we went back in time. We went back to the '20s, the '30s, the '40s, the '50s and we looked at what conduct caused harm to Ms. Hallgren. And after considering that conduct, you all determined that one or more of the criteria for entitlement to punitive damages was met.
Now we're here in 2012 and you look at the company today and you have to make an assessme
in this phase of the case, is it necessary to punish the company today for things that the company did in the past so that those things will not happen again in the future?
That's why the timing of these events, the timing of these events compared to the regulations that exist today, I would submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, are important factors in determining whether any additional money is necessary.
Think about it for a moment. Think about the way things happen. Time only moves in one direction. Time moves forward. That's how life works. Certain things happen, other things happen later, and that is the course of events. And keeping those events in perspective is absolutely critical to this phase of the case because much of what you heard during the Phase I was probably new to you.
When we first got together almost three weeks ago, I'm sure that none of you knew much about the history of the cigarette industry, the government's role in cigarettes, or the public health community. But in the course of the last three weeks you've heard a lot, and, frankly,
that's a very short period of time to learn about all of these things.
You've been told about conduct that happened from the 1920s right on up to the time that Mrs. Hallgren passed away. And you may feel, you may feel that it would have been absolutely necessary to step in in the 1950s or the 1960s and stop conduct that you found to be wrongful. You may feel that way.
But you know of all the powerful things that a court can do, the one thing it cannot do is it cannot turn back the hands of time. The Court cannot put us into a time machine and take us back to a moment in time in the '50s or in the '60s and take action according to what you found in the evidence based upon what you heard in Phase I.
As much as you may feel today in 2012 that certain things should not have happened back then, it is not possible to do that and that is not part of the responsibilities you have in this case.
The plaintiff may tell you, and, frankly, they have told you, it was Philip Morris back
then and it's Philip Morris today so they need
to be punished. But what sense does that make?
As you've heard during this phase of the trial, all of the Philip Morris employees who engaged in the conduct that you found to be wrongful are generations removed from the people who currently work for the company.
Now, I'm not suggesting that individuals who engaged in wrongful conduct should not be punished if appropriate under the facts and under the law. But what I am suggesting is that the individuals you are being asked to punish today in 2012, the Philip Morris of today and its employees, are not in the same position as the people and the individuals that you found engaged in wrongful conduct in Phase I.
You know, you may feel after Mr. Bass sat down that you'd like to get up right now, you'd like to head to Richmond, Virginia and you'd like to go to the offices of Philip Morris and you'd like to say, you know what, I want to speak with Mr. Campbell, I want to speak with Mr. Cullman, I want to speak with Mr. Wakeham. And do you know what would happen? You would told they don't work here anymore. They're not here. They haven't worked here for many years.
That's what you would be told.
Or you might think, you know what, I want to go to the offices of the Tobacco Institute. I want to speak to Mr. Dwyer and I want to speak to Mr. Kornegay. Well, the Tobacco Institute no longer exists. It was disbanded in 1998.
Mr. Dwyer and Mr. Kornegay don't work for Philip Morris. They've never worked for Philip Morris.
So what would happen if today you went to Philip Morris? You would probably meet someone like Richard Jupe, who you met yesterday. He's a scientist in the product development department.
Mr. Jupe was born in 1967. And I'll tell you, ladies and gentlemen, I have personal and selfish reasons for thinking that was a wonderful year, but what do we know about 1967? It was three years after the Surgeon General of the United States in this country declared to the American public that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer and chronic bronchitis. It was one year after warning labels were put on every single pack of cigarettes in this country.
Think about it, ladies and gentlemen._
Mr. Jupe, the man that you met yesterday, has never lived in an era where there were not warning labels on cigarette packages. He joined the company in 1995, and ironically, that was the year that Claire Hallgren passed away. And you know that within several years, three years after he joined the company, the company changed its public position on smoking and health.
And he told you yesterday, whatever Mr. Jupe's personal opinions are on what he would have said if he had been at that hearing in 1994 or what he would have said in 1975 or 1964, you and I both know Mr. Jupe can't go back in time, he can't take those statements back.
And you could talk to Mr. Jupe about the concerns, about the things that you heard during the first phase of this trial in the past, and you know, again, Mr. Jupe can't change any of those things.
The issue you face, ladies and gentlemen, today in this courtroom is whether additional money should be awarded to Mr. Hallgren to punish Mr. Jupe and the Philip Morris of today for the bad conduct of people that no longer work at Philip Morris. That's the issue that
you have to consider today.
Mr. Jupe told you a little bit about how cigarettes are designed and how Philip Morris and the public health community, including the National Cancer Institute, have worked hard to change the design of cigarettes in the hope of making them less dangerous. And what Mr. Jupe also told you was that despite all of those efforts, today these companies cannot manufacturer a cigarette that has no risk of cancer.
The Surgeon General of the United States said as recently as 2010, there is no safe level of smoking. But despite that, in this country, we've made the decision that if an adult wants to smoke cigarettes, he or she is allowed to make that decision. That is one of the freedoms we enjoy in this country, and everyone agrees with that.
So now let's talk a little bit about the restrictions that are in place today, some of which have been around for over a decade. And ] do, as I promised, only have two boards.
This is a timeline, and you're probably all
very happy to see that it's much shorter than
the timeline I had on Tuesday. And you probably appreciate that I have an affinity for timelines. And we're going to walk through a couple of these events, but the point I want to emphasize is, as we walk through each of these points, today there is control. Today there is regulation. Today there are agencies that control everything that these two companies do when it comes to the manufacture and design of cigarettes.
Let's start with 1998. You heard Mr. Jupe talk to you about the Master Settlement Agreement. You know that was an agreement tha settled lawsuits that had been filed against these two companies by the attorneys general of the 50 states. You know that that agreement imposed advertising restrictions. You already know from Phase I that virtually all cigarette advertising, except for magazines and newspapers, was banned in 1971. But you know now as a result of the Master Settlement Agreement, there are no billboards, there are no signs in any kind of stadiums, there are no cigarette advertisements on busses or other means of transit or transportation. And you
know there is no branded merchandise, bags, hats, shirts with Camel or Marlboro on them.
You also know that each of the companies has to make regular payments to the states, to every state, all 50 states, each and every year. You heard that Philip Morris to date has paid 55 billion dollars to the 50 states. And you heard that Philip Morris will continue to make payments every single year, every single year, forever.
I'm going to skip over 1999 and I'm going to come back to that.
In 2005 Mr. Jupe told you that Philip Morris removed and stopped placing any cigarette ads in magazines. Effectively today, the only place where Philip Morris has any advertisements for its cigarettes are in the convenience store behind the counter where the cigarettes themselves are displayed. That's as of 2005.
And, finally, you heard that in 2009 a law was passed, a law was passed that gave the Food & Drug Administration, the FDA, regulatory authority, complete jurisdiction, over the design, the manufacture and the marketing of all cigarettes in this country._
And let's think about that for a moment.
We've already discussed that by your verdict it is clear that you heard things that concerned you.
And here's my last board.
I've tried to put the evidence that you heard during the trial all on here in very general broad categories.
But if what concerned you was cigarette advertising, what do we know? You know that all cigarette advertising was taken off of television and radio as of 1971. You also know that the Food and Drug Administration now governs, regulates and restricts how cigarette companies advertise their products; when, where and how they advertise their products. There is control. There is control.
If what concerned you was the use of ingredients or additives in cigarettes, what is the evidence you've heard? The FDA has a complete list of every single ingredient used in every brand of cigarettes sold by Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds. The FDA is empowered. It has the power to tell Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds, take this additive out, take that additive out,
you can no longer sell your cigarettes with any of these particular additives. They have control over that issue, if they think that is the right thing to do.
If what concerned you most was the level of nicotine in cigarettes, what else did you hear? The FDA can actually tell Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds, do you know what, you need to dc whatever you can to reduce the amount of nicotine to a particular level. You also heard that the FDA has not told Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds to do that as of now, but you know they have the authority and the control to do that, whenever they decide that that is the appropriate thing to do.
If what concerned you was filtered cigarettes and low tar or light cigarettes, the FDA has the same authority. They can tell the cigarette manufacturers, do you know what, we don't want you to put filters on your cigarettes anymore. Now again, the evidence you've hearc is, the FDA, nor any other public health agency, has ever told cigarette companies to stop using filters. But if the FDA in its discretion and its exercise of its authority to protect the
health of the American public decides that's what it wants to do, it has the control. It has the control.
If what concerned you was the fact that Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds did not share their internal documents with the public health community, what do you know today? You know that millions of pages of these documents have already been produced. And you know that under the FDA laws, the FDA has the right to access to all of the research from all of these companies.
The FDA has the right, unannounced, to show up at the factory of Philip Morris and say, we want to look around, we want these documents. And, in fact, Mr. Jupe told you they have already gone and inspected Philip Morris' facilities. They've done that already. They have the power. They have the control.
And finally, if what concerned you most was the fact that there were public statements made that disagreed with the Surgeon General or disputed things said by other members of the public health community, you now know that statements like that can never be made again, can never be made again.
The FDA controls what these companies can and cannot say about their products.
Based on what you see here, the conduct that you heard about during Phase I of this case can never be repeated. Can never be repeated.
And if you were to award any money as punishment in deterrence, it would go only to Mr. Hallgren. It would not go to fund smoking cessation programs. It would not go to fund cancer research.
I told you at the beginning of this case, I was very clear about this, some of the former employees of Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds were wrongheaded. "Wrongheaded," that was the term I used. They held on too long to the notion that it had not been scientifically proven that smoking causes lung cancer or that smoking is addictive.
But please recall as you consider the issue today what you heard about Mrs. Hallgren. And what you heard shows she did understand that smoking was dangerous and that smoking was addictive, at least as far back as the late 1950s.
And also remember that during the course of
this trial Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds did provide information and research to the Surgeon General. I didn't lug that big green book in here, but you saw it several times.
Those companies provided all of the known research on smoking and health collected as of 1959 to the Surgeon General, and the Surgeon General relied on that information, at least in part, to determine in 1964 that smoking caused lung cancer and when the Surgeon General began to tell the American public, you know what, you need to quit, you need to quit.
But I won't dispute, and, frankly, I have not disputed it at any point during this trial, that representatives of Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds clung too long to technicalities, to definitions, that might have some meaning in the world of science, but, frankly, ladies and gentlemen, makes no difference when we're talking about the health of the American public.
For too long they did not align themselves with the public health community. But as you heard in this courtroom, that is no longer the case today. It's no longer the case today.
Because you know as of 1999, what has Philip Morris said publicly since 1999? Smoking causes lung cancer. Smoking is addicting.
There is no safe cigarette. These statements are irrevocable, irrevocable. There's no turning back, no turning back from these statements.
And so awarding a large sum of money to Mr. Hallgren isn't going to send a message to Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds to change their behavior, because they've already changed their behavior, and, frankly, the FDA, the states' attorney general dictate what they do and what they cannot do. So the evidence you heard in Phase I, those events will never be repeated again.
But if you disagree with me and you ultimately conclude that the plaintiff has satisfied his burden to persuade you that there is a purpose served today in 2012 to punish and deter and you think Mr. Hallgren should be awarded punitive damages, let me suggest this to you.
Earlier this week, on Tuesday, you
determined that the amount of Mr Hallgren's
loss was two million dollars. Unfortunately, under the law that's the only way we can value a loss of that kind. And you also determined that the responsibility for that loss should be split 50-50. So at this point in time, Mr. Hallgren has been awarded one million dollars in damages; $500,000 from Philip Morris, $500,000 from RJ Reynolds.
And if you're going to award any additional money to Mr. Hallgren to punish these companies, I would suggest that you award him another one million dollars, $500,000 to Philip Morris, $500,000 to RJ Reynolds. And if you were to do that, Mr. Hallgren would leave this courtroom with two million dollars, the exact amount that you determined on Tuesday was his loss.
And if you did that, if you did that, the goals of compensation and punishment would be served. And if you did that, I wouldn't tell you that was wrong.
Now, I'm going to sit down in a moment, and like Mr. Bass said, this is the last time I'm going to have a chance to speak to you. And you reach this point and, frankly, as a lawyer, you sort of are at a loss for words.
I want to thank you again. It has been an honor and a privilege to be able to present this case to you. And I think there is no question among any of the people in this courtroom that you have paid close and careful attention to everything everybody has said, including me, and I appreciate that very much.
I'm going to sit down. Mr. Burton's going to speak to you next and then Mr. Denney is going to have 30 or 40 more minutes to talk to you. And what I want to leave you with when you listen to the things that Mr. Denney tells you is, think about what purpose, what purpose is served by punishment today, given everything you now know, everything you now know about the wa these companies are required to conduct business by the states' attorney general, by the FDA.
Thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen.



MR. BURTON: May it please the Court?
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. BURTON: Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
This, as Mr. Geraghty said, will be the last time that I have a chance to speak to you. Like Mr. Bass, and I'm sure Mr. Denney will do the same thing, we thank you. We thank you. It's been a long trial. You've stayed hard. You've paid attention. You've taken notes. And I know you've taken a significant time away from your family.
When we were here through the course of this trial, we presented evidence to you in Phase I. And when I stood up before you the other times, frequently I said I'm going to be very short and I'm not going to repeat what Mr. Geraghty said, and I'm going to try and do that today. But this situation is a little different because you're now being asked, based upon what we heard, to award 9 million dollars in punitive damages against my client for conduct that happened in the '30s, '40s '50s and '60s when Ms. Hallgren chose to smoke our brands for eight years.
So I'm going to spend a little bit of time with you and talk to you about how Reynolds has changed. I'm going to review with you Dr. Borgerding's testimony and show you what
Reynolds does now to make sure, as Mr. Geraghty said, this never happens again.
We did present evidence to you in the first case -- excuse me, in the first phase and suggest to you that that evidence meant that our conduct had not caused Ms. Hallgren's lung cancer and death. You retired and on Tuesday afternoon, as both Mr. Geraghty and Mr. Bass had said, you returned a verdict. And you checked each of the four boxes. You disagreed with us.
You said that our negligence was a legal cause of her injuries, our product defect was a legal cause of her injuries, our concealment and our agreements to conceal. And you also, after deliberating for three hours, concluded that the plaintiffs had satisfied their burden of proof with respect to entitlement to punitive damages.
Obviously we were disappointed with that verdict, but please know that we respect it.
We've heard what you had to say. But I need to talk with you just a moment about another thing that you did that day and that is the compensatory award.
This is what you filled out. And what you
filled out is you assigned as Mr Geraghty
said, you assigned 50 percent of the responsibility to Ms. Hallgren and 25 percent of the responsibility to my client, and 25 percent of the responsibility to Mr. Geraghty.
So we find ourselves in somewhat of an odd situation when we're talking about awarding millions of dollars in punitive damages when the fault you assigned to Mrs. Hallgren is higher than the fault that was assigned to us. That's the only way that you can read your verdict.
Now, I need to talk to you about another aspect of it. When you awarded damages, you awarded $9,471.88, and that was the total amoun of the damages lost by the estate. That was 100 percent of that loss.
You also awarded 2 million dollars to Mr. Hallgren. Again, as you said when you filled that out, that was 100 percent of his loss, and 100 percent of his loss for the loss of his wife's companionship and protection and for his pain and suffering.
So by that verdict, by that amount, you've compensated Mr. Hallgren fully. That's what your verdict says. You compensated him fully.
Now, since Phase I, I've done much like what
Mr. Geraghty did, I've gone back, I've looked at the evidence, I've looked at the documents, I've read the testimony, and what I've tried to do is identify what it is that you found important, what it is that made you answer those questions the way you did. And like Mr. Geraghty, I'm somewhat in a conundrum. We haven't had a chance to talk. I don't know exactly what you found important. And so what we did in Phase II is we brought you a witness to try to do that.
Now, before I get into that evidence, I need to remind you of just three things quickly about what we're here doing. This is a punitive damage phase. Mr. Hallgren is the only person that will receive this award.
Any money that you award does not go to the American Cancer Society. It doesn't go to the American Lung Association. It doesn't go to a state agency. It doesn't go to a -MR. DENNEY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Go ahead.
MR. BURTON: It doesn't go to a smoking cessation clinic. It goes to Mr. Hallgren.
That's where the money goes.
In addition, as Mr. Geraghty said, if you award punitive damages, it is only for the harm to the plaintiff, only for the harm to the plaintiff. It's not harm for others that you're punishing for.
You heard evidence of 400 (sic) deaths. You cannot award, and the instructions will tell you, you cannot make an award for a death of another person. This is about Claire Hallgren at this phase. You can't award damages for the 7,000 other plaintiffs in Florida that have their cases pending against us.
As Mr. Denney said yesterday, they have their claims. They're pursuing their claims.
And rest assured they are pursuing their claims.
So as you consider this, you can't award damages for harm to those people or the 10,000 other people that have sued these companies across the United States.
And the last thing I want to mention quickly is your award has to bear a reasonable relationship to the harm caused by my client.
Now, Mr. Bass when he stood up, he used the two million dollar figure. I submit to you that that's not the right figure to start with. When
you look at the fault that's allocated, that you allocated to Reynolds, you allocated fault equivalent to $500,000, so that's the starting point, that's the starting point when you assess whether or not there's going to be an award of punitive damages in this case against my client.
And I want to review the evidence with you now and then I'm going to come back to you and suggest some common sense ways that you may b able to do your job.
Now, in Phase II, as I mentioned, and I think Mr. Bass, we brought you Dr. Michael Borgerding. Dr. Michael Borgerding was a senior director of product integrity at RJR. He leads the clinical study effort there. He is a 30-year employee in research and development area. And he's dedicated his life's work to find ways to reduce the risk of tobacco products.
Do you remember the last question I asked him, when he said, yes, I believe I can make a difference. I believe I've made a difference.
I can reduce the risk. We can reduce the risk of this product. Can we make it safe? No.
That's why he's there and that's what he's
dedicated his life to.
And what did he talk about? He talked about RJR's guiding principles. He talked about RJR's
efforts to reduce harm. He talked about their policies on harm reduction. He talked about the business environment within which they now operate and the regulatory environment within which Reynolds operates.
He also reviewed with you the guiding principles and beliefs. And I'm going to suggest to you in a minute after I go this how these fit within what I think he did, but he reviewed with you Reynolds' guiding principles and beliefs: Smoking causes cancer. Smoking is addictive. Smoking is the leading cause of preventable death in this country. There is no tobacco product that is safe. Quitting smoking significantly reduces risk. Those are the principles that this company operates under today.
He also talked to you about testing. Talked about the tests that Reynolds does now. That's test tube test studies, animal studies, studies with smokers. He talked with you about the actual studies that Reynolds does with smokers.
They bring smokers in. They give them a battery of tests to measure the extent to which they have carcinogens in their bodies. You remember the discussion about biomarkers.
They use a reduced-risk product. They use Snus. They use Eclipse. And then they were measured again after six months. That's the kind of research and work that's going on at Reynolds today.
And what does that show? That these products that Reynolds developed are less risky. That's what it shows.
He talked to you about the product stewardship program, where if they want to make a change to a cigarette -- and we're not talking about a significant change -- he said if they just want to change the paper, the supplier comes from ABC Company and they change it to Company, they go through this checklist. They want to understand the change. They review the literature. They do chemical analyses. They do biological tests. And they do smoking behavior studies.
And he also reviewed with you the range of products. And this is a continuum of risk. And
this is very important, because Reynolds is doing something very different here. You have combustible products on the right side. And you see in the middle there, you see traditional cigarettes. And it's a little off kilter. You can see it up here, you see those are the ones with the highest risk. As you move across the continuum to the left, you get to NRTs. That a shorthand for nicotine replacement therapy.
And what Dr. Borgerding told you is that this company, starting with Premier and Eclipse in the '80s, has dedicated itself to developing, creating less risky products. Spent a billion dollars on Premier and Eclipse project alone.
It now manufactures Snus. You remember the pouch that goes between your mouth, lower risk product.
He even told you that this company has acquired a company in Sweden called Niconovum that manufactures nicotine replacement therapies. Think about that for a minute, ladies and gentlemen. That's buying a company, trying to bring that product into this country to get FDA approval to help its own customers quit. That's what's going on there.
They're developing technology, they're developing products to assist in people's efforts to quit smoking.
So let's see how all this fits in with what you did. As I said, you checked each box, and the first concern was obviously that there was something we did, something these companies die that was negligent. Well, let's look at the evidence that we brought you in Phase II that at least, I believe, addresses that issue.
RJR agrees that smoking causes deadly disease and addictive. We acknowledge that smoking is a leading cause of preventable deaths in the U.S.
You heard a lot about not cooperating with the public health community, not acknowledging causation, not acknowledging the addiction. Clearly, that is being done today.
We advise smokers to obtain their own information from the public health community.
Anybody in the world can go to our website, and if they do, do you know what they find? A link to the NCI, National Cancer Institute, a link to the CDC, a link to the Surgeon General's
Reports
We tell customers there is no safe tobacco product. There simply isn't one. There are inherent risks in the product and it is not safe.
We encourage our customers to quit. And for those who do not want to quit, we've produced lower risk products.
But there's more evidence on this issue.
You remember, and I mentioned, that we're mak nicotine replacement therapies, bringing them to this country and making them available to customers.
We did the research on the low nitrosamine tobacco. You remember Dr. Borgerding talked about that. They went into the tobacco barns, they identified the problem. They fixed the problem, but they didn't keep the technology to themselves. They shared it. They shared it with competitors. They shared it with universities. They shared it with public health communities. All with the result that the tobacco now used in cigarettes has lower tobacco-specific nitrosamines, which is where some of the carcinogens are.
We've adopted a rigid testing procedure for
all of our products. I'm not going to go over it in detail. It's the product stewardship program.
You remember the quality of life study where Dr. Borgerding talked about comparing the actual smokers using different products to see over time how that affected their risk profile.
They did smoke chemistry. They did biological tests. As I've said, they've conducted the research into tobacco-specific nitrosamines. They operate within significant advertising restrictions.
And they've paid 40 billion dollars to states under the MSA. Well, we heard a lot of talk about it this morning. What needs to be clear is the allegations in those cases that led to those payments were the very same allegations made here.
MR. DENNEY: Objection, Your Honor. That's not in evidence.
THE COURT: Step up.
(Sidebar discussion held as follows:)
THE COURT: Was it discussed in the testimony on -MR. BURTON: I thought he brought it out on
cross-examination.
MR. DENNEY: I did bring it out on cross, and that's not true either.
MR. BURTON: It is true.
THE COURT: I don't recall it being in evidence, so I'm going to sustain the objection and move on. That's fine. Thank you.
(Sidebar discussion concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. BURTON: We heard a lot of discussion about the MSA. And Dr. Borgerding told you that we had paid 40 billion dollars in connection with that. Well, that's roughly 3 billion dollars a year, and those payments go on in perpetuity. So every year, year after year, we're going to continue to pay three billion dollars. Are those the kind of activities that suggest that this company is acting negligently?
I say they do not.
Let's look at your second concern. Now, your second concern was they manufactured a defective product. Again, I don't know exactly what bothered you, but as best I can tell, we brought Dr. Borgerding to address those.
The product stewardship program, test tube
studies, animal studies, chemistry of smoke, biological activity in smoke, looking at all of those things to make sure that the risk profile of these products is as low as possible.
The FDA has oversight in all phases of our business; ingredients, packaging, production, materials. They look at tar and nicotine yields. They look at any new product. The FDA is right there. That's the kind of oversight.
There's full disclosure of ingredients and additives. You saw the voluntary disclosure on the website. If you want to go see what's in a Camel cigarette, you hit the link, it tells you what they are, voluntarily done.
We conducted studies and one of you asked both of the scientists that came here about filtered cigarettes and whether they were safer, and what you heard was that we had conducted studies that demonstrated that filtered cigarettes produced less risk, are less risky even when you take compensation into account.
Dr. Borgerding talked about his quality of life studies that address that very issue. We use low nitrosamine tobacco in all cigarettes and we cooperate with the public health
authority.
I submit to you that given that framework, there is not a problem, there's no defective product being put on the market today.
Let's look at your third concern. This is that we somehow concealed things. Well, let's look at that today, what the evidence is in Phase II that we brought you.
The website provides links to the Surgeon General, the National Cancer Institute. We admit smoking causes disease. We admit smoking is addictive. The public document website has 1.6 million pages in it. The Master Settlement Agreement and the Florida Settlemen Agreement were prior document disclosure.
Anybody in the world can get the documents that you saw in this case. Go to the public website, plug in search terms, Dr. Teague,
Dr. Rodgman, any lawyer, plaintiff defense, any member of the public can get those documents, completely open.
We had full disclosure of additives and ingredients, not only to the FDA, but you heard Dr. Borgerding talk about the State of Texas and the State of Massachusetts, turned over lists of
ingredients.
The FDA has full access to our manufacturing plants and our facilities. No way to conceal anything that's going on in those facilities.
If the FDA says, we want to come in, the FDA's coming in.
And we have the product stewardship program to make sure, to make sure that everything is done possibly to test those products before they go to market.
So let's look at the last concern you've had, and that was there was a concern about an agreement not to -- agreement to conceal.
Mr. Geraghty touched on this. CTR, NTI, they're no longer around. Tobacco Institute is no longer here, been out of existence for over a decade.
American Tobacco Company is no longer here. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Company is not here
The executives, the executives, they've been gone for decades. The scientists, Claude Teague and Alan Rodgman, they've been gone for decades.
We cooperate with the public health authorities, with the FTC. You heard Dr. Borgerding say he personally met with the
FTC, the FDA, the State of Texas and the State of Massachusetts. They're subject to FDA regulation. The FDA has such broad authority, if they think something's going wrong they can come in and close the plants. They can seize the products. They can stop sales.
And the state AGs under the Master Settlement Agreement, they have authority to go to court and enforce and enjoin advertising violations.
So is there an effort, an agreement to conceal going on today? Absolutely not. We've addressed those.
The bottom line, ladies and gentlemen, is the RJ Reynolds company of today, in 2012, is a very, very different company from the one in 1960. And remember, as I said a moment ago, Reynolds has paid 40 billion dollars to date with an obligation to continue to pay 40 billion -- excuse me, billions of dollars a year.
And remember, ladies and gentlemen, remember, if Reynolds were to step out of line, if they were to step out of line, the MSA -excuse me, the attorney generals and the FDA,
they're right there. They're right there.
There's no risk, no risk of any -- of what you were concerned about, obviously, happening again today. There's 7,000 plaintiffs out there with their lawsuits. They're pursuing their claims.
If we step out of line, they're there.
Remember, this is not -- you've got -- if you punish, you punish for harm to her.
But this company is in a regulatory environment. It is under control. It is under a proverbial microscope with law enforcement agencies everywhere in a position to regulate its behavior.
So that comes to your job, and I think there's some common sense ways to approach you job. You concluded, as I said, that Reynolds is -- responsibility or share of the responsibility is $500,000. As I told you there, I submit to you that's the starting point, because remember, Reynolds cannot be punished for harm caused by someone else. So Reynolds cannot be punished for harm that Ms. Hallgren was responsible for that you found or that Philip Morris responsible for.
So we start with $500 000
And as Mr. Geraghty said, you're award has to bear a reasonable relationship to that picture. I ended up in the same place where Mr. Geraghty did, but from a little different analysis.
I submit to you that a reasonable ratio is 1 to 1; that is, you have your $500,000 in compensatory award, that if you consider punitive damages and they are warranted in your view when you deliberate, they should be somewhere between zero and $500,000.
How do you make your choice? How do you decide within that range?
I submit to you that you go back to the four counts that you looked at. You among the six of you know what evidence you found important. If the evidence that we brought you in the form of Mr. Jupe and Dr. Borgerding addressed your concerns on one of those counts, fully addressed your concerns, then I submit to you what you ought to do is take the $500,000, divide it into four parts; $125,000 for each of those counts.
If we didn't satisfy any of your concerns, you would award $500,000. If you find that we did address your concerns, then you would not award
any money for that particular count.
So, ladies and gentlemen, the company that you're being asked to punish and Mr. Denney is going to talk about is a very, very different company from today.
Today Reynolds is fully transparent. It fully cooperates with the public health community. It is open and honest with customers about risk of its products. It thoroughly and rigidly tests its products before they go on the market. It provides its customers with advice on quitting. It provides its customers with lower risk products. And it's even involved in efforts to get its own customers to quit.
Ladies and gentlemen, I appreciate your time. I appreciate your service. I do not have another opportunity to talk with you today, but as Mr. Geraghty said, when you deliberate, when you deliberate, think about whether a punitive damage award today would result in Reynolds changing any of this behavior. It's already changed. It's a different company. And I submit to you under those circumstances that if you award punitive damages, if you decide that you should, that it should be a 1 to 1 ratio and
it should be at $500,000.
Thank you for your time.
