          And now for the defense, Mr. Bayuk.
          MR. BAYUK:  Thank you, Your Honor.  And may
      it please the Court, counsel, Miss Hardin.
          Good afternoon, ladies and gentleman.
          (Jury says good afternoon.)
          MR. BAYUK:  I need to start the same place 4245
      that Mr. Kaiser did, which was to thank you for
      your time and attention to this case.  The
      system doesn't work without you and so we really
      appreciate it, but more so, I want to thank you
      for your patience, because this trial has lasted
      a long time.  It's lasted about three and a half
      weeks.  It's almost two weeks to the day from
      when I was up here giving you the opening
      statement.  And you were actually a little bit
      more patient than you needed to be in this case,
      because as the argument that you just heard for
      the last hour demonstrated to you, much of what
      you heard isn't going to help you in this case.
      Much of the argument you heard and the evidence
      that was talked about isn't going to help you
      answer any of the questions that y'all have to
      decide when you go back to jury room and
      deliberate.
          I told you at the beginning, I told you in
      opening statement, I think this is pretty
      simple.  I think you're going to find it's a
      pretty simple case.  The case is not about
      smoking in general.  It's not about other
      smokers.  It's not about tobacco company conduct
      in general.  It's not about tobacco company 4246
      documents.  The case is only about one smoker
      and one smoker only, and that's Mr. Hardin.
          This is Mr. Hardin's case.  You are here to
      decide things like why Mr. Hardin smoked; what
      he saw; what he relied on; what he knew; and why
      he did the things that he did.
          And so I want to spend my time today talking
      to you about the evidence that relates to that
      issue, the evidence that's going to help you.
          I asked you in opening statement, "Please,
      please, try to keep your eye on the ball.
      Please listen to the evidence as it came in and
      see, number one, does it relate to Mr. Hardin.
      Because if it doesn't, it's not going to be of
      much use to you when you go back to deliberate.
          But, number two, if the evidence does relate
      to Mr. Hardin, what side does it support?  Does
      the evidence support the claims that are being
      made or does it refute them?
          Is the evidence that you remember consistent
      with the argument that you heard this morning or
      does it refute it?  Is it the opposite?
          And I think when you --
          MR. KAISER:  Objection to what counsel
      thinks. 4247
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. BAYUK:  Well, my plan for the next hour
      is to walk you through the evidence.  And I
      would submit to you that once we do that, you're
      going to see, overwhelmingly, the evidence only
      points to the fact that the plaintiff has failed
      to carry their burden of proof on each and every
      one of their claims.  And we're going to look at
      that evidence.
          One thing I want to remind you of, and it's
      important.  Based on what you just heard this
      morning, the instructions tell you this:  "The
      plaintiff has to prove her case with evidence,
      not with argument."
          You have an instruction that says, "You
      cannot engage in guesswork or speculation or
      guess about things that were not covered here."
          The plaintiff can't fill the gaps in their
      case by asking you to rely on their argument.
      And you heard it a number of times this morning.
      You heard it right off the bat with the
      discussion of addiction and what Dr. O'Brien
      said, the plaintiff's addiction expert.
          Because there's been discussion of these DSM
      criteria.  You-all remember when Dr. O'Brien 4248
      came to testify and what he said about the DSM
      criteria.  We're going talk about that in
      detail.
          But the argument you heard this morning was,
      "Well, maybe there was this criteria, you know.
      Dr. O'Brien said it.  If I had had the chance to
      interview Mr. Hardin, maybe I could have found
      this."
          That's argument, that's not evidence.  So
      you can't find that the plaintiff met their
      burden when that's all that you have.
          Another example.  You know, we went through
      trial.  Dr. Proctor was the first witness.  He
      was on the stand for about a day and a half,
      nothing to do and not a single thing about
      Mr. Hardin.
          Then Dr. O'Brien testified, Dr. Flurry,
      Dr. Messina.  Mr. Hardin's deposition was
      played.  Mrs. Hardin testified.  All the while,
      not a single comment by all these people that
      knew Mr. Hardin, including the man himself, said
      he was demented.
          It wasn't until the cross-examination of
      Dr. Giakas, the last witness you heard from,
      when the plaintiff decided, "Mr. Hardin's 4249
      testimony actually wasn't that good for them,"
      and so the explanation was invented that
      Mr. Hardin was demented.
          You didn't hear a single thing about that
      until the very end of the case.  After
      four-and-a-half hours of his own deposition was
      played to you, after you were just argued to
      about what he said and what it means.  That's
      what I mean when I say, "Please keep your eye on
      the ball and look for evidence, because argument
      doesn't suffice."
          So when you boil it down like so, I think
      you'll find the case is pretty simple.  I want
      to show you a board -- I showed you an
      opening -- a board of five facts that I think
      answer all of your questions that you will have
      to decide when you retire to deliberate.
          Can everyone see that?
          I told you in opening statement we were
      going to establish these facts by the end of the
      case.  The evidence does establish these facts.
      It's overwhelming and unrefuted evidence.
          Number one, Mr. Hardin did not start or
      continue to smoke because of anything the
      tobacco industry said or did. 4250
          That's what the evidence is.  You heard a
      lot of argument about that this morning; heard a
      lot of argument, "He must have relied because he
      did this thing that other smokers did" or
      "Tobacco companies were saying this and he did
      it, so that must be reliance."
          Well, we have evidence not just about people
      that knew him.  We have evidence from him
      himself about why he did things, why he
      switched, why he smoked.  And the overwhelming
      evidence is the tobacco industry had nothing to
      do with it.  He told you that himself.
          Number two, despite knowing the risks of
      smoking, he chose to keep smoking for decades
      without ever trying to quit because he enjoyed
      it.  And we're going to look at the evidence on
      that.
          Number three, once he was motivated to quit,
      this is in 2005, he quit the first time he tried
      with no difficulty, no withdrawal, no relapse,
      no craving, never going back.  That's simply
      what the evidence is.
          Number four, he admitted -- Mr. Hardin
      admitted that he could have quit smoking sooner
      and prevented his disease and death.  He told 4251
      you he had the power to change the outcome, but
      he didn't want to quit.  That's what the
      evidence is.
          And, finally, the plaintiff's case is
      legally barred because Mr. Hardin knew or should
      have known that he had a medical condition that
      he related to smoking before May 5th, 1990.
          You heard the defense, on this claim, has
      the burden of proof.  And I'm going to show you
      we've carried that burden overwhelmingly.
          We're going to look at the evidence, because
      it's not -- the argument you heard this morning,
      there's zero evidence to support this.  This is
      something we made up.  I'm going to show you
      testimony on this exact issue in a little bit.
          And now the quotes.  You've heard these time
      and time again in this trial:  From opening
      statement, you heard it from multiple witnesses,
      and you heard them come from Mr. Hardin himself.
          You know, there's a claim made, "He didn't
      know" -- you heard the argument, "He didn't know
      the dangers of smoking."
          What did he tell you?  This is the
      difference between argument and evidence.
          What was the evidence? 4252
          You saw the warnings and you understood that
      smoking was dangerous, didn't you?
          "Right."
          There's no evidence of confusion.  There's
      no evidence of doubt.  He says he understood.
      He knew that cigarettes were dangerous.
          He told you repeatedly, "I saw the warnings.
      I saw the sign on the cigarettes, but I didn't
      pay no attention.  I didn't heed by them."
          Not that I missed them.  Not that "I didn't
      know every pack of cigarettes carried a
      warning."  I saw it, and I did not heed it.  And
      why?  Why did he tell you that?
          Well, number one, he told you, "It's my
      choice to smoke."
          He didn't say, "Addiction makes me smoke."
      It doesn't compel me against my will to smoke."
      And this is when he's deposed in this lawsuit as
      the plaintiff.  "It's my choice to smoke.  It's
      strictly up to me whether I quit or not."
          Not "It's 10 percent up to me and the rest
      is because of addiction."
          "It's strictly 100 percent up to me whether
      I quit or not."
          And what was the difference with Mr. Hardin? 4253
      He told you, "I didn't want to quit."  This is
      before 2005.  "I didn't want to quit."
          Not "I couldn't quit," not "I was unable to
      quit," not "I want to quit but I can't."
          "I didn't want to quit."  That's the
      evidence.
          When I say, "Keep your eye on the ball" --
      and based on what you heard this morning, it is
      so important to not be distracted by issues that
      you are not here to decide.
          You know what, these questions that
      Mr. Kaiser told you the defense isn't going to
      answer -- well, you know what, I want to focus
      on the questions you're here to answer.
          You have a copy of a verdict form.  We call
      this machine the ELMO.  I'm not sure why, but
      when Mr. Kaiser was answering these questions as
      he thought they should be answered on the
      verdict form, he failed to point out something I
      told you in opening.
          You don't need to go further than the
      verdict form to know that this case is only
      about Mr. Hardin, not to be distracted by other
      issues.
          Every single question on the verdict form 4254
      has Mr. Hardin's name on it.  Every single one
      relates specifically to him and his very
      specific legal claims.
          And so when I say "Don't be distracted,"
      just for example, you heard a lot of argument
      this morning about addiction, and you heard a
      lot of argument about mass media, about
      marketing, and about reliance.
          And so let me talk to you about what the
      evidence is on those issues so we can put those
      to bed.  We can put them aside and they won't
      distract you from what you're here to decide.
          There's a lot of claim, a lot of talk about
      Mr. Hardin being addicted.  What was the
      evidence?  What was the evidence on that?
          And you heard two experts come, Dr. O'Brien
      and Dr. Giakas.  And Dr. O'Brien -- we're going
      talk more about him.  You kind of got two
      stories from him.  You got one on direct
      examination and then you got a different story
      on cross-examination.  We're going to talk about
      exactly what he said and why there was such a
      difference.
          But the bottom line, all of the evidence
      supports that Mr. Hardin was not addicted to 4255
      nicotine.  And I'm going to show you testimony,
      but y'all remember that?
          The evidence was Mr. Hardin did not lose
      control over his smoking.  Dr. Giakas told you
      that, and Dr. O'Brien, on cross-examination,
      said, "Yes, I saw evidence he could control it.
      He could control his smoking.  Mr. Hardin quit
      when he wanted to quit with no problem."
          Dr. O'Brien told you, "The hallmark of
      addiction is being unable to quit when you want
      to."
          Well, this is what the evidence supports
      unequivocally.
          And, finally, he had the ability to quit and
      prevent his disease.  So when you hear all of
      this talk, these claims about addiction and
      Mr. Hardin was compelled, this is what I mean
      when I say to ask yourself if the argument you
      hear lines up with the evidence.
          Because, I submit to you, it's actually the
      opposite.  The evidence supports the other
      conclusion, and it's overwhelming.
          What was the evidence about why Mr. Hardin
      smoked if it wasn't for addiction?
          Well, you heard a lot of reasons.  You heard 4256
      a lot of reasons from Mr. Hardin himself and
      from both of the experts:  Enjoyed smoking,
      liked the taste, smoked to relieve the boredom
      of hours on the road in his truck, smoked to
      help relieve stress and relax when he'd run into
      traffic, help him concentrate on the road.
          And, finally, Dr. Giakas explained to you,
      you know, there's this concept of distress or
      impairment.  That's how you can distinguish
      addiction from someone that just does something
      regularly, a habit.
          And Dr. Giakas explained to you that
      Mr. Hardin smoked out of habit.  You heard
      Mr. Hardin himself tell you, "Smoking was a
      habit I got into."
          That was his testimony under oath.
      Advertising, mass marketing.  A lot of time
      spent this morning and in this trial talking
      about those issues.
          Well, first, the jury instructions give you
      guidance on how to approach the claims.  And so
      I want to highlight a few.
          Instruction number 16 tells you, "The
      manufacture, sale, and advertising of cigarettes
      is a lawful activity and cannot be the basis for 4257
      liability."
          Why is there so much time spent on
      advertising when your instructions tell you in
      black and white, it can't be the basis of
      liability the fact that Reynolds advertised.
          Instruction number 18, "Reynolds has a First
      Amendment right to advertise its products.  You
      cannot base a liability on the fact they
      advertised or even how much money they spent."
          That's a jury instruction that you have to
      follow in the case.  So why is there so much
      time spent talking about the advertising when
      the instructions tells you what role it plays.
      It doesn't play any role.
          But more importantly, if we're going to
      focus on Mr. Hardin, what was the evidence about
      Mr. Hardin?  You heard a lot of talk with
      Dr. Proctor about skywriting and bellhops, you
      know, billboards, magazines, and television ads.
          Mr. Hardin himself told you, "I didn't rely
      on advertising.  I didn't use advertising to
      base any single brand choice or smoking decision
      that I ever made."
          That was Mr. Hardin's own words as the
      plaintiff in the case. 4258
          And then there was a lot of talk this
      morning about this Winston ad.  You were shown a
      board where Mr. Hardin's testimony was that he
      smoked Winstons because he remembered a Winston
      jingle, "Winston tastes good like a cigarette
      should."
          Well, he did remember that ad in the
      deposition, and do you remember what he said
      right after he recalled it?
          He said, "That wouldn't have been it.  That
      wasn't why I switched.  That wouldn't have been
      it."
          Mr. Persons, who's going to get up after me
      and walk through the rest of the verdict form,
      is going to show you that that particular
      testimony, that that's the evidence.  You didn't
      get the full picture this morning.  And so the
      full picture is the only ad Mr. Hardin
      remembered, he then said immediately, "I didn't
      rely on that ad."
          A lot of argument was made too about
      filters, that he switched from -- switched to
      filtered cigarettes because he was relying on
      the tobacco companies.  You were shown some
      testimony from Dr. Proctor, but you weren't 4259
      shown the next question and answer from
      Dr. Proctor's exam.
          Because the next question that Mr. Kaiser
      asked him was, "Did the tobacco companies ever
      tell the public that filters were safer?"
          And Dr. Proctor said, "No.  They wouldn't
      say that.  They didn't say that because they
      didn't want people to think the other cigarettes
      were not safe."  So they didn't say that.
          Dr. Proctor told you, "The only people
      telling the public that filters were safer was
      the public health community, the Surgeon
      General."  And Mr. Persons is going to go over
      that with you.
          But more to that point, in what Mr. Kaiser
      showed you this morning, and he showed you the
      testimony, Dr. Proctor said, "The big push for
      Winston was in 1954" -- "the big push for
      Winston cigarettes was in 1954."
          What did Mr. Hardin say about when he
      switched to Winston?  1952.  1952, before they
      were even being pushed, as Dr. Proctor said, by
      Reynolds.  So that's the full story.  That's the
      full story to show you that there's no evidence
      of reliance. 4260
          And more broadly, not just about advertising
      but, you know, you heard a lot of discussion
      about White Papers and Frank Statement and the
      Waxman hearings.
          Again, what was Mr. Hardin's experience?
      What did he tell you?
          He was not impacted by or did not rely on
      any public statements by any tobacco company or
      anything in the tobacco industry.  There's no
      evidence he ever thought there was a controversy
      or that he was confused.  The only evidence is
      that he understood smoking was dangerous.
      That's the evidence specific to him.
          And then we had two experts, one on each
      side, review the entire record.  Remember, I
      asked questions about the entire record.  All
      the depositions, all the medical records, all
      the discovery responses, thousands of pages.
          Did you find anything dealing with this case
      showing Mr. Hardin had any reliance on anything
      from the industry?
          Their expert said no.  Our expert said no.
      There is simply zero evidence of reliance.  That
      is the full story.
          And so with that, I want to spend the rest 4261
      of my time walking you through the evidence.
          You know, this is called closing argument,
      but I don't need to argue.  I don't need to
      argue about it, not on this evidence.  I'm
      simply going to show you what the evidence was,
      remind you what it was and tell you how it
      answers all of these questions.  And I think --
      I submit that you will find there has been a
      complete failure of proof on every claim.
          And so I'm going to walk through first two
      claims on the verdict form and then I'm not
      sure, we may take a lunch break and Mr. Persons
      is going to get up and walk you through the
      rest.
          And so I want to start with question
      number 1:  "Was Thomas Hardin addicted to
      cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was
      such addiction a legal cause of his
      COPD/emphysema and death?  Yes or no?"
          This is the class membership question, so
      let's look at the evidence on class membership.
      You remember when we discussed this in opening
      statement we illustrated this as two hurdles.
      There's two components of the plaintiff's burden
      on this.  They have to meet both.  They can't 4262
      just meet one.  They have to prove addiction,
      and then even if they prove addiction, they have
      to prove addiction causation, that addiction is
      what drove Mr. Hardin to smoke himself to COPD
      and death.  That's their burden to prove both
      those issues.
          So let's take them one by one.  Addiction,
      the plaintiff must prove that Mr. Hardin was
      medically addicted to nicotine.  Well, what was
      the evidence?  The only standard that you got
      from both sides was the DSM.  Mr. Kaiser showed
      it to you this morning.  The purple book, the
      DSM-5 and its criteria.  Well, the evidence, and
      we're going to look at it, was Mr. Hardin does
      not meet those criteria for nicotine addiction.
      That's simply what the evidence was.  And so
      kind of a framework for how we're going to walk
      through what the evidence was, you heard, you
      know, Mr. Kaiser said that Dr. Giakas said this
      was the gold standard.  Well, Dr. O'Brien who
      wrote the book told you that it was the GOLD
      standard.  Psychiatrists agree it is the only
      test.
          Both experts agree also, you have to have 6
      or more of the 11 criteria.  Mr. Kaiser told you 4263
      that in opening.  He said, "I'm going to bring a
      world-renowned expert.  He's won all kinds of
      awards."  The discussion of awards was longer
      than his discussion of Mr. Hardin.  But he --
      he -- Mr. Kaiser told you, the expert is going
      to come and say, "I wrote these criteria and you
      have to have 6."  And we'll see what the expert
      says.  That's what he told you in opening.  He
      didn't really admit to it on direct examination,
      but on cross examination I had to show him his
      deposition, he said, "You require 6 criteria?"
      And he said, "Yes."  That was his testimony
      under oath.  Dr. Giakas said the same thing, "6
      or more are required."  That's one component.
          In addition to that, there has to be
      significant impairment or distress, another
      component that plaintiff has to meet to prove
      addiction.
          And, finally, both experts agreed that half
      of people that smoke every single day just as
      much as Mr. Hardin are not addicted to nicotine.
      They smoke for other reasons.  That's simply
      what the evidence was and it came from both
      sides.
          And so both experts, you know, a lot of talk 4264
      about Dr. O'Brien and him writing the DSM-5, but
      might have found it telling that when Mr. Kaiser
      was asking him what was in the DSM-5,
      Dr. O'Brien couldn't remember.  And so
      Mr. Kaiser had to walk up to the witness stand
      and show him the book that he wrote to remind
      him what he had written in the book.  Maybe
      that's not surprising because Dr. O'Brien told
      you, "I was involved with DSM-5, but I've never
      applied it.  It's been out for over two years
      and I've never applied it to single patient.  I
      don't apply it in practice.  I don't see
      smokers."  That's what he told you.
          Contrast that with Dr. Giakas.  He came,
      told you if he wasn't here, he'd be treating
      patients that day.  That was on a Thursday and
      Friday.  He was missing patients to be here.  He
      uses the book every single day in his practice.
      He has diagnosed 600 patients for smoking issues
      and nicotine addiction.  He knows the ins and
      outs of how it is applied clinically every
      single day.
          Talk a little bit more about Dr. O'Brien.  I
      want to point out a jury instruction.  You got
      it read to you before open -- before closings, 4265
      but it's an instruction, instruction number 3 on
      the believability of witnesses.  It tells you:
      In evaluating the believability of any witness
      and the weight that you will give to the
      testimony, you may properly consider the
      demeanor of the witness while testifying, the
      frankness or lack of frankness of the witness,
      the intelligence, any interest they may have,
      and then the ability of the witness to remember
      the matters about which the witness testified.
          I'd submit to you this instruction was made
      for Dr. O'Brien in this case.  And why do I say
      that?  You remember, as I said, different story
      between direct and cross-examination.  Direct
      examination, you may have found it pretty clear
      that Dr. O'Brien actually didn't remember much
      about the case.  We find out why on
      cross-examination, because he hadn't read a
      single material about the case in about six
      months.  He couldn't answer basic questions
      about what people said in the case.  When
      Mr. Kaiser was asking about how he applied the
      DSM-5 criteria, he answered, "Well, Mr. Hardin
      smoked.  Mr. Hardin smoked.  Well, we're here in
      a smoking case."  Mr. Kaiser had to prompt him. 4266
      "Well, did you see anything about quit
      attempts?"  "Oh, quit attempts, that's right."
      You may remember the testimony.  But on
      cross-examination I was very respectful to the
      man.  We went very slowly and I was asking him
      questions that I had already asked him in
      deposition, and time and time again he gave
      different answers.  And so y'all know by now we
      call this impeachment.  Before trial starts we
      have an obligation to go take depositions of the
      witnesses, say what they're going to say; see
      what their opinions are.  It's all under oath
      and we make a written transcript.  And that's so
      that when the witness comes to court we're not
      surprised by what they say.
          And oftentimes you may have seen during the
      plaintiff's case we did get surprised by what
      the witnesses say, and so we have an obligation
      at that time to bring you the full story, to
      show the witness their testimony that was given
      under oath and have you evaluate why was there a
      change in the testimony.  And here there was a
      change 33 times.  33 times.
          You know, Mr. Kaiser told you this morning,
      Dr. O'Brien, you know, questions were posed to 4267
      him and he said, "You know, there's no black and
      white answer.  I can't say yes or no."  And then
      I would show him his testimony under oath where
      the answer would be yes or no.  And so you have
      to think about why was he not candid with you on
      cross-examination.  And the instruction tells
      you that you need to take that into account when
      you consider the weight to give to his
      testimony.
          I told you the requirement of 6 or more
      criteria.  The plaintiff told you that in
      opening.  Dr. O'Brien told you that.  This was a
      big change.  You know, Mr. Kaiser, I thought it
      was very telling in his closing, he told you,
      "Oh, Dr. O'Brien found the DSM criteria met."
      He didn't give you a number.  He didn't tell you
      how many criteria there were because he knows he
      has to have 6 or more.
          Well, in trial on direct exam, Dr. O'Brien
      came up with 8.  8 criteria.  So I had to bring
      out his deposition on cross-examination where he
      admitted under oath he only found 5.  He only
      found 5 criteria.  And so what happened between
      the deposition and trial?  Well, maybe among
      other things, Dr. O'Brien knew he had to find 6 4268
      if he was going to help the plaintiff carry the
      burden of proving that Mr. Hardin was addicted.
      And so all of a sudden it went from 5 to 8.
          In addition to the number of criteria, there
      has to be this finding of significant impairment
      or distress.  And Dr. Giakas told you why.  And
      so you don't have a trivial condition rise to
      the level of a mental disorder, rise to the
      level of an addiction.  That's why you don't go
      through the checklist without training and check
      off boxes when you see something like smoking in
      bed or smoking one to two packs a day.  You have
      to understand more.  You have to apply clinical
      judgment.  That's what Dr. Giakas told you.  And
      the purpose of that is to see if the behavior
      rises to a severe level, rises to being an
      addiction.
          Well, what did Dr. O'Brien say on
      cross-examination when I asked him, I pushed
      him, "What was the evidence of distress or
      impairment?"  This is what he told you, "We
      don't have evidence that he was distressed by
      his smoking."  Dr. Giakas told you the same
      thing.  Didn't show any distress or impairment.
      And remember, Dr. Giakas went through the extra 4269
      step of watching the video, not just reading the
      transcript but watching the testimony, so as a
      board-certified forensic psychiatrist he could
      look at Mr. Hardin's demeanor.  He could see
      what Mr. Hardin's body language was and how his
      voice was when he's talking about his smoking.
      And he said, "That just confirms it."  You all
      saw it.  You need to decide if you thought you
      saw distress when Mr. Hardin was talking about
      his smoking.  Dr. Giakas told you his opinion as
      a forensic psychiatrist.  So that's something
      you need to think about, the evidence that you
      have, not argument but the evidence is he was
      not distressed or impaired.
          So you have plaintiff failing to carry their
      burden simply because they didn't meet the test
      that they put in front of you, 6 or more
      criteria.  They don't meet this test.  Their
      expert on cross admitted this.  So this is
      another reason they don't carry their burden.
          But there's more because what did Mr. Hardin
      say?  What did Mr. Hardin say about his smoking
      and whether he was distressed about it?  He told
      you in his deposition, "I never had no problems
      smoking."  Never had no problems with smoking. 4270
      And that's consistent with the other quotes.
      "It's my choice, strictly up to me, I didn't
      want to quit, never had no problems smoking."
          Well, what was the problem?  And we don't,
      from the defense side, don't submit that there
      was any problem.  Mr. Hardin engaged in
      behaviors he was free to engage in.  And I told
      you in opening, not one single person from this
      side is going to say anything bad about him.
      And I'm not up here to say anything bad about
      him now, but what was the evidence that if
      Mr. Hardin had any problem, what was it?
          Heard a lot of talk about gambling, a lot of
      discussion about gambling from a number of
      witnesses.  And so when the claim is being made
      by the plaintiff that smoking was causing the
      problems, that smoking was the problem and
      distressing his daily life, is that how you
      remember the evidence?  What was the evidence of
      what was actually causing some distress in his
      life?  Because it wasn't the smoking.  It wasn't
      what they claim he was addicted to.  It was the
      behavior that no one claims he was addicted to,
      gambling.
          And so I've compared and contrasted what the 4271
      evidence was and what you've heard from the
      witnesses on these issues.  Because if
      Mr. Hardin had any problem, it was the gambling,
      not the smoking.  The gambling, Mr. Hardin
      testified about the Reno incident where he lost
      so much money he had to call his boss, couldn't
      get where he was going because he couldn't
      afford it.  He said on his trips he would stop
      at casinos when he's on the way to make
      deliveries.  Smoking never impacted his work.
      In fact, the opposite.  Mr. Hardin told you,
      "You know what, we had company meetings."  He
      couldn't smoke.  "I didn't smoke and had no
      problem.  No withdrawal, no problem at all."
      "When I had to go places and deliver goods and
      you couldn't smoke at the delivery site, no
      problem with not smoking, no problem."  No
      impairment at work.
          Caused financial problems, gambling, again,
      the Reno issue, you heard something again,
      argument that came up at the end of trial when
      there's all this discussion of noncompliance,
      that somehow Mr. Hardin couldn't afford his
      medications.  Well, if that was -- that was the
      case, and you heard Dr. Giakas say this, he 4272
      was -- Mr. Hardin was gambling until the end of
      his life.  You saw the medical record that
      Dr. Giakas showed you just seven days before he
      died.  Mr. Hardin was gambling until the end of
      his life.  His choice to do that.  But when you
      look at what was causing problems, if anything,
      it was not the smoking.  Smoking never caused
      any financial problems.  You heard about
      gambling.  "The only problem we ever had," the
      only problem, tension in the marriage from the
      gambling.  Never a single fight about smoking.
      No conflict at all about smoking.
          You heard on the stand when Mrs. --
      Mrs. Hardin was testifying, you heard on direct
      examination from Mrs. Hardin, and it's a little
      uncomfortable, you know, in this setting to be
      talking about it, when Mrs. Hardin is sitting
      here, I don't mean any disrespect, but I need to
      bring you -- remind you what her testimony was.
      And so there was discussion about gambling
      before she testified, so she knew what the
      discussion was going to be.  And on her direct
      examination, she told Mr. Kaiser she never had a
      problem with gambling.  She told her husband
      that he should do it, it was an outlet or a 4273
      recreational activity.  And she encouraged him.
      On cross-examination we had to say,
      "Miss Hardin, you know, in your deposition did
      you say you told your husband that gambling was
      addicting?"  And she said, "No, I don't tell him
      that," and then we had to show her her
      deposition testimony and remind her what she
      said.  And this was a while ago.  But she said,
      when shown the deposition, "Okay, I might have
      told him it was addicting."  And then the
      question was asked, "Well, not only you told him
      it was addicting, you told him he was addicted?"
      And she said, "I might have, I might have told
      him he was addicted."  Unequivocal, she never
      told him he was addicted to smoking.  And then
      finally, gambling, the last thing you wanted to
      do, again, back to that medical record seven
      days before he died, when you think about the
      evidence on smoking, you know, evidence was put
      before you, it causes permanent brain changes.
      It causes long-lasting craving, you relapse
      years after you quit smoking, all you want to do
      is smoke.  But the last thing Mr. Hardin wanted
      to do in his life wasn't smoke a cigarette, it
      was take one more trip to the casino.  Again, 4274
      that's his choice.  But that's the evidence in
      the case that you have to think about.
          Smoking, you know, you heard the story, I
      think this is again from Mrs. Hardin on the
      stand where he quit smoking in 2005.  No problem
      quitting, no withdrawal, and on one occasion
      after that, Mrs. Hardin said that Mr. Hardin
      said, "You know what?  I want a cigarette.  I
      could smoke a cigarette as long as this trailer.
      I like to smoke."
          What is Mrs. Hardin's response?  Remember,
      Mr. Hardin quit because his doctors had been
      telling him, "You're going to die if you don't
      stop.  You're going to die.  You're hurting your
      COPD.  You're hurting your health."  In 2005
      they said, "If you don't quit, you're going to
      die."  He quit and lived seven more years.  And
      so kind of stunningly, you have this episode
      brought to you from Mrs. Hardin where Mr. Hardin
      says, "You know, I like to smoke."  And
      Mrs. Hardin, the plaintiff in the lawsuit, who's
      bringing a claim, you're told, for somewhere
      between 11 and $20 million, told her husband,
      "I'll go get you some cigarettes.  You should
      smoke.  I'll go get you some cigarettes."  And 4275
      Mr. Hardin had to be the one to say, "No, we're
      not going to do that again.  Done smoking.  No
      problem quitting.  I'm done smoking."  That was
      the evidence that you have in this case.
          And so now we looked at the evidence, the
      plaintiff can't carry their burden to show you
      the number of criteria for addiction.  They
      can't show the impairment or distress to prove
      addiction.  And so Dr. O'Brien, left without the
      DSM, came up with a new definition on the stand,
      a new definition of addiction.  He said, "The
      hallmark sign of addiction is the loss of
      control and an inability to quit when you want
      to quit.  You want to quit, but you can't quit.
      That's what I, you know, 50 years as a knight, a
      French knight, this is what I define as
      addiction."
          But then what happened on cross-examination?
      He admitted that even that test wasn't satisfied
      by Mr. Hardin because he said on cross, "For
      most of his life Mr. Hardin did not want to
      quit..." not was unable to quit, not had an
      inability to quit.  He did not want to quit.
          There's no evidence before 2005 that
      Mr. Hardin ever decided for himself that it was 4276
      time to quit smoking.  There's no evidence he
      was ever motivated before 2005.  At some point
      he got really motivated and at that time he quit
      smoking.  And Dr. O'Brien also told you at the
      end of the cross-examination, he always had that
      ability.  He always had the ability to quit, the
      power to quit and prevent his disease and death.
          And so with the definition that he resorted
      to, that he set up, "You want to quit, but
      can't," he told you the evidence shows
      Mr. Hardin never wanted to quit.  And when he
      finally did, he did quit.  That's the opposite
      of the hallmark of addiction.  And so plaintiff
      fails on this prong to carry their burden of
      proof on addiction.
          And this was untouched on redirect.  They
      have a chance on redirect examination to get up
      and try to fix this.  Say "he didn't really mean
      those things" or "can you explain, Dr. O'Brien,
      what you were saying when you made those
      admissions?"  Not an effort at all to try to add
      context to these admissions.  They're unrefuted
      in the evidence.
          And then you go to this point, both experts
      agreed, people that smoke just like Mr. Hardin 4277
      every single day, half of them, at least half of
      them are not addicted.  They smoke for other
      reasons.  It's an either or proposition.  You
      smoke for addiction or you smoke for another
      reason.  That's what the experts told you.
          Well, what are reasons people smoke besides
      addiction?  Both experts said this.  Enjoyment,
      taste, relaxation, socialization, bonding,
      stress relief, weight control, boredom.  They
      gave you a list from both sides.
          And then what did they say about Mr. Hardin
      particularly?  You've already seen this slide at
      the beginning of the closing.  He smokes for all
      these reasons.  And this isn't a case where the
      defense, I'm up here saying, you know, he
      enjoyed smoking and the plaintiff is saying, no,
      no, that's not the evidence, he didn't enjoy
      smoking.  This is unrefuted, undisputed evidence
      of all of the various reasons why he smoked, the
      same reasons both experts told you people smoke
      every day and are not addicted.  We have all
      these reasons in the case.
          We read to you at the end of our case
      Request for Admissions, admissions that the
      plaintiff made under oath about why Mr. Hardin 4278
      smoked.  We asked questions because we wanted to
      know before trial started, why do you contend
      that Mr. Hardin smoked?  They could have said
      addiction.  They could have said he couldn't
      control himself.  This is what they said and
      this is instruction number 11:  "You must accept
      these facts as true."  Not that he smoked
      because of addiction.  He smoked because he
      enjoyed smoking.  It relaxed him.  He liked the
      taste of his Kool cigarettes.  He liked the
      smell of tobacco as it burned.
          This was admitted by the plaintiff before
      they ever came into court and put on their case
      for you.  It's a judicial admission you have to
      accept as true.
          And so the bottom line, all of the
      evidence -- and I would respectfully submit to
      you it's overwhelming.  If you recall your
      memory and you recall what the evidence was as
      it related specifically to Mr. Hardin, he did
      not meet the criteria.  He did not meet the DSM
      criteria.  And, again, I think it's -- I submit
      it's very telling, you didn't hear a number from
      Mr. Kaiser this morning.  There's a really
      distinct reason why he didn't, because he knows 4279
      what Dr. O'Brien said.  He knows what
      Dr. O'Brien said on cross-examination.
          Smoking did not cause distress or
      impairment.  We looked at that evidence.
      Mr. Hardin controlled his smoking when he had
      to.  He was able to quit at any time, and he
      demonstrated that in 2005.
          And, finally, you know, there was evidence
      generally about withdrawal symptoms.  Well, what
      was the evidence specific to Mrs. Hardin?  You
      heard something about you could hear it in his
      voice or ill.  But what did Dr. O'Brien, the
      plaintiff's expert, tell you?
          "I couldn't give him that criterion.  I
      couldn't give him number 11 which dealt with
      withdrawal.  I didn't see enough evidence for
      it."  So he did not meet that.
          Dr. Giakas agreed.  He told you that too.
      The experts were in agreement on that point.  So
      I'm not sure what you heard about withdrawal
      this morning, but that's not consistent with
      what the evidence was, not consistent at all
      from both experts.
          Dr. Giakas explained to you in detail, he
      even answered a question from y'all about quit 4280
      attempts.  He explained to you, what does an
      addicted smoker look like?  What do I look for
      in my practice clinically when I'm applying the
      DSM and treating smokers every day at my
      practice?  He told you an addicted smoker
      tortured by smoking, dislikes what they're
      doing, is guilty about continuing to smoke
      because they want to stop it and they're having
      trouble, smokes against their will, not in
      control, avoids going places because they can't
      smoke there, so they miss out on going to the
      ballet recital or they miss out on flying on the
      airplane because they can't go without smoking.
          That's not the evidence about Mr. Hardin.
      He told you smoking never caused a problem.
      Dr. O'Brien told you he never missed out on
      anything he wanted to do because of smoking.
      It's simply, if he couldn't smoke, as Mr. Hardin
      himself told you, if he couldn't smoke then he
      would go wherever he needed to go and when he
      got done playing or whatever he wanted to do, he
      would simply smoke when he could.  That's
      control.  Addicted smoker, multiple failed quit
      attempts.  Struggles to quit after diagnosis.
      Relapsing.  Withdrawal symptoms.  Chain smokes 4281
      one after the other two, three, four, five packs
      a day.  Multiple relapses and craving.
          How does that compare to Mr. Hardin based on
      the evidence you have?  "I don't want to quit.
      Not I can't quit again.  I don't want quit."
      You know, I feel like I keep coming back to
      these things, but it's because the evidence is
      so overwhelming on these points and there's no
      contrary evidence that the plaintiff can point
      you to.  He enjoyed smoking.  He smoked because
      he wanted to.  He controlled his smoking.  No
      withdrawal.  Quit for good and never looked
      back.  No evidence of craving.
          That's what the evidence is.  That's why you
      cannot allow plaintiff to meet their burden with
      just argument.  That's why they have to point
      you to the evidence that establishes these
      things.  And this is what the evidence shows.
          And then final point, final point to kind of
      put the cherry on top of why Mr. Hardin was not
      addicted, in addition to all these other reasons
      they failed to carry their burden, there's
      discussion of personality and discussion of
      risk-taking.  And, yes, Dr. O'Brien did fight
      this on direct examination.  He wouldn't admit 4282
      it on cross -- on direct examination and so this
      is one of those 33 times I had to say,
      "Dr. O'Brien, you know, in your deposition you
      said personality and specifically these
      risk-taking behaviors are relevant to
      determining whether or not someone is addicted."
      He said, "Yes."  Determining whether or not --
      Dr. Giakas told you it's important because you
      have to use your clinical judgment.  You have to
      use clinical judgment in assessing the DSM.  And
      that's -- part of that is looking at the
      personality, because people smoke, half of them
      every day they value the benefits over the
      long-term risks.  And that's a decision people
      make without addiction impacting them.
          And so who was Mr. Hardin?  His wife
      described him as someone who was stubborn and
      did what he wanted to do, his own man, made his
      own decision, independent and risk-taking.  And
      the claim was made this morning in closing, why
      on earth would someone smoke for 50 years every
      single day?  Because they liked it or because
      they enjoyed it?  The only explanation for that
      is addiction.  Well, what do you know about
      other things that he did in his life, about how 4283
      he operated his truck, about his gambling when
      people are telling him, "You have to quit
      gambling."  He's getting into disputes with his
      wife.  His in-laws are telling him, "You have to
      quit gambling."  And he says, "I enjoyed it.  I
      wanted to continue gambling."  How did he
      approach other risks?  Why on earth, to use
      their logic, why on earth would the man speed
      all the time, overload his truck, endanger
      others' safety on the road?  Why would you do
      that?  Well, there's no evidence that that was
      caused by addiction.  Why would you not take
      your COPD medications?  Why on earth would
      someone do that?  Well, there's -- that wasn't
      caused by addiction.  Both experts told you
      that.
          I showed you this in opening.  This
      noncompliance, it wasn't a two-year thing.  It
      was a chronic thing that lasted the length of
      his treatment.  Addiction doesn't cause people
      to do this.  That's the bottom line.  Addiction
      isn't driving this.  And so, you know, when the
      claim is made to you why on earth would someone
      smoke, well, why on earth would someone do this?
      And does it speak to their personality?  Does it 4284
      speak to who they are and what they think about
      risks and doing what they want to do?
          I submit to you smoking, on the evidence you
      heard, is exactly consistent with that judgment
      about someone's personality.  This isn't being
      driven by addiction.  This is just who
      Mr. Hardin was.  And we're not here to blame
      him.  You know, a lot of discussion about
      Dr. Giakas judging him.  Y'all can judge that
      for yourselves.  You can judge what you thought
      of that.  He came and presented facts.  And
      unlike Dr. O'Brien, he learned the record.  So
      he didn't have to be reminded about things.  He
      recalled every detail for you.  Think about that
      when you think about the believability of
      witnesses as well.
          The message was clear, there's people just
      like Mr. Hardin, we showed this in opening, we
      showed it with Dr. Proctor, this was a message
      that was dictated, that was directed directly to
      people like Mr. Hardin.  He knew he was
      gambling.  He knew it.  "I didn't heed the
      warnings," but he knew what the risks were and
      he made the choice just like every other thing
      in his life.  This was the message. 4285
          Can you play it, Mr. Smith?
    (Video clip was played and taken down to the best
of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  You lose.
    (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. BAYUK:  It doesn't get any more powerful
      and it doesn't get any more specific to the
      facts of this case than this public service
      announcement in the '70s.  This is Mr. Hardin.
      And the evidence you heard, he made a choice to
      do these other things.  He made a choice to
      smoke.  He told you that.  "It's my choice."  He
      knew the risks.  And he made the choice.
      Because he was hoping he wouldn't get sick.  He
      knew cigarettes caused cancer.  He understood
      they were dangerous.  And just like the other
      behaviors, you heard from the witness stand,
      this was a gamble that he made, he's allowed to
      make, and then ultimately it didn't turn out
      well.  He lost.  But he tells you, "It's my
      choice.  It's not addiction.  It's my choice."
      And so I would submit based on all of that, all
      of those pieces of evidence, the plaintiff has
      overwhelmingly failed to prove to you that
      Mr. Hardin was addicted under the own -- their 4286
      own test that they set up.
          But there's a second hurdle that they have
      to prove even if you --
          THE CLERK:  Mr. Bayuk --
          MR. BAYUK:  -- even if you found addiction.
          THE CLERK:  Mr. Bayuk, you have 15 minutes
      remaining.
          MR. BAYUK:  Thank you so much.
          They have to prove that addiction was a
      legal cause of Mr. Hardin's COPD/emphysema and
      death.  And this was the same way I asked you to
      think about it in opening, was Mr. Hardin
      rendered powerless by nicotine addiction so he
      was unable to quit and prevent his death?  Well,
      you heard Mr. Kaiser tell you this morning on
      this issue, addiction causation, what else does
      addiction do besides compel you against your
      will to smoke, forces you to smoke, leaves you
      unable to quit, powerless to quit?  Well, what
      was the evidence on this?  This is the jury
      instruction on what you have to find
      addiction -- the role addiction played in
      Mr. Hardin's disease and death.
          The plaintiff has to prove that Mr. Hardin's
      alleged addiction directly and in a natural and 4287
      continuous sequence produced or contributed
      substantially to producing his COPD/emphysema
      and death so that it can reasonably be said that
      but for his alleged addiction his COPD/emphysema
      and death would not have occurred.
          If he was powerless, unable to quit, forced
      against his will to smoke, that is why he got
      COPD/emphysema and death.  That's why he died.
      That's what the plaintiff has to prove to you.
      Well, what was the evidence on this?  It fails
      for three reasons.  It fails, number one,
      because overwhelmingly they have not proven
      addiction, so addiction can't cause disease or
      death if you're not addicted, number one.
          Number two, their own expert admitted that
      the disease came before the addiction.  They
      have to prove addiction caused the disease.  I'm
      going to show you his testimony, Dr. O'Brien's
      testimony on that.
          And, finally, the evidence, again, is
      unrefuted, Mr. Hardin always had the ability to
      quit.  The claim is being made he was powerless,
      he was unable to quit.  Well, that's not the
      evidence.  That's the argument, but that's not
      the evidence. 4288
          And so on this point, you know, I asked
      Dr. O'Brien on cross-examination, "You say he's
      addicted, Dr. O'Brien, when is the first time
      you can say with certainty to this jury that he
      was addicted, that he had nicotine addiction?"
      And Dr. O'Brien said, "It was in 1996 when he
      made these quit attempts."  Well, you know the
      evidence, those quit attempts came after he was
      diagnosed.  He had the disease before the
      plaintiff has the first shred of evidence that
      Mr. Hardin was addicted.  That alone, this one
      fact alone, prevents them from meeting their
      burden on this issue.  They can't show addiction
      before disease.
          But more so, on top of that, you know
      Mr. Hardin admitted fault.  He told you and you
      heard it in the instructions he bears some
      measure of fault for causing his COPD and
      emphysema and his acts and omissions related to
      his quit attempts.  His lack of quitting were a
      cause.
          Well, what does this mean?  What does the
      admission mean?  It's a lot of legal jargon.
      But what does it mean as a matter of common
      sense? 4289
          Well, number one, it means Mr. Hardin chose
      to smoke for 50 years without making a real quit
      attempt.  It means that he knew smoking was
      dangerous and chose to continue smoking.  That
      he was not confused is that strictly -- that's,
      again, his words -- strictly responsible for
      quitting and that he's able to quit.
          Think about this:  Why would you say that
      you're at fault for something you have no
      control over?  If you can't change the outcome,
      if you can't quit smoking and prevent your
      disease, why would you ever have any fault for
      that if you couldn't do anything about it?  It
      doesn't make any sense.
          That's what the plaintiff's admission of
      fault means, that he was the only one in control
      of what he did, the only one in control to
      prevent his disease and death.
          Dr. O'Brien told you this on
      cross-examination, "He was the person
      responsible for beginning smoking and for
      continuing smoking."
          Not "addiction was responsible," not "he had
      no choice in the matter."  He was the only
      person -- the only person who could have made 4290
      choices about his smoking was Mr. Hardin.  He
      was in the driver's seat.  He was the one in
      control.
          And Dr. O'Brien told you, "Even if he was
      addicted, Mr. Hardin could exercise power over
      his addiction and quit smoking.  And he could
      have done it and he had the ability to do it and
      prevent his disease."
          Not he was unable.  Not he couldn't quit.
      He always had the power and the ability to quit
      and save himself.
          It was in his control from the plaintiff's
      expert, Dr. O'Brien.  And then he told you,
      generally, there's no smoker who was addicted so
      severely that they're powerless over their
      smoking.  And what does that mean for people in
      this country in general?
          You heard millions of people quitting at the
      same times Mr. Hardin is choosing to keep
      smoking.  The '50s through the '80s, all of
      them, 95 percent of them quitting by putting
      their cigarettes down and stopping because
      they're concerned about the risks.  60 million
      total quit smoking, all the while Mr. Hardin
      kept smoking. 4291
          Dr. Proctor broke the numbers down to you
      more specifically.  All this time he's talking
      about a denialist campaign.  Well, these people
      didn't get the message.  People are quitting by
      the millions.  And so why is Mr. Hardin
      different than the 60 million people who quit?
      Were his cigarettes more addictive?  Dr. Proctor
      told you, no.  What, is his brain different?
      Was he exposed to advertising differently than
      the people who quit?  Did he smoke for longer?
      Did he start earlier?  Did he smoke more than
      these 60 million people that quit?  No.  No
      different than those people.  What is the
      difference?  Did he want to smoke?  Did he not
      want to quit until 2005 when he quit for good?
      That's the difference.
          Every expert, every person, including
      Mr. Hardin himself tells you, that's a quote
      from Mr. Hardin, he know -- he knows, "You have
      to want to quit" if you're going to quit.  But
      he didn't want to.  We've looked at that
      evidence.
          Mrs. Hardin on the stand, there were
      times -- "Were there times that you were
      insisting that he quit?" 4292
          "No, I didn't insist because, you know, God
      gives us all the opportunities to do what we
      want to do, and we've got to do something --
      we've got to want to do something or we just
      ain't gonna do it."  That's the plaintiff in the
      case telling you why her husband didn't quit
      smoking.  He didn't want to.  "You've got to
      want to do it," she told you on the witness
      stand.  He didn't want to.
          His doctor, Dr. Flurry, "Mr. Hardin always
      acknowledged he knew he needed to stop, but he
      would laugh at it.  He would laugh it off."  And
      then these quit attempts in '96, you got the
      full story on that from Dr. Giakas.  He talked
      to you about quit gestures because they were
      prompted by Mrs. Hardin asking her husband to
      quit.  She went out and bought the patches, when
      she told him, "You can't smoke on the patches,
      Mr. -- "Thomas.  You can't smoke on the
      patches."  His response was -- it was not, "I
      want to quit so I'm going to try patches."  It
      was, "We're going to have to have these patches
      off right now."  And that's consistent with him
      wanting to keep smoking, as he told you.  "I
      didn't want to quit smoking."  That's the 4293
      evidence.  Mrs. Hardin said, "Even these '96
      attempts she doesn't know if Mr. Hardin was just
      trying to placate her by going through the
      motions."
          Dr. Messina, "At the same time he's
      described as making quit attempts, he needs to
      be much more motivated to stop."
          And Dr. Flurry, "It was obvious every time I
      saw him he wasn't going to quit smoking."  And
      this is one of the most powerful admissions in
      this case, this is from the plaintiff's attorney
      taking this deposition, Dr. Flurry said he
      was -- Mr. Hardin was an extreme, and the
      plaintiff's attorney said, "Well, when you say
      he was an extreme, do you mean he was extremely
      addicted?  And the treating physician said, "He
      was extremely unwilling to quit smoking, not
      unable, not couldn't, extremely unwilling."  And
      Mr. Hardin reminds you, "Strictly up to me.  I
      didn't want to quit."  His own words why he
      smoked, "My choice."  Not addiction, not
      confusion, "My choice."
          And so when you think about this question,
      you think about all this evidence, I would
      submit to you the only reasonable answer based 4294
      on the evidence you have is to answer question
      number 1, no.
          Now I recognize, I don't think you should
      get past that point, but I recognize you might,
      I have to do my job to talk to you about the
      next issue because we have to go through the
      verdict form.  It's our job as attorneys to do
      that.  So I want to talk to you briefly about
      question number 2.  And you see on the verdict
      form:  "Did Thomas Hardin know or should he have
      known in the exercise of reasonable care prior
      to May 5th, 1990, that he had a -- that he had
      chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
      emphysema, and that there was a reasonable
      possibility that that condition was caused by
      smoking?"  That's the question before you on
      question number 2.
          Well, the evidence on this is clear.  And
      frankly, I was really surprised with what I
      heard Mr. Kaiser say.
          MR. KAISER:  Objection to counsel being
      surprised.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. BAYUK:  Well, y'all take into account
      what you thought it meant when you heard 4295
      argument this morning that the defense had not a
      single piece of evidence to establish this
      claim, that this was made up, it was invented
      and not a single witness put any symptoms of
      COPD in the 1980s and not a single witness
      connected those symptoms in Mr. Hardin's mind to
      smoking.  We're going to look at what that
      evidence is.  And so you're going to think about
      why you heard the argument you did when you look
      at who the testimony came from in the case.  But
      the bottom line is, before that date Mr. Hardin
      should have known that there was a reasonable
      possibility that he had a medical condition that
      was caused by smoking.  That's what the --
      that's what the evidence establishes.
          This is the question.  I read it to you.
      This is the instruction on the issue,
      instruction number 15 in your packet.  It tells
      you Reynolds does not need to prove that
      Mr. Hardin was actually diagnosed with a disease
      or medical condition before that date in order
      to prevail on this defense.  The critical date
      is not the diagnosis, because you've heard a lot
      of discussion about diagnosis in 1996.  Well,
      that's irrelevant for the purposes of this 4296
      question.  It's not diagnosis.  It's when the
      disease or condition first comes about, when it
      first manifested itself.  And the instruction
      tells you, in making that determination you may
      properly consider what Mr. Hardin knew prior to
      May 5th, 1990, concerning the health risks of
      smoking.  You can consider his knowledge about
      the dangers of smoking when you're thinking
      about this issue.
          And so what is the evidence?  Well, the
      evidence is Mr. Hardin did have symptoms of
      COPD/emphysema before May 5th of 1990.  He
      received clear warnings about those exact
      conditions before that date.  And he connected
      his symptoms to his smoking.
          Comes from Dr. O'Brien.  This came on
      cross-examination.  Mr. Kaiser made not a single
      effort to follow up on this or try to refute it
      on redirect examination.  Dr. O'Brien told you
      the severity of the COPD in 1996, do you
      remember the treating doctors in the video said
      his COPD was severe in 1996 based on the PFTs,
      the pulmonary function tests.  It was severe.
      Dr. O'Brien is a medical doctor.  He told you
      the severity of that condition is something that 4297
      could have been going on as early as ten years
      before, 1986.
          He also told you that Mr. Hardin described
      having symptoms going back a number of years
      before 1996.  And specifically about the cough
      related to COPD dating back to the 1980s at the
      same time that Dr. O'Brien told you Mrs. Hardin
      began warning her husband in the '80s.  He said
      1983.  You heard argument this morning there was
      no discussion of Mrs. Hardin saying anything in
      the '80s.  Well, their own witness said it,
      their own expert who reviewed every material
      told you that, that Mrs. Hardin started warning
      him the same time he's having a cough in the
      '80s.
          The medical records, the first medical
      record you have says past medical history.  And
      that's because Dr. Flurry said the condition was
      so severe he had to have the disease.  I assumed
      he had it.  "If it walks like a duck," as
      Mr. Kaiser said, he had the disease.  And he
      wrote down unequivocally "past medical history."
          Dr. Messina's first record, "chronic cough
      and sputum production over a long period of
      time."  You heard something about six months 4298
      this morning.  He only had a cough for six
      months.
          That's not what the evidence is.  I'm going
      to show you Dr. O'Brien's testimony on that, the
      actual transcript of what he told you from the
      witness stand.  But then you think about this
      issue:  Well, did Mr. Hardin know or should he
      have known?  Is there any doubt that he should
      have known the symptoms he was having being
      connected to smoking?  He received warnings
      dating back to 1964 when he heard about the
      Surgeon General's Report telling him a
      relationship exists between cigarette smoking
      and emphysema.  "I heard his report.  Like with
      the warnings, I didn't pay much attention to but
      I heard it and this is what it said."
          And then in 1955, every single pack of
      cigarettes he picks up to smoke a cigarette
      (sic) tells him that smoking causes emphysema,
      it tells him about the disease that he has at
      that time.  Every time he goes to smoke, he's
      having these symptoms and the packs are telling
      him what he has.  "I saw the sign on the
      cigarettes, but again I didn't pay attention.  I
      understood it.  I didn't pay attention or heed 4299
      it."
          And here's the testimony from Dr. O'Brien.
      I don't know if Mr. Kaiser was in here when
      Dr. O'Brien said this, I asked him the question,
      "And you agree that Mr. Hardin certainly
      recognized the symptoms that he's having as
      being connected to smoking going back in time,
      right?"
          Answer, "Yes."
          THE CLERK:  Mr. Bayuk, you have one minute
      remaining.
          MR. BAYUK:  Thank you.  Question, "And so
      it's pretty clear that Mr. Hardin is having
      symptoms of COPD back in the 1980s -- back in
      the 1980s, but he's not getting serious about
      quitting until later on?"
          "Right."
          Mr. Hardin recognized the symptoms as being
      connected to smoking and the symptoms were of
      COPD in the 1980s.  Plaintiff's expert, not the
      defense expert.  Plaintiff's expert, untouched
      on redirect, untouched by Mrs. Hardin or by any
      other witness.  And so when you answer this
      question, this is the evidence that helps you.
          You know, argument heard -- defense can't 4300
      prove this.  There is no evidence.  Well, this
      is what the evidence is.  And so even if you can
      get past question 1, I submit to you based on
      that evidence that the answer to question 2 is
      unquestionably yes, Mr. Hardin did know or he
      should have known about his condition before May
      5th of 1990.
          I'm going to sit down now.  You guys have
      been so attentive for the last two weeks.  I
      really thank you for your time.  Thank you very
      much.
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentleman, at this
      point in time, I do want to remind you, we're
      going to take a lunch break because we're going
      to continue on.  We're still -- have not heard
      all of the closing arguments.  And I've not
      given you the rest of the law that you must
      follow.
          Having said that, I'm going to ask that you
      leave your notebooks here, close them up.  And,
      again, you are strongly now reminded to adhere
      to the orders that I've been giving you for the
      last two, three weeks that we've been here.
      Whatever you may have heard, your thoughts,
      impressions or ideas, you are not to discuss at 4301
      this point.
          Again, just as a remainder, when you
      commence your deliberation, which is at the end
      when the attorneys have finished with their
      closing arguments and when I've given you the
      last part of your instructions, then is when you
      can all get together and commence deliberation.
      But up until then, you are prohibited from
      commenting, sharing or discussing anything about
      the case.
          Having said that, it is 10 after 2:00,
      according to that -- the clock here, but that's
      fast.  It's 2:04, actually.  I'll have you come
      back, then, at -- come back at 2:55.
          And just make sure you've eaten -- eaten
      enough but not so much that you fall asleep.
      And we'll get ready to work, then.  All right?
          Thank you so much, and we'll see you back
      then.


          MR. PERSONS:  Yes, Your Honor.  May it
      please the Court, counsel, Mrs. Hardin, and
      ladies and gentleman of the jury.
          Good afternoon.
          (Jury says good afternoon.)
          MR. PERSONS:  Hope you had a good lunch but
      not too good a lunch so you can stay awake.  I
      want to add my voice to the Court's, and thank
      you for your patience and your attention.  We
      really do appreciate it.  Obviously the system
      won't work without you.
          I'm going to start where Mr. Bayuk left off,
      and that's with questions 3 and 4.  And because
      those questions are so similar, I'm going to
      discuss them together.  And those questions
      require reasonable reliance upon a statement 4309
      that conceals or omits material facts.  I'll
      tell you what that means.  Here's the question,
      question number 3 and number 4.
          Number 3, "Did Thomas Hardin reasonably rely
      to his detriment on any statement made by
      Reynolds that concealed or omitted material
      facts not otherwise known or available
      concerning the health effects or addictive
      nature of cigarettes, and, if so, was such
      reliance a legal cause of his COPD/emphysema and
      death?"
          That's number 3.
          Number 4 is slightly different.  Number 4,
      "Did Thomas Hardin reasonably rely to his
      detriment on any statement made in furtherance
      of an agreement entered into by Reynolds to
      conceal or omit material facts not otherwise
      known or available concerning the health effects
      or addictive nature of cigarettes and, if so,
      was such reliance a legal cause of his
      COPD/emphysema and death?"
          Now, that contains a number of legal
      principles, and we're going to discuss them now.
      We'll look at the jury instruction itself that
      you'll have with you. 4310
          You did give me the clicker.  Thank you,
      Mr. Smith.  I'm looking to you to advance and
      I've got it right here.
          But here's the instruction, final
      instructions number 19 and number 20.  And on
      number 19, on plaintiff's claim for fraudulent
      concealment against Reynolds, can everybody see
      that?  Can't.  They can't see that very well.
      Is there any way we can -- no?
          TECHNICIAN SMITH:  No.
          MR. PERSONS:  Okay.  Let me -- I'll read it
      slowly.  On plaintiff's claim for fraudulent
      concealment against Reynolds, the issues for
      your determination are whether Thomas Hardin
      reasonably relied to his detriment on any
      statement made by Reynolds.
          So, first of all, there has to be a
      statement upon which he reasonably relied.  And
      that statement would have to be one that
      concealed or omitted material facts not
      otherwise known or available regarding health
      effects or the addictive nature of cigarettes.
      And if so, whether that reliance was a legal
      cause of his COPD and his death.
          Now, a material fact, this is very 4311
      important, a material fact is of such importance
      that Thomas Hardin would not have acted as he
      did but for the concealment or omission of that
      fact.  In other words, it's a game changer.
      It's something that would have caused him to
      change his behavior.  And in this case we're
      talking about smoking.  It would have to be
      something that would have caused him to quit
      smoking.
          And, first of all, there's no evidence of
      any reliance.  In fact, the evidence is to the
      contrary.  You can scour the record and I'm
      going to show you where experts did that.
      There's no evidence of any reliance whatsoever.
      In fact, Mr. Hardin testified, and you saw his
      testimony, that he never relied on any statement
      made by any tobacco company, R.J. Reynolds or
      any other tobacco company in making his smoking
      decisions.  Either the decision to start smoking
      or to continue smoking and not to quit.  Didn't
      rely on anything, any statement.
          Now, argument can be made that there was
      advertising out there and there was a campaign
      of doubt.  He never saw those things.  You'll
      remember from Dr. Proctor, the first things I 4312
      asked Dr. Proctor, a series of questions when I
      began his cross-examination, elicited from him.
          "What information do you have about
      Mr. Hardin?"  He had none.  He had a lot of
      information about what was generally in the
      information environment, but he couldn't link it
      to Mr. Hardin because he hadn't studied anything
      about Mr. Hardin.  In response to those
      questions he would always say, "Well, I was not
      his biographer, I didn't study anything specific
      to him."  In other words, I'm a generic witness.
      A generic witness would apply to smokers in
      general.  Well, this case isn't about smokers in
      general.  This case is about Mr. Hardin.  And
      Mr. Hardin is not a generic plaintiff.  He's a
      plaintiff in his own right.  This is his case,
      and so that's what we're focusing on.  So there
      is no statement upon which he relied because he
      said there was -- he didn't rely on any
      statement.  And there's no evidence of any
      statement that he ever saw, read or heard that
      concealed information.
          So the answer to questions 3 and 4 should be
      no.  But we're going to discuss why.  In order
      to carry their burden of proof on this, these 4313
      claims, the concealment and agreement to conceal
      claims, and I hope you could see that a little
      bit better?  Can everybody?  Okay.
          Plaintiff failed to show that Mr. Hardin
      died because the dangers of smoking were unknown
      or available -- unavailable.  You'll recall we
      spent a lot of time with Dr. Proctor showing
      newspaper clippings for every place that
      Mr. Hardin lived, because Mrs. Hardin's
      testimony was that in each place they lived she
      subscribed to the daily newspaper.  That's
      information that's available.  Whether you want
      to avail yourself of it or not, that's up to
      you, but it's available.  It's available to you.
      And there was an abundance, an overabundance of
      information going back to the 1924 Reader's
      Digest that we showed you talking about the link
      between smoking and cancer.
          In fact, there was one edition, the title of
      it was "The Growing Horror of Lung Cancer."  And
      then there were the stories by Dr. Alton Ochsner
      of New Orleans, prominent physician there, and
      there's -- now there's the Ochsner Award, that's
      the award for people who do the biggest
      research, the most advanced research on smoking 4314
      and health.  He lived in New Orleans and wrote
      pieces for the Times-Picayune.  And we showed
      you all of that time, time, and time again.
      That was to illustrate that the information was
      available about the dangers of smoking.
          Now, let's break it down a little more
      personal.  We can -- we brought you evidence of
      Mr. Hardin's own personal knowledge of the
      dangers and addictiveness of smoking.  Bottom
      line is you cannot conceal what is already
      known.  If you know something, it can't be
      hidden from you because you already know it.
          Now, this might apply to some other smoker
      at some other time, some other place, but -- but
      it does not apply to Mr. Hardin.  So there is no
      connection between any statement that concealed
      or omitted a material fact and Mr. Hardin's
      death, because a material fact would have
      changed the outcome, and there is no evidence of
      any concealment or omission of a material fact
      by Reynolds or any other tobacco company.
          Now, I know you can't see this, but let me
      read part of it.  "Reasonable reliance on a
      statement that concealed or omitted material
      facts was a legal cause of Thomas Hardin's 4315
      chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and death
      if it directly and in natural and continuous
      sequence produced or contributed substantially
      to producing such COPD/emphysema and death so
      that it can reasonably be said that but for
      reasonable reliance on the concealment or
      omission of that fact, the COPD/emphysema and
      death would not have occurred."  And that's what
      I meant when I said a game changer.  It would
      have to be something that had he heard it, he
      would not have contracted COPD and died.  It
      would have been something that would have
      prevented him from dying.  In other words, it
      would have been something that would have caused
      him to quit smoking.  And we know from the
      evidence that he had an abundance of personal
      warnings that he didn't heed, and -- and he
      didn't stop smoking.
          "This means that plaintiff must prove that
      but for Mr. Hardin's reasonable reliance on a
      statement by Reynolds concealing or omitting
      material facts not otherwise known or available
      concerning the health effects or addictive
      nature of smoking cigarettes, Thomas Hardin
      would have acted differently and, as a result, 4316
      would have avoided his COPD/emphysema and death.
      Thomas Hardin cannot be found to have reasonably
      relied to his detriment on a statement
      concealing material facts if he knew it was
      false or its falsity was obvious to him or if
      the facts allegedly concealed were otherwise
      known or available."
          And so there you have it.  They don't meet
      that standard, they have not carried their
      burden.  Now, the evidence is that Mr. Hardin
      did not die because the dangers and
      addictiveness of smoking were unknown or
      unavailable to him.  Again, you can't conceal
      what's already known.  Mr. Hardin always knew he
      shouldn't be smoking.  Now, his parents didn't
      say don't smoke because of the health effects,
      but the schools were required to teach about the
      dangers of smoking.  We covered that with
      Dr. Proctor.  Smoking was prohibited at his
      schools.  Mr. Hardin's parents didn't smoke.
      His parents didn't allow the children to smoke.
      Mr. Hardin was spanked and scolded when his
      parents caught him smoking and he had to hide
      his smoking at home and at school.  When he got
      a little older, the testimony was they would see 4317
      him smoking, but that was after he got a little
      older.
          We know that he knew that cigarettes were
      bad for him, bad for his health and that they
      caused cancer.  How do we know that?  The term
      "cancer stick," Dr. Proctor says it really
      skyrocketed in the 1950s, the use of that term.
      Mr. Hardin himself was asked, "Did you ever hear
      anybody refer to cigarettes as cancer sticks?"
      And his testimony was, "All the time, you hear
      everybody saying cancer sticks."
          Plaintiff's expert, Dr. Charles O'Brien the
      psychiatrist was asked, "In fact, when he
      heard" -- referring to Mr. Hardin -- "when he
      heard the term 'cancer stick,' he recognized the
      implication that cigarettes caused cancer?"
          Answer, "Yes."
          So he knew the connection between cigarette
      smoking and cancer.  So he knew it was
      dangerous.
          Here's Mr. Hardin, he was asked the
      question, "I'm just talking generally now.  And
      you've heard of the reports that the United
      States Surgeon General periodically issues?"
          Answer, "I've heard his report, but I didn't 4318
      really pay much attention to it."
          Question, "And what you heard was that the
      Surgeon General had said that smoking could be
      hazardous to your health; is that right?"
          "Uh, yeah."
          And that's the 1964 Surgeon General's Report
      that came out and said that smoking is hazardous
      to your health.  Smoking is linked between --
      that the link between smoking and lung cancer in
      men.  The evidence for women points the same
      way.  It also said that there was a link between
      smoking and emphysema.  So he's familiar with
      the 1964 Surgeon General's Report.  Didn't pay
      much attention to it, but he was aware of it.
          And they want to talk about he's got
      dementia, but here he's giving a deposition in
      2011.  That's going pack to 1964.  That's all --
      over 40 years before, but he remembers it.
          And then, of course, there are the warnings
      that appeared on every pack of cigarettes that
      he smoked beginning in 1966, and his testimony
      was, he remembered the warning that said smoking
      may be hazardous to your health.  That's the
      first warning that went on in 1966.  He's
      familiar with it. 4319
          "Caution:  Smoking may be -- cigarette
      smoking may be hazardous to your health."  And
      then in 1970 it says, "Warning:  The Surgeon
      General has determined that cigarette smoking is
      dangerous to your health."
          And then they had the four rotating warnings
      beginning in 1985, including one that says:
      "Smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease,
      emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy."
          Mr. Hardin's testimony was, "I saw the sign
      on the cigarettes, but I didn't pay no
      attention.  I didn't heed by them."  And so the
      information is there.  It's available, and he's
      aware of it.
          Question, "You saw warnings and you
      understood that smoking was dangerous, didn't
      you?"
          Answer, "Right."
          Now that's his testimony.  That's the
      evidence in the case.  That's not lawyer talk.
      That's not argument.  That's evidence.
          Mr. Hardin always knew he shouldn't be
      smoking.  He heard cigarettes were called
      "cancer sticks" all the time.  He heard the
      Surgeon General's Report linking smoking to 4320
      emphysema.  He saw and understood the 1966 pack
      warning.  He was told in the 1970s that
      cigarettes were addictive.
          When Thirl Wilson, his best friend, one of
      his best friends according to him, told him
      smoking was dangerous, his response was "I knew
      it was addicting."  So despite knowing the
      risks, he never tried to quit.  And, of course,
      Thirl Wilson quit smoking when his brother,
      Thirl Wilson's brother, died of lung cancer.
      His brother was a heavy smoker and died of lung
      cancer.  He quit smoking and he urged Mr. Hardin
      to quit as well, but Mr. Hardin did not.
      Mr. Hardin did not need any more information to
      make an informed choice about smoking or
      quitting.  He knew enough to know he needed to
      quit, but he chose to continue to smoke.
          He testified that advertising never played a
      role in any of his smoking decisions.  So
      despite all the stuff you saw this morning about
      advertising and how, "Oh, he must have depended
      on the advertising to make these decision,"
      well, that's not the evidence.  The evidence is
      he testified the advertising never played a role
      in any of his smoking choices.  And also, you 4321
      know, from any of the ads, none of those ads say
      that smoking is healthy for you.  No.  They
      don't say that smoking is healthy for you.
          When he tried cigarettes for the first time
      after his brother sent them to the house,
      Mr. Hardin -- this is -- these are his own
      words, he didn't know what a cigarette was, so
      he didn't start smoking because of something
      that R.J. Reynolds or some other tobacco company
      did.  He started smoking because his older half
      brother who was stationed at Fort Jackson, South
      Carolina, sent cigarettes home.  He could
      alternate between Lucky Strikes and Camels.  And
      then him, he was the youngest in the bunch,
      Mr. Hardin and another group, a group of boys
      and one girl, his cousin Mamie, they went out
      back and started smoking cigarettes.  That's how
      he got started.
          I'm making this thing do stuff.  How do you
      cut it off?  Smith?  I'm about to mess up
      something.  I -- thank you.
          TECHNICIAN SMITH:  You're welcome.
          MR. PERSONS:  Thank you, Mr. Smith.
          All right.  Thank you, sir.
          TECHNICIAN SMITH:  You're welcome. 4322
          MR. PERSONS:  That's how he got started.  It
      wasn't because of some glamorization.  It wasn't
      because of a movie star or a baseball player or
      some athlete, no.  Or a baseball card.  No.  He
      got access to the cigarettes and started
      smoking.
          I don't know why they showed you
      Mr. Heimann's deposition.  It's a good question.
      So much of that deposition focused on Pall Mall
      cigarettes.  Well, Mr. Hardin didn't rely on any
      Pall Mall advertisements.  When he was smoking
      Pall Malls he was asked, "When you were smoking
      Pall Malls you told us you were smoking them
      because your cousin Mamie was smoking them,
      right?"
          "Right."
          Question, "Any other reason you were smoking
      the Pall Mall?"
          Answer, "She could -- she could go buy them,
      and I could get them from her once she paid for
      them."
          Question, "It wasn't anything the tobacco
      company said, was it?"
          Answer, "Not that I know of."
          Question, "And you weren't relying on any 4323
      advertisement by any tobacco companies?"
          "Oh, no."
          No, he was not.  That's the evidence.  That
      was the evidence that was played for four hours
      and something during the deposition that you
      saw.
          He didn't rely on advertisements from
      switching to filters.  The public health
      community was encouraging people to switch to
      filtered cigarettes if they weren't going to
      quit smoking.  Number one, they were encouraging
      them to quit.  But if you're not going to quit,
      they said, switch to filtered cigarettes.  The
      Surgeon General had that message.  The public
      health and anti-tobacco group -- groups had that
      message.  They were promoting filters.  Reader's
      Digest promoted filtered cigarettes.  The
      tobacco companies were not advertising filtered
      cigarettes as being safer.  There's not one ad
      that said that filtered cigarettes are safer.
          You remember Dr. Proctor said they weren't
      going to do that when it might suggest that the
      non-filtered cigarettes are unsafe.  If
      Mr. Hardin thought unfiltered cigarettes were
      better for him, that information would have come 4324
      from the public health community.
          He did not smoke Winston cigarettes for two
      years in the 1950s based on the Winston jingle.
      His testimony, "That wouldn't have been it."  So
      advertising didn't influence his decision to
      smoke filtered cigarettes.
          Mr. Hardin didn't smoke menthol cigarettes
      because of any advertising.  He switched to
      menthol cigarettes because they tasted better
      and no other reason.  No ad prompted him to
      switch.  He switched to Kools because they
      tasted better.  He didn't give any other reason
      for it.  He wasn't relying on any ad at the time
      he made the switch.
          Question, "And can you remember any ads for
      Kools?"
          Answer, "You know, I really don't.  Don't
      remember no ads for Kool.  I just know they
      taste better than the rest of them."  That was
      his reason for switching.  Nothing about Willie
      the Penguin or anything else that caused him to
      make the switch, much less any statement from a
      tobacco company.
          Now, Dr. O'Brien and Dr. Giakas, the two
      psychiatrists, they looked at all of the -- they 4325
      read all the depositions.  They read all the
      discovery in the case, the interrogatories.
      They read all the medical records.  And they
      were asked this question:  Whether they saw
      anything that would lead them to believe that
      Mr. Hardin relied on anything that Reynolds or
      anyone in the tobacco industry said.  And after
      reviewing all of the case materials, here's what
      they said.
          Dr. Charles O'Brien:  "I don't know of
      anything that influenced Mr. Hardin with respect
      to advertising... I can't say that he was
      influenced by anything."
          Dr. Giakas:  Question, "Did you see any
      evidence in the entire record, thousands of
      pages of testimony, where Mr. Hardin ever relied
      on anything from the tobacco industry?"
          Answer, "No."
          Question, "To make any decisions about
      smoking?"
          Answer, "It's not in there."
          It's simply not in evidence.  There is --
      simply is no evidence.  It's just not there.
      You can't make it up.  It's not there.  There's
      no evidence that he was influenced by anything 4326
      that the tobacco companies said or did that
      caused him to make any decision about starting
      to smoke or continuing to smoke.
          He wasn't impacted by The Frank Statement.
      You saw a lot about that in opening statement
      when plaintiff's counsel, Mr. Kaiser, was going
      through The Frank Statement.  Well, Mr. Hardin
      never saw it, much less relied on it.  He never
      saw it.
          "Have you ever heard about what's sometimes
      called The Frank Statement?"  He shook his head
      no.
          "Basically it was a publication that came
      out, it was addressed 'A Frank Statement To
      Cigarette Smokers.'  Did you ever hear of that?"
          Answer, "Not as I can recall."
          Question, "Do you ever recall reading that
      statement?"
          "Uh-huh."
          Question, "Ever recall anybody talking about
      that statement?"
          "Don't ring a bell."
          So he didn't see it.  He didn't read it.  He
      didn't even discuss it with anyone.  So it has
      absolutely nothing to do with him.  So how can 4327
      there be a causal connection between him and The
      Frank Statement when it's something that he
      never saw, never read, and never discussed?
          He wasn't impacted by the Waxman hearings.
      There was no evidence that Mr. Hardin was ever
      impacted by the Waxman hearings, where the
      executives testified before Congress that
      nicotine was not addictive and that smoking
      wasn't dangerous.  In fact, the Waxman hearings
      had just the opposite effect.  Caused more
      people to start quitting.  That was
      Dr. Proctor's testimony.  I asked him, "Wouldn't
      you agree, based on your review of the
      historical record, what probably happened as a
      result of the Waxman hearings was that it
      increased people quitting smoking?"
          His answer, "Oh, for sure, yeah.  The period
      after '82 is when you really finally get the
      rate of smoking going down.  It peaks in '82.
      People see things like the Waxman hearings, and
      that accelerates that trend."
          Question, "Accelerates the quitting?"
          Answer, "Right."
          So it accelerated.  It caused even more
      people to quit, not cause people to refrain from 4328
      quitting.
          Now, Mr. Hardin wasn't impacted by any
      concealment or agreement to conceal.  We know
      that for a fact and here's additional proof of
      it.  All of these internal documents, all of
      these internal company documents that
      Dr. Proctor likes to call "secret documents,"
      well, they were made public in the 1990s.  They
      became publicly available in the 1990s.  The
      tobacco industry -- Institute and the Council
      For Tobacco Research, they were disbanded, they
      ceased to exist in 1998, so obviously they
      couldn't influence anything anymore.  The
      tobacco companies publicly admitted their
      cigarettes were dangerous and could cause
      disease and that nicotine is addictive, they did
      that in 2000.  But Mr. Hardin didn't make a
      single effort to quit smoking until he decided
      for himself that he wanted to do so, and that
      was 2005.
          So if there was a material fact contained in
      any of that, I mean, if there was anything that
      contained a material fact in something that had
      not previously been disclosed, it certainly
      didn't impact Mr. Hardin, because he didn't even 4329
      make an attempt to quit smoking when all of this
      became available.  And that's what the jury
      instruction says, "known or available."  So even
      after it was available, it did not change his
      behavior.
          Also the jury instruction number 24 will
      tell you, "I hereby instruct you that plaintiff
      makes no claim for concealment or agreement to
      conceal information regarding smoking and health
      or addiction before December 1953 or after
      2000."  So that's the relevant time period that
      we're talking about in terms of these statements
      upon which plaintiff alleges Mr. Hardin relied.
      Of course, the evidence is he never relied upon
      any statement by Reynolds or any other tobacco
      company or anybody in the tobacco industry in
      making decisions about quitting smoking.
          So the answer to questions 3 and 4 are, no,
      he didn't rely.  He told you that.
          I want to talk to you now about comparative
      fault, because that's the next question on the
      verdict form is question number 5.  And it says
      "Please state the percentage of any fault that
      was a legal cause of Thomas Hardin's chronic
      obstructive pulmonary disease, COPD/emphysema 4330
      and death that you charge to Thomas Hardin,
      R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company."
          So we'll talk about that now.  Now, it's
      important to remember that the assignment of
      fault relates only to actions that were a legal
      cause of Mr. Hardin's COPD and death.  In other
      words, things that but for that conduct, that --
      those actions, he wouldn't have contracted COPD
      and died.  Reynolds cannot be assigned fault for
      actions that were not a legal cause of
      Mr. Hardin's COPD and death.  And this does not
      call for a comparison of whose choices were
      worse, whether one party made a worse choice
      than another.  But the choice that's at issue
      here, or choices, were choices that would have,
      could have prevented Mr. Hardin from getting
      COPD and dying as a result of that disease.
      Those are the choices that matter.
          And the evidence shows that the only person
      who was in a position to make the choice to quit
      was Mr. Hardin.  It was solely something that
      was in his control and nobody else's.  And so
      the fault lies with him.
          And that's not to cast aspersions on him or
      be unduly critical of him.  I mean, that was his 4331
      right.  He exercised his right.  He had the
      freedom to go and purchase cigarettes and smoke
      as much as he wanted to.  But he did so knowing
      that there were consequences, knowing that it
      could cause disease, knowing that it could kill
      him, and yet he made the choice to do so anyway.
      That's what the evidence is.
          Here's the instruction.  "Your determination
      of Reynolds' fault, if any, must be based solely
      on conduct by Reynolds, if any, that plaintiff
      has proven was a legal cause of Thomas Hardin's
      COPD/emphysema and death."
          And members of the jury, there simply isn't
      anything.  Plaintiff has the burden to prove
      each and every percentage point of Reynolds'
      fault.  You don't start 50/50 and say, "Oh, I'm
      going to work back."  No.  They've got to prove
      every degree of fault, how is it -- how is
      Reynolds responsible.  When they've already
      admitted that Mr. Hardin bears some measure of
      fault for causing his COPD/emphysema and that
      his acts or omissions related to the frequency
      and duration of his efforts to quit smoking were
      a legal cause of his COPD emphysema.  I submit
      to you, they were the only cause. 4332
          You don't blame somebody, you don't put
      responsibility on somebody for not trying hard
      enough or long enough to quit smoking if it's
      beyond their control.  You simply don't.  So the
      contention somehow that Reynolds bears fault is
      belied by their own admission that Mr. Hardin
      bears fault, because if it's impossible to stop,
      then why do you fault him for not trying hard
      enough?  If it's impossible to stop, then why do
      you fault him for not trying long enough?  It
      simply defies logic.  But logic dictates that
      Mr. Hardin bears sole responsibility for his
      smoking and continuing to smoke.
          Even addiction doesn't mean that you can't
      quit smoking.  Dr. Charles O'Brien, the
      plaintiff's expert said, "Every smoker, even if
      he's addicted, has the choice to quit.  Every
      smoker is fully responsible for making the
      decision to quit.  Only the individual smoker
      can stop smoking.  No one can do it for him."
      That's something that both of the experts, both
      of these psychiatrists would agree with.
          THE CLERK:  Mr. Persons, you have 30 minutes
      remaining.
          MR. PERSONS:  Thank you, ma'am. 4333
          Dr. Charles O'Brien, "He was the person
      responsible for beginning smoking and for
      continuing smoking?"
          "Yes.  It was -- even as an addiction, you
      can't say that anyone else is responsible for
      it."
          Even as an addiction, that's the evidence in
      the case.  You can't say it's somebody else's
      responsibility.  That's another word for fault.
      That's their own expert is saying that.  That's
      the evidence in the case.  Even as an addiction,
      you can't say that anyone else is responsible
      for it.  Beginning smoking and for continuing
      smoking.
          Question, "So the specific question is only
      Mr. Hardin was responsible for his smoking
      behavior?"
          "Yes, I agree with that."
          In case you didn't get it the first time,
      well, you might be kind of -- didn't -- didn't
      catch it.  Okay.  I'm going to tell you again,
      "Yes, I agree with that."
          "Mr. Hardin is the only person who could
      have made choices about his smoking?"
          "Yes.  Not R.J. Reynolds, not some other 4334
      entity, not someone else."
          Question, "Regardless of the fact that you
      think he was addicted, he had the power and the
      ability to quit smoking and avoid his COPD?
          "Yes."
          And that's what we're talking about, the
      power with responsibility for quitting and
      avoiding COPD, avoiding death, rested solely
      with Mr. Hardin.
          "Dr. Flurry, was there at any time, to your
      observation, Mr. Hardin didn't understand the
      consequences of COPD?"
          Answer, "I think he understood the
      consequences, yes, sir.  He knew what he was
      doing."
          Here's Dr. Frank Messina, the lung doctor.
      "It's true also, Doctor, that stopping smoking
      may, in fact, stop the progression of the
      disease, correct?
          "Yes."
          Question, "And it's also true that stopping
      smoking may, in fact, help, in other words,
      improve -- the respiratory function, correct?"
          He says, "Right.  Absolutely.  Yeah.  Some
      people jump up, get better." 4335
          He didn't mean you get well, because it's a
      chronic condition that doesn't heal, doesn't go
      away.  But the symptoms can improve once you
      stop smoking.  That was the point he was making.
      Your quality of life can improve once you stop
      smoking.
          But Mr. Hardin didn't stop.  He continued to
      smoke.  And that continued smoking during that
      time, no doubt, continued the progress of his
      COPD or worsened the progress of his COPD.
          And Dr. Robert Flurry said, "Yes, it did.
      Yes, it did."  So the suffering that they're
      talking about, it's a slow, painful existence,
      debilitating condition that required Hospice
      care at the end was exacerbated, was made worse
      by smoking.
          Dr. Robert Flurry.  Had Mr. Hardin quit
      smoking in 1996, he would not have continued to
      go to the hospital for exacerbation of COPD and
      would not have been in Hospice in 2011.  Had
      Mr. Hardin quit smoking in 1996 his COPD would
      have progressed slower.  Quitting smoking could
      have prolonged Mr. Hardin's life and it might
      have given him those 12 years that plaintiff's
      counsel wants you to compensate him for.  But 4336
      we'll never know, because he didn't quit.
          What we do know is that by, according to the
      medical testimony, quitting smoking, could have
      prolonged his life.  We do know that.  We do
      know that.  But he didn't quit.
          "If he'd stopped smoking, I would have
      expected things to have gotten better for him,
      yes.  I would have expected things to have
      gotten better for him, yes, but he didn't."
          But he took responsibility for it, because
      he was asked -- or he testified, "The only thing
      I could think of is that I didn't quit smoking
      then instead of waiting, because it's strictly
      up to me whether I quit or not."
          Question, "It was your decision to smoke or
      stop?"
          "Right."
          So when you get to assign the fault, I
      submit to you that it's 100 percent on
      Mr. Hardin and zero percent on Reynolds because
      the only person who had the responsibility, and
      this is according to Dr. O'Brien, to stop
      smoking -- he could have stopped smoking -- was
      Mr. Hardin, was Mr. Hardin.  And that would have
      prevented him from getting COPD and he wouldn't 4337
      have died of COPD had he done so.  That's the
      evidence in the case.
          Now, damages.  I want to talk about damages,
      not because they're warranted.  They aren't.  We
      just told you why he's not addicted, that
      addiction did not cause his COPD.  It was the
      failure to quit smoking.  That should be the end
      of the inquiry.  I told you also that he knew or
      should have known that there was a
      possibility -- not probability, a possibility
      that he had a smoking-related condition prior to
      May 5th, 1990.  That should end the inquiry.
          And I just showed you evidence that
      demonstrated unequivocally that he didn't rely
      on anything.  So the answer on those questions 3
      and 4 were "no."
          So damages are not warranted.  But I have to
      talk about them.  I have to talk about them
      because if I don't, somebody will get up and
      say, "Well, he didn't even talk about damages,
      which means that they probably don't challenge
      our claim for damages or our calculation."  But
      they aren't warranted.  They aren't warranted.
          And one of the things I remember we asked
      during voir dire was if the evidence and law 4338
      supported a verdict in favor of R.J. Reynolds
      Tobacco Company, would you be able to render it?
      And there wasn't a single hand of anybody that
      said, no, that they could not do it, and that
      can be a very unpleasant thing.  Because we
      mentioned it in voir dire, it would mean that
      the plaintiff recovers nothing.  But if the law
      doesn't support it, and Lord knows the evidence
      is not there, then it points in one direction.
      And that's in the direction of a verdict in
      favor of R.J. Reynolds.  And what that means is
      the plaintiff doesn't recover anything.
          You can come to court in this country and
      you can ask for anything, but it doesn't mean
      that it should be awarded unless there's
      evidence to support.  And there's no evidence to
      support it.
          Now, the plaintiff has the burden to prove
      each and every dollar of damages, which is
      coming in and making calculations and pulling
      some numbers out and assigning values to time.
      That's one thing but that's not proof to
      entitlement to damages.  Because you have to
      prove liability.  You have to prove
      responsibility before you can award damages 4339
      against somebody.
          In reaching your verdict, do not let bias,
      sympathy, prejudice, public opinion or any other
      sentiment for or against any party influence
      your decision.  Your verdict must be based on
      the evidence that has been received and the law
      on which I have instructed you.  Those are
      instructions from the Court.  That's the law
      that you must follow.  And you have to set
      sympathy aside.
          It's a natural human tendency -- it's a
      natural human tendency when you see somebody
      suffering to feel sorry.  It's a natural human
      tendency when somebody has suffered the loss of
      a loved one, much less a spouse of 51 years, to
      feel some sympathy, but that cannot drive your
      decision.  It has to be driven by the evidence
      and the law.
          And, ladies and gentleman, the law points in
      one direction, and that's a verdict in favor of
      R.J. Reynolds, which means no damages.
          Now, the plaintiff's claim for 12- to 20
      million defies all common sense, especially when
      at an average time a family of four makes
      $50,000 a year.  Just as an example, just do the 4340
      math.
          To earn $20 million, for the average person
      who's a family of four, 50,000.
          MR. KAISER:  Object to that statement.
      That's outside the evidence.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  This is argument,
      Counsel.  Go ahead.
          MR. PERSONS:  400 years, that's how long it
      would take.  400 years ago was 1615, back to the
      Jamestown Colony.  That's how long it would take
      somebody to make $20 million.
          But you can get up and you can ask for
      anything.  You can throw out all kinds of
      numbers.  One thing we do know is the plaintiff
      is not seeking economic damages, not seeking
      medical expenses.  We're not talking about
      funeral expenses.  We're not talking about
      Mr. Hardin's pain and suffering.
          What we're talking about is Mrs. Hardin's
      pain and suffering and loss of companionship.
          Well, why did she have to endure the
      suffering of watching him suffer?  And why is
      she without him?  Why does she not have the
      companionship?
          Well, it's because he chose to smoke, and he 4341
      enjoyed it.  It's because he chose to continue
      smoking for decades -- not decade, not two, but
      several decades -- despite knowing the risk.
          Some 50 years he chose to smoke knowing the
      risks.  Warning on every pack of the cigarettes.
          Warnings all in the media about the dangers
      of smoking.
          Warnings from his doctors, "Sir, you need to
      stop smoking," and the response is to laugh.
          Warnings from friends, and the response is
      to laugh about it.  But you want compensation.
      Always had the ability to quit but didn't want
      to quit; by his own admission, he didn't want
      to.  So why should he be -- someone be
      compensated for that?
          He quit the first time he wanted to quit
      without any difficulty, and the reason he wanted
      to quit then was because the doctor told him --
      and he testified.  You saw his testimony on this
      screen right here.  He said, They told me I
      wouldn't be here if I didn't quit.  If I wanted
      to stay here.  If I wanted to stay on this
      Earth, I've got to quit smoking.
          Well, they had been telling him that message
      for years.  Since that first visit back in 1996, 4342
      it took almost ten years about them preaching to
      him about quitting before he quit.
          And during those ten years, he did other
      things to aggravate his own suffering.
          Had inhalers and didn't use them; that's
      what the medical records said.  Nothing in the
      medical records said he couldn't afford the
      inhalers.  Said he had the inhalers and he
      didn't use them.  Had the medication and didn't
      take it.
          The first time anyone heard anything about
      not being able to afford something wasn't in any
      of these records or depositions or the medical
      records or anywhere else.
          It was on the witness stand, the first time.
      "But yet you had money to go and play Lotto and
      play Instant Millionaire and go to Reno, but you
      didn't take your medicine, but now you want to
      recover for pain and suffering?"
          Never relied on the tobacco industry to make
      any decisions about smoking; but yet the tobacco
      industry, R.J. Reynolds in particular, should
      compensate for what you did to yourself?
          Not only is that contrary to the law and the
      evidence in the case, it's simply unfair. 4343
          "Please state whether you find by clear and
      convincing evidence" -- well, let's do this
      right quick.
          Damages, zero dollars.  Let's talk about
      punitive damages.
          "Please state whether you find by clear and
      convincing evidence that punitive damages are
      warranted against Reynolds under the
      circumstances of this case?"
          No.  No, they are not.
          It's a different burden of proof when you
      get to the punitive damages.  The burden of
      proof on all the other issues in the case -- or
      the burden of proof is the greater weight of the
      evidence.
          When you get to punitive damages, the
      plaintiff must prove punitive entitlement by
      clear and convincing evidence.  And the
      instructions will tell you what that is, but
      it's a much, much, much higher burden.  It's not
      beyond reasonable doubt, but it's up there.
          The instruction says, "Clear and convincing
      evidence differs from the greater weight of the
      evidence in that it is more compelling and
      persuasive.  As I have already instructed you, 4344
      greater weight of the evidence means the more
      persuasive and convincing force and effect of
      the entire evidence in the case.
          "In contrast, clear and convincing evidence
      is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking
      in confusion, and of such weight that it
      produces a firm belief or conviction without
      hesitation about the matter in issue."
          So if you've got any hesitation whatsoever
      about whether punitive damages are warranted,
      then the burden has not been met.  They have not
      met their burden.
          And the Engle findings are of no help to
      Mr. Hardin or Mrs. Hardin on this issue because
      the Engle findings do not establish that Mr. --
      Mrs. Hardin is entitled to punitive damages.
          And, of course, punitive damages are over
      and above the compensatory damages.  They're in
      addition to the damages to compensate for the
      loss.  So this is something over and above that.
          "The Engle findings may not be considered in
      any way when determining whether punitive
      damages may be warranted."  Can't even be
      considered in any fashion.
          "In determining whether punitive damages may 4345
      be warranted, you should also take into
      consideration any mitigating evidence, and
      mitigating evidence is evidence that may
      demonstrate that there is no need to impose
      punitive damages."
          And I submit you there is no need to impose
      punitive damages.  Number one, they haven't
      carried the burden; but, number two, there's no
      need to impose punitive damages.
          They harp on the filters and talking about
      filters.  Well, that's not a reason to punish
      Reynolds, because the Reynolds scientists,
      according to Dr. Proctor, who's looked at all of
      these documents, internal company documents, the
      Reynolds' scientists genuinely believed filters
      were safer back in the '50s, when Mr. Hardin
      switched to Winston and Marlboro.
          They really believed it, and that's in the
      internal company documents.  They didn't
      advertise them as being safer, but the
      scientists felt that they were safer.
          We know that the Council For Tobacco
      Research, CTR, funded $350 million of research.
      They funded over -- funded projects that
      resulted in 7,000 scientific publications.  The 4346
      Surgeon General cited those studies more than
      600 times.
          If they didn't have anything to do with
      smoking, then the Surgeon General was way off
      base because the Surgeon General cited this
      research 600 times.  It was funded in
      universities nationwide.  And at least ten of
      the research scientists were Nobel Prize
      winners.
          The relationship between -- the research
      results established a relationship between
      cigarette smoking and COPD.  Some of the
      research showed the effects of cigarette smoking
      on the impairment of lung function among heavy
      smokers, the effects of inhalation of cigarette
      smoking and the risk of lung injury, and the
      declining lung function.
          Even after these scientists came out with
      these studies that were contrary to the
      positions the tobacco companies were taking, CTR
      continued to fund that research.
          Here's one study in particular that came out
      in 1963 that talked about the addictive
      aspects -- aspects in heavy cigarette smoking.
          "Summary and conclusions:  Heavy cigarette 4347
      smokers thus appear to be true addicts showing
      not only social habituation but mild physiologic
      withdrawal effects."
          And this research was funded in part by
      grants from the Tobacco For Research.  And this
      is at a time when the industry was saying that
      it was -- it was habit-forming, it wasn't
      addicting.
          But here's a scientist, research scientist
      funded by the CTFR, coming to the conclusion,
      yet the funding wasn't cut off.
          Since 1986 Reynolds has disclosed to
      Congress the ingredients and additives in its
      cigarettes.
          Since 2009, they've disclosed to the FDA the
      formulas for all the cigarette products and all
      the research done on ingredients and additives.
          And since 2009, the FDA has had authority to
      regulate the levels of tar -- bless you --
      nicotine and other harmful components.  In fact,
      the FDA has the ability to tell Reynolds to take
      out ingredients in its cigarettes and ban
      additives.  They haven't done so.
          Reynolds has also done research trying to
      make a less hazardous cigarette.  They've been 4348
      doing that for more than 50 years.  From the
      '50s to the '90s, they made efforts to remove
      known carcinogens from smoke.  They spent over a
      billion dollars in the '80s trying to develop a
      less harmful cigarette, one that heated the
      tobacco instead of burning it.
          And they continue today trying to develop a
      less harmful cigarette, and it's called the
      Reefo.  They've developed products that are less
      dangerous and products to help people quit
      smoking.
          The VUSE e-cigarette is much safer than a
      combustible cigarette because it doesn't burn
      tobacco.  And a large number of smokers use VUSE
      to quit smoking.  And Reynolds is in favor of
      FDA regulation of e-cigarettes.
          Zonnic is a nicotine replacement product,
      and it's less expensive than Nicorette.  It's
      FDA-approved, and it's sold right alongside the
      cigarettes in the hopes that someone purchasing
      a pack of cigarettes will have second thoughts
      and try ZONNIC to try to quit smoking.  The
      evidence demonstrates there's no need to impose
      punitive damages.
          In determining whether punitive damages are 4349
      warranted -- this is the final instruction,
      number 36 -- you may not seek to punish Reynolds
      for any harm suffered by any individuals other
      than Thomas V. Reynolds.
          THE CLERK:  Mr. Persons, you have ten
      minutes remaining.
          MR. PERSONS:  Ten?  Thank you, ma'am.
          If you decide the punitive damages may be
      warranted, there will be a second trial, second
      part of this trial where there will be -- the
      parties can present additional evidence,
      additional argument, witnesses, and so forth,
      and the judge will give you additional
      instructions for that phase.
          But I will submit to you there will be no
      need for that phase, because if you check "no"
      to questions 3 and 4, then there will never be
      even the need to consider punitive damages.
          And I submit to you that that's the proper
      thing to do, because the evidence supports
      answering those questions no.
          So on this one, number 7, not warranted --
          Oh, thank you.
          MR. BAYUK:  Sure, sure.
          MR. PERSONS:  At the outset of the case, 4350
      Mr. Bayuk came before you and told you, I think
      he told you again at the outset of his remarks
      earlier this afternoon, that these were the four
      things you really needed to know in order to
      answer every question on that verdict form.
          All seven questions to be answered with this
      information.
          Number 1, "Mr. Hardin did not start or
      continue to smoke because of anything the
      tobacco company industry said or did."
          Number 2, "Despite knowing the risks of
      smoking, Mr. Hardin chose to keep smoking for
      decades without ever trying to quit because he
      enjoyed it."
          Number 3, "Once Mr. Hardin was motivated to
      quit, he quit the first time he tried without
      difficulty."
          Number 4, "Mr. Hardin admitted that he could
      have quit smoking sooner and prevented his
      COPD/emphysema and death."
          "Plaintiff's case is legally barred because
      Mr. Hardin knew or should have known he had a
      medical condition that he related to smoking
      before May 5th, 1990."
          That's all you need to know to answer all 4351
      those questions on the verdict form, all seven
      of them.  That's all.  You don't really need to
      know anything else.
          And Mrs. Hardin put it best when she said
      "I've always been taught that we've got our own
      mind.  We do what we want to do.  I don't care
      what you say to somebody (sic), you know,
      they're not going to pay attention unless they
      want to."
          But yet they want you to think that
      R.J. Reynolds -- Mr. Hardin would have paid
      attention to R.J. Reynolds.  But, Ms. Hardin,
      she knew him as well, if not better than anybody
      else.
          And she said, "Unless somebody wants to do
      something, I don't care what you say to him.
      They're not going to change."
          And that's in line with what Dr. Cuyler
      Hammond said back in 1954 in the Cuyler Hammond
      research he did working for the American Cancer
      Society."
    (Video clip was played and taken down to the best
of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          DR. HAMMOND:  It is now established in my
      opinion beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette 4352
      smoking greatly increases the probability of
      developing lung cancer.
          In my opinion, people should be warned of
      the dangers and they are being warned.  What
      they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke
      or not, is their own business."
    (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. PERSONS:  And, of course, in 1964, some
      ten years later, when the Surgeon General's
      Report came out, the same Surgeon General's
      Report that Mr. Hardin testified that he was
      familiar with, this was what Harry Reasoner had
      to say:
    (Video clip was played and taken down to the best
of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          MR. REASONER:  In this kind of a country it
      comes down to you, whether you like it or not.
      No one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and
      it is now quite clear that no one is going to
      tell him it's good for him either.  The decision
      is his, the decision and the health that may
      depend on it.  This is Harry Reasoner.  Good
      night.
    (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. PERSONS:  And it was his decision.  He 4353
      will be the first one to acknowledge that.  We
      don't have to guess about it.  We don't have to
      speculate about it.  We know what he said about
      it.
          He said, "It's strictly up to me whether I
      quit or not."
          It was your decision to smoke or to stop,
      right?
          And he said, "Right."
          It was his decision.  It was his decision.
      And it was his decision not to quit and to
      continue in that activity knowing full well
      there could be harmful consequences including
      death by continuing to engage in that activity.
      But he chose to continue to do it.  And it's not
      anybody's right to tell him to do otherwise.
      Tell him to do otherwise.  It was his decision.
          But he bore the consequences of that
      decision and that's called personal
      responsibility.  He recognized it.  He
      appreciated it.  He embraced it.  He articulated
      it.  He said, "It's up to me."  His choice, his
      responsibility.
          I submit to you, based on all the evidence
      that you've seen in this case over the past 4354
      two-and-a-half weeks, the evidence points in one
      direction, and that's a verdict in favor of
      R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, because not only
      did the plaintiff not carry their burden, the
      evidence adduced during the course of this trial
      overwhelmingly points in favor of a defense
      verdict.
          The evidence is overwhelming that he was not
      addicted, didn't meet the medical definition.
      The evidence is overwhelming that addiction did
      not cause him to die of COPD.  The evidence is
      overwhelming that he knew or should have known
      that there was a reasonable possibility that he
      suffered from a smoking-related illness prior to
      May 5th, 1990.
          The evidence is overwhelming that he didn't
      rely on anything, any statement from
      R.J. Reynolds omitting or concealing any
      material fact about the dangers or addictiveness
      of smoking.
          The evidence is overwhelming that he's --
      plaintiff is not entitled to any damages.  The
      evidence is overwhelming that 100 percent of the
      fault is on Mr. Hardin, who chose to smoke and
      was the only person who had the power to quit 4355
      and thereby avoid contracting COPD, the illness
      that killed him.
          And the evidence is overwhelming that
      punitive damages are certainly not warranted in
      this case.
          I thank you for your attention, especially
      coming right after lunch.  I do.  The case is
      now with you.  We won't get a chance to come
      before you again and say a word because we don't
      have the burden.  But even though we don't have
      the burden I think we've demonstrated, we've
      demonstrated clearly and convincingly that the
      plaintiff is entitled to take nothing.  Again, I
      thank you for your kind attention.
