          MR. KAISER:  Thank you.  May it please the
      Court and the counsel.
          Ladies and gentleman of the jury, good 4191
      morning.
          THE JURY:  Good morning.
          MR. KAISER:  I want to first thank you for
      your sacrifice and commitment in joining us for
      the last several weeks here.  We couldn't do
      this without you.  You've taken a lot of time
      out of your lives.  And we do appreciate that.
          What I want to do, just like I told you in
      opening statements how I was going to proceed,
      I'm going to tell you the same way I'm going to
      proceed in my closing argument.  And that is,
      I'm going to track the verdict form and, based
      on the evidence, hopefully answer the questions
      for you to help you in your deliberations.
          So we'll begin with question number 1 on the
      verdict form, which is, "Was Thomas Hardin
      addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?  And
      if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his
      chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
      emphysema, and death?"
          Can everyone see that?
          So regarding addiction, you recall that you
      heard from Dr. O'Brien who was a psychiatrist
      and had been studying in research and addiction
      for about 40 or 50 years and teaching for 50 4192
      years.  And remember Dr. O'Brien referred to
      addiction as a disease of the brain?
          And he said nicotine addiction is a disease
      of the brain; nicotine addiction is a mental
      disorder and is included in the book of mental
      disorders called the Diagnostic and Statistical
      Manual, the DSM-5, along with the 40 or 50 other
      mental disorders in the DSM-5.
          And the mental disorder caused by nicotine
      is called Tobacco Use Disorder.  And you heard
      about the criteria, and the criteria was written
      by Dr. O'Brien.
          And remember Dr. O'Brien discussing the
      various components of this brain disease and
      remember him telling you about nicotine
      addiction being a learned behavior and causing a
      memory.
          And he talked about this idea that if you
      smoke a cigarette, each puff is a discrete puff
      and a dosage of nicotine, and you get this
      immediate peak and effect in the brain from
      nicotine because the nicotine gets to the brain
      faster than any other way when you inhale a
      cigarette.
          And he talked about these peaks, and then 4193
      the nicotine starts to reduce.  And then the
      next puff has the same peak.  And with each of
      those puffs -- remember, he talked about this
      memory and this learned behavior so that if a
      person like Mr. Hardin who smoked a pack and a
      half or two packs a day, we're talking 400 doses
      of nicotine in one day, which he characterized
      as a lot of memory, a lot of learned behavior.
          And remember he also talked about the fact
      that the addict doesn't do any work.  The addict
      doesn't do any work in order to activate the
      pleasure system in his or her brain.  Remember,
      he testified about that.  And he said, "That is
      what causes addiction."
          And so what I'm going to do with you is
      briefly go over some of his testimony about the
      effect that nicotine has on the brain before we
      get to the criteria.  And one of the things that
      Dr. O'Brien said, he said, "Addiction is a
      change in the brain.  It's a memory.  And the
      younger you are when you learn this behavior,
      the harder it is to change it."
          And we know that Thomas Hardin started
      smoking when he was nine or ten years old.
          He talked in terms of the thing that causes 4194
      learning to occur very strong and very fast is
      when the reward system is activated.
          But there are drugs that, by coincidence,
      happen to go straight to the reward system, and
      that makes them abused.  And he told you, drugs
      of abuse like nicotine and other controlled
      substances go right to the reward system and
      activate the reward system when they hit the
      brain.
          The reward from smoking is with each puff,
      like he said.  So there are about ten puffs per
      cigarette and there -- so there are about 20 in
      a pack.  So you get about 200 rewards.  That's
      what Dr. O'Brien said.
          Remember, he also discussed this idea of
      cues: the smell, the feel of the package, things
      that stimulate and start cravings to cause you
      to have another cigarette.
          There are cues associated with everything.
      So for smoking, it would be, you know, a pack of
      cigarettes, the smell of cigarettes, seeing
      someone smoke, you know, seeing people smoking
      in movies especially.
          But, yes, so these are the cues, and these
      teach your body to expect the reward, and it 4195
      produces a craving so that every time someone
      sees or is exposed to a cue, the response after
      it activates the reward system is to smoke.
          And remember Dr. O'Brien testifying about
      "People are exposed to cues at such a fast time
      that they don't even know it and they start
      smoking."
          What happens when someone becomes aware
      through therapy of the cues that trigger the
      smoking and the craving?  And his answer was,
      "Well, first of all, they could fight it
      better."  So that's why it's important to allow
      the smoker to know why or what the cues are to
      identify those cues.
          And then Dr. O'Brien talked about this idea
      of control.  And he said, "Addiction does affect
      your free will.  Addiction affects the
      probability of your being able to make a
      decision and, you know, there's -- there's
      not -- things are not naturally black and
      white."  Remember he said that?  It's not
      normally -- you can't -- you can't answer a
      question, a black and white question when
      there's a gray area.  And he talked about this
      idea, this probability, and he said, "Addiction 4196
      is a learned behavior that's very hard to
      unlearn."  So that in a case of someone like
      Thomas Hardin who smoked every day of his life
      for 50 years, that's a lot of learned behavior,
      that's a lot of memories, and it's a lot of
      learned behavior to unlearn.  And so if we apply
      the facts to the criteria as Dr. O'Brien did,
      what he told you from the facts and you heard is
      that Thomas Hardin would smoke the first thing
      he did when he woke up -- when he woke up in the
      morning.  Remember, he said, "before my foot hit
      the floor"?
          So what does that mean per the criteria?  He
      smoked because, during the night, you heard,
      your nicotine levels are at their lowest level
      because you haven't smoked in hours and what
      happens then is you get this feeling, you get
      this urge and you smoke.  That's craving.
          Now, remember Dr. O'Brien said, "I can't
      rule out craving, but I didn't get a chance to
      talk to Thomas Hardin."  But you know exactly
      what the criteria says about craving, a strong
      urge to smoke, and you heard the evidence.  You
      can apply the facts of that criteria and find
      indeed that there was craving with this strong 4197
      urge to smoke.
          You heard that Thomas Hardin smoked the same
      amount of cigarettes, the consistent amount of
      cigarettes throughout the day and every day of
      his life.  So what does that mean?  It means,
      number one, that he's smoking more than he
      intended.  Remember, that's a criteria.  And
      Dr. O'Brien explained that.  When you first
      start smoking your very first cigarette, you
      don't intend to be smoking years later one or
      two packs a day.  No one intends that.  And
      that's how he reads and that's how he explains
      the criteria that he wrote, simply that by the
      time you are now smoking 15 years, 20 years, 30
      years, you're smoking more than you intended
      after you had that first cigarette.
          The fact that Thomas Hardin smoked a
      consistent amount of cigarettes every day, what
      else does that tell you?  That tells you that he
      meets another criteria, which is tolerance.  And
      remember the way Dr. O'Brien explained
      tolerance.  Thomas Hardin could not have smoked
      two packs of cigarettes the first day he tried
      them or he would have gotten sick because
      nicotine is a drug, it's a poison.  He had to 4198
      work up to a level, a consistent level that
      satisfied him, which he did.  In this case, it
      was a pack and a half or two packs a day.  That
      is what is meant by tolerance.
          Now, Dr. Giakas, the defense expert, he
      wants to write more in the criteria.  He wants
      to tell you that you need to smoke up to
      infinity to have tolerance because that's what
      the criteria says.  And he simply added that
      component of the criteria so that he could just
      be more subjective and in that way no one would
      be tolerant.  Remember, that's exactly what he
      said.  "You have to keep smoking more and more
      and more because you're used to the levels."
      Under his position you would have to smoke
      forever consistently raising your level, which
      is not what Dr. O'Brien said he had in mind when
      he wrote the criteria.
          Now, you heard that there were times
      Mr. Hardin would go to church, and he could not
      sit through a whole service.  Some people said
      he could.  We don't know when, but he would have
      to go and smoke.  On those occasions when he
      would be able to sit through, you heard the
      testimony, he could not wait to get to the car, 4199
      he had to smoke right outside the church, which
      means, what?  He had a strong urge or a
      compelling need to smoke a cigarette or else why
      couldn't he have waited to get to the car.
      That's another example, a craving, a strong urge
      to smoke.  And you could bet that while he was
      sitting in that church he wasn't thinking about
      anything other than cigarettes because what
      compelled him to have to smoke when he got out.
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, object to this.
      These facts are not in evidence.  There's no
      evidence of this.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Okay.  No speaking
      objections.
          Ladies and gentleman, you are the judges of
      the facts.  You know the evidence that you
      heard.  Remember what the lawyers say is not --
      is not the evidence or law.  This is just
      guiding you.  Okay?  Thank you.
          Go ahead.
          MR. KAISER:  And you heard the evidence when
      Mrs. Hardin would tell him, "Look, can't we at
      least walk to the car before you smoke?"  And he
      would have a cigarette right when he walked out
      of that church service. 4200
          Now, you also heard testimony that he would
      go to movies, not very often, and if there was
      an intermission he would smoke and his wife said
      he would get up invariably and walk outside to
      smoke, another instance that he could not sit
      through a movie without having to excuse himself
      and smoking, an example of an urge, a strong
      urge to smoke which satisfies craving.
          What else do we know about the smoking
      habits of Mr. Hardin?  Mr. Hardin would smoke in
      bed at night, not once but several, many times.
      And what does that mean?  The criteria there
      says "smoking in dangerous conditions," like
      smoking in bed.
          Now, there's no added language in that
      criteria that says you have to burn yourself
      three times; you have to burn your house down;
      you have to die in a house fire.  That's what
      Dr. Giakas wants to add so that he could be
      subjective and not find anyone that meets this
      criteria.  The criteria as written that you saw
      said "smoking when it's dangerous," and that's
      how Dr. O'Brien wrote the criteria.  Smoking in
      bed is an example of being dangerous.
          Now, the defense wants to portray Thomas 4201
      Hardin as being this risk-taker, as engaging in
      these risky behaviors, but when it comes time to
      smoke in bed, which is a dangerous condition,
      he's smoking responsibly.  Remember Dr. Giakas
      said that?  "He smoked responsibly," so when it
      came to that, he was a responsible smoker.
      Well, that's hogwash.  He met the criteria by
      virtue of him smoking not once but several times
      in bed.
          You also heard that there were many
      occasions when Mr. Hardin would get up during
      the night in order to smoke and get milk.  Now
      why on earth would he have to get up and smoke?
      Again, you heard Dr. O'Brien testify this whole
      idea about the nicotine levels lower when you're
      not smoking and it disrupts your sleep, and here
      we have Mr. Hardin on numerous occasions getting
      up at nighttime in order to smoke.
          Another example, we have evidence of
      Mr. Hardin trying unsuccessfully to quit smoking
      cigarettes.  And there's criteria for that.  And
      the criteria is "unsuccessful efforts to cut
      down or control smoking."  You didn't hear
      anything about unsuccessful efforts to quit.
      You didn't hear anything about a legitimate or 4202
      serious quit attempt.  That's not in the
      criteria.  The criteria is solely "unsuccessful
      efforts to cut down or control smoking," which
      Mr. Hardin did, but he was unsuccessful.
          Again, he met the criteria.  He tried.  He
      used the patch.  It was the addiction that was
      compelling him to smoke that made it difficult
      for him to even quit.
          And remember, each time he started again,
      were there any symptoms he was experiencing?
      You heard from Thomas Hardin, "Did your wife
      know that you had quit when you were on the
      road?"  And he said, "She heard it in my voice,"
      so obviously he was feeling something.
          Do you remember what else he said?  At some
      point he said, "My wife knew how ill I was."
      And he explained that, "You know, when you're
      getting on someone's nerves because you want a
      cigarette and you need one."  That's what he
      meant by I was -- you know, "My wife knew how
      ill I was."  So these are feelings that the man
      is experiencing.  And you've seen the protocol,
      the criteria for withdrawal.
          Now, Dr. O'Brien said, "I can't credit
      withdrawal, but I can't discount it.  I simply 4203
      didn't get a chance to talk to him."  But when
      you add these up, there are so many criteria out
      of the 11 that Mr. Hardin has met, that he was
      obviously not just suffering from Tobacco Use
      Disorder, but he was seriously addicted.  And
      what is his impairment?
          Remember there has to be this clinically
      significant impairment, and Dr. O'Brien told you
      what this impairment was.  The man had COPD from
      smoking cigarettes.  It basically made him
      sedentary and nonfunctional.  That is the
      impairment.  The man smoked when he had COPD
      knowing it was going to kill him.  That also
      meets the criteria.  He was told in no uncertain
      terms, "You need to stop so at least the
      symptoms can get better.  The disease won't.
      You can't cure it, but you need to stop."  And
      he couldn't stop.  He couldn't stop.  The man
      kept smoking while he had a disease that was
      caused by smoking.  That's another criteria.  So
      you've got the impairment.  You've got numerous
      criteria met, certainly more than six, so by
      clear and convincing evidence the man was
      addicted.
          Now, remember Dr. O'Brien was asked some 4204
      questions on direct examination.  Was there
      anything other than Mr. Hardin's addiction that
      you felt was driving his continued smoking?  And
      his response was, "No.  I mean, I think that's
      the -- that's the overriding, you know, the main
      thing."
          What about Mr. Hardin's personality, what
      did you find out about that?  And what does
      Dr. O'Brien say?  "Now, as a clinician we have
      to take that into account when we treat them,
      because knowing their personality helps us
      decide what's going to work for them."
          Question, "How did this risk-taking behavior
      impact your opinion in this case?"
          And his answer was, "Well, I just thought
      that was pretty much a nonissue."
          He was definitely addicted.  Whether or not
      he was a risk-taker is not an important issue
      according to Dr. O'Brien.
          "Now, Dr. O'Brien in assessing whether one
      is addicted to nicotine do you need to first
      consider one's cognitive abilities?
          "Not really.
          "In assessing one's addiction to nicotine in
      cigarettes do you need to assess one's 4205
      motivation?
          "You know, again, we, you know, the issue
      that I always approach is treatment."
          So you might ask, why, then was the
      defendant's presentation with their expert
      almost exclusively devoted to motivation,
      cognition, quitting behavior and personality
      when it has nothing to do with the criteria
      right here in the book?  You will not find any
      criteria to assess addiction based on
      personality, based on motivation, based on
      cognition, nothing.
          The reason that Dr. Giakas spent almost his
      entire presentation talking about that was
      simple.  He wanted to judge Thomas Hardin.
      That's why they put him on the stand, to tell
      you Thomas Hardin was at fault.  Thomas Hardin
      made a choice.  Thomas Hardin made a personal
      decision to smoke.  That's what Dr. Giakas
      wanted to tell you, because the man is so
      obviously addicted if you apply the criteria.
          Remember, this is the gold standard
      according to the defendant's expert.  This is
      the book he uses to assess addiction.  In no
      uncertain terms, you don't need to consider any 4206
      of these personality traits, cognition,
      motivation to assess addiction.  All he was
      trying to do was to try to tell you that I'm
      judging Thomas Hardin.  So as an expert he
      wanted to come in here and judge Thomas Hardin
      to say, "Well, he must have been at fault."  And
      I'm going to show you how he's wrong.
          Now, when you look at Thomas Hardin, you
      look at his smoking history, you see a man who
      smoked basically every day of his life for 50
      years without a day off, without a day off.  Do
      you really think that's a person who just liked
      smoking?  Now, there's no question when he was a
      boy, when he was a kid and he just started to
      smoke and felt cool with the others fellas,
      sure, he might have liked it, we told you he
      probably did like it, but do you think when he
      was smoking every single day without a day off
      there might have been more to it than just
      enjoyment or bonding with buddies or liking the
      feel of the cigarette in his hand?  After all,
      we're dealing with a poisonous chemical called
      nicotine.  Remember every puff he took, he got a
      dose of nicotine.  So perhaps there's a lot more
      than enjoyment or bonding with buddies when he 4207
      smoked a cigarette every day of his life, 40 of
      them every day of his life without a day off.
          We're talking a lot more than a habit,
      folks.  We're talking addiction.  So I submit to
      you that we have proven by a greater weight of
      the evidence that Thomas Hardin was addicted to
      cigarettes containing nicotine.
          The next item, then, is what about his
      illness?  And you've heard about Thomas Hardin
      being diagnosed with COPD on August 2nd of 1996.
      We've got a medical record.  Dr. Flurry
      testified via deposition.  And what you can see
      from this medical record on the first day that
      he sees Dr. Flurry as a new patient, there was
      some writing that Dr. Flurry said he wrote.  And
      what he said he wrote.  And among other things
      was that Mr. Hardin had a sister and three
      brothers who were healthy.  And this is
      important because you heard some testimony that
      Mr. Hardin was aware of the risk of smoking
      because he had some brothers that had developed
      lung cancer or COPD.  At least in 1996, we know
      they're healthy, so that came sometime later.
          We also know that what predicated Mr. Hardin
      going to see the doctor was because he had a 4208
      cough, a cough for six months.  Not a cough that
      put him into the '80s.
          Six months in 1996 caused him to go see the
      doctor.  This is on August 2nd of 1996.  And we
      see the patient note from the doctor, their main
      complaint is of six months of persistent cough,
      worse in the morning.
          Now, past medical history, it says "COPD."
      And remember, during Dr. Flurry's deposition, he
      noted that and said, "Look, this is the first
      time I saw him.  When it walks like a duck and
      quacks like a duck, and I assume he probably had
      it before."
          But he said, "There's no basis for me to
      know that he was diagnosed before the COPD."
          If he had been diagnosed with COPD, folks,
      do you think he'd be coming in to see Dr. Hardin
      to find out what's wrong with him and get
      diagnosed with COPD for a second time (sic)?
          That wouldn't happen.  And so we know from
      his social history, he smokes two packs a day
      and denies alcohol.  He's married.  His
      assessment when he saw him on August 2nd, 1996,
      he has COPD -- COPD.
          This is long before he filed a lawsuit in 4209
      this case where he said he was smoking two packs
      a day, denying alcohol.  And the assessment here
      is COPD.
          And just to make certain, what did
      Dr. Flurry do?  Dr. Flurry referred him to a
      lung specialist, Dr. Messina.  We heard from
      Dr. Messina as well.  Dr. Messina was from
      Pensacola Lung Group, and Dr. Messina wrote a
      note to Dr. Flurry about his examination of
      Thomas Hardin.  And we note that he's never had
      any unusual exposure to fumes, dust, chemicals,
      asbestos, or radiation.
          He does have a chronic cough and sputum
      production over a long period of time, although
      he was never asked, "What is a long period of
      time," only he was never asked "What is a long
      period of time?"  No one knows what that means,
      at least in Dr. Messina's eyes.  Interestingly,
      you'll remember, during Thomas Hardin's
      deposition he was shown some medical records and
      letters.  He was shown this one -- this one
      asking him, "How long a period of time did you
      have this chronic cough?
          You know what he wasn't shown?  He wasn't
      shown the first medical record where it says six 4210
      months.  Why?  Because he would have said,
      "Well, six months."
          And so the impression here is COPD combined
      with bronchitis, wheezing as well as an element
      of emphysema, just like Dr. Flurry said.  And he
      also notes here that he had a discussion with
      Mr. Hardin about the need to quit smoking
      because that's what caused the COPD.
          Smoking causes COPD, and in this case,
      that's the exclusive cause of Mr. Hardin's COPD.
      It's not an Alpha-1 Antitrypsin deficiency.
      It's not an exposure to asbestos.  You will not
      see one medical record, one chest X-ray, one CAT
      scan, that suggests anything other than COPD.
          So the evidence certainly, by a greater
      weight of the evidence, demonstrates that
      Mr. Hardin was diagnosed with COPD.  He died of
      COPD.
          And then the question comes, "Did the
      addiction -- was that a legal cause of his COPD
      and death?"
          And remember Dr. O'Brien's explanation, "the
      fact that one is addicted, like Thomas Hardin,
      compels him to smoke more than if he wasn't
      addicted, because if he wasn't addicted he'd be 4211
      able to stop if he had to.  Compulsion to smoke
      results in more toxins from the cigarettes,
      which results in disease."
          So in a legal sense, that's what causes
      disease.  So his addiction, by virtue of him
      being compelled to smoke and getting more toxins
      than otherwise he would if he was not addicted
      is what caused his disease in this case.
          So based on the greater weight of the
      evidence in this case, it's more likely than not
      that Mr. Hardin was addicted to the cigarettes
      containing nicotine, and it was the addiction
      that was a legal cause of his COPD and death.
          I submit to you, then, the answer on the
      verdict form is "Yes."
          The next question, "Did Thomas Hardin know
      or should have known in the exercise of
      reasonable care prior to May 5th, 1990, that he
      had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
      COPD/emphysema, and that there was a reasonable
      probability that his COPD/emphysema was caused
      by smoking?"
          That's not my burden of proof, ladies and
      gentleman.  That's the defendant's by a greater
      weight of evidence. 4212
          And I submit to you that there is no proof
      that Mr. Hardin had reason to know or believe
      that he had the possibility of having COPD
      before 1990; in fact, before six months prior to
      August 2nd of 1996, because there's absolutely
      no evidence by testimony, by medical records or
      otherwise, that Mr. Hardin was on notice that he
      should do something sometime in the '80s.
          Now you heard in opening statement the
      defense attorney tell you, well, you're going to
      hear evidence that Mrs. Hardin was telling her
      husband to quit from 1983 on.  Didn't hear a
      word.
          You're going to hear evidence he had a cough
      in the '80s."  Didn't hear a word.  Didn't see
      any evidence, didn't see one medical record that
      said the man was coughing in the '80s.  Didn't
      see one record or one shred of evidence that the
      man's wife was telling him from 1983 to stop
      smoking.
          There has been absolutely no proof by a
      greater weight of the evidence or otherwise that
      Mr. Hardin had reason to know before May 5th of
      1990 that he had a smoking-related disease,
      COPD. 4213
          The answer is a resounding, "No," ladies and
      gentleman.
          Number 3:  "Did Thomas Hardin reasonably
      rely to his detriment on any statement made by
      Reynolds that concealed or omitted material
      facts and otherwise known or available
      concerning the health effects or addictive
      nature of cigarettes?  And, if so, was such
      reliance a legal cause of his COPD/emphysema and
      death?"
          Now, what we have as a result of the class
      membership in this case, we have the Engle
      findings.  And you have the Engle findings?
          And the Engle findings tell you, among other
      things, that the defendants, R.J. Reynolds,
      concealed or omitted material information not
      otherwise known or available, knowing that the
      material was false and misleading, or failed to
      disclose a material fact concerning the health
      effects or addictive nature of smoking
      cigarettes or both.  And the concealment refers
      to this agreement the defendants made with
      others to conceal.
          So what does this mean?  We know what the
      information is that R.J. Reynolds knew about the 4214
      health risk of smoking and the addictive nature
      of nicotine.  We know that from the evidence in
      this case.
          And what you know is that at least from the
      '40s and definitely into the early '50s,
      R.J. Reynolds, by that time, already knew that
      their cigarettes could cause cancer.  They knew
      that their cigarettes had carcinogens in them.
          They also knew the importance of nicotine
      going back to 1935.  Certainly, by 1953,
      December, they knew that nicotine was not only
      important to the smoker, but it was a dangerous
      drug, and it was addictive.  So we know that
      R.J. Reynolds knew that in December of 1953.
      That's very important.
          We also know that there was some very
      negative information about smoking and health in
      1953 by the mouse-painting studies that you
      heard about.  Remember that?
          These mouse-painting studies showed a
      causative link between smoking and cancer.  And
      what happened was the results of these
      mouse-painting studies became public, and they
      received a lot of media attention; in fact, so
      much attention did these studies receive that 4215
      the tobacco companies responded.
          And they responded by meeting on
      December 14th at The Plaza Hotel.  And what did
      they decide to do?  They decided that they were
      going to provide false assurances to the public.
      They were going to pledge research into this
      issue of smoking and health and get to the
      bottom of the problem.  And they knew full well
      this was just a public relations matter and they
      weren't going to do any such thing.
          And what they did for the next 50 years was
      this campaign of denial, falsely assuring people
      that they were going to get to the bottom of the
      problem.  And we know, folks, that they were
      successful in counteracting this negative
      information that was put out there about
      cigarettes.
          And how do we know that?
          Because there's evidence in this record
      about the success of this denialist campaign.
      For example, you've heard evidence that despite
      this 1953 mouse-painting study that had
      tremendous publicity, by the next year,
      cigarette sales grew to record levels and
      continued to grow. 4216
          By 1960 you've heard 50 percent, half of all
      doctors in the United States were still smoking
      cigarettes.  Obviously, they didn't get the
      message.
          1964, the Mercury mission was a series of
      several flights into space.  And you heard that
      four of those seven astronauts on those missions
      were smokers.  These are the best of the best,
      highest IQs, and they're smoking cigarettes
      during this timeframe.
          1965, you heard immediately after the
      Surgeon General's report was made public, record
      sales and highest profits in the history of the
      tobacco industry.
          1967, what's admitted into evidence is this
      Federal Trade Commission report that talks a lot
      about the warnings or the cautions in 1966 being
      totally ineffective, and it talked about
      cigarette advertising.  And what it talked about
      was that advertising was so pervasive that you
      could not help but seeing ad after ad in the
      media.
          1972, The Roper Proposal by The Tobacco
      Institute, remember what it said among other
      things?  The scheme was brilliantly executed, 4217
      brilliantly conceived and executed.
          Twenty years later, they were talking about
      how well their scheme was, but it wasn't over.
      It wasn't over.  Remember, they said, "We still
      have to create doubt."
          1978, we talked about this meeting in New
      York with Dr. Proctor at which time all these
      representatives of the tobacco company,
      including R.J. Reynolds met, and it was divulged
      during that meeting that the TIRC was nothing
      more than an industry shield.
          That was the organization that was going to
      provide funds to these reputable scientists to
      get to the bottom of the problem.  And their --
      the CTR, which replaced the TIRC, was just a
      front.
          THE CLERK:  Mr. Kaiser.
          MR. KAISER:  Yes.
          THE CLERK:  You have one hour remaining.
          MR. KAISER:  One hour remaining?
          THE CLERK:  Yes.
          MR. KAISER:  Thank you.
          We saw a memo in 1978 that most consumers
      weren't aware of what nicotine did or what
      nicotine was. 4218
          And in 1982 -- it took them until 1982 for
      cigarette consumption to peak.  That means from
      the 1950s to 1982, cigarette sales kept growing,
      growing.  Cigarette consumption kept growing and
      growing.  So we know that this campaign of
      denial was effective in counteracting the
      negative information.
          So what did Thomas Hardin know?
          We know that in the 1950s, Thomas Hardin
      didn't know anything about cigarettes and
      health.  Dr. Giakas testified about that.
      There's nothing -- nothing to suggest that he
      knew when he first started smoking that
      cigarettes were bad.
          And when he continued to smoke, he didn't
      know cigarettes were bad in the 1950s.  He
      certainly didn't know that cigarettes could
      cause cancer in the 1950s.  No evidence of that.
          There was evidence that his parents never
      said a word about smoking being bad.  There's
      evidence that he never learned smoking was bad
      from church.  There was evidence that he never
      learned smoking was bad from school.  And we
      have evidence that the cigarette companies,
      R.J. Reynolds included, created this climate of 4219
      normalizing cigarettes during earlier times,
      running into the '50s and even later.
          So we know Thomas Hardin, when he's smoking
      by the time that the tobacco companies were
      meeting in 1953, doesn't know a thing about the
      dangers of cigarettes causing cancer and being
      addictive.
          And so the question then becomes, what
      message did Thomas Hardin receive?  Did he
      receive the message from the negative campaign?
      Or did he receive the message from this campaign
      of denial?  And the evidence in this case shows
      you that he received the message from this
      campaign of denial, and he relied on their
      misrepresentations and their concealment.
          And I'm going to show you what the evidence
      is in that regard.
          Remember the testimony of Dr. Proctor, when
      Dr. Proctor was talking about the tobacco
      industry inventing baseball cards and the
      tobacco industry, he was saying that most of the
      top athletes were paid to advertise cigarettes:
      Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig, Joe Dimaggio, top
      baseball players, golf players, football
      players. 4220
          "Again, it's hard to name a sport that was
      not used in advertising."  That's what
      Dr. Proctor said.
          And at the deposition of Thomas Hardin, he's
      asked, "Do you recall seeing any commercials by
      any -- any stars talking about the dangers
      associated with, for example Yul Brynner."
          And he said, "I used to see billboards
      showing them smoking but didn't say it was
      hazardous."
          "You used to see billboards of Yul Brynner's
      cigarettes?"
          And his answer was, "I don't -- I don't know
      if it was Yul Brynner."
          And then he's asked, "Do you remember who
      Yul Brynner was?"
          And his answer was, "He was a baseball
      player?"
          Now, this was one of the most famous actors
      in the '50s and '60s, and here's a man during
      his deposition thought he was a baseball player,
      certainly suggesting he saw the ads on
      billboards that were advertising cigarettes via
      athletes, baseball players.
          Then Dr. Proctor was testifying about when 4221
      Reynolds and American Tobacco started selling
      their filtered cigarettes, because during this
      campaign of denial, remember the evidence was
      that the tobacco companies started pushing
      filters as a safer alternative without agreeing
      that cigarettes were dangerous.
          And filters became eminently successful.  In
      fact, in a decade, most people started smoking
      filters rather than unfiltered.
          And so Dr. Proctor says, "Well, Reynolds'
      really big push is with Winston beginning in
      1954."  American tried a filter, not very
      successfully, but the Tareyton cigarette, the
      one marketed with the "I'd rather fight than
      switch."  That's what Dr. Proctor said.
          Thomas Hardin's deposition, now how do you
      believe -- "Do you believe that you were
      addicted to cigarettes?"  And what does he say?
          "I believe I had to have one or rather fight
      than switch."
          Now, isn't that interesting, he's parroting
      the exact phrase from Tareyton cigarettes.  And
      in what parlance do you ever hear someone say,
      "rather fight than switch"?  Certainly
      indicative that the man saw that ad for Tareyton 4222
      cigarettes at some point in the '50s, because he
      parroted that same exact jingle.
          What else?  "When you switched to Winston
      were you relying on something that you read or
      from the tobacco company?"
          And his answer was, "I remember seeing an
      advertisement saying Winstons or Marlboros taste
      good like a cigarette should.  Now, but with
      respect to Winstons seemed to me like that was
      Winston."  And he was right.  It was Winston.
          "Can you identify any ads that you've seen
      for cigarettes?"  That was later in the
      deposition.  And he says, "Onliest one I could
      think of is the one that says, I forgot what it
      say, something about Winstons, Winstons taste
      good like a cigarette should."
          We know the man was exposed to the
      advertising because 50 years later he's
      parroting what the jingles were at the time that
      they were on television or in magazines or on
      billboards.
          Now, Dr. Proctor's testified.  He's asked
      about the historical record.
          "Do you know why there was this advertising
      change from unfiltered to filtered cigarettes 4223
      during this time period?
          "Yes.
          "Why was that?
          "Well, it's part of the reassurance
      campaign.  The news is being publicized that
      smoking causes deadly harm, and with this, the
      industry started marketing filters as a safer
      product, a form of reassurance."
          Thomas Hardin's deposition, "You switched
      from Pall Mall, the unfiltered, to a filtered;
      is that right?
          "Right.
          "And did you do that because you thought --
      and you did that -- did you -- that because you
      thought it would be better for you?
          "Right."
          So here's a man getting a message somewhere
      that filtered cigarettes were better for him.
      And during the same timeframe in the '50s that
      the tobacco companies are advertising and
      pushing filtered cigarettes, Thomas Hardin
      switches from unfiltered to filtered cigarettes.
          And you also heard Dr. Proctor talking about
      this Willie the Penguin was a character invented
      for Kools, developed in the '30s as a medicinal 4224
      cigarette for the next 20 years promoting
      menthol cigarettes.  And you heard Joyce Hardin
      testify that when Thomas Hardin after the late
      '50s switched to menthols, it was Kool
      cigarettes, menthols that he smoked primarily
      for the rest of his life.  So these are example
      after example of actual reliance on
      advertisements, on messages from the tobacco
      companies that prompted Mr. Hardin to act.
      That's actual reliance.
          So the only question, then, is this:  If
      Mr. Hardin had been told the truth when he was a
      kid, when he was smoking, before he was smoking
      even a pack a day in 1955, if he had been told
      the truth, what R.J. Reynolds knew at the time,
      that cigarettes could cause cancer and that they
      were -- the nicotine was addictive, would he
      have acted differently and perhaps not continued
      to smoke?
          Well, what do we know?  We know that as a
      young man, as a boy, Mr. Hardin did not involve
      himself in risk-taking.  There's no evidence of
      that in this record.  We know that he was a
      responsible kid because he left school early in
      the 9th grade to go work at a farm because his 4225
      family was poor.  That's responsible behavior.
      We know that if the truth had come out in the
      '50s, perhaps there would have been restrictions
      on smoking sooner.  We know that if the truth
      had come out, perhaps this climate of normalcy
      wouldn't have existed.  We know if the truth
      came out, perhaps parents would have been able
      to tell their kids, smoking is bad, it causes
      cancer earlier.  Perhaps people in church would
      have been telling the parishioners that smoking
      is bad, it causes cancer.  Perhaps school
      teachers, if this climate didn't exist, would
      have been telling their kids and their pupils
      smoking is bad, it causes cancer.  And so what
      would Mr. Hardin have done, this responsible kid
      who was not smoking a pack a day yet when
      confronted with this evidence where it might not
      have been cool to smoke with your friends, I
      can't assure you based on the evidence he would
      have quit.
          But based on the evidence, more likely than
      not, probably would not have continued smoking
      because it would have been easier for him at
      that time to stop.  That is reliance.  That's
      how reliance caused his disease, because had he 4226
      known the truth he would have been able to quit
      smoking prior to becoming addicted and we
      wouldn't be here today because he wouldn't have
      gotten his disease.  But he wasn't told that
      information, which R.J. Reynolds knew and Thomas
      Hardin didn't.
          The starting point for this is very
      important.  It doesn't start after he's smoking
      40 years and didn't quit because of his
      addiction.  It started when he was smoking as a
      kid in the early 1950s when he had the chance to
      quit if he knew the truth.
          The next question, ladies and gentleman, and
      this question is answered yes, the next question
      is the reliance on the conspiracy.  And again,
      the message was from the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
      Company, they were part of this agreement after
      1953.  So it's the same with this conspiracy.
      The answer is yes.
          "Please state the percentage of any fault
      that was a legal cause of Thomas Hardin's
      chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, emphysema
      and death that you charge to Thomas Hardin and
      R.J. Reynolds."
          Now, simply, again the starting point is 4227
      back when Thomas Hardin is a boy, not when he's
      smoking cigarette after cigarette 50 years
      later.  And what we know is that R.J. Reynolds
      has its laboratories, has its chemists, it's a
      big company making these cigarettes.  Thomas
      Hardin is this kid.  R.J. Reynolds wanted
      someone like Thomas Hardin to rely on their
      advertisements.  We know that from Robert
      Heimann's deposition.  They wanted someone like
      Thomas Hardin to rely on their advertisements,
      and he did.  They wanted Thomas Hardin to smoke
      their brand of cigarettes, and he did.  They
      wanted Thomas Hardin to smoke a lot of their
      cigarettes, and he did.  They wanted Thomas
      Hardin to become addicted to the nicotine in
      their cigarettes, and he did.  They wanted
      Thomas Hardin to smoke for a long time, and he
      did.  Thomas Hardin started as a kid, as a boy
      did everything R.J. Reynolds wanted him to do.
          Now, whose fault is that when he didn't know
      at the time what could happen?  Now, that's
      fault in a vault right there against
      R.J. Reynolds, I submit to you.  That's at least
      75 percent of the fault because this kid, when
      he wasn't lured into smoking by their acts, 4228
      perhaps wouldn't have ever smoked.  That's their
      fault.  What's Thomas Hardin's fault when he's a
      kid?  Absolutely nothing when he starts, because
      he doesn't know anything.
          And I have some questions that I'd like to
      direct to you, and I'll answer them.  And I
      could tell you one thing, the defense will not
      respond to these, because, remember, from their
      opening statement they don't want to respond to
      their conduct.  They act as if they don't exist
      and this case is simply about Thomas Hardin.
      That's not the case.
          And so the first question, ladies and
      gentleman, is when RJR knew of the dangers of
      smoking in the 1950s, why did it choose not to
      tell the public?  Why didn't it tell people,
      "This is what we found out"?  Well, you know
      from the evidence it was because they took
      profits over health, that's why.  At the expense
      of someone like Thomas Hardin, that's not Thomas
      Hardin's fault.  That's R.J. Reynolds' fault
      when Thomas Hardin is a kid in the '50s.
          When R.J. Reynolds knew of the addictive
      nature of smoking in the '50s, why didn't they
      tell the public then?  Again, how can you say 4229
      that that's Thomas Hardin's fault when he's a
      boy, when R.J. Reynolds, this company, is not
      telling them what they know.  That's the fault
      on R.J. Reynolds.  And we don't accept any fault
      for that.  When R.J. Reynolds knew of the
      dangers of smoking in the '50s, why did they not
      voluntarily warn the public by putting warnings
      on their packs of cigarettes?  We know from
      Robert Heimann, if they didn't have to in the
      '70s and the '60s, they wouldn't have done it,
      so certainly they could have done it in the
      '50s, but they -- they didn't choose to do it.
      That's not Thomas Hardin's fault, folks.  He's a
      kid.  He's kid in the '50s.
          When R.J. Reynolds knew of the addictive
      nature of nicotine in their cigarettes in the
      1950s, why did it choose not to voluntarily warn
      the public that nicotine is addictive, smoke
      responsibly or you might not be able to quit?
      That is not Thomas Hardin's fault when he's a
      boy in the '50s, I submit to you.  That's
      R.J. Reynolds' fault.  Why did R.J. Reynolds
      normalize and glamorize its cigarettes in its
      advertising campaigns using famous actors and
      actresses and athletes for decades going into 4230
      the '50s, going into the '60s?
          Remember when Robert Heimann in his depo was
      talking about Pall Malls and the advertising,
      satisfaction and beauty and glamour, and they
      advertise these, and they created this climate,
      and at no time in these advertisements did they
      say, "but these will cause cancer; but these are
      addictive."  That ladies and gentleman, I submit
      to you, is not Thomas Hardin's fault.
          Why did R -- why did R.J. Reynolds choose
      not to cooperate with the Surgeon General in
      1964 regarding its knowledge that its cigarettes
      were deadly and that nicotine was addictive?
      Again, that's not Thomas Hardin's fault.
          Why did R.J. Reynolds urge people to switch
      to filtered cigarettes rather than quitting when
      they knew that their cigarettes could cause
      cancer and that filters weren't even effective?
      Thomas Hardin didn't know that.  But he bought
      what they were telling him and he switched to
      filters.  That's not his fault.
          Why did R.J. Reynolds advertise menthol
      cigarettes as a health cigarette from the 1930s
      to the '50s when it knew cigarettes were deadly
      regardless of menthol or not, and sure enough, 4231
      we have Thomas Hardin switch to menthol
      cigarettes.  It's not his fault.  He was
      listening to what the tobacco company was
      telling him.
          Remember the -- this whole idea if the
      Tobacco Institute funded by R.J. Reynolds and
      other companies they maintained since 1980, they
      can't argue free choice when the smoker is
      addicted.  That's not Thomas Hardin's fault.
          Why did R.J. Reynolds choose not to take all
      the nicotine out of their cigarettes that they
      knew they had the capability of doing since
      1935?  That was their choice.  That's not
      Thomas Hardin's fault.  Cigarettes he had had
      nicotine in them and he got addicted.
          Why did R.J. Reynolds provide these false
      assurances to the public for almost 50 years
      with its efforts to do more research knowing
      that this TIRC and CTR was a front and an
      industry shield and they didn't tell the public?
      That's not Thomas Hardin's fault.  That's their
      fault.
          So the only possibility of Thomas Hardin's
      fault, if you want, is that maybe he just didn't
      try hard enough to quit smoking even though he 4232
      was in the throes of addiction.  Give him fault
      for that.  But what else is he at fault for?
      Sure, at some time he found out that cigarettes
      could cause cancer.  He found out that
      cigarettes could cause COPD because he got it.
      And he found out that cigarettes were addictive,
      the nicotine was addictive, because he tried to
      quit in 1996 and couldn't.  So put fault on him
      for maybe just not trying hard enough to quit
      earlier.  Maybe he would have been successful.
      We don't know.  No one can guarantee that.  So
      put the fault on him.  But I submit to you based
      on the evidence, ladies and gentleman, the
      percentage of fault, as I told you in opening
      statement, the lion's share of fault is on
      R.J. Reynolds, and I submit to you that Thomas
      Hardin's fault is 10 percent and R.J. Reynolds
      is 90, because their actions started when he was
      a boy in the '50s.  And it was too late when he
      knew by the '80s or the '90s of what cigarettes
      could do to him because he was already addicted.
          The next question then becomes damages,
      compensatory damages.  We filed this lawsuit
      because we're asking you to compensate Joyce
      Hardin for the loss of her husband, for her pain 4233
      and suffering and for her loss of his
      companionship from the time he became ill in
      1996 until he died in 2012, as well as into the
      future for 12 years after his death based on the
      mortality tables, because based on those tables
      she lost 12 years together with him because he
      had another 12 years to live but for his COPD.
          And the way I've done this, ladies and
      gentleman, is to break down the damages into
      three phases.  The first phase being when he was
      first diagnosed to 2005 when he was intubated in
      the hospital; the second phase being when he was
      getting progressively worse from 2005 to his
      death; and the third phase is future damages for
      the loss of companionship and Miss Hardin's pain
      and suffering.
          And as you recall, the evidence from the
      time of diagnosis, Thomas Hardin was still able
      to work until his retirement from his neck
      injury.  He was not going to get better because
      COPD does not get better.  You're not cured.
      It's a progressive disease.  And what he had
      during this time were bouts of coughing, fever.
      He'd have to go to the doctor and get
      antibiotics; his shortness of breath got worse. 4234
      When he retired you heard he was living more of
      a sedentary lifestyle.  And he had a makeshift
      bedroom eventually that he stayed in.  And by
      19- -- by 2005 you heard he had respiratory
      distress, was hospitalized and they had to
      intubate him and put a breathing tube in so that
      he would be able to breathe.
          And that's the first phase.  Not as bad as
      what the phase is that we're getting into, 2005
      to 2012.
          It's during that phase that he starts really
      getting progressively worse.  He's now on home
      oxygen after 2005.
          He's having more exacerbations of his COPD,
      where he's having to go to the hospital several
      times.
          He needs a scooter to ambulate, to be able
      to get around the house.
          His -- he's losing his mental sharpness and
      his memory, according to his wife.
          He has shortness of breath.  That's getting
      worse.
          He's diagnosed as being hypercapnic, which
      means he's retaining CO2, not O2, which means
      respiratory failure, which can kill you. 4235
          He spends more time sleeping than awake
      later on.
          He can't do the basics: shaving, showering,
      fixing meals.  You saw the Day in the Life
      video.
          He needs Hospice care, and on February 14th,
      2012, dies with his family present.
          This, I submit to you, is the worst time for
      Mr. Hardin and, therefore, Mrs. Hardin's pain
      and suffering.
          And finally we have from that time, we have
      from 2012 to 2014, for the 12 years that she
      won't have Mr. Hardin, that -- that loss of
      companionship.
          And so I want to talk about some of the
      facts that you heard while Thomas Hardin was
      sick with his COPD and eventually died.
          And you heard that this was the only man
      that Joyce Hardin knew.  She met him when she
      was 12 or 13 years old.  She married him at 15
      years old, after leaving school early, moved
      away from home.
          She said to you that he was a wonderful
      husband and a father and never had an unkind
      word to say about anybody.  They were married 4236
      for 50 years.  They were never separated or
      divorced or had thoughts of either.  They had
      thoughts about traveling upon retirement with a
      mobile home across the country, you heard.
          She was taking care of Mr. Hardin when he
      was no longer able to take care of himself.
          She was still working for a time and told
      you that she felt terrible because he was not --
      he was there and she wasn't, so she made sure
      that someone was always at the house with him.
          She eventually stopped going to church
      because she was so worried about him.  And she
      would sleep on the sofa bed in the makeshift
      bedroom except for one occasion, and she told
      you that was the occasion where he fell and had
      a laceration.
          Mrs. Hardin had a heart attack in 2010, and
      I'm not suggesting that was an effect from
      Thomas Hardin's COPD.  It's just a fact.  She
      had a heart attack and still had to take care of
      him.  She watched Mr. Hardin deteriorate until
      his death.  A Hospice pastor visited her to help
      with the grieving.  She kept a pair of his
      pajamas because it had Thomas's smell on them
      for a while after he died.  She visits his grave 4237
      to make sure it's maintained.  She is not
      remarried.  She has no romantic interest with
      anybody.
          You watched her testify and saw that it was
      very hard for her to keep her composure when she
      was talking about her husband, and she thinks
      about him every day to this day.
          She cried for three months after he died.
      And so this is the hardest part of the case,
      ladies and gentleman, because you're being asked
      to quantify an amount of money on noneconomic
      damages.  You're being asked to come up with an
      amount of money for pain and suffering.  And
      there's no instruction that the judge read to
      you that has a calculation as to how to do that.
      And I told you in jury selection that's my
      obligation to help you.  And so what I'm going
      to do is suggest to you a way to calculate, to
      come up with a monetary figure to compensate
      Joyce Hardin for her pain and suffering and loss
      of companionship.  And the way I'm going to
      suggest is based on units of time.  And why do I
      say units of time?  Because everything we do in
      life is based on units of time.  We sleep a
      certain amount of hours.  We work a certain 4238
      amount of hours.  We get paid for a certain
      amount of hours.  Life itself is really based on
      units of time.  And so what I have suggested is
      to utilize an hourly rate based on a daily
      hourly rate, and I say "suggestion" because you
      are not obligated to consider my method.  You
      might find that there is a better one that you
      want to use.  You might hear from the defense
      and they give you an alternative that you think
      is acceptable and better.  Ultimately the
      decision is what you want to do.
          And so by way of my suggestion, I want to
      show you what I have done by way of a summary.
      And it's based on three phases that we went over
      earlier.  It's based on the less serious phase
      from diagnosis to intubation.  It's based on the
      worst phase.  And it's based on the hopefully
      healing phase from 2012 to 2024.  And so you
      could see it gives you a low rate, a mid rate,
      and a high rate for each phase.
          So phase A is nine years.  That was from the
      diagnosis to intubation.  Phase B is 6.5 years
      when he left the hospital on oxygen.  Phase C is
      12 years, the time without Thomas after he died.
      And as you can see, there's a low rate for the 4239
      nine-year period of 30 hours, $30 an hour times
      24 hours in a day, times 365 days times nine
      years equals $2,365,200.  The midrange
      alternative is $40 an hour times 24 hours in a
      day, 365 days times nine years is $3,153,600.
      And the next one, again, based on $50 an hour,
      the same calculation, $3,942,000.  And then we
      have the midrange.  We have the mid -- the
      second phase, 6.5 years, starting with a low of
      $150 an hour, which is considerably higher
      because this was the worst time during Thomas
      Hardin's suffering that it had its effects on
      Joyce Hardin, her pain and suffering, her loss
      of companionship during this time when he was
      basically sleeping more than waking.  So you see
      $150 an hour times 24 hours in a day times 365
      days times 6.5 years equals $8,541,000.  The
      midrange of $200 an hour, I suggest with the
      same calculations equals $11,388,000, and the
      high range is $250 an hour with the same
      calculations amounting to $14,235,000.
          And, finally, the last 12 years where
      hopefully Miss Hardin's suffering will ease with
      time, we can only hope, but her loss of
      companionship will still be the same.  She won't 4240
      have her husband and so it is a significantly
      less amount of an hourly rate here, and you'll
      see the low hourly rate, $10 an hour times 24 a
      day times 365 days times 12 years equals
      $1,051,200.  The midrange is $15 an hour with
      the same calculations, $1,576,800, and finally
      at $20 an hour with the same calculations for 12
      years, $2,102,400.
          And in summary, for compensatory damages you
      can see then in different ranges, the low range
      in total is $11,957,400, the medium range is
      $16,018,400, and the high range is a total of
      $20,279,400.
          This is my suggestion to compensate
      Miss Hardin for her pain and suffering and her
      loss of companionship from her husband's illness
      until his death and in the future based on the
      mortality table.
          And finally, before I sit down, we are
      asking that you find that we have proved by
      clear and convincing evidence that punitive
      damages should be assessed against R.J. Reynolds
      in this case.  Remember, punitive damages are
      totally separate.  Punitive damages goes to the
      conduct of R.J. Reynolds, to punish 4241
      R.J. Reynolds and to defer others -- to deter
      others from future behavior.
          And so I've included some facts in support
      of our entitlement to punitive damages here.
      And as you could see, number one, R.J. Reynolds
      was aware of the importance of nicotine in their
      cigarettes as early as 1935 but took no action.
      R.J. Reynolds was aware in the 1950s that the
      nicotine in their cigarettes was addictive but
      chose not to warn the public.  This is not
      accident.  This is intentional.
          R.J. Reynolds was aware in the 1950s that
      the nicotine in their cigarettes was addictive
      but chose not to take nicotine out of their
      cigarettes.  This is intentional.  R.J. Reynolds
      was aware in the '50s that their cigarettes
      could cause cancer but chose not to warn the
      public.  Again, that's intentional conduct.
          R.J. Reynolds wanted smokers to become
      addicted to the nicotine in their cigarettes.
      Remember on the Claude Teague memo I showed you.
      He said, "Happily for us, cigarettes are a habit
      they can't break."
          R.J. Reynolds wanted people to rely on its
      advertising while concealing information about 4242
      the dangers of smoking and addictive nature of
      nicotine.  Again, that's an example of their
      intentional misconduct.
          R.J. Reynolds wanted people to smoke its
      filtered cigarettes instead of quitting despite
      knowing that filters were ineffective while
      failing to warn the public.
          And you could see the other examples I have
      here.  Finally, R.J. Reynolds throughout their
      campaign of denial put profits over people's
      lives.  And for these reasons, ladies and
      gentleman, I believe we have provided you proof
      by clear and convincing evidence that would
      allow you to assess punitive damages against
      R.J. Reynolds.
          I'm going to sit down and I'm going to have
      an opportunity to talk to you later, but I would
      ask that based on the evidence, you find
      R.J. Reynolds liable for its conduct in this
      case and you compensate Joyce Hardin for her
      loss of companionship, for her loss of
      companionship and for her pain and suffering.
      And I thank you very much.


          MR. KAISER:  Good afternoon, ladies and
      gentleman, my last time to talk to you.  Couple
      of observations before I start with my response.
      And that is, number one, just because you keep
      repeating yourself over and over and over again
      doesn't mean it's true or it's going to come
      true.
          Number two, if the case that we did prove by 4356
      a greater weight of the evidence was so flawed
      and such a failure, why did it take two hours
      for them to convince themselves that it was?
          You see, Mr. Bayuk, when he talked about
      addiction and said no to number one, that's the
      end of the case.  But they went on to try and
      convince you that it should be no, the answer
      should be no to all seven questions.  You see,
      they're not convinced because there is evidence
      that we showed you well beyond the greater
      weight of the evidence.
          And that leads me to something else.  There
      are two burdens of proof in this case.  When you
      get to whether or not we're entitled to punitive
      damages, that's by clear and convincing evidence
      and the judge already gave you an instruction.
          But everything else is greater weight of the
      evidence.  Greater weight of the evidence, more
      likely than not, are we more likely right than
      not, equal scales of justice, one little grain
      of sand tipping the scales, that's what that
      means.  It's a simple burden of proof and that's
      all we have to show.
          Now, a couple of things that I need to
      respond to.  Number one, you heard that this 4357
      case is only about Thomas Hardin the smoker.
      It's not about anybody else.  It's not about
      people.  It's not about R.J. Reynolds.  It's
      strictly about Thomas Hardin.  Well, that's not
      true.  That's not true, because, remember, the
      fact that we have proved class membership allows
      you to consider these things.  And this says
      defendants, R.J. Reynolds.  That's what that
      means.  R.J. Reynolds placed cigarettes on the
      market that were defective and unreasonably
      dangerous.  That doesn't say anything about
      Thomas Hardin.  Defendants, again,
      R.J. Reynolds, concealed or omitted material
      information.  That says about R.J. Reynolds and
      their conduct, not Thomas Hardin.  Defendants
      agreed to conceal with others material
      information.  You see, that's defendants.
      That's R.J. Reynolds.  That's not Thomas Hardin.
          The defendants were negligent.  That's
      R.J. Reynolds.  That's not Thomas Hardin.
          So when someone says this case is only about
      Thomas Hardin, I beg to differ.  You've got
      these findings, for one.  On the verdict form
      you're asked to apportion fault between Thomas
      Hardin and R.J. Reynolds.  So this case is a lot 4358
      more than just Thomas Hardin.  But there's a
      reason why they want you to think that, because
      they will actually win this case if they don't
      exist.  If they don't exist, they've won,
      because then it's just all the conduct on Thomas
      Hardin.  But we can't escape the fact that they
      do exist.  And they've existed for a long time.
          You know, this whole idea about advertising
      being legal, advertising is legal.  They
      advertised their cigarettes for a long time.
      From a 40-year period you heard they spent 240
      billion, with a B, dollars.  And they're able to
      do that.  It's legal.  What you can't do is
      conceal material information and lie.  See, what
      you can't do is when you advertise and you know
      that cigarettes cause cancer and they're
      addictive, what you can't do in the '50s is
      advertise your products and glamorize your
      products and you don't tell people, "By the way,
      these will kill you."  That's what you can't do.
          There was some argument that Mr. Hardin
      wasn't impaired, that he didn't have any
      clinical significant impairment, and yet you
      heard Dr. O'Brien tell you that the impairment
      was the man had COPD.  Now, whether Mr. Hardin 4359
      said he wasn't impaired, whether anyone said he
      wasn't impaired, Dr. O'Brien told you that.  And
      you know what, that wasn't challenged.  No one
      disputed that fact.  That was Dr. O'Brien saying
      this was the clinical impairment.  He had COPD,
      the man's work obligations would have been
      affected.  Even the fact he was retired, had he
      been not injured, where he had to retire he
      wouldn't have been able to work because of the
      impairment of the COPD, because it disabled him.
      That's the impairment.  And that was not
      challenged whatsoever.
          You heard Mr. Bayuk telling you millions of
      people quit smoking, but then Mr. Bayuk told you
      this case is only about Thomas Hardin.  Well,
      then why is he talking about millions of people
      who quit if this case is only about Thomas
      Hardin?
          50 percent of people that smoke just like
      Mr. Hardin are not addicted.  Why is -- why are
      we worried about 50 percent of other people if
      the case is only about Thomas Hardin?  Why are
      they throwing that out at you?  50 percent of
      the people, you heard that statistic in this
      trial, but you heard nothing else.  Where did 4360
      that come from?  Are those people really smoking
      two packs a day?  Are those people smokers for
      50 years?  Are those people maybe smokers that
      have had ten cigarettes in their lifetime?  No
      one ever testified to that.
          Dr. Flurry apparently said that it seemed
      like Mr. Hardin was unwilling to quit.  Well, I
      submit to you that Dr. Flurry was not qualified
      as an expert in addiction in this case and
      didn't render opinions on addiction in this
      case.  So I ask you, how is he qualified to
      render an opinion as to whether or not someone
      is going to or not going to quit smoking?  What
      does he base that opinion on?  He was not an
      expert witness on addiction.  He was a treating
      physician.
          There were no witnesses brought by the
      defense in this case to talk about Mr. Hardin
      having symptoms of COPD long before 1996.  They
      didn't bring any witness to tell you about that.
      What they did was they're relying somehow on
      plaintiff's expert witness in addiction,
      Dr. O'Brien, to tell you that Mr. Hardin must
      have been suffering from COPD for a long time.
      And not only that, but then they're going to use 4361
      Dr. O'Brien as a seer to say, "And he would have
      known he would have had symptoms of COPD and
      that they would have been related to smoking."
      That's a lot to say when you're an addiction
      expert.  See, where was Dr. O'Brien qualified to
      render an opinion about someone's COPD?  He
      didn't testify about that.  And again, that's a
      red herring.  You will not see one medical
      record if you search through them in this case
      that supports that.  There is not one medical
      record that will talk about one single symptom
      Mr. Hardin had going back in the '80s.  There is
      not one single medical record that you will see
      in this case or have seen in this case that
      tells you that Mr. Hardin had symptoms of which
      he was aware in the '80s.  There is not one
      medical record that you will see or have seen in
      this case that suggests to you in any way that
      Mr. Hardin would have known anything about COPD.
          What it was, whether it was caused from
      smoking, not one scintilla of evidence to
      support this defense of statute of limitations.
          What you have seen is an August 2nd, 1996
      medical report from Dr. Flurry.  And what does
      it say?  This is that same report they didn't 4362
      show to Mr. Hardin.  And what does it say?
      "Symptoms for six months."  That's it.  Not ten
      years, ladies and gentleman, six months.  I
      submit to you, that defense doesn't fly.  They
      have fallen woefully short of demonstrating the
      burden by a greater weight of the evidence that
      this is somehow barred by a statute of
      limitations.
          There was some suggestion that Mr. Hardin
      was well-aware of the Surgeon General's Report,
      and you had better bet that Mr. Hardin probably
      didn't go to the Library of Congress and read
      that '64 Surgeon General's Report.  In fact, if
      you remember Thomas Hardin's deposition, he was
      asked about the Surgeon General's Report.  No
      question whether or not he knew what it was.  He
      said, "I've heard of it," one time and yet the
      follow-up question was never asked, "When did
      you first hear about this report in 1964?"
      Never asked.  How could you draw an inference
      that he heard about it in 1964, '74, '84 or '94?
      We just don't know.  And what did Mr. Persons
      tell you?  Well, he knew from the '64 Surgeon
      General's Report that smoking was hazardous.
      Well, he didn't know it could cause cancer.  You 4363
      see, R.J. Reynolds knew, but Mr. Hardin still
      didn't know.  Even if you credit that he heard
      of the Surgeon General's Report and that
      cigarette smoking was hazardous to your health,
      that didn't tell him it was going to cause
      cancer or COPD or that nicotine in the
      cigarettes he was smoking was addictive.
      R.J. Reynolds knew that in '64 and '54 and
      didn't tell him.
          And there was some suggestion that
      Mr. Hardin knew about the dangers of smoking in
      the 1970s.  That's what Mr. Persons told you.
      And he said something about Thirl Wilson.  There
      was not one shred of evidence, folks, not one
      single shred of evidence in this case that you
      heard or saw that suggested in any way that
      Mr. Hardin had heard anything in the 1970s.
      Nothing.
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I have to object.
      That's a misstatement of the evidence.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Ladies and gentleman,
      just remember, you are the judges of facts.  You
      heard the evidence and it will be up to you to
      believe or not believe whatever evidence you did
      hear during this trial.  And what the lawyers 4364
      say is not evidence.  Go ahead.
          MR. KAISER:  It's very interesting that
      there were expert witnesses called in this case
      on addiction, Dr. O'Brien and Giakas, and now
      the defense wants to turn around and use them
      for all sorts of other expert subject matter
      areas.  They want to use Dr. O'Brien for an
      expert in reliance and advertising.  And
      remember I asked him, "Are you an expert in
      advertising?"  He said, "Of course not."  But
      they won't ask him whether or not from his
      review of the record he found any instances
      where Thomas Hardin relied on advertising.  How
      does he know?  He's an addiction expert, not a
      reliance expert.  And he told you from the
      witness stand he wasn't looking for examples of
      whether anyone relied on advertising.
          You know from the facts, though, that Thomas
      Hardin did rely on the advertising.
          And somehow R.J. Reynolds' scientists
      thought filters were safer.  Do you remember
      Dr. Proctor testified that the president and CEO
      for American Tobacco for which R.J. Reynolds is
      now responsible, refused to sell and make
      filtered cigarettes for a few years.  Why? 4365
      Because he said, "That's just a public relations
      gimmick and they're not effective."
          And he thought filters were safer?  They
      knew filters were not effective and they knew it
      was just a gimmick.
          And Harry Reasoner, you saw that last report
      from Harry Reasoner.  What did he tell you?
      Yeah, it's an adult responsibility to smoke, an
      adult responsibility, not a boy responsibility
      or a kid.  And that's what happened in this
      case.  And let's go back and talk about
      addiction and the testimony you heard.  And
      first of all, you need to find out who was the
      real expert in this case.  Who had the
      qualifications in this case to render an
      opinion?  And when you look at it, you see
      there's no comparison between the two.  You see
      on the one hand, a man who's knighted by the
      French government, who's been a keynote speaker
      all across the world, who's been teaching since
      William Giakas was in diapers, whose credentials
      are so far more superior to Dr. Giakas that
      that's why Dr. Giakas when he took the stand,
      what did he say?  "Oh, I see patients.  I
      don't -- I don't do research.  I don't do 4366
      research."  Why?  Because he knew his
      qualifications pale in comparison to
      Dr. O'Brien's.  You could just see and remember
      the testimony.
          Well, who was Dr. Giakas?  Says he treats
      patients.  But you really think that's true?
      This is a man who admitted he speaks on behalf
      of pharmaceutical companies.  This is a man who
      also does forensic consulting work.  And this is
      a man who's testified and he's been employed on
      behalf of R.J. Reynolds since 2007 and in the
      five cases he's testified in for R.J. Reynolds
      not one occasion has he ever taken the stand and
      said a smoker was addicted.  That's who he is.
      He is a professional witness who just so happens
      to be a psychiatrist.
          Dr. O'Brien is a world-renowned psychiatrist
      who happens to have testified on two occasions
      in tobacco cases in 50 years of practice.
          Dr. Giakas is a man who by his own admission
      in 2007 was contacted by lawyers representing
      R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.  They asked him
      to review documents on different cases.  And it
      wasn't until three years later that he first
      testified.  Well, you know why?  Because it was 4367
      Dr. Giakas who said they sent him articles on
      addiction to read because he hadn't read them.
          They created and packaged and brought
      Dr. Giakas here as an expert in addiction.  And
      by the way, you didn't hear one word from that
      witness that he was ever board certified in
      addiction psychiatry.  What you did hear is that
      for 20 years Charles O'Brien was board certified
      in addictive psychiatry and didn't re-up
      recently.  And he said they even asked him to
      write the questions for the exam.  And he said
      it wasn't necessary for him to re-up.  So when
      you look at the qualifications, Dr. Giakas, I
      submit to you, he pales in comparison to
      Dr. O'Brien.  We know who the real addiction
      expert was.
          And we can also look at some testimony.
      Let's take a look at the good Dr. Giakas's
      testimony.  You remember when he testified on
      direct examination, he was glib and looking at
      you folks and talking and giving nice little
      speeches.  And then when I started
      cross-examining him, all of a sudden he started
      not being so direct.  And wouldn't answer the
      question.  Remember that?  And getting a little 4368
      nervous.  And then all of a sudden the next day
      he came in and started making his speeches again
      when I was asking him questions.  Again, not
      answering the question I asked him.  How many
      times did I have to ask him or say to him, "I
      didn't ask that question, did I?"  But he didn't
      care what the question was.  He just kept
      wanting to get in his answer and keep repeating
      his mantra.  It was personal choice behavior.
      It was his choice.  I didn't see any instances
      of him climbing the walls and screaming to the
      world that "I'm in distress and I need help."
      Who's usually the last one to know they have a
      problem?  Who do you think is the last one to
      usually know?  The person that has the problem.
      Everyone else around the person knows but that
      person.  That's what normally happens.  And yet
      he didn't go screaming, climbing the walls
      saying he needs help.  That meant he wasn't
      addicted and wasn't impaired.
          Let's take a look at some testimony, and
      talk about impeachment.  When the man started
      talking about animal studies, I said, "Wait a
      minute, you don't look at animal studies, do
      you?"  "Oh, yes I do."  Well, I had to refer him 4369
      to his deposition testimony.  "I do occasionally
      read animal studies."  He reviewed the
      deposition.  And I said, "You had an opportunity
      to read the deposition?"  And he said, "I
      spotted that error after the fact
      unfortunately."
          And then he went on.  He read it, reviewed
      it and still didn't see the mistake that he had
      said, "I don't read animal studies."
          It was only when he was preparing for this
      trial for the first time that he realized he
      made a mistake in previous testimony where he
      said, "I don't read animal studies."  Well,
      which is it?  When it's more convenient here to
      say "I do" or when it was more convenient in the
      past when he said, "I didn't"?
          I asked him whether he agreed with the
      statistic:  "80 percent of individuals using
      tobacco attempt to quit at some time, but 60
      percent relapse within a week and less than 5
      percent remain abstinent for life."  And he
      said, "I don't agree with that."  "Let's look at
      some of your testimony," I said to him.  We went
      back to prior testimony.
          And what did he say? 4370
          "There are definitely people who will go
      back to smoking, and I do agree with those
      stats."  Same exact statistics that I read him
      earlier.  I definitely -- he agrees with those
      stats.  Then what does he say?  "I've gone back
      and looked at that and my agreeing was a
      mistake."
          Same thing.  When he read the deposition --
      when he read his testimony -- or this was one
      where he said, "Well, you know, in trial, the
      pressure of trial, you just don't know.  You
      make mistakes."  This is another instance.  It
      was more convenient here, but in the past it
      wasn't.  He's not going to agree with that
      statistic because look at that, only 5 percent
      of the people that quit of those millions remain
      abstinent.
          Remember Dr. O'Brien was telling you that
      the criteria he wrote includes loss of control
      and that addiction is a loss of control.
      Dr. Giakas in prior testimony, "And just because
      somebody quits smoking does not mean they were
      not addicted, correct?"
          And he agreed, "Correct."
          "It does mean that their ability to control 4371
      the use of the substance is affected, does it
      not?"
          And his answer, "If they are addicted, yes."
          -- right?
          "And then, 'Okay.  In fact, if they're
      addicted, then their ability to control the
      substance is reduced as a -- generally speaking,
      than if they're not addicted, correct?'
          "And what did you say?
          "Correct."
          But then he added, "And as I've learned at
      how attorneys look at these things is the
      reality is you can have a not-a-loss-of-control
      issue and still be addicted.  I'm kind of
      broadening this out.  Loss of control is not a
      requirement.
          "What's a requirement is that you have
      impairment of functioning.  So even if you don't
      have the loss of control and you have the seven
      other criteria, we might still say you're
      addicted.
          "You agree with that testimony?  Did I read
      it correctly?
          "Well, I did say that at the time, exactly."
          Well, so now he came in this courtroom and 4372
      said, "No, being addicted doesn't mean you've
      lost your free will or your control."
          Well, which is it?  In the past when he
      admitted to it or when he was on the stand and
      denying it?
          See, that's another example of impeachment.
      What's the truth from this man?
          You will remember this.  On direct
      examination, Dr. Giakas was asked, "Well, do you
      remember there was some reference in
      Mr. Hardin's deposition where he said something
      about being ill?"
          He goes, "I do remember that," and he went
      on this long-winded speech about what he meant
      by that.
          "And do you remember what he told you?
          "No.  I just considered that, with the
      nicotine patch, he had gotten nauseous.  And
      I've never heard patients talk about feeling
      ill, so I just assumed it meant that he had just
      worn the patch, like he had done in the past,
      and he got ill."
          And then he was shown the deposition when
      Mr. Hardin specifically said, "She knew, my
      wife, how ill I was," and defined it.  He 4373
      defined it in the deposition.
          So when I was reading that, Dr. Giakas
      acknowledged it, that he had defined it.
          And what did he say, the old man,
      Mr. Hardin?  Remember?  "Somebody getting on
      your nerves when you ain't got that cigarette,
      you want one."
          And what did Dr. Giakas say?  "And I saw
      that, absolutely."
          Well, which is it?  His made-up explanation
      for what this guy meant when he said "My wife
      knew how ill I was" or the truth?
          Because the truth suggests withdrawal, ill,
      like you're getting on someone's nerves because
      you've got to have that cigarette.  He certainly
      was not going to admit to that because if he
      admits to that, that's criteria on withdrawal,
      another instance.  This time he made this up of
      whole cloth.
          And, finally, in response to a very good
      question -- and it came from a juror.  None of
      us asked it.  And that was:  "What defines a
      real quit attempt?"
          And look how long the answer was.  He did
      everything but answer the question.  You could 4374
      read that.  Everything but answer the question.
          "What's a real quit attempt?"
          Well, first of all, there's nothing in the
      DSM-5 that talks about a real quit attempt.  So
      the answer would have been, "Well, I could tell
      you what it is, but it's not a requirement in
      the DSM-5.  You can't find it there.
          "What's a serious quit attempt?"
          Same answer.  "You don't find it in the
      DSM-5.  What you find for that criteria is
      unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control
      smoking."
          So even though this is totally irrelevant,
      do you think it really took a page for him to
      answer the question?
          And when you read it.  You realize he didn't
      answer it.  He's bringing everything back to
      Mr. Hardin as opposed to answering the question
      of what constitutes a real quit attempt.
          The reason he couldn't answer it is because
      that's not part of the criteria.  He had to
      think on his feet, and that's the answer that he
      gave you, ladies and gentleman.
          You know, you keep hearing about Thomas
      Hardin just wasn't addicted; he just smoked when 4375
      he was dying of COPD because he enjoyed it.
          And then you hear at the same time, this was
      a man who was stubborn.  He did things he wanted
      to do, and he was going to do them.
          And you've heard me ask this before, and I'm
      going to say it again:  If this was a man who
      was set in his ways and called stubborn and he
      simply liked to smoke regardless of developing
      COPD and dying in the process, why isn't this
      stubborn man who wanted to do things his own way
      say to those people who were telling him to
      quit, "Hey, leave me alone.  I want to smoke"?
          He didn't say it.  Why didn't he say it?
      Because his wife, Joyce Hardin, said, "He didn't
      want to die."  He didn't want to die.
          This was a man who was smoking cigarettes
      day after day, dying a progressive disease, and
      he's dying and he's smoking, and they're going
      to tell you that he's smoking because he just
      liked it.
          And by the way, no one came into court and
      said, "Well, it sometimes takes 45 or 50 years
      of smoking two packs a day before you're
      addicted."
          The only reason Dr. O'Brien talked about 4376
      when he would have realized he was addicted is
      when he said, "Well, this is when he quit."
          He in no uncertain terms said, "Well, he
      wouldn't have been addicted 45 years earlier."
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I object again.
      That's not in evidence.
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentleman, again, you
      are the trier of the fact.  You are only to
      consider evidence, and you know what evidence
      that is.  And when you do go back to deliberate,
      you will be given all the evidence to review as
      well.  Thank you.
          MR. KAISER:  Do you really think -- and what
      did Dr. O'Brien say?  The toughest patients that
      he treats are the ones that start when they're
      young.  The kids that start when they're young
      are the toughest ones to treat.
          So do you really think it took Thomas Hardin
      40 years before he was addicted after he got his
      disease or when he first became addicted?
      That's ridiculous and hogwash.
          Now, let's take a look.  Doses of nicotine
      this man would have taken into his lungs.  This
      is a man who, for 50 years of smoking, if you
      assume he didn't smoke two packs, just a pack 4377
      and a half a day, and the average puffs for a
      cigarette is ten, just like you heard in this
      courtroom, for 50 years, 365 days times 30
      cigarettes at ten puffs, that's 5,475,000 doses
      of nicotine, every time that man puffed on a
      cigarette, every time he puffed on a cigarette,
      he took in a dose of nicotine, an addictive
      drug.
          Do you think that maybe this guy was
      addicted after taking 5,475,000 doses of
      something that we know is addictive?  Or do you
      think maybe he just liked it and it was a habit?
          You don't have to find that there's been any
      proof from that witness stand that nicotine is
      addictive, because that's already been found for
      you.  That's not something you have to do.
          But when you consider 5,475,000 doses of
      nicotine, you could rest comfortably that we
      have proven by a greater weight of the evidence
      that Mr. Hardin was addicted.  And that's why
      Mr. Hardin couldn't quit until he was told in no
      uncertain terms in 2005, after he was intubated
      with a tube going down his throat to breathe for
      him, "If you don't stop now, you're going to
      die." 4378
          And that finally let him hit rock bottom and
      stop.  Even Dr. Giakas said, "Sometimes that's
      what it takes, hitting rock bottom."
          Well, that was the man's rock bottom.  And
      thankfully, he was able to quit in 2005.
          And finally, we've known since 1980 that
      R.J. Reynolds and other tobacco companies have
      taken the position that they can't defend
      continued smoking as "free choice," as they call
      it today, if the person was addicted.
          That's since 1980, and they're coming in
      here today saying, "Oh, it was just his choice
      to smoke.  If he was addicted and you find he
      was addicted, his free choice was compromised."
      That's their own position.
          There was this suggestion that somehow all
      of this information was available to Mr. Hardin
      for years and years.  So he would necessarily
      have known that this information about the
      health risk of smoking was available to him.
          And remember when Dr. Proctor testified and
      I finished up on my redirect examination of
      Dr. Proctor by asking him one general question,
      and I kept repeating it.
          And that question was:  If for hundreds of 4379
      years that information that smoking was harmful
      and nicotine was addictive was in the public
      record, I prefaced each time, and I would say,
      then why was there a need to publicize the
      mouse-painting studies in 1953?
          And Dr. Proctor's answer was, "Because
      people didn't know."
          And I asked the same question again, and I
      said, "Well, then why did cigarette sales rise
      after 1953?"
          And he said, "Because people were not
      informed."
          And then, "Why were 50 percent of all
      doctors in the United States smoking in 1960?"
          Same reason again, "Because people didn't
      know.  And the message that was put out by the
      tobacco companies was ineffective."
          And I asked the same question again, "Why
      were four of seven astronauts on the '64 Mercury
      mission regular smokers?"
          Same answer, "Because people didn't know.
          "Then why did President Kennedy form a
      committee to investigate the link between health
      risks and cigarette smoking?"
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I have to -- none of 4380
      this is in evidence.
          THE COURT:  Let me see the attorneys
      sidebar.
SIDEBAR CONFERENCE:
    (The following proceedings were had before the
    Court outside the presence of the jury:)
          THE COURT:  I mean, he's going to say it's
      argument.  So that's -- what else are you going
      to say with respect to --
          MR. KAISER:  I'm going say most of it is in
      evidence because I was allowed to do it.  There
      was only one or two.  In fact, you said, go
      ahead, ask for two -- you could ask two more.
      But it is argument at this point.
          MR. BAYUK:  Well, my objection to this was
      in Dr. Proctor's deposition (sic) Mr. Kaiser
      maybe asked four or five of these questions, and
      then Your Honor shut it down.  So the rest of
      his board is not argument.  He's telling them
      what Dr. Proctor said, which is not in evidence
      and that's not argument.
          MR. KAISER:  I'll change the statement and
      say something else.
          THE COURT:  Yeah, I think you need to
      because I don't remember all of it.  That's why 4381
      I asked us to go sidebar.  Okay?
END OF SIDEBAR CONFERENCE
    (The following proceedings were had before the
    Court and jury:)
          MR. KAISER:  And also, regardless of whether
      all of these were asked to Dr. Proctor, what's
      important is this:  These are facts.
          And the question, again, "If everyone had
      known for hundreds of years that smoking was bad
      and nicotine was addictive, then why did it take
      until 1966 before cautions were placed on
      packages of cigarettes?
          "Well, the evidence shows because the
      tobacco industry's response was working and
      people weren't informed.
          "Why was there a need to change the warnings
      in 1970 and 1985?
          "Same reason.  And plus, the 1967 Federal
      Trade Commission report, the '66 cautions were
      woefully ineffective.
          "Why were there decades of news coverage on
      anything to do with smoking and health?"
          Remember what Dr. Proctor said?
          "They're called newspapers, not oldspapers.
      You don't publicize something, you don't give 4382
      media attention to something when it's known.
      You cover something when it's unknown.
          "Why was there a need for Bill Talman to
      appear in a public service announcement in 1966,
      the guy from Perry Mason?
          "Because people didn't know.
          "Why were one-third of all doctors in the
      United States smoking cigarettes in 1970, still
      a third of all doctors?
          "Why?  Because the message still wasn't
      getting out.
          "Why did the tobacco industry believe that
      consumers knew very little about nicotine and
      the fact it was a poison?"
          Remember, in 1978, we have that memorandum.
      That's what it said.  People didn't know.  The
      denialist message was successful, as I showed
      you earlier today.
          "Why was there a need for Yul Brynner to
      appear in a public service announcement in 1955,
      this famous actor in the 1950s and '60s that
      Thomas Hardin thought was a baseball player?
      Why did it take until the 1980s where there were
      restrictions or where people could smoking
      cigarettes? 4383
          "Because people weren't informed.
          "Why did it take the Surgeon General until
      1988 to report that nicotine in cigarettes was
      addictive?  If this has been known for hundreds
      of years, why did it take until 1988?
          "Why didn't it take until 1982 before
      cigarette consumption peaked?  If all this
      information was out there and everyone
      supposedly knew, how come cigarette sales kept
      skyrocketing?
          And, finally, "If all this information was
      out there for all these years, why is there a
      need for historians of science like Dr.
      Proctor?"
          And like Dr. Proctor said, "Because history
      is often forgotten, and that's what a person
      like him does for a living.  They bring back
      history that would otherwise have been
      forgotten."
          And in this case, the history of all this
      knowledge that you heard about had been
      forgotten.  And when it was brought back, it was
      counteracted by the message from the tobacco
      companies.
          And we also know what Thomas Hardin did 4384
      know, and you heard the evidence, it does not
      matter that in 1950 schools in Alabama were
      supposed to teach classes about smoking.
          What you heard here from Thomas Hardin's own
      mouth in the 1950s when he was in school, he was
      taught nothing about smoking.
          His parents never said anything that smoking
      was bad, much less caused cancer.  They told him
      he was too young to smoke, but when he was 15,
      he was smoking in the house.  Never learned
      anything in the church about smoking being bad,
      much less causing cancer.
          In 1966, when the cautions went on the packs
      of cigarettes, what did that tell him?
          It told him that cigarettes may be hazardous
      or they may not be hazardous.  Didn't tell them
      him what hazardous meant.  Didn't tell him it
      was going to cause lung cancer.  Didn't tell him
      it was going to be addictive so one day when he
      tried to quit, he wouldn't be able to.  That's
      what those cautions told him.
          What did he know in the '80s?  Where is any
      evidence he knew anything in the '80s?
          Now we know he knew things in the '90s.  And
      the defense wants you to believe that it's 4385
      Thomas Hardin's word you have to believe.  He
      didn't rely on anything.  He didn't see
      anything.
          Well, if they're taking that approach, what
      else did he say?  When was the first time you
      realized cigarettes were bad for your health?
          And what did he say?
          "1996, when I was diagnosed."
          If you're going to take the defense's word
      for it and listen to their argument that you
      just got to listen to what Thomas Hardin said,
      well, then why not listen to what Thomas Hardin
      said in 1996?  Didn't know smoking was bad for
      him.
          Now, this is a man -- you saw his
      deposition.  You saw the way he answered
      questions.  They were repeatedly, not just one
      time, repeatedly going back to the same subject
      matter and asking him, "Did you rely on any
      ads?"
          And they'd come back to it again, "Did you
      rely on any ads?"
          Then they'd suggest an answer for him.  "You
      didn't rely on this ad, did you?"
          First of all, do we know even if he knew 4386
      what it meant to rely on something?  Was that
      ever explained to him?
          Now, you saw his demeanor in that
      deposition.  You saw how he answered questions.
      And you know what else?  This has come up in the
      closing argument of the defense about this
      dementia.
          And you'll see in evidence, there's a
      medical record from 2010, and this was another
      explanation that Dr. Giakas gave.  But this says
      what?
          First of all, the patient is an extremely
      poor historian, especially when his age is taken
      into account.  A historian about the facts.
          "Psychiatric:  Extremely poor historian, as
      above.  Distant.  The patient constantly had to
      be asked the same question."
          Now, this is before his deposition.
          "Assessment and plan:  Poor historian.
      Whether the patient has underlying dementia or
      not is not clear.  But it certainly would appear
      that the patient does have some dementia."
          This is in 2010 before his deposition.  And,
      of course, Dr. Giakas's explanation is, Oh,
      well, he had pneumonia.  Of course, he's going 4387
      to have dementia because that's what pneumonia
      causes.  Really?  That's an addiction specialist
      telling you about pneumonia.
          This is the medical record telling you about
      this man's ability to remember things as a
      historian and the fact that there might be some
      dementia.  And, yet, they would go back to the
      same subject matter.  This was a deposition for
      two days, and they kept going to the same
      subject matter.
          "Well, let's talk about the warnings again,
      Mr. Hardin.  When did you first see these 1966
      warnings?  It was at that time, right?"
          There's not one shred of proof that
      Mr. Hardin saw warnings in 1966.  He didn't know
      when he saw them.  He didn't give a date when he
      saw them.  Remember all he said was "hazardous
      to your health."  When did he see them?  Nobody
      knows.
          But the most important thing when we now get
      to comparative fault is something that the
      defendants will not and cannot address, and I
      did address it already, and that's this, all
      they want to dwell on is this idea that
      Mr. Hardin 40 or 50 years while he was smoking, 4388
      after he was smoking didn't make enough serious
      attempts to quit.  And they keep dwelling on
      that.  He made a couple of attempts but waited
      nine more years until he was able to quit, which
      meant he could have quit any time in his life,
      but they ignore the fact, they will not address
      the fact that you've got to start when
      Mr. Hardin was a kid and never had a cigarette
      in his mouth.
          See, they won't talk about when he started
      because that's their fault.  That is R.J.
      Reynolds's fault, and that's why they can't talk
      about it.
          Remember when I put that board up and I kept
      asking question and question?  When they knew
      about the health risks in the '50s, why didn't
      they tell anybody?  When they knew it was
      addictive in the '50s why didn't they tell
      anybody.  When they knew it was dangerous in the
      '50s, why didn't they put warnings on their
      cigarettes?  When they knew it was addictive,
      why didn't they put warnings on their cigarettes
      in the '50s and the early '60s?
          They can't respond to that because if they
      do, they're going to have to admit they were 4389
      putting profits over health.  And they're going
      to have to admit that's not Thomas Hardin's
      fault.
          Thomas Hardin here in 1952, this is a boy.
      This is the person they're talking about.  This
      is the person that they had in their sights in
      1953 and 1954 when they decided to counteract
      negative messages about cigarettes.  This is the
      person they wanted to smoke a lot of their
      cigarettes.  And he did.  This is the person
      they wanted to get addicted, and he got
      addicted.  This is the person they wanted to
      smoke a lot of cigarettes for a long time.  And
      he did everything they wanted him to do.
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, I'm sorry to
      interrupt.  There's no evidence of any of this
      in the case.  I move to strike all of it.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. BAYUK:  And I also would like to make a
      motion, Your Honor.
          MR. KAISER:  Now, we'll see the 1972 Roper
      proposal when Claude Teague of R.J. Reynolds
      says, "Happily for us, cigarettes are a habit
      that they can't quit."  What does that mean?
      That they recognized that they were selling 4390
      cigarettes that were addicting people and they
      were happy about it.
          What did Robert Heimann say in his
      deposition?  "We wanted people to rely on our
      advertising.  We didn't care how much people
      smoked."  That's what they're saying.  That's
      the evidence in this case.  And so you have to
      go with the starting point, when this boy in
      1953 had just started to smoke, wasn't even
      addicted, hadn't even smoked a pack a day
      regularly yet.  And so that's what you have to
      do.
          They want to just talk about quitting
      behavior, but the problem is you can't argue
      choice when the person is addicted.
          So if we look at the comparative fault, you
      see quitting behavior and starting behavior,
      smoking initiation.  And they keep talking about
      motivation.  Remember Dr. Giakas, you know,
      wanting to judge him.  "He just wasn't
      motivated, didn't want to try, didn't want to
      quit."
          Well, from the evidence in this case, all
      right, did you see or hear one scintilla of
      evidence that anyone actually counseled Thomas 4391
      Hardin on how to formulate a plan to quit if
      that's what you had to do?  You will not see one
      medical record.  You did not hear from one
      witness that said, "We told him how to formulate
      the plan.  He just refused to follow it."  No
      one identified his cues for him so that he would
      know what prompted his smoking.  Didn't hear any
      evidence about that.
          You heard Dr. O'Brien say, "Well, that's a
      good first step because when people are aware of
      the cues it helps them quit."  You haven't seen
      one medical record where it indicates that any
      doctor identified his cue so that it would help
      him identify them and know that he should not
      react when he would see a cue.
          There is nothing in the medical records as
      to what was said to Thomas Hardin to help him
      become motivated to quit.  You haven't seen one
      medical record that actually said what the
      doctors told him other than their opinion, they
      don't think he's serious enough to quit.  And
      these aren't addiction experts.  These are
      treating physicians and a lung doctor.
          What did RJR do to counsel Thomas Hardin how
      to quit?  What information did they give him in 4392
      the '50s?  Zero.  They got him started.
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, same objection.  And
      I renew a motion.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. KAISER:  Their advertising created a
      climate in the '50s and '40s where it was
      normalized, where smoking was glamorized, where
      they pitched their products with athletes, and
      we know that Thomas Hardin saw them.
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor --
          THE COURT:  Let's go sidebar.
SIDEBAR CONFERENCE:
    (The following proceedings were had before the
    Court outside the presence of the jury:)
          MR. BAYUK:  Your Honor, this is now -- this
      is now repeatedly putting facts before the jury
      that aren't in evidence that Your Honor has
      excluded.
          THE COURT:  Yeah, this I remember
      specifically.
          MR. BAYUK:  I mean, I have -- I'm going
      to --
          MR. KAISER:  What was that?
          MR. BAYUK:  This is about youth.
          THE COURT:  It's the youth poster.  It's the 4393
      youth.
          MR. BAYUK:  It's -- you're targeting --
          MR. KAISER:  I did not say one word about
      any age or youth.
          MR. BAYUK:  He said -- He said they targeted
      this boy.  This is who was in their sights.
          THE COURT:  Absolutely.
          MR. KAISER:  We're talking about the '50s.
      The man's hardly --
          THE COURT:  You talked about --
          MR. BAYUK:  You said '52.  You showed a
      school picture.
          THE COURT:  The record is very clear.  The
      record is very clear that you're saying you've
      got to look at the boy.  It's clear.  The record
      could be read back.
          MR. KAISER:  It does.  I might have said one
      word that --
          THE COURT:  It's quite clear that the boy is
      not nine years old, not a 20 year old.
          MR. KAISER:  And it doesn't matter what --
      it -- so I can't say what age he was when he
      started?  You precluded me from saying that they
      targeted youth, and I didn't say one word about
      targeting youth. 4394
          MR. BAYUK:  That's exactly what he said.
          MR. KAISER:  I didn't use the word "target."
          THE COURT:  But it's clearly implied.  I'm
      going to caution you to stop.  You're going
      against my ruling.
          MR. BAYUK:  And I have to --
          MR. KAISER:  I'm not going to go against
      your ruling.
          THE COURT:  You are.
          MR. BAYUK:  It's argument under appeal.  I
      mean, I have to move for a mistrial.  I don't
      know if -- I'd understand if Your Honor wants to
      defer on it, but, I mean --
          THE COURT:  I'm going to defer on it.
END OF SIDEBAR CONFERENCE
    (The following proceedings were had before the
    Court and jury:)
          MR. KAISER:  You know, by the time the
      warnings and the cautions were placed on the
      packs of cigarettes, Thomas Hardin had been
      smoking for almost 20 years.  For almost 20
      years he had been smoking for every day of his
      lifetime.  That's when they're saying, "He
      should have been able to quit any time after
      that.  It was just his personal responsibility." 4395
      You know, who else's responsibility is it to do
      anything in life?  That doesn't say a word.
          Now his smoking initiation, there was no
      mention of any health risk and addictive nature
      of nicotine while R.J. Reynolds advertised its
      products in the '40s and '50s.  We know that.
      We know that they glamorized through their mass
      marketing efforts and helped normalize
      cigarettes.  We know that.
          We know that R.J. Reynolds manufactured and
      sold a defective product.  That's an Engle
      finding.  Thomas Hardin didn't.
          We know that R.J. Reynolds was negligent.
      Thomas Hardin wasn't.
          We know that R.J. Reynolds wanted people
      like Thomas Hardin to rely on the advertising.
      That's what Robert Heimann said.
          We know that R.J. Reynolds wanted people
      like Thomas Hardin instead of quitting smoking
      to switch to filtered cigarettes.  And, of
      course, they didn't come out and say "filters
      are safer."  But Dr. Proctor said they were
      marketed as a better alternative without
      admitting that their products were unsafe.  And
      that's why you have all of these people 4396
      switching to filtered cigarettes, leaving hardly
      any people smoking unfiltered cigarettes in a
      very short time.
          And it was R.J. Reynolds that concealed
      information and lied to the public about the
      health risk of smoking for 50 years, not
      Thomas Hardin.  So that's how you have to
      compare fault in this case.  You don't just look
      in isolation a period of time when he had been
      smoking for 50 years.
          I also want to go back now to this
      deposition and let you be the judge.  Because
      just a little snippet I want to play for you,
      and you can gauge whether or not this was a guy
      who had all his faculties to be able to answer
      the questions and rely on his -- on his memory.
    (Video clip was played and taken down to the best
     of the reporter's ability as follows:)
BY MR. COGAN:
    Q.    The first warning appeared in 1966.  Do you
recall seeing the warnings when they first appeared?
    A.    I don't remember what year it was that --
    Q.    But I take it you do remember seeing those
warnings; is that right?
    A.    (No response.) 4397
    Q.    Is there something about my question that's
confusing you, Mr. Hardin?
    A.    I was --
    Q.    The first --
         (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. KAISER:  And, of course, Dr. Giakas's
      explanation was he was short of breath and had
      problems breathing.  That explains that.  You
      didn't see him having any problems breathing or
      being short of breath there.  There was an a
      three-minute pregnant pause in response to a
      simple question.  And you saw how many times
      that happened during the deposition.  Actions
      speak louder than words.
          When you hear his testimony he didn't know
      if he relied on something; he didn't think he
      relied on something.  Remember the facts.
      Remember what Dr. Proctor said, "Winston tastes
      good like a cigarette should.  Rather fight than
      switch."  This man said the same exact thing,
      which means what?  He saw the ads.
          Dr. Proctor tells you these billboards had
      athletes.  They were pitching athletes.  They
      invented baseball cards.
          And what does Mr. Hardin say?  Yeah, I saw 4398
      billboards, but it didn't say anything about
      being addictive.
          And who was Yul Brynner?  A baseball player.
          And then when you talk about filters,
      pitching filter cigarettes as an alternative to
      non-filters.  And what did Thomas Hardin say?
      He said that he switched to filters because they
      were better for him.  Where is that coming from?
      That's coming from the tobacco industry, the
      people that were selling the cigarettes, the
      people that wanted other people to smoke
      filtered cigarettes.
          As far as compensatory damages are
      concerned, you didn't hear one word about an
      alternative calculation for you to consider.  So
      that's -- comes down between my suggestion or
      any suggestion that you want to employ that you
      think might be better.  That's what we're left
      with at this time.
          And, finally, on the punitive damages,
      remember, every instance I showed you on this
      board went to R.J. Reynolds' intent, not
      negligence, but intent.  They acted willfully
      and intentionally without regard for human life
      when they didn't tell people what they knew back 4399
      in the '40s, back in the '50s when Thomas Hardin
      was just starting to smoke.  And that is why you
      should assess punitive damages in this case
      because we've proved by clear and convincing
      evidence.
          This is a woman who, on the one hand, knew
      her husband in the days when he was vibrant and
      healthy and then had to resort to taking care of
      him when he was basically sleeping more than
      waking while he was suffering from COPD and
      ultimately dying.  I ask you, ladies and
      gentleman, after considering the evidence in
      this case you find R.J. Reynolds liable and you
      compensate Joyce Hardin for her pain and
      suffering and for her loss of companionship that
      continues into the future for the next 12 years
      and that you assess punitive damages in this
      case.  And I thank you.
