MS. PARKER: Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the Court, and counsel and Mr. Hargroves.
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
I think that there is only one thing that I agree with what Mr. Acosta said, and that is I do want to join him in thanking you for your service
as jurors. We know that you have been here over two weeks now. And we know you have been away from your regular routines. And we have been able to see. You-all have been so diligent and you-all have been taking notes and asking questions and paying attention, even when maybe some of it was not the most riveting part of the case.
And we do appreciate that very much. And I want to express my appreciation and also the appreciation of R.J. Reynolds and our entire trial team. So thank you for that.
Now, as I said, you have been here over two weeks, and you have heard a lot. You have heard a lot of different documents and a lot of evidence and all. But I think that I can boil all that down to what you really need to know to answer the questions on the verdict form. And that's what I am going to try to do this morning. I'm going to try to boil down all of that evidence into 12 simple truths that I think, when you all go over,
I think you will see that the evidence has proved.
And I'm going to talk this morning about Reynolds and when I say Reynolds, just so I don't have to say the whole thing, I mean Reynolds, I mean Brown & Williamson, and I mean the American
Tobacco Company, because both of those are now part of Reynolds. Okay.
So let's get started. Here is the first simple truth. And that is this case is only about one smoker. This case is only about Debra Hargroves. This isn't about any other smoker. It isn't about any other point in time. Mr. Acosta showed a lot of documents and a lot of testimony about things that had nothing to do with her. He showed you ads that she had never seen. He showed you ads before she was ever born. That doesn't have anything to do with.
He showed you information about products that she didn't use. She never smoked Tareyton; she never smoked Carlton. That's not the issue in this case. The only thing you are going to be asked on the verdict form is about Debra Hargroves. And, honestly, that's why Mr. Acosta's case lasted so long. That's why he had Dr. Cummings on the stand for four days, because they didn't talk about Debra Hargroves. They talked about everything else.
This morning, you heard Mr. Acosta spent most of his time talking about everything but Debra Hargroves and the cigarettes that she smoked. But
that's going to be the question that you are going to be asked on the verdict form.
Ladies and gentlemen, just like I said when I talked to you in my opening statement a couple of weeks ago, this case is not a cause; it's not a crusade. It's not a chance for you to vote on whether or not you think cigarettes should be legal. And that's because our society has already decided that.
Our society is fully aware of all of these health risks that Mr. Acosta has been talking about. Our society has decided that, nevertheless, people are aware of health risks of smoking and cigarettes should be a legal product. You are not going to be asked to decide that question on the verdict form.
Again, this case is only about Debra Hargroves. It's about the choices she made. It's about the fact she knew the risks, and it's about the fact that every single day she smoked, she decided to take those risks. This trial is only about her. Truth Number 1.
Truth Number 2. Debra Hargroves knew the risk the whole time. You heard Mr. Hargroves testify that Mrs. Hargroves knew, the whole time
he knew her, that cigarettes were bad for her health, bad for the environment, and bad for everything. Mr. Hargroves said that Debra Hargroves knew that smoking could cause lung cancer. She knew the risk the whole time. And there was no question -- that's what he said. He said there is no question that she knew that smoking was bad for her health.
We brought you Aunt Ethel Bruce and we brought you Lacy Ford to go over all of those facts about her life to establish that.
Now, you heard all about that on Monday and Tuesday, so I'm not going to spend a lot of time on that this morning, but let me just spend some time just summarizing that evidence that you heard starting with the 1950s.
Mrs. Hargroves was born into a world where the risks of smoking were already common knowledge. She had access to that information from her family, from her Aunt Ethel Bruce, from her school textbooks. She knew the risks all the way back in the 1950s.
She heard Aunt Ethel warning her mother that whole time. Remember, they took -- they lived in the small house or the small trailer, and Aunt
Ethel said she talked to Debra's mother every time she saw her and told her she shouldn't smoke and how bad smoking was for her.
Several published studies came out on smoking and disease back then. There was widespread news coverage. And in 1957, the Surgeon General and the NCI said the public is informed of the risk.
Let me spend a minute -- let me point this out. This is the Surgeon General saying that.
Okay. That's the person that Mr. Acosta just called the chief doctor of the United States. The chief doctor of the United States said, in 1957, that the public is informed of the health risks of smoking. And all of those warnings continued in the 1960s.
Let's go to that slide.
Remember all those school textbooks that we showed? Those are her actual textbooks used in her classes under Florida law. And they said that tobacco contains nicotine, that it's a drug, and that it causes lung cancer.
1964 is when that same Surgeon General's report came out. Also, the American Medical Association said in 1964 that the health risks of smoking were common knowledge. And then the first
warnings went on the packages January 1st of 1966. That was about -- Mrs. Hargroves was 11 years old. Every cigarette that Mrs. Hargroves smoked from January 1st, 1966, forward had a warning.
And then in 1968, remember that quote from Daniel Horn who was with the federal government? He said you could stand on the rooftop and shout smoking is dangerous from the top of your lungs, and you aren't telling anybody anything that they don't already know.
And let's move to the 1970s. 1970s is when -- 1970s is when Mr. Hargroves quit smoking, and he encouraged her to quit at that same time. 1970 is when a new warning went on the cigarette. And remember the three times in the 1970s when Mrs. Hargroves was pregnant? And she said she knew -- Mr. Hargroves said she knew it was bad for her each one of those times. And Aunt Ethel said she pled with Mrs. Hargroves every time she saw her and that she beat that drum for years.
And then remember it was the late 1970s when Aunt Ethel said that she told her, told Debra,
Uncle Buddy is dead from smoking.
And then the eighties and the nineties, all the way up through to 2000, remember all that
testimony? Aunt Ethel said, Your mother ruined her health and told her that she told Debra Hargroves that her mother had died from cancer because she smoked cigarettes.
How much more powerful a warning can you get that cigarettes can cause death and lung cancer than your own mother, a smoker, a heavy smoker, dying of lung cancer and being told by your mother's sister that she died because she had ruined her health with cigarettes?
And then in 1984, Debra Hargroves' grandmother passed away, another smoker. 1985 is when the rotating warnings started on the packages. Remember all during this period of time Mrs. Hargroves' children testified they told her; they talked to her about the health risks of smoking; the grandchildren did; and then doctors warned Mrs. Hargroves to stop. And they offered her smoking cessation treatment options.
And let's look at Mrs. Hargroves actions.
She smoked alone because she didn't want smoke to harm others. Again, she knew, this lady knew. There is no question whatsoever. That is a truth in this case, that the entire time she smoked Mrs. Hargroves knew that smoking was bad for her
and could cause lung cancer and could cause death. That's why she never smoked in front of her children or her grandchildren, and that's why she taught her children not to smoke.
And then what did she say? I better not catch you smoking. Remember that testimony? Cigarettes are not safe. That's what she -that's what her son David testified. Disgusting habit, that's what her son David testified that she said. Cigarettes are bad for you, that's what her daughter said, testified in court.
There is just no dispute in this case that Mrs. Hargroves -- the only person that this case is about -- that Mrs. Hargroves knew the whole time that smoking was bad for her and could cause death.
Now, let me stop right here for just a minute and talk to you about this age nine issue.
Mr. Acosta acts like that because Mrs. Hargroves tried her first cigarette at age 9, that that was the end of it, you know. She tried her first -he acts like she tried her first cigarette at age nine, and she became an addict, and that set the rest of her life. That's not right. That's just absolute -- that's just not right. Let's talk for
a minute about what she knew at age 9.
Okay. First of all, we know that Aunt Ethel was telling her mother and she heard her during that whole period of time, that it was bad for her. We know what her school textbooks said, that it was a drug and it could kill you. But we also know that Mrs. Hargroves understood that.
How do we know that? Because Mrs. Hargroves hid her smoking from her parents. Remember,
Mr. Hargroves said -- Mr. Hargroves took the stand and testified and he admitted that Mrs. Hargroves hid, you know, the fact she had taken that first cigarette out of her mother's pocketbook, because she hid it from her mother. It's because she knew. It's because she knew that she wasn't supposed to smoke. She knew it was wrong for her.
We also know she was not an everyday regular smoker at age 9. Remember, her brother, her older brother, Robert Kitchens, he said she didn't start smoking -- he didn't see her around the house smoking until age 13. That was in 1967. And then remember Aunt Ethel Bruce said it was closer to around 14 or 15, right before she got married.
Either way, there is no testimony from those people who knew her back then, her brother, her
Aunt Ethel Bruce, neither one of them said that she was a regular smoker at age 9. And that's even what Mr. Acosta's witness, Dr. Cummings, said.
Remember his first witness, Dr. Cummings?
And this is what Dr. Cummings testified to in this courtroom. He said, You know, they usually are starting off experimenting. They have to learn how to smoke. You don't start off smoking a pack a day at nine years old. It's usually you develop periods where there would be experimentation.
That's true for almost all tobacco users.
They start through an experimentation stage, and some people experiment, and they say, This isn't for me. And then this is really important. Back at that time, just like today, it was illegal to sell cigarettes to minors. The entire time that she became a regular smoker, whether it was age 13 or age 14 or age 15, every package of cigarettes had a warning on it, a hundred percent of them.
You've got to ask yourself, How is Reynolds responsible for that? Reynolds did not put cigarettes in her hands at age nine. Reynolds was not on the scene then. She went to the cigarettes because that's what she knew from her family. Her
mother smoked, her father smoked, her older brother smoked. And she copied her family, just like many other people did who start smoking.
And, remember, Mr. Hargroves testified here in this courtroom that Mrs. Hargroves -- that he thinks that Mrs. Hargroves had responsibility for smoking her first cigarette. But it's not just that Mrs. Hargroves -- Mr. Acosta made it sound like Mrs. Hargroves made only one decision about smoking, and that was age 9, and that was it.
That's not right.
She made a decision about smoking every time she picked up a pack. And what's really important is she made the decisions to go back to smoking after she had successfully quit all those numerous occasions. Okay? Remember the testimony that she had quit smoking in 1982 for about six months, when her mother died? Okay? She was in her twenties when she went back to smoking. In her twenties. She was a grown woman. She was married, and she had three children when she made that decision.
Same thing with Pastor Hollowell, testified that she had quit smoking for a period of time to be a Sunday school teacher. And he said he
believed her when she said she had quit. And then she started back again. She was -- she was a grown woman when she made those decisions, not a nine-year-old.
The cigarette did not just pop up and jump in her mouth and light itself. Mrs. Hargroves is the one who made the decision and who took the actions to smoke every time she picked up a cigarette.
And she took full responsibility for that during her lifetime.
Let me move to the next -- the next point that I want to talk to you about. It's Truth Number 3.
The only questions on the verdict form are about design defect. That's it. Mr. Acosta made it sound like this is a big case for you to decide everything that there ever was about cigarettes.
Mr. Acosta made it sound like you are here to decide just a general issue about whether or not we were being negligent. He made it sound like this was a case about fraud, and it's not.
The verdict form that you all are going to have when you go back there to deliberate, when you go back into the room to deliberate, the only questions before you get to the damages part --
and I'll talk about those later -- the only questions on the verdict form are about design defect. And that's why we started our case with the top cigarette designer at Reynolds.
And it's not -- there they are. It's two questions there. The first question is about negligent design, and the second question is about defective design. And both of those questions have two parts: The issue about design and it's also legal cause.
It's not enough that cigarette smoking caused Mrs. Hargroves' lung cancer. I told -- I told all of you that during jury selection. Otherwise, we wouldn't be here. There wouldn't be a need for a trial, because we don't dispute that. You are here to decide the questions on the verdict form and only those questions on the verdict form. And those questions have to do with cigarette design. Cigarettes are inherently dangerous. I've said that all along. There is no such thing as a safe cigarette. But that's not enough to prove design defect and legal cause in this case.
There has to be some evidence. There has to be proof by Mr. Acosta about a specific problem, a specific design defect, not of cigarettes in
general, but in the actual cigarettes, the actual Kool and Pall Mall cigarettes that Mrs. Hargroves smoked. That's it. That's the only question that you are here to decide.
And, you know, he spent very little time -Mr. Acosta spent very little time this morning talking about those cigarettes. He was talking about cigarettes in general. Again, that's not what you are here about.
There has been no evidence, absolutely zero evidence, none, none, in this case that the Pall Mall or the Kool cigarettes that Mrs. Hargroves smoked are in any way different than all the rest of the cigarettes that are sold on the market.
There is nothing about them that's any different.
There is nothing about how they are designed that makes them in a different class where they would be defective. They are just cigarettes, and cigarettes are not safe. Being dangerous does not mean defective. Otherwise there would be no alcoholic beverages sold. You couldn't have -cars are defective under that theory. Knives would be, guns, everything. Dangerous by itself is not enough.
Mr. Acosta has to prove that there is
something specifically wrong with the design defect of the actual cigarettes that she smoked.
And he has not put on that proof in this trial.
He has to show, really, three things. He has to show what I was just talking about, that there is something wrong, a defect in the design of her actual cigarettes. He also has to show that if it weren't for that design, but for that design, that there would be some other product out there that Mr. Hargroves would have smoked that would have prevented her from getting lung cancer. And he hasn't done any of that.
Consumers, ordinary consumers, just like Mrs. Hargroves was an ordinary consumer, have known of the risk of smoking the whole time. And there is nothing different about the cigarettes that she smoked. I'm going to talk more about that with you in a minute.
Let's move on to Truth Number 4. She was not influenced by advertising or company documents. Remember what I said in my opening? I said you all are going to be shown a lot of documents; you are going to hear a lot of testimony that has nothing to do with Mrs. Hargroves. What you need to do is to figure out, of all that stuff that
Mr. Acosta talked about, where is the link to her?
We are only here about her. We're not here about
somebody in Little Rock. Remember the documents from Little Rock? We're not here about somebody from England. Remember some of his documents were from England? We're not here about somebody from Washington. We're not here about somebody who read The New York Times. We're only here about Mrs. Hargroves.
So why did he show you all of that? Because he's trying to rile you up so you will get so mad against Reynolds that you will forget about the facts relating to Mrs. Hargroves. That's what you need to stay focused on, the facts about Mrs. Hargroves. Because she -- again, the only question you are going to be asked on the verdict form is about Mrs. Hargroves.
So what does all this have to do with her?
Mr. Hargroves' own testimony proves that the documents have nothing to do with Mrs. Hargroves. Here is what he admitted on the stand under oath here in this courtroom. He agreed that there was no evidence that Mrs. Hargroves ever saw any statements by any cigarette company. Do you all remember that? He said that she had never had
contact with a cigarette company. Remember,
Mr. Acosta showed you all these letters and said, oh, people wrote letters to Reynolds and Reynolds wrote back to them. That's not Mrs. Hargroves. And Mr. Hargroves admitted that she never relied on any kind of statement from a cigarette company.
So, again, why did he show you all those ads of Santa Claus? Remember that? He had a whole collage up there when Dr. Cummings was on the stand. He had a whole collage up there of ads about Santa Claus.
When I cross-examined Dr. Cummings, I said, Wait a minute, these are from the 1930s and 1940s. She didn't even see those. She wasn't even born then.
And then the other collage that he had that talked about health issues, I said the same thing there. I said, Dr. Cummings, these ads are before she was born.
He said, Well, yeah.
Why is Mr. Acosta doing that? Again, he's trying to make you mad so that you will get back there and be mad and won't stay focused on Debra Hargroves and the fact that Debra Hargroves never saw anything from a cigarette company. And the
testimony is she never relied on any advertisements from Reynolds. That -- those are the facts in this case.
Mr. Acosta just did not tell you the whole story. He didn't even tell you half of the story about the cigarette companies and about Debra Hargroves. Remember, we brought, again, Dr. Gentry who came on Friday who testified? He is the -- he reports to the president of the company. He is the top scientist. Remember, he testified he has 3,200 people who report to him. He is the top person responsible for cigarettes at Reynolds.
And Mr. Acosta didn't ask him about any of this stuff. All of this stuff that he's talking about this morning, why didn't he ask Dr. Gentry that? You know why? Because every time he started asking him that on Friday, Dr. Gentry had a perfect, great explanation for everything.
Every time that Mr. Acosta would ask him, Well, what about this, what about this? And Dr. Gentry would explain as a scientist why things were done. That wasn't some sinister thing going on. Mr. Acosta did not ask him about all these allegations that he has, because he didn't want to hear the answer. He didn't want you-all to hear
the answer.
Many of those documents have the word "draft" on them. So when you go back -- Mr. Acosta said go back and look at the document. If you do, look on the first page. How many of them have "draft" written at the top. And many of those documents have ideas or proposals that were never implemented by Reynolds. Somebody in a company -you remember the testimony? There have been thousands and thousands and thousands of people who have worked at these companies over the years, you know, hundreds of years. There are going to be proposals out there that are not good ones.
That does not mean the company acted on it.
So before you rely on a document, make sure that that's a document that was implemented in the cigarettes that she was smoking. You are not going to have that here.
Let me give you some examples. There is one document that Mr. Acosta kept talking about. He hasn't mentioned it this morning, but he may talk about it later. He talked about it a lot with Dr. Cummings, and it talks about the bags of money. Do you remember that? There was a document that said Oh, we're looking for bags of
money. That document is from a company in England. Why is Mr. Acosta showing you that?
And then remember he kept going back to a document that said, Evidence of cigarette smoking as a health hazard is overwhelming. That's all Mr. Acosta asked Dr. Cummings. Here is a document that says here it's overwhelming. Then I had to get up and take my turn. And I asked Dr. Cummings to keep on reading the rest of that paragraph, because if you read the rest of the paragraph it says there is the same evidence about air pollution.
And then how many times have we heard Mr. Acosta talk about candy cigarettes here?
There has been absolutely zero evidence in this case -- zero, zero evidence -- that Reynolds had anything whatsoever to do with candy cigarettes. None. Why is he -- why is he doing that? Because he's trying to get you to get mad at us and, again, to forget the fact that there is no evidence that Mrs. Hargroves knew anything about candy cigarettes either.
How is that Reynolds' fault?
Instead, the facts are one of these documents Mr. Acosta read to you from 1963 -- 1963 is when
Debra Hargroves turned nine years old. Here is what Reynolds said in 1963. Our feeling has always been that smoking is a pastime for adults and that young people should not smoke.
And then remember Mr. Acosta talked to you with Dr. Cummings about a document that said, well, we'll lose 40 billion dollars a year if everyone smokes one less cigarette. Remember that one? He spent a lot of time going over that with Dr. Cummings. Reynolds didn't say that. Brown & Williamson didn't say that. American Tobacco didn't say that. We don't know who said it, but we know it came from the documents from the public relations company. It didn't come from Reynolds.
Again, you have got to stay focused here on what is the evidence about Reynolds and the cigarettes that Debra Hargroves smoked.
And then remember Mr. Acosta spent a lot of time talking with Dr. Cummings about how the tobacco company had bought the AMA. We bought off the American Medical Association. Remember that? We paid them $10,000,000. You bought them off so that they would say -- so that they would not make the public statements that they did. Remember that?
And then we showed the editorial from the Journal of the American Medical Association. We put it there on the screen with Dr. Ford where the AMA themselves said in their -- in their official publication that that was nonsense, it did not happen. They got $10,000,000 for research, and that research money did not go to the AMA. It went to five scientists, including three scientists who were on the committee from the Surgeon General.
But Mr. Acosta is just trying to make us look bad without getting the facts. And then all those people who are in the documents, they are all long gone from Reynolds. Claude Teague, remember Dr. Gentry said he had never even met him. Ed Horrigan is not there. Jim Johnston is not there. TIRC and CTR are gone. They have been gone since 1998. TI is gone. American Tobacco is gone.
Brown & Williamson is gone.
Mr. Acosta also showed you some public statements from different tobacco companies over the years. But, again, Mrs. Hargroves, according to Mr. Hargroves, the plaintiff here, he says she never saw them and she never relied on them.
Let's go over some examples. Remember the
Frank Statement? How many times have we seen that from Mr. Acosta. It was published before she was born. And it wasn't even published in the Lakeland newspaper where she lived. And Mr. Hargroves testified on the stand he had never heard of it either until his lawyer showed it to him in this lawsuit.
And then Dr. Cummings agreed that at the time this was published, everything in there was correct. And then what about that deposition of Robert Heimann? He showed his picture today. Remember, he is the one -- this is the deposition from 1986 taken in a different lawsuit in Mississippi. Remember during Dr. Cummings' testimony, they played a little snippet of it?
And then I had to come back and play the rest of it when it was my turn. And remember, Dr. Heimann said, clear as day, he said he had agreed for 25 years that cigarette smoking and lung cancer are statistically related.
You know, that's been a big part of this debate. There is a difference between whether you can prove cause based on statistics or whether you need to know the mechanism, the scientific mechanism. And that's a scientific issue that the
scientists just didn't agree about over the years.
But Mr. Acosta only showed the part saying they disagreed with the Surgeon General. He didn't tell you the rest of the story where Mr. Heimann said -- pardon me -- where Mr. Heimann said, I have been saying for 25 years that smoking and lung cancer are statistically related.
And then what about that clip? Remember he made a big to-do. Dr. Cummings made this big to-do about all the CEO's lining up and testifying in Congress, raising their hand and saying, Cigarettes are not addictive, not addictive, not addictive. I played you the rest of it, where the CEO of Reynolds, Jim Johnston, explained his answer and he said, You know what -- and he said -- you saw him on the clip. He said there's a difference based on what definition you use.
And that -- the Surgeon General, again, Mr. Acosta says the top doctor, the top doctor changed the definition of addiction.
In 1964, the top doctor said cigarettes are not addictive, because they don't cause intoxication. Then in 1988, the top doctor changed the definition. There is nothing wrong with that. We haven't done anything wrong. That
is -- again, that's the Surgeon General's definition. But, no, Mr. Acosta and Dr. Cummings only played a teeny little snippet where he says no. And I have to play the rest of it to explain the context of that.
And throughout all of this, Mr. Acosta is just completely ignoring Mrs. Hargroves, who was fully aware of the dangers of smoking, never relied on anything.
You know, it seems like Mr. Acosta is arguing this morning, Well, consumers didn't know everything about cigarettes, so somehow that wasn't sufficient. Okay. Well, that's -- that's not right.
First of all, Dr. Gentry testified even today the mechanism by which cigarettes cause lung cancer isn't known. Whoever figures that out is going to get a Nobel prize. It's not known. It's not known today. But every single person, every single ordinary consumer today knows that cigarette smoking can kill you, even if that mechanism is not known.
And then think about alcohol. Okay?
Everybody, all ordinary consumers, everybody knows if you drink alcohol, you could cause cirrhosis of
the liver; you could die; you could go get in your car and run over somebody and kill them. But you don't know all the chemicals in that -- that beer you drank. You don't know the manufacturing process for wine, because you don't need to know that. What you need to know is if you drink, it can kill you. If you drink, it can hurt your health. If you drink, you can hurt other people.
You don't need to know all this little detail.
Just like Mrs. Hargroves, Mrs. Hargroves and every other ordinary consumer knew that smoking was dangerous; it could cause lung cancer; it could cause death; cigarettes are hard to quit; and cigarettes can be addictive for people. You don't need to know the details, just like you don't need to know it for alcohol.
So who did influence Mrs. Hargroves? Well, her mother. Remember, Aunt Ethel testified on that videotape Monday morning? She said -- this is what she said. She said, Debra needed a good role model. And she did.
The model that her mother set for her was to smoke. And her mother even knew the dangers of smoking, and she knew she shouldn't smoke around her children, because Aunt Ethel had told her
that, had beat that drum every time she saw her.
Mrs. Hargroves, though, tried that first cigarette out of her mother's pocketbook because she saw her mother smoking. Her older brother influenced her. Her older brother was a smoker.
Her father influenced her. Her father was a smoker. And Mr. Hargroves influenced her smoking. Remember, he's the one who influenced her to switch to Kools. That's why she smoked Kools.
She smoked Kool Filter Kings. Mr. Hargroves smoked Kool Filter Kings. That's why she smoked Kool, because he smoked them.
He bought cigarettes for her when she was under age; Reynolds didn't do that. He said he bought about half of the cigarettes that she smoked. He bought her cigarettes by the carton, including after she was diagnosed with lung cancer. That's who was influencing Mrs. Hargroves, her family who were smoking. And the absolutely undisputed -- undisputed -- evidence in this case is she was not influenced and didn't even see any of these statements that Mr. Acosta keeps talking about.
Let me move to Truth Number 5. The government knew that cigarettes are dangerous.
Everything that you have heard in this case, everything Mr. Acosta has been talking about this morning, the government already knows that. There is no such thing as a safe cigarette. It's not possible to make a cigarette that is completely safe. Nothing you have heard here, though, hasn't been known to the federal government, to the Surgeon General, to the State of Florida, to Congress.
Let's pull up some of these documents that Mr. Acosta used with Dr. Cummings. Remember this one? He put it up in color, but, again, this is the only copy I have. This talks about the different risks. Remember? Remember that document? Well, the Florida -- State of Florida knows that, and the federal government knows that.
Then this next document, remember this one, that showed about the per capita consumption?
Same thing: State of Florida knows this; U.S. government knows this.
And then all those company documents.
Is that all of those?
Okay. All those company documents that you have seen in this case and that Mr. Acosta has shown to you, they are all on the Internet; they
are all publicly available. Our government knows about all of those. But notwithstanding all of that, notwithstanding that cigarettes cause
400,000	deaths a year, our society has decided that they should be a legal product because adults in our society get to decide. Here in America, adults get to decide how you want to live your life, which brings us to the next truth in this case.
Cigarettes are legal. Even though the government is fully aware about all of those health risks, all of these bad things about cigarettes, the government knows that but says the public is warned, the public is fully warned, and cigarettes should be a legal, lawful product.
That's -- and the federal government collects taxes on cigarettes. And this is what's really, really important here, really, really important.
On page 3 of those instructions that the Court read to you yesterday, it says, The manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a lawful activity.
Reynolds cannot be held liable merely for selling and manufacturing cigarettes. So somebody -- that's really important, because if someone goes back -- when you-all are deliberating
and somebody says, Well, wait a minute, you know, she smoked cigarettes made by Reynolds and she got lung cancer and died, and so I think that -- I think she deserves some money. You need to speak up and say, No, that's not the law. That is not the law. The law is you have to find that Reynolds has violated one of these legal standards that Judge Levens read you about. You have to find that there is a design defect.
Just the fact that we made cigarettes that she smoked and that she got lung cancer and died from it, that is not enough under the law. That's not enough under the instructions that you have been given by the Court, and that's not what you are going to be asked on the verdict form.
And Reynolds has -- the evidence at the trial was Reynolds has complied with all of the laws and regulations and statutes that applied to cigarettes. But this is America. And in America, adults have the right to make decisions about how they are going to lead their lives. Adults have the right to decide if they want to do something that's risky, like smoking cigarettes.
It does not -- the law does not require Reynolds to sell only one type of cigarette, only
a type of cigarette that has no nicotine. That would be like requiring people who make milk only to sell fat free or to sell -- or to require coffee manufacturers, that they can only sell caffeine free. That's just not how it is here in America.
Mr. Acosta's real argument, his real complaint is not against Reynolds. His real complaint is against our society and our government to allow cigarettes to be sold. Think about that.
Everything that he's argued has been in a Reynolds -- that cigarettes should not be legal. Cigarettes shouldn't be sold. They cause all these deaths. They are terrible. Everything else Mr. Acosta said, all of that is known by our government. But, nevertheless, our federal, state policy of our society is adults get to make that decision.
Remember, Mr. Acosta has the burden in this case to prove to you that the actual Pall Mall cigarettes and the actual Kool cigarettes that she smoked were defective, and that means that they didn't perform the way they were expected and that they were somehow different from all the rest of
the cigarettes out there. And he has not and cannot prove that.
So let me talk now about design defect a bit more. And this is Truth Number 7. Mr. Acosta is not going to be able to meet his burden of proof. He's not met his burden of proof, that the cigarettes she smoked had a defective design that made them different than all the other cigarettes out there on the market and that made them not perform the way consumers expected.
All cigarettes cause -- can cause lung cancer. All cigarettes can be addictive to some people. But this is not no fault. You know what no fault -- have you ever heard of that with, like, car insurance? So if you have no fault car insurance, that means if you are in a wreck, whether it's your fault or not, your insurance company has to pay you for it. That's not what this is. The law here, the law in Florida is there has to be proof by Mr. Acosta that there was something wrong with the cigarettes she smoked.
Remember during jury selection -- do you remember this gentleman? You were all sitting out there and he was sitting on the very back row kind of under where the clock is. He was number 87,
Mr. Hartmann.
MR. ACOSTA: Your Honor, I need to object. That's not evidence in the case.
MS. PARKER: I'm just using an example.
THE COURT: Final argument must be confined to the evidence in the case.
MS. PARKER: Let me just use an example for you. Okay? What if someone drove a motorcycle 100 miles an hour and they drove that motorcycle 100 miles an hour and they ran into a brick wall? You can't get money for that. You can't get money from the motorcycle manufacturer because you did that. The only way that you can sue the motorcycle manufacturer is if something was wrong with the motorcycle. The same thing about cars. You know, all of us, you know, you can get in a wreck, you know, just driving home from the courthouse or driving home from work. And cars are built -- the federal government allows cars to be built to go way over the speed limit. Right?
Your car can go 90, 100 miles an hour. The federal government allows that.
But if you go out and you get in a wreck, you can't sue the manufacturer just because driving cars may be risky. There has to be something
wrong -- not with cars in general -- with that actual car you were driving. And the same thing is true in this case for the cigarettes that she smoked. Mr. Acosta, he did not prove to you that the actual cigarettes she smoked is what caused her injury. His quarrel is with all cigarettes.
There is nothing special about the cigarettes she smoked. No witness said there was anything unique about them as compared to every other cigarette on the market.
Just think about this. All those medical records that you saw, no doctor said, Well, wait a minute, I want to know what brand you were smoking. They didn't care. The only thing they cared about is she smoked cigarettes, because cigarettes are what causes lung cancer.
No doctor said, Hey, I need to find out whether she had such and such in those cigarettes or this, that, and the other. Nobody cares about that, because what caused her lung cancer is the fact that she smoked cigarettes that are inherently risky, inherently dangerous. That does not mean that they are defective.
And so who did Mr. Acosta bring to talk to you about the only issue that's on the verdict
form? Dr. Farone. Remember him? He came by videotape. He's a former employee of Philip Morris Tobacco Company. He never worked at Reynolds, never worked at Brown & Williamson, never worked at the American Tobacco Company.
He admitted on that videotape that he knew absolutely nothing about Debra Hargroves. He said he didn't know her name; he didn't know what she smoked; he didn't know anything about her, nothing. That's who they are relying on.
And then in that videotape, that whole day that we heard, he never mentioned Pall Malls once, not once. And he only mentioned Kool cigarettes one time, and that was just very briefly. That's it. He spent his time talking about Philip Morris.
And he talked about this theory he has that cigarette manufacturers should take everything off the market except the very, very lowest tar and very, very lowest nicotine cigarette. Remember that?
Under his theory, you couldn't buy regular milk; you couldn't buy Krispie Kreme doughnuts; you couldn't buy beer. He wants to tell adults -he wants to treat adults like six-year-olds and
say, This is the only thing you can buy and nothing else. Is that the kind of country you want to live in? You wouldn't even be able to go to the cafeteria on the second floor here and buy a range of products, under his theory.
And here is what's important. No government agency and no reputable public health organization has ever endorsed his theories.
And then Dr. Cummings. Dr. Cummings is a public health researcher. He's never designed a cigarette. He has no training in cigarette design. His real expertise is going around the country testifying for plaintiffs lawyers like Mr. Acosta against tobacco companies. Remember that he testified this was the eighth trial in just this year? Remember this calendar that I showed him? And he agreed with it. And all these days that he is testifying, he's taking vacation time. He's taken five weeks of vacation time already this year. But he's paid for his vacation time. He's paid $500 an hour. He is extremely anti-tobacco.
And what he does is go around the country and he sells this package, this traveling slide show he has. He sells it for $500 an hour to
plaintiff's lawyers. And he is so eager to get into court and make his money and attack Reynolds, he didn't even get his facts straight.
I want to go over some of those. And, again,
Dr. Cummings never attacked Pall Mall cigarettes or Kool cigarettes. He made a general attack on all cigarettes, because he thinks they shouldn't be allowed to be sold, a decision that our society has made.
Okay. What did he talk about? He talked about flue curing. We've heard a lot about flue curing in this case. But, remember, he said, oh, well, we knew about it; we didn't do anything about it, and all that. But then Dr. Gentry took the stand. And Dr. Gentry explained -- Dr. Gentry explained that they didn't know that the way that the farmers were curing the tobacco was causing problems in 1999.
And remember Mr. Acosta put something on the stand -- put something on the screen, and he tried to say, No, no, look at this. Remember, he was pointing? He was saying, Look at this. This is a citation here, and this shows that you knew it.
And Dr. Gentry said, What you are citing to, what you are pointing to, that goes to a different
sentence.
And Mr. Acosta said, You got me there.
When Reynolds learned in 1999 that the way the farmers were curing tobacco was causing a problem, they immediately issued a press release, and they spent millions of dollars working with the farmers to fix it.
But even with that new technology that's now in place, cigarettes are still not safe.
Cigarettes are dangerous, but they are not defective. And Mr. Acosta has not proven that flue-cured tobacco is what caused Mr. Hargroves -Mrs. Hargroves' lung cancer.
You also heard from Dr. Cummings about additives. Okay. So what's -- what's the answer about additives? Remember, additives were mentioned in the 1964 Surgeon General's report. They have been no secrets. And then starting in 1986 Congress required the cigarette companies to give a list of additives to Congress. Congress then sent them to the federal agency, the Department of Health and Human Services, and they evaluated them. And since 1986, no additive has ever been found to be hazardous. No additive has ever been -- Congress has never come back to any
cigarette company and said, Hey, here is an additive on your list, and this is hazardous, and you need to take it out. That has never happened.
And remember all that testimony that Dr. Gentry went over about all the testing, the independent testing that Reynolds had done on the additives, as well. And just think, do you know the formula for Coca-Cola? Do you know all the additives in Coca-Cola? Do you know all the additives that are in beer that makes a Budweiser taste different than a Coors Light? Right? You don't know that. That's no different with cigarettes, although now Dr. Cummings -- Dr. Gentry testified on Friday all of that information is on our website.
But even a no-additive, zero-additive cigarette is not safe. We make one. Remember, the Winston no additives? But we have to put -we have to put a separate warning on the ads for it just to remind everybody, even if it's no additive, that doesn't mean it's safe. Mr. Acosta has not proved that additives are what caused Mrs. Hargroves' lung cancer.
Then ammonia. We've heard about ammonia. Dr. Cummings admitted on the stand that his idea
that ammonia can speed up nicotine in the brain is just a theory. Here is what he was asked.
Now, the idea that ammonia can be used to speed nicotine to the brain is, as you have described it previously, just a theory, correct?
He says, Yes.
There is nothing wrong with adding ammonia. And some ammonia is already naturally in tobacco. You heard Dr. Gentry say that. The reason why ammonia is put in cigarettes, Dr. Gentry explained on Friday, is a processing aid, and it's a flavorant. And the amounts that are put in do not affect pH of the cigarettes. And the use of ammonia in cigarettes has been known to our government for years. It's been disclosed on those additives list for years, and the government has never told us to stop putting it in there.
And Mr. Acosta has not proved that ammonia is what caused Mr. Hargroves -- Mrs. Hargroves' lung cancer.
And then he also -- he and Dr. Cummings also said, Well, Reynolds tried to manipulate nicotine to addict smokers. That would be terrible. But it is just flat not true.
The evidence in this case is that -- can we
put up that screen -- all those people advocated doing research on the tar and nicotine ratio.
Okay. And what they meant was the thing in cigarettes that's bad for you is tar, and so all these people said, Hey, tar is what's bad; lower it; lower the tar, but keep nicotine the same so -- because that's why people smoke, is because they want the nicotine. Okay? That is the manipulating of nicotine that Mr. Acosta and Dr. Cummings keep talking about.
Now, do you really believe that all these people, including the Surgeon General, the National Cancer Institute, were proposing something to manipulate nicotine to addict smokers? That's crazy.
And then the National Cancer Institute Tobacco Working Group, remember that group, the National Cancer Institute and the tobacco companies that worked together cooperatively for about 10 years? In their own words, they suggested this. They suggested that research.
But in any event, Dr. Gentry testified -- and is uncontroverted in this case -- that Reynolds never used any of this research that they did, that they did, that these people requested, they never used
that research and they never applied any of that research in their commercial cigarettes. So none of that research has anything to do with Debra Hargroves or the Kool cigarettes or the Pall Mall cigarettes that she smoked.
And then filters and low tar, Dr. Cummings and Mr. Acosta talk about that. Well, they talked about how people compensate, and that means that the low tar filter cigarettes aren't really safer.
Well, Reynolds knew about compensation. Reynolds advised the federal government. Remember this document? It's in evidence. Reynolds in 1966 sent a submission to the federal government,
Federal Trade Commission, and said, Hey, you know what, no two human smokers smoke the same way. This method, which is the smoking machine, is not going to measure that.
You know what it's like? It's like -- you know when you buy a car and it's got a sticker on it and it has the EPA gas mileage? Okay? That doesn't mean that every single car and every single driver of that car are going to have the exact same miles per gallon. What it means is here is the average based on standardized testing. That's all that is.
And Dr. Cummings agreed. So what he said -agreed on the stand. You don't dispute that the public health community encouraged Reynolds and the other cigarette companies to develop cigarettes with filters?
No, I don't dispute that.
Also, the public health community encouraged Reynolds and the cigarette companies to develop a low tar, low nicotine cigarette. He said that's true as well.
Remember, Dr. Farone testified that the work he did at Philip Morris on filters was something that he was proud of.
But here is what's important in this case.
What's important in this case is Mrs. Hargroves didn't want to smoke a low tar, low nicotine cigarette. Remember, the evidence is she tried a Virginia Slims light sometime in the seventies.
She tried that cigarette, and she didn't like it.
She went back to smoking her Kools, her regular Kools. How much more powerful evidence can you get that this smoker, the only person that this case is about, she didn't want to smoke those kind of cigarettes. She tried them and rejected them.
And when it comes to smoking and health, we
don't know anything more than the government or the top doctor, the Surgeon General, or the public health community. All of those organizations know cigarettes cause lung cancer. Cigarettes can be addictive. But cigarettes are still legal, and they are not defective. And Mrs. Hargroves knew that too.
And here is Truth Number 8. And that's that Reynolds has worked hard to reduce the health risks of smoking. Reynolds has done more than any other company, any other research organization, or federal government, or public health organization. Reynolds has done more than anybody else to improve the design of cigarettes. Reynolds was not negligent, and it did not design cigarettes in a way that deserves punishment. That's why we bought you Dr. Jeff Gentry to testify.
Remember, he said Reynolds had 600 patents since 1980. Those are hard-working, good people who are trying to do their best. As long as they are in the business of selling a product that is dangerous, they are going to do it in the most responsible way. And Dr. Gentry told you there is no such thing as a safe cigarette.
But Reynolds has always operated under the
bedrock principle, the bedrock premise since the 1950s, that cigarette smoking causes disease, and so they were trying to lower the risk starting in the 1950s.
And Reynolds has made enormous strides in that area. Remember the bucket list that Dr.
Gentry brought? All those different areas, thousands of different research projects, lettuce cigarettes. Do you remember that? BAP, they tried to reduce it. And that was even mentioned in Debra Hargroves' school textbook. The government knows there is BAP in smoke also, by the way.
And then this general reduction, all those areas -- if we could pull up the next slide -remember, Dr. Gentry went through all of that. Reconstituted tobacco, those are the jars he passed around. Expanded tobacco, another Reynolds invention. Those were some other jars of tobacco we passed around.
All those different techniques is what allowed Reynolds to achieve this dramatic reduction in tar and nicotine over the years.
That conduct is not negligent. That is not conduct that's deserving of punishment. And
Reynolds accomplished those reductions in tar and nicotine by doing what the federal government and the Surgeon General and others recommended.
For example, remember this chart? Dr. Wynder was that famous scientist who did the mouse skin painting studies back in the 1950s. Dr. Wynder recommended a 40 percent reduction in tar. Well, Reynolds has accomplished way more than that.
Let's pull up for the Kool cigarettes she smoked. Remember, for nicotine, it's a 55 percent reduction. Tar, is a 50 percent reduction.
Again, that conduct is not negligent, and that conduct does not deserve punishment.
The same thing with the National Cancer Institute Tobacco Working Group that we talked about. We worked cooperatively with the federal government on cigarette design, including this memo. This is in evidence. This is a 1968 memo internally at Reynolds from the president to the top head of research. And he said in there, Start working with the government, and let's try to develop a safer cigarette. That's what the top people at Reynolds were saying in 1968.
And then, remember, two Reynolds scientists received letters of thanks, letters of
appreciation from the federal government for that work on the National Institute Tobacco Working Group.
And then Premier and Eclipse, we have spent over a billion dollars trying to develop those, trying to do something different, tobacco that heats instead of burns, trying to develop a safer cigarette. And even Dr. Farone, Mr. Acosta's witness, complimented us on that work we had done.
Again, this is not negligence. This is not conduct that deserves to be punished. The Reynolds scientists were working hard to make a dangerous product that the government knows is dangerous that is allowed to be sold, as safe as it reasonably could be.
And that leads us to Truth Number 9.
Consumers want and Reynolds is allowed to sell a range of products. Again, Mr. Acosta talked again this morning. His view is we should only sell no-nicotine cigarettes. Everything else should come off the market. But there are low nicotine cigarettes that are being sold. Low nicotine cigarettes that have been on the market the whole time that Mrs. Hargroves was smoking. Most people don't like those.
And here is who you have never heard advocate what Mr. Acosta says. Here is who you have never heard say, You know what, the cigarette companies should take everything else off the market, only sell -- take out the nicotine and only sell cigarettes with no nicotine? Who has never said that? The top doctor of the United States, the Surgeon General, because this theory is just not -- it does not make sense. There are cigarettes out there already on the market. Mrs. Hargroves didn't want to smoke them. She didn't want to smoke Virginia Slims.
Okay. This is what she smoked, Kools. Remember this chart? Her cigarettes were about in the middle of the market, what she smoked. And they weren't her only option. If she wanted to smoke a lower tar, lower nicotine Kool cigarette -- we sold those also. She didn't want to smoke them. Remember, she tried Virginia Slims and said, This isn't for me. She went back to what she wanted, which was the Kool -- which her husband smoked, the Kool Filter Kings.
Reynolds provides this wide range of tar and nicotine because it tries to give consumers a choice, because that's what consumers want. But
that's what -- what Mr. Acosta is arguing, what Dr. Cummings and Dr. Farone argued is like telling people that they shouldn't be allowed as a matter of law to choose between a Big Mac and a chicken sandwich or a regular Coke and a diet Coke or a hardtop car or a sporty convertible that's more dangerous, or regular beer, nonalcoholic beer, regular coffee, decaf, butter or margarine. He's saying you shouldn't be able to make that choice.
But our society preserves the right of people here in America, not only to choose to smoke but to choose the type of cigarettes they want to smoke. And all of those are legal products, which brings us to Truth Number 10.
There was no safer, feasible alternative design for her cigarettes. Mr. Acosta hasn't proven that there is one. And when you are looking at this issue, remember, you are looking at it at the time of the manufacture -- okay -not hindsight but at the time of manufacture.
Even today, no government, no research institutions, no foreign government, no other company, no one has ever designed a cigarette that people will actually buy that's any better or any safer than those cigarettes that Mrs. Hargroves
smoked.
If you make a safer product that nobody will buy, you've done no good. That's not helping anybody. And even if Kools had been removed from the market, Mrs. Hargroves would have just gone out and smoked a Philip Morris cigarette or a cigarette made by somebody else. The goal is to develop a design for cigarettes that people will actually buy, not that the companies haven't tried. They have been competing against each other for years to come up with a safer cigarette.
There is nothing about the Pall Mall or the Kool cigarettes that she smoked that was defective. They function exactly like consumers like her expected. There was no feasible, safer alternative design for those cigarettes that she would have smoked and that would have avoided her lung cancer. And that's why your verdict here should be for Reynolds.
But Mr. Acosta spent a lot of time this morning trying to distract you from the issue about cigarette design by talking about addiction.
So I want to -- I want to address that also.
And that is Truth Number 11, which is that Debra Hargroves was able to quit smoking. You
know, some of you may be thinking, well, I think maybe she was addicted. And does that mean that my verdict should be for Mrs. Hargroves? That's not the case. The key point is there is no question on the verdict form about addiction.
That's really important.
When you get that verdict form and you take it back there and look at it, there is no question that asks you about addiction. You are not here to decide whether she was addicted or whether she wasn't addicted. The only questions you are asked to decide is about the design of her cigarettes.
And even if you think she was addicted, you still have to -- Mr. Acosta still has to prove that there was a defective design in the cigarettes she smoked and that that's what caused her to get lung cancer.
There was no defect because the public, including Mrs. Hargroves, knew that smoking could be hard to quit and knew that cigarettes caused cancer.
Mr. Acosta just ignored the fact that Mrs. Hargroves could have -- and she did -- quit smoking during her lifetime. Mr. Acosta acts like, you know, if you smoke cigarettes, that the
nicotine just takes over your brain, and you become a robot, and that's the end of it. That's just not the case.
If smokers had no control -- if smokers had no control over their actions, you would not see the dip in sales that you see on those charts. Remember, Dr. Cummings even admitted that after the Great Depression, there was a dip in sales. That's because of money. That's not addiction.
People become motivated to quit smoking for a lot of reasons. Price. Okay? When the price of cigarettes go up and people quit, that's not addiction, or workplace restrictions. If somebody goes to work somewhere or changes jobs and -- or their job changes and they can no longer smoke or it's not convenient for them to smoke and they quit, that's not addiction.
If it's -- if you are all of the sudden at work with or around a group of people where it's socially unacceptable to smoke and you quit, that's not addiction.
If you have a health scare like Mrs. Hargroves had in her life when her mother died -- her mother, a heavy smoker, died from cancer. If you have a health scare and that --
and you quit smoking, that's not addiction.
Or if you become motivated to quit smoking when you reach a birthday or a New Year's Eve resolution, there is nothing in your body that changes. Just think, on New Year Eve's, on December 31st, there is not all of the sudden in your body that changes that allows you to quit smoking because you make a New Year's Eve resolution. That is not addiction. That is when you yourself become motivated to quit.
You yourself have to want to quit smoking. Having family members say to you over and over to you, You ought to quit; I want you to quit, that doesn't do it. The smoker has to, for themselves, for herself, has to be the one to make that decision.
Even Dr. Cummings -- you know, he talked about this clinic, the smoking cessation clinic he has in New York. Even he said -- he agreed -- you have never told anybody who comes to your smoking clinic that it would be impossible for them to quit, have you?
He said, That would be stupid. That's what he said right here on the stand.
But the smoker has to be the one to make that
decision.
Again, Dr. Cummings agreed.
You agree that the individual smoker has to decide whether or not to continue to smoke, correct?
That's right, they have to make the decision to quit.
And Mr. Hargroves agreed. Mr. Hargroves agreed.
I asked him, No one other than Mrs. Hargroves decided for her when to quit, correct?
He said, She chose the time she wanted to quit, yes, ma'am.
And I asked: Mrs. Hargroves is the person who was in charge of that decision, correct?
He said, Yes, correct.
Ultimately, it was up to Mrs. Hargroves.
Many different labels have been applied to smoking over the years, habit or dependency or addiction. And, remember, we talked about there have been different definitions over time with the Surgeon General. But all along, everyone, including Debra Hargroves, knew that smoking could be hard to quit. And many lay people refer to that as addiction, even in the 1950s and the
1960s, just like her school textbooks. Remember, we showed you her school textbook that called nicotine a drug and used the word addiction.
Can smokers quit? Absolutely, all smokers can quit. For some people, it's very hard; for other people, it's easy. But all smokers, once they become motivated, can quit smoking.
Remember this guide that Dr. Cummings wrote? Remember, I asked him about this? This is something he wrote that was put out by the American Cancer Society. And he said if you answered yes to all three questions, including, Do you want to stop, you can stop smoking. That's why over 60 million Americans have now quit.
And Mrs. Hargroves, just like everybody else, could have quit smoking if she had enough motivation and persistence. But here is the thing: The strongest evidence that Mrs. Hargroves could quit is that she did quit. That is proof positive here. Proof positive, because she did quit on multiple occasions. And that's not controverted here.
Remember in 1982, that's when her mother died of cancer. And Aunt Ethel Bruce testified that she told her your mother has died from smoking
cigarettes, from cancer from smoking cigarettes. And Aunt Ethel said that Mrs. Hargroves quit smoking for about six months. And she said she believed her. She said she talked to her on the phone. She knew she had quit. She was proud of being quit.
And then Mr. Hargroves testified. And let's pull this up.
I asked, Was she able to quit for a week and a half cold turkey?
He said, Sometimes.
Okay. That's more than one time. Sometimes. He agreed.
Remember Pastor Hollowell? Pastor Hollowell came, and he testified that she told him she had quit so she could be a Sunday school teacher. And he believed her. Remember?
But you do know that she quit smoking at some point, right?
ANSWER: She quit for two weeks. Yeah, she quit for two weeks.
That's what he said.
That was something she told you?
Yes, sir.
And, of course, you believed her?
Yes, sir.
And then remember the medical records? In 1985, she was concerned about her weight gain from smoking. Here is what you need to know about this. She had gained so much weight that it caused her to go to the doctor about it. She -it's not like I gained one or two pounds. She had -- she went to the doctor because she had gained weight since quitting smoking.
And if you look at those medical records?
It's Plaintiff's Exhibit 508, that big stack of medical records they have. You will see this is the highest amount she ever weighed, 147. All of her other medical records, she weighed in the 120s or 130s. She had gained that much weight, which shows she had been quit smoking for a long time, because you don't gain that much weight overnight.
And she started taking weight loss medicine. Remember? Mr. Hargroves agreed. She had gained so much weight she took weight loss medicine from September through February of this time period. That's a long time for her to have quit.
So Aunt Ethel says that she quit smoking for about six months when her mother died. Walter Hargroves said she quit for a week and a half
sometimes. Pastor Hollowell said she quit for at least two weeks when she wanted to be a Sunday school teacher. And the medical records here from 1985 said she quit and quit for long enough to have weight-gain issues. Mrs. Hargroves was able to quit smoking because she did quit smoking on multiple occasions.
But Dr. Cummings -- Mr. Acosta was talking about this morning, Dr. Cummings testified that Mrs. Hargroves could not quit.
Let's go back and remember what Dr. Cummings -- about Dr. Cummings. Dr. Cummings didn't read all the transcripts. Remember I went through the long list?
Did you read the transcript of the children, of Pastor Hollowell, of Aunt Ethel Bruce?
He said, No.
He hadn't even read all of the transcripts of the plaintiff. He only read the transcripts that Mr. Acosta gave him, and that was only part of the transcript of the person who was here asking you for money. He said he didn't watch those seven hours of video. He didn't even know about it.
When I asked him, he didn't even know what I was talking about. And he said he made assumptions.
Well, by the way, that seven hours of video, as you have heard, no cigarettes, no ashtrays, no discussion of smoking at all, no withdrawal symptoms. Just a normal family.
There is a monumentally huge fact that Dr. Cummings did not know. And this is his assumption that Mr. Acosta asked him to make.
Mr. Acosta asked him to assume that Mrs. Hargroves never quit smoking. That's not the case. All those depositions that he didn't read -- he didn't read Pastor Hollowell. He didn't know she quit for two weeks. He didn't read Aunt Ethel Bruce's deposition. He didn't know she quit for six months. So everything that Dr. Cummings says about whether she was addicted or not addicted should go out the door. He doesn't know the facts that he is talking about here.
Mr. Acosta only gave him a part of it and asked him to make an assumption that is not correct. But Mr. Acosta's attempt to rewrite history didn't stop there. Remember, he also told Mr. Hargroves, according to Mr. Hargroves, not to discuss addiction in his deposition, which is a sworn testimony under oath. Remember this?
I said -- Mr. Hargroves is on the stand. I
said, So you don't dispute that back when we took depositions, sworn testimony from you in this case, you said you had no opinion as to whether or not Mrs. Hargroves was addicted.
This is what he said: I was told to stay away from the word "addiction." Yes, ma'am, I was, because I don't know what addiction is.
Who told you to stay away?
ANSWER: I was. I was told by Mr. Acosta that the word -- that addiction would get me in trouble.
That's not right. The truth is that Mrs. Hargroves was a willing smoker who did stop on a number of occasions. That's uncontroverted. It's in the medical records. It's what her family members, her pastor testified. And she had full control over her smoking.
Remember, she only smoked on the patio or in her car. She didn't smoke in her bedroom. She didn't smoke in the house. She didn't wake up at night to go have a cigarette. She didn't smoke inside her children's houses. She didn't smoke inside any building. She didn't smoke in public. She didn't smoke in front of her children. She didn't smoke in front of her grandchildren; she
didn't smoke in front of visitors; she never left a church service to go smoke. She sat in the nonsmoking sections in restaurants. She never left a restaurant to go smoke. Smoking never interfered with her social activities. She never chose smoking over time with her family. And Mr. Hargroves said that smoking never interfered with her role as a mother or a grandmother.
This is a lady who had control over her smoking. Mrs. Hargroves was a strong woman. She was good at running her household. She did the millions of things that housewives and mothers do. She raised her children. She helped raise her grandchildren, and she enjoyed smoking.
Now, Mr. Acosta has shown you some medical records, and he may show them to you again when he gets the chance to talk to you further, some medical records where she was in the hospital and she was crying and she wanted to have a cigarette break.
I want you to look real carefully at those documents, because every one of those documents are dated after she was diagnosed with lung cancer. As a matter of fact, they are dated -those same pages where she talks about being
emotional and crying because she wanted to go downstairs, she had just been told that she had lung cancer. And another time she had just been told that her lung cancer had spread to her brain. Of course she would be emotional then.
And the records that talk about how she needed a cigarette and wanted to go downstairs, that actually only happened one time. It's more than one record. It's the same date. You will see when you look at it. It's talking about the same time. So put those records aside, because she had already been diagnosed with lung cancer then. Nothing that she could have done at that point would have prevented it, because she already had it. All right?
Now, why is it that Mrs. Hargroves chose to smoke? Well, her daughter testified in court that smoking relaxed her. Her husband testified in court that it gave her a few minutes of quiet time. He agreed with that. It calmed her down. And Mr. Hargroves also testified that she liked to smoke.
And that brings us to Truth Number 12, which is Mrs. Hargroves could have done more to stay quit. Mr. Hargroves agrees that Mrs. Hargroves --
it was her choice to quit smoking and how to quit smoking. Remember, he testified it was her choice. It was her choice.
Mrs. Hargroves had many different options available to her to help her stay quit, but she never used them. She never sought or used any medication to stop smoking. She never sought help from a doctor. Up until the very end when she has -- when she is in the hospital for the lung cancer, she never sought hypnosis; she never attended a stop-smoking clinic; she never attended any type of stop-smoking support program; she never went to a public health authority, like the American Cancer Society, and asked for help.
In fact, remember, her doctors who are independent -- these are doctors who are not getting paid. They don't have a -- they didn't even know about the lawsuit at that point in time. These are her doctors way back who are treating her at the time that she was sick.
Those doctors put in their medical records that they talked to her about her smoking. They tried to work with her so that she would be able to quit smoking, and she refused. She said she was not interested. Remember this document?
Medical record from May of 2000. The doctor warned her to stop.
And it says, Offered a cessation program.
And it said, Patient declined.
Now, I want to stop for a minute and address something that Mr. Acosta has said in his opening, and he's brought it up from time to time since then. This is not a situation where Mrs. Hargroves really wanted to quit and really wanted to go to the smoking cessation clinic but she didn't because her insurance didn't cover it. That is just an excuse for this litigation that's been made up out of thin air.
Remember, they paid $800 out of pocket to go to electric shock therapy allegedly, and they paid between 6- and $10,000 to go to the chiropractor out of pocket. And Mr. Hargroves agreed that he would have paid for Mrs. Hargroves to go to a smoking cessation clinic. And Mr. Hargroves also said all of their other medical expenses were covered by insurance. And it's also -- if you look at the rest of these documents that are later on, you see the same thing.
Like April 2001, this is a year later. She refused a smoking cessation clinic again. And
then a year after that, September of 2002, Are you interested in quitting? It's circled "no." This document is really important. It doesn't get anymore clear than that.
And then October of 2002, another really important record. It says, Smoke, not ready to quit.
Those -- those records that I've just gone over are Exhibit ANS8081. And they're going to be with you back there when you deliberate. If you are going to go -- if you are going to come to court and try to get money damages, you have an obligation to try to get -- to try to quit.
You've got an obligation to get help if you can't quit on your own.
She did the exact opposite. She turned down multiple offers of help from her doctors, because she told them she just wasn't interested. When she was back there talking privately to her doctors, when Mr. Hargroves wasn't with her, even the plaintiff's expert, Dr. Burns, who testified by videotape -- remember this? Even he agrees the smoker has control of her behavior. Addiction does not mean a smoker cannot quit, and addiction does not relieve a smoker of her responsibility.
I'm not criticizing Mrs. Hargroves. We haven't sued anybody. I'm not trying to second guess Mrs. Hargroves. This lawsuit was filed after she died, and there is nothing wrong with her decision as an adult to choose to smoke.
All I'm saying is they have come into court, and they are trying to get money damages, and she's telling her doctor that she doesn't want to quit. And that's not right. Mrs. Hargroves was not a victim in her life. So please don't turn her into a victim in this courtroom just so that they can get money.
Now, all of that brings us to the verdict form. And I want to spend a little bit of time going over that verdict form with you. All of these 12 truths that I have been spending my time going over will give you the answers that you need to know on how to fill out that verdict form.
And if we could pull that up.
Again, this verdict form has the two questions, two of what are called liability questions. And both of them involve the same issues, which is design defect and legal cause. Okay?
Now, Judge Levens told you about the law
yesterday. And what I'm going to try to do is to go over the evidence and explain why your answer should be in favor of Reynolds.
But let me first address just some initial legal issues. You are going to have -- you have had some instructions about it and I believe will have a little bit more before you go to deliberate.
First of all, the plaintiff has the burden of proof on every one of his claims. Every bit of these first two questions the plaintiff has the burden of proof on. Reynolds has no burden of proof on any of this. The plaintiff has to prove a design -- a defect in design, and the plaintiff has to prove that, if there was one, which we don't think there was; we don't think there has been evidence of one -- the plaintiff also has to prove that that defective design is what caused her lung cancer. And there has been no evidence of that in this case.
Also, Judge Levens has instructed you about the credibility of witnesses. Many aspects of this case are going to depend on the credibility of the witnesses. And so I'll ask you to be sure to remember that jury charge, jury instruction
from Judge Levens.
And then the Court is going to instruct you that you cannot be motivated by sympathy or bias in favor of one party or another. And, again, that's something that's going to be very important in this case.
Now, to prove their defect claims, the plaintiff is required to prove that the cigarettes that Mrs. Hargroves smoked were defective. Now, that word defective doesn't mean what you might think it ordinarily means. There is a legal definition for it. And it's a special legal meaning that the Court's explained to you.
For example, unreasonably dangerous doesn't mean dangerous; it doesn't even mean very dangerous, because if that were the case, all alcoholic beverages would be defective, all knives would be defective, all guns would be defective; all cars would be defective just automatically. That's not the law.
What it means is that the product failed to perform as safely as an ordinary consumer would expect when used as intended or that risk of danger in the design, not cigarettes, but the -- see, in the design -- outweighs the
benefits of the design.
Those are the two different standards, the legal standards. And I'm going to talk about them in order. The ordinary consumer, that's Debra Hargroves. Debra Hargroves was an ordinary consumer, and that focuses on what the ordinary consumer, Debra Hargroves, knew and expected.
Cigarettes are not defective under that test, because Mrs. Hargroves' cigarettes were no different than all the others out there on the market. They did exactly what they were supposed to do. They did exactly what consumers expected them to do, by providing tobacco wrapped in paper that you light and that you inhale the smoke.
The dangers of cigarette smoke have been common knowledge and known by Debra Hargroves the whole time. Consumers are not entitled to expect a product to perform more safely than what the warning says. Remember, from January 1st, 1966, forward, there was a warning on all of the cigarettes she smoked. If the warning -- if there is a warning there, the consumer -- that sets consumer expectations. The consumer shouldn't expect cigarettes to be safe when it says right there on the package that they are not.
Remember, Dr. Ford testified about all the information the public received and knew during Mrs. Hargroves' lifetime. And, remember, Aunt Ethel Bruce testified that three times -- she said three times, public knowledge. Three times during her deposition she said it was public knowledge; it was public knowledge; it was public knowledge.
Mrs. Hargroves knew the dangers of smoking the whole time. And dangerous does not mean defective. Guns, knives, alcoholic beverages, just remember that.
Okay. Now, let's talk about the other test, which is the risk of using the cigarette as designed. And, again, Mr. Acosta talked about the risk of cigarettes versus the benefits of cigarettes. That's not the test. That's not what's in the instructions that you have been provided. The issue is the design. Okay?
And remember Dr. Gentry came in and testified with you -- testified and told you why it was that each one of these designs was used, why that design was necessary. But in spite of all the awareness of the risk, people like Mrs. Hargroves, and people still today, make the choice to smoke
Well, why is it that people do that? You know, people make their own analysis, their own risk utility analysis, risk benefit analysis, and they decide for themselves. Millions and millions of people say, Hey, the health risks of smoking are such that I don't want to take that risk, and those people don't smoke.
Other people say, I know smoking is bad -could be bad for me; I know smoking has health risks, but I want to smoke anyhow. Those are decisions that are individual to each person, and it's not our job here to second guess decisions that individuals have made, like Mrs. Hargroves, about how she wanted to lead her life.
Many of us every day make lifestyle decisions about health risks, like whether or not to drink alcohol or whether to eat healthy or whether to go out and take a walk at lunch and get some exercise or, you know, watching TV and not getting enough exercise.
Just like the rest of us, Mrs. Hargroves made decisions about how she wanted to live her life and she took the health risk as part of that.
Mrs. Hargroves chose to smoke Pall Mall. She chose to smoke Kool. She smoked -- she chose to
switch back to Kool from Virginia Slims. She chose to smoke in the face of the warnings. She chose to stop smoking for weeks and for several months at a time. She chose to start smoking again after she had quit. She chose to decline her doctor's advice and her doctor's offers of help to quit. And she chose to continue smoking every time she lit up.
Now, during jury selection every one of you agreed that individuals should be permitted to make that choice for themselves. Whether or not we agree with Mrs. Hargroves is not the issue.
The issue is whether or not we should second guess her when she made her own choices about how she wanted to lead her life.
And there is no evidence in this case, zero evidence, that the cigarettes that Mrs. Hargroves smoked were broken or contaminated in any way. There has been no recall of any of the cigarettes that she smoked, because the government hasn't found them to be defective.
Under Mr. Acosta's argument, under his theory that the Reynolds cigarettes were defective, all cigarettes would be defective. All beer and wine would be defective. All knives would be
defective. All guns would be defective. All cars would be defective. That's not the law. And that's only part of this question. The question on the verdict form, those first two questions, ask two things, defect and then legal cause. So I want to talk for a minute about legal cause.
There was no defect in her Kool or Pall Mall cigarettes. But you -- Mr. Acosta also has to prove that if there were a defect, that that defect is what caused her lung cancer. And legal cause is not just regular cause in layman's terms. Legal cause has a special legal definition that's in the papers that the Court gave to you.
In other words, Mr. Acosta has to prove that the alleged design, whatever he says is the design defect, that that is what caused her lung cancer, not that cigarettes in general caused her lung cancer, but that the design is what caused it.
And he's failed to do that.
He's made all sorts of general attacks about cigarettes. But there is nothing about flue curing that made Mrs. Hargroves turn down offers of help from her doctors, right? There is no evidence that flue curing is what caused her lung cancer, none of that. There is nothing about
additives that made Mrs. Hargroves turn down the offers of help from her doctors. That's true.
There is nothing about additives -- no evidence in this case that additives is what caused her lung cancer. Nobody even looked at that. Mr. Acosta put on no evidence of that. There is nothing about ammonia that caused Mrs. Hargroves to say, I don't want any help from my doctors. And there is no evidence that ammonia is what caused her lung cancer, no evidence of that. They haven't proven that.
There is nothing about menthol or filters or low tar cigarettes that's been proven to be a cause of her lung cancer either. The only thing Mr. Acosta is doing is saying she smoked cigarettes and that caused her lung cancer, and, ladies and gentlemen, that is not enough under the legal test, the legal standard from the Court.
When you review all the evidence in the case, you will see that the answer to these questions is no. It's in Reynolds' favor, because Mr. Acosta has not shown that there is a defect in the particular cigarettes that she smoked, those actual Pall Mall or actual Kool cigarettes.
He hasn't proven that any kind of alleged
defect was the legal cause of her lung cancer, as opposed to it just being her smoking in general. And the undisputed evidence shows that Reynolds has been the worldwide leader in the area of cigarette design and that the cigarettes she smoked were some of the best designed cigarettes in the world. And Mrs. Hargroves knew the whole time that cigarettes are bad and dangerous for her.
So when you get those first two questions, we ask that you answer them no. And you will stop right there. Your foreperson will sign the verdict form, and that's it, because the plaintiff just hasn't met their burden of proof.
But, unfortunately -- and I always hate this, but, unfortunately, it's part of my job. I've got to talk to you about the rest of the questions on the verdict form also. But just because I'm talking about them, I don't want you to think that you should answer them. You should answer those first two questions no in Reynolds, and just stop right there. But as part of my job, I've got to talk to you about the other ones.
The next two questions are Questions 3 and 4, and they really go together. And, again, our
position is you shouldn't even get to them.
They talk about allocation of responsibility.
And the important thing there is that Mrs. Hargroves took full responsibility for her smoking. Remember this document? It's in evidence. She signed it before she even got -before she was ever diagnosed with lung cancer, where she said, I take full responsibility for the risk I assume and any consequences that may result from my decision to smoke.
Every time that Mrs. Hargroves had a cigarette and disregarded the warning, she made a choice, and that's what caused her to have lung cancer. When she decided to restart smoking after she had quit for that six months and those weeks that she had quit, she made a choice. And every time that she turned down help from her doctors, she made a choice. And Reynolds has zero fault in that.
There is no defect in Reynolds cigarettes and nothing that Reynolds did affected Mrs. Hargroves. There is only one person who was in a position in this case to take steps to avoid the injury that caused her death, and that was Mrs. Hargroves.
She -- she was the person who could make those
choices to quit. Nobody could quit for her. Only she could do that. And, again, she said in her lifetime that she accepted responsibility. And Mr. Hargroves acknowledged that as well.
Because Reynolds is not at fault and there has been no defect, you shouldn't award any damages here. You shouldn't even get to the questions on the verdict form that ask about damages. But, again, I have to address a couple points about that because it is my job.
First of all, compensatory damages that you were asked about, that's not to punish Reynolds. That's to compensate Mr. Hargroves. They are not punitive. They are not against us as punitives.
This number that Mr. Acosta mentioned, $25,000,000, that's pulled out of thin air. There is no basis for that. It's not tied to anything.
That's just a number he's pulled out of the air.
And, again, our position is you shouldn't even get there. And when you are deciding this case, you've got to put your -- under the Court's instructions to you, you've got to put sympathy -sympathy aside and decide the case based on the facts and reason.
Now, they are also asking for something
called punitive damages. They are not a matter of right. They have a high standard. It's called clear and convincing evidence. It's the highest standard in civil cases. It's a different standard than what you may -- you may have heard about already. Punitive damages are higher evidence. This is clear and convincing, so when you go back, if you-all are talking about it, you shouldn't even get to this. But if somebody is talking about it and you have differences of opinion or you aren't sure about it, that's not clear. That means the answer is no.
And it requires that you find that Reynolds' conduct was gross and flagrant and recklessly disregarded Mrs. Hargroves' safety, that someone at Reynolds was consciously indifferent to Mrs. Hargroves' safety or that Reynolds' conduct was an intentional violation of Mrs. Hargroves' rights. Reynolds didn't do anything with the intent to harm Mrs. Hargroves or the intent to harm any smoker. Your -- you shouldn't even get to this part. You shouldn't even get to this part.
Reynolds led the world in cigarette design. Remember all of that? I'm not going to go over it
again here. But remember all of this that Reynolds has done? That's not the kind of evidence, the kind of conduct that you should punish.
And Reynolds' responsible conduct didn't begin or end with cigarette design. Remember about all the research that Reynolds has done over the years that you have heard about. We funded scientific research. We funded it at different medical schools and research institutions, including here in Florida, including by some of the nation's finest scientists, Nobel Prize winners. And remember, Reynolds' research itself was cited in all of these Surgeon General's reports.
And Reynolds also conducted its own product stewardship program. Remember, that Dr. Gentry talked to you about?
Even Dr. Farone complimented Reynolds' testing program and said that Reynolds had been a pioneer in the area of cigarette testing.
Remember those 600 patents that we got?
And we showed you the Reynolds website. Dr. Gentry showed that to you on Friday. This is what we say to the world. Cigarette smoking is a
leading cause of preventable deaths. Cigarette smoking significantly increases the risk of developing lung cancer. No tobacco product has been shown to be safe and without risk. And nicotine is addictive. And Reynolds has made a strong commitment of investment to try to make smokeless products like Snus as a way of harm reduction for people who smoke.
And there is no need to deter Reynolds.
Mr. Acosta talked about the need to deter Reynolds. There is no need to deter Reynolds.
Dr. Gentry testified that since 2009, the -- the FDA, the Food and Drug Administration regulates cigarettes and all aspects of cigarettes.
This is not a record of conduct that warrants punishment. And this is about Reynolds.
Mr. Acosta is asking you to punish Reynolds today. He's asking you for money from Reynolds today.
Here is what we've done. Identifying the constituents of smoke; attempting to reduce the suspect constituents; lowering tar and nicotine; following suggestions of the public health community; publishing articles; cooperating with the National Cancer Institute; conducting research; investing over a billion dollars in
Premier and Eclipse; we keep Eclipse on the market even though it's losing money; and we have been working on this technology to lower tobacco-specific nitrosamine.
All of that, Reynolds did. That is a record of responsible conduct when you are manufacturing a dangerous product. But a dangerous product doesn't mean it's defective. Our government knows it's dangerous. Everyone knows. Mrs. Hargroves knew.
Dr. Gentry came in and testified. He was very candid, he was very forthright, and he said, Reynolds is not perfect. No company is perfect.
You wouldn't believe that if somebody said
it.
Reynolds had to make reasonable decisions in real time based on what they knew back then, not what we know today and look back on hindsight. You need to look at the whole picture. Don't judge Reynolds just by one document or one little bit of evidence. You need to look at the whole picture.
And I'm not going to say that looking back in hindsight, that there are no stupid memos out there, because there are. But that's not how you
should decide this case. You should look at the whole picture. And it would be really shocking, wouldn't it, if over all those years and thousands of different employees if you didn't have some documents like that out there.
But when you are looking at them, again, did Reynolds ever act on them or were they just drafts? Mrs. Hargroves never saw them.
Now, after I finish, which is going to be shortly, Mr. Acosta is going to have another opportunity to get up and talk to you. And I have no idea what he's going to say to you. I've tried this morning to address everything that I thought might be helpful to you, and I tried to anticipate what questions you might have and tried to answer them. I wish that this were like jury selection where I could ask you a question and you could ask back and we could talk. But we can't. So I hope that I have answered everything that you need to know to go back and decide the questions on the verdict form.
Just remember, during jury selection I asked all of you if you could commit to putting aside sympathy and deciding this case on the facts. And you said that -- all of you raised your hands and
said that you would. And I only ask that you honor those commitments when you go back later today.
Now, you are all going to have to decide this as a group. It has to be a unanimous verdict.
But you each have your own individual convictions. And I want to ask that you honor those individual convictions. Don't just -- please, don't just give in and award money to Mr. Hargroves because this is a sympathetic situation. Instead, focus on the facts; focus on the questions on the verdict form; focus on what the evidence has been in the case and the proof or lack of proof.
And I want to thank you again very much for your service as jurors. Our jury system would not work without your service, and we appreciate it.
I just want to leave you with another final thought. You know, if Mr. Hargroves can get awarded money damages here, then anybody who eats high fat foods or drinks beer or drinks wine, alcoholic beverages or rides a motorcycle without a helmet or buys a sporty convertible instead of a big, heavy mini-van, all you have to do is to hire somebody to rifle through a bunch of ancient documents, pull out little snippets here and there
out of a few of them, concoct a case that has nothing to do with the plaintiff here, and then come to court and try to make you so mad that you are forgetting about the facts about Debra Hargroves.
Don't let that happen, please. You stand between us and the kind of society that we have.
Remember what Surgeon General Koop said? And remember, he was the top -- he was the top doctor that Mr. Acosta and Dr. Cummings have quoted over and over during this case. Remember what he said? Ultimately, you are the one that has control over your behavior. The cigarette is not going to light itself and jump in your mouth. Nor are you going to go into a brain-induced hypnotic trance and light the cigarette. No matter how much you have smoked or how much you might like to smoke, the choice to light up is always yours.
Use your common sense, please, when you are back deliberating. Look at the facts. And we ask you to return a verdict in favor of Reynolds.
Thank you very much for your attention this morning.
