          MR. ALVAREZ:  May it please this honorable
      court?
          THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Ms. Hess.
          Counsel.
          Afternoon.
          Well, we're here at the end.  It's the last day, and it's my last opportunity to address
      you.  Although I'll have a very brief moment to
      speak to you in my rebuttal, because we're going
      to break it down the same way as I broke before,
      we're going to go first, Mr. Paige will follow,
      Mr. Reilly will have an opportunity to address
      you, and then I will again address you.
          But I want to thank you, first of all, for
      your verdict of last week.  Thank you.
          What have we learned in this phase?  Well,
      we learned that Philip Morris has lost certain
      issues.
          Philip Morris was found negligent.
          Philip Morris was found strictly liable for
      selling or supplying cigarettes that were
      addictive.
          Philip Morris was found strictly liable for
      placing cigarettes on the market that were
      defective and unreasonably dangerous.
          These issues are not before you.  They have
      already been established.
          Strike 1, strike 2, strike 3.
          But that's not all.  There's more.  They've
      also been found responsible or there have been
      some findings of intentionally misleading the public, concealing or omitting material
      information not otherwise known or available.
          And I think if we do this, it's probably
      better, look at the important language:
      Concealing or omitting, knowing, false,
      misleading, failed to disclose; agreed with
      other tobacco companies to conceal.
          This is powerful.  Let this soak in.
          They have been found responsible.  They're
      findings that are not going to be disputed.
          There's no denying it now.  They lost the
      legal battle in Phase I.  They can't deny the
      legal findings.  They were forced to admit it.
      Fifty years of casting doubt is over.
          Today there's a different kind of call for
      Philip Morris.  We saw that funny little
      commercial where that man, funny little man, in
      that uniform at the end of the commercial would
      go, "Call for Philip Morris."  Well, today
      there's a different call for Philip Morris.  And
      it's in this building and it's on this floor and
      it's in this courtroom and it's in front of this
      jury, and it's a call for justice.  It's a call
      for justice.
          The jig is up.  There's no more denying it. They denied it for 50 years.  They can no longer
      deny it.
          You're going to be getting a verdict form,
      and your verdict form is going to be your
      verdict.  And I want to walk you through some of
      the things that you're going to be asked to
      decide, what your job is.  We know your job is
      not to decide whether they're responsible,
      whether we're responsible.  Those issues have
      already been decided.
          First of all, what I've told you from the
      first time that I did a closing argument, you
      have to follow the law, follow the instructions
      that the judge is going to give you, follow the
      law.
          You have to decide the percent of
      responsibility to Philip Morris and Stuart Hess,
      not if Philip Morris is responsible; that's not
      the question.  The question is is to what
      degree, what percentages of responsibility
      between Philip Morris and Stuart Hess.  That's
      what you all have to decide.  Not if, but what
      is the percentage.  That's going to be the first
      question on the verdict form.  Very important
      that you understand that. The second question is going to deal with
      compensatory damages of Mrs. Hess and David, her
      son, for the loss of a husband and the loss of a
      father.  That's the second question.
          The third question is:  Did Stuart Hess rely
      on Philip Morris' misleading -- omitted
      statements to his detriment?
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Can we change this?
          MR. REILLY:  That's actually not a correct
      statement.
          THE COURT:  Folks, step in the jury room,
      please.
          (Jury exits courtroom.)
          THE COURT:  Read back what he read.
          (A portion of the record was read by the
reporter.)
          THE COURT:  Granted, it's incorrect.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  It is incorrect.  I was
      reading it and I needed to take that little part
      out.
          THE COURT:  How much time did we spend on
      that?
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Judge, I only had a few
      minutes plus a lot of time to do the jury instructions.
          THE COURT:  You told me you needed 10
      minutes.
          Do you need any more time?
          MR. ALVAREZ:  No, Judge.
          THE COURT:  Bring the jury in.
          (Jury enters courtroom.)
          THE COURT:  You need to show it and correct
      it.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  May I proceed, Judge?
          THE COURT:  Go ahead.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  So the question is:  Did
      Stuart Hess rely on omitted statements to his
      detriment?  That's the question.
          The fourth area is whether punitive damages
      are warranted and what is the amount of those
      punitive damages.
          Can I see the next slide?
          Philip Morris made a deal with this
      15-year-old young man.  When he started smoking,
      he was actually younger than 15, but we'll
      accept for purposes of argument's sake he was 15
      years of age.  When he started smoking at 15, he
      began a career of smoking, which he didn't know
      was going to cause him to be addicted for the rest of his life.
          Philip Morris made a deal with a
      15-year-old.
          Philip Morris knew America trusted its big
      companies in the '40s and '60s -- or through the
      '60s.  They knew that.  They knew it was a
      different time, it was a different place.
      People trusted big corporations.  They knew that
      marketing worked.
          Tobacco was the number one advertiser on TV
      back then.  They hired famous celebrities; they
      hired famous athletes to promote their products.
      They knew it worked.
          They knew their product was really a highly
      addictive drug.
          They knew if they looked them young --
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.  We
      talked about this before.  I object.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  They knew if they hook 'em
      young, they'd have a life-long customer.
          They knew the younger you started, the
      harder it was to quit.
          They knew that casting doubt on the safety
      that millions would believe them.  They knew that.  That was their strategy, that was their
      plan.
          They knew that addicts just wanted
      justification to smoke, a psychological crutch.
      They knew that.  That was their plan, that was
      their strategy.
          They knew they could prey on people's
      weaknesses.  And that's what an addiction is,
      it's a weakness.
          And they knew that filtered cigarettes were
      not safer.  They knew it.
          And they knew it could kill.
          It was the perfect plan from the beginning.
      There's three Ds to it:  Dilute, deny, and
      doubt.
          Dilute the message from the health care
      providers of America.  Deny that it is killing
      your customers.  Doubt the safety so your
      customers keep buying your product.
          Dilute, deny, and doubt.  That was their
      strategy, that was their plan.
          Just think of this as a partnership with a
      young man.  And in any partnership there has to
      be a 50/50 proposition.  But when you look at
      this, is this really a 50/50 proposition? It's not 50/50 when your partner starts out
      hiding the truth from you.
          It's not 50/50 when your partner attacks the
      people who are trying to tell you the truth.
          It's not 50/50 when your partner denies the
      truth to you.
          It's not 50/50 when your partner assures you
      it's okay.
          And it's not 50/50 when your partner profits
      and you die.  It's not 50/50.
          It's not a 50/50 partnership.  And it was
      never a fair fight with this 15-year-old.
          In the 1950s and '60s the more Philip Morris
      knew, the less it told its customers.  And the
      less Stuart knew, the more he trusted.
          This is going to be question 1 in your
      verdict form:  State the percentage of
      responsibility that you charge to Philip Morris
      USA and Stuart Hess.  And this is that
      apportioning of fault that we talked about.
      This is where you get to decide what percentage
      of fault Philip Morris is in this case that
      caused Mr. Hess' death and what percentage of
      responsibility Mr. Hess shares in his death.
          Well, studies show that 3 to 5 percent of smokers that try to quit are successful, only 3
      to 5 percent.  That's a very small amount.
      That's per year.  And we know that he tried for
      over 20 years.
          We admitted we bore some responsibility in
      our first pleading in this lawsuit.  We said
      that.  We said that to you.  The difference
      between us and them is that Philip Morris did
      not admit anything.  They were found
      responsible.  So we think Philip Morris should
      be held 95 percent responsible and Stuart Hess
      only 5.  Because when you do and you look at the
      studies, that's between 3 and 5 percent of the
      people each year that try to quit are
      successful.  And we know from the evidence in
      this case that he tried for many, many, many
      years, over 20 years, to try to quit.
          Want to talk about truths and lies.  Because
      I found this quote and I thought it was funny,
      but it's true.
          "A lie gets halfway around the world before
      the truth has a chance to get its pants on."
          This quote is well over 60 years old.
      Winston Churchill said that during World War II.
          "A lie gets halfway around the world before the truth has a chance to get its pants on.
          Philip Morris took him away from his family.
      He didn't leave willingly; they took him away.
          They weren't just married.  You know, Elaine
      and Stuart were very, very close.  They had a
      tremendous bond.  It was more than a marriage.
      They were best friends.
          He was more than a father to David.  You
      could tell from his testimony what an influence
      his dad had on his life and how much he will be
      missed.
          He was a special man and special family, a
      family that ate together, a family that played
      together, a family that shared time together, a
      family that laughed together, a family that
      cried together, a family that was devoted to
      each other.
          And how do you replace someone like Stuart?
      How do you replace a one-of-a-kind crystal that
      shattered into a thousand pieces?  How do you
      replace that?  A one-of-a-kind piece?  You
      can't.
          How do you replace a smile that warms your
      heart?  You can't.
          How do you replace your spouse of 32 years? You can't.
          How do you replace your best friend?  You
      just can't.
          How do you replace your confidant?
          How do you replace your dad?
          How do you replace your yin if you're the
      yang?
          How do you replace Stuart?
          The judge is going to instruct you.  He's
      going to give you actually this instruction,
      because the only way that you have to try to
      make Ms. Hess and David whole is to award, you
      know, damages, money damages.  That's the way
      our system works.  That's how our system works.
          We can't bring him back.  We can't force
      anybody to do anything.  The only allowances
      that the law makes for us is we're allowed to
      ask for money damages.  And what the law says
      about that is, award an amount of money that the
      greater weight of the evidence will fairly and
      adequately compensate them for their damages,
      including any such damages that they are
      reasonably certain to incur or experience in the
      future.
          That's what's fair, what's reasonable. Now, you saw, you heard, you evaluated
      Mrs. Hess and David, and you could tell that
      their loss was substantial.
          THE CLERK:  Ten minutes, Counsel.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Thank you.
          One of the questions on the verdict form
      will ask you:  What is the amount of any damages
      sustained by Elaine Hess in the loss of her
      husband's companionship and protection and in
      pain and suffering as a result of Stuart Hess'
      death?
          Now, let me tell you that he passed 12 years
      ago.  This didn't strike me until last night
      when I was thinking about it.  One of the things
      we did is we read you the mortality tables, and
      we found that Elaine has another 20 years of
      life left.  So 12 and 20 equals 32.  That's
      exactly the time that they were married, 32
      years.
          She has to replace -- you have to replace 32
      years of life that she would have had with her
      husband.
          And I will tell you or I would suggest to
      you that that's an enormous loss for a terrific
      family, for a wonderful man who was so loved by his family and his wife.
          And we suggest that the value of that is
      anywhere between 15 and 20 million dollars.
      Now, that sounds like a lot of money, but the
      loss is big, the loss is tremendous, the loss is
      huge.
          Next question is about David Hess.  They're
      going to ask you:  What is the amount of any
      damages sustained by David Hess in the loss of
      his parental companionship, instruction and
      guidance, and pain and suffering as a result of
      Stuart Hess' death?  This is a man who treasured
      his father, treasured every moment that they
      spent together and now realizes how precious
      those times were when he was a young man,
      because he's not able to continue on, he's not
      going to be able to ask him for help, ask him
      for guidance, be around him on special
      occasions, watch his children, he's not going to
      be able to do that.  And that -- he suffers by
      that.
          And we suggest that the value of that is
      between 10 and 15 million dollars.
          The compensation award should match the
      loss.  This is not a small loss.  It's about a tremendous loss.  It's not about a trivial life.
      It's about a life that touched many people.
      It's not about life that will go without a hurt.
      It's about a life that will be missed as long as
      Elaine and David live.
          I'm going to leave you with, you know,
      Elaine speaks to you through us.  She can't come
      up here and address you.  That's what we do.
      And this is her message to you that I'd like to
      read to you.
          I miss your smile.
          I miss how you used to look at children with
      so much pride and devotion.
          I miss the little things you did that made
      us -- that made me feel special.
          You shared my life for 32 years.  You shared
      my parents' love and made them part of your
      life.  You shared your sense of humor with all
      of us.  You wanted us to love each other
      unconditionally as you loved us.  You wanted us
      to move on with our lives and not feel sorrow.
      You wanted us to remember the family is at the
      foundation of our lives.
          I will never stop loving you.  I will never
      stop missing you.  I will never stop hurting for you.
          That's Elaine's message to you.


          MR. PAIGE:  Hello.  I want to start off, as
      we have, Mr. Reilly and myself and Alex Alvarez,
      who's my friend and my partner in this, and
      thank you.  We know how hard you worked.  And we
      apologize for being late today.  I hate being
      late, and I don't like waiting.  And we do
      apologize for that.
          I'm proud, as Alex is, of Elaine for
      bringing this case and coming forward and
      standing up for her rights.  And we're proud of
      the verdict and the findings that you found in
      the first phase.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  We thank you for that.  I mean,
      that was hard.  That was not easy.  It wasn't
      easy.  It was a lot of work.  And we're happy
      that you saw what was true and what was real
      there.  And it's important, what you decided in
      the past, and what you decide today is so
      important.  It's such a big issue.  This is not
      trivial.
          A lot of people -- I'm going to be talking about punishment, punitive damages.  At home I'm
      not the one who talks about punishment.  It's my
      wife, but here I'm the one who's going to talk
      about punishment.
          And there's a lot of people who are watching
      what you're doing today.
          Philip Morris is watching.  They need to
      know, they need to know by your verdict that
      you're not going to just pat them on the back,
      tell them it was just a big misunderstanding,
      and tell them it was okay.  That's wrong.
      That's wrong.  What they did, the acts that they
      did for decades, each and every day was a
      choice, and it was wrong, and it cannot be
      tolerated.
          There's other corporations watching, and
      they need to know, they need to know by what you
      do that it will not be tolerated by six people
      from the community will not tolerate.  Today you
      have so much power.
          Tomorrow you'll go back to your jobs, you'll
      go back to your lives, and this is something you
      probably will remember.  A lot of times we try
      cases and we tell juries, you'll go back to your
      lives and you'll forget about us.  But this is something you may remember for a long time.
          Today you have the power.  You're the
      judges.  You're the judicial branch of the
      government and you will decide this issue, what
      is right and what is wrong.  And you will decide
      whether or not you will pat Philip Morris on the
      back and tell them, hey, it's a big
      misunderstanding, we're okay with that, or
      you'll let them know if you're going to hold
      them accountable.  Actions like this, what they
      did, cannot be excused.  They must be, must be
      held accountable.  And that's your job.
          So this is really a big opportunity, you
      have a lot of power to make something that was
      so wrong for so many years, for so many decades
      that affected this family, that affected Stuart
      Hess.  You know, he didn't do anything to
      deserve this.  They ruined his life.  They took
      his life and that wasn't right and that wasn't
      their place to do that.  And they knew exactly
      what they were doing and they need to be
      punished for that.
          And this is not about -- this is about, I
      want to be very clear, this is about
      accountability, it is not about sympathy. Mr. Reilly told you before that you're going
      to be instructed, and I believe the Judge did
      instruct you, not to consider sympathy.  Elaine
      Hess and David Hess get sympathy at home from
      their family, from their friends, and this is
      not about sympathy.  This is about holding
      somebody accountable, not looking the other way.
          You've seen the evidence.  When you came
      here at the beginning, we took two days to find
      a jury out of 100 people, and we found six
      fair-minded people who would have open minds and
      listen to the evidence, watch the videos, and do
      what was right and what was fair.  And you saw
      what they did.
          Coming into court you didn't know, nobody
      knew, about these documents, these confidential
      documents.  You couldn't have known.  But now
      you know.  And like Alex said, the jig is up.
      We know.
          We couldn't tell you about the findings in
      Phase I.  You didn't know about them.  But
      there's no dispute.  They are co-conspirators
      with other major corporations where they
      concealed information regarding the health
      effects, the addictive nature of cigarettes knowing, knowing that people would rely upon it.
      They did it on purpose.  And there's no more of
      a sinister act than that.  There's no more of an
      evil --
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.  I think
      he's referencing using the Phase I findings in
      the damages.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  Overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  The issues of their conspiracy
      and concealment, they work towards comparative
      negligence as well.  There are issues about what
      did Stuart do wrong and what did they do wrong.
      And you have to compare the actions of each of
      them.
          I told you the other day that we welcome
      that debate, we look forward to that debate.  I
      will debate any day, anywhere, anyplace with
      anybody the fault of somebody who's addicted to
      nicotine, who can't quit who's tried 20 times,
      25 times to quit and compare his responsibility
      to a liar, to a deceiver, to somebody who's
      engaged in some of the, really, the most
      sinister acts that you could think of knowing
      that they could ruin the life of this family who
      did nothing wrong to them.  It's not a close call.
          We admitted in our first pleading -- I
      signed the pleading, I wrote that pleading where
      I admitted partial responsibility on behalf of
      the Hess family, because -- and it's no
      secret -- I do believe nobody's perfect.  If you
      tried 20 times, you could try 21 times.  If you
      tried for 23 years, you could try for 25 years.
      That's just the way it is.  Nobody is perfect.
      There is no perfect person who's going to come
      to court and say, I bear no responsibility.  But
      you have to compare the fault between Stuart
      Hess and this corporation.  And it's no close
      call.  You've seen the evidence.
          So the purpose of punitive damages -- when
      we talk about punitive damages and we're going
      to be talking about large figures.  And I'm not
      embarrassed and I'm not ashamed to talk to you
      about it because you have to consider the
      evidence and consider what punitive damages are
      for.  Punitive damages are to punish.  That's
      what they're for.  They're not to make Elaine
      Hess whole.  They're not to make David Hess
      whole.  The Judge is going to tell you they are
      to punish.  And you cannot punish Philip Morris by giving an insignificant sum of money for
      punitive damages.  They won't care.
          Punitive damages are to deter other
      corporations that look at this verdict, that
      listen to you, that hear what you've done and
      will know that they cannot do that, that the
      conduct is not acceptable under any standard,
      anyplace in the world, in this county, in this
      courtroom, it will not be tolerated.
          And if you award punitive damages of 5 or 10
      million dollars, big corporation like Philip
      Morris and these other corporations, it does not
      matter to them.  That is not money that matters
      to them.  They make that money in one day. And
      we've been here for 12 days.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor, no
      foundation.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PAIGE:  So back to the punitive damages
      award.
          In order to be entitled to punitive damages,
      and I don't think it's in a dispute, it should
      be very clear, we have to show that the conduct
      that you've seen, not that the findings, but the
      conduct that we presented in this case through Dr. Kyriakoudes, Dr. Proctor, Dr. Schaller, even
      their own expert, the documents that we put into
      evidence has demonstrated that their conduct
      showed a reckless disregard for human life.
      There's no question about that they showed a
      reckless disregard for human life.  They did not
      care.  They did not care.  And to think that it
      went on for so long is unbelievable.
          They could have -- it could be any one of
      these things, it's 1, 2, or 3.
          To show entire lack of care, that they must
      have been consciously indifferent to the
      consequences.  They were so indifferent they did
      not care.
          And they had a wanton and reckless disregard
      for the welfare of the public.
          Clearly, the conduct of what they did for 50
      years or 40 years as it pertained to Stuart
      Hess, he started smoking in 1957 and he died in
      1997.  And this is something that they did for
      decades, decades.
          Usually you talk about conspiracy,
      concealment, it occurs one time, two times,
      three times.  They could have stopped it
      anytime.  They could have stopped in the '50s -- can I see the '50s?
          So the Judge can see.
          The '50s, this is here.  It might be easier
      to read here.
          We all know that they had a meeting at the
      Plaza Hotel when the studies came out about
      smoking.  They made a decision to hire a
      scientific body, the TIRC.  They hired a public
      relations firm, you know.  They published The
      Frank Statement in 448 newspapers.  It was seen
      by 40 million people.  They had their agents
      Hill and Knowlton --
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor, relating
      to the plaintiff.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  The documents are in evidence.
      They manipulated the science.  They promoted
      filters.  And they made statements.  And this is
      a typical statement that they made in the '50s
      that you all have seen.
          I don't know if this is blocking the screen,
      if you can see the screen up there.
          Is that blocking the screen?
          (Video clip played.)
          VOICE:  I would like to quote from (inaudible) at that time the Tobacco industry
      (inaudible).  At that time we stated we accept
      an interest in people's health as a basic
      responsibility parallel to every other
      consideration in our business.  And that's where
      we stand.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  That's where they should have
      stood for 50 years.  That is a statement that if
      they would have really cared about people's
      health, about their customers, about Stuart
      Hess, we would not be here.
          In the '60s we've seen the documents where
      they talk about the most important story is one
      which --
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, relating to the
      Plaintiff, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  I don't understand that.
      Overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  The most important story is one
      that casts doubt on the relationship between
      smoking and cancer.  That's what their
      confidential memos say.  You could not have
      known that before you came here.  That is wrong.
      That is not what reasonable, rational people do knowing that their product is deadly.
          You're not -- I can't even rationalize how
      somebody would put that on a piece of paper or
      discuss that with a partner of theirs, hey, we
      know our product is addictive, we know that our
      product is deadly, we know it might affect this
      woman and her family, Mr. Hess, but we're going
      to go ahead and create doubt so they keep using
      our product.  It just seems -- it seems
      ludicrous that they would do such a thing.
          They have memos about the illusion of
      filtration and the Surgeon General's Report when
      it came out.  You saw their shareholders'
      reports.  It's in evidence.  They would tell
      their shareholders, who are investing in their
      companies, that the Surgeon General Report is
      not accurate, that it's not real, that it's not
      true.  And then they have the memo that talks
      about how they're going to deal with the Surgeon
      General Report, that we're going to provide
      psychological crutches and self-rationale to
      addicted smokers so they can continue smoking.
          And the credibility of Philip Morris is such
      a big issue here.  I remember when they had
      Professor Schaller.  He has a doctorate degree and he's an expert.  And I showed him that
      document, I don't know if you remember or not,
      but he was the one who hadn't looked at any of
      their documents.  And I showed him that document
      about the psychological crutches.  He said, I
      don't know what that means.  I can't understand
      what that means.
          We all know what that means.  They were
      getting addicted smokers and giving them
      information so they would rationalize their
      behavior.  You don't do that.  It's immoral to
      do that.  It's evil to do that.  You do not do
      what they were doing.
          And this is a typical statement that they
      were making in the '60s.
          (Video clip played.)
          VOICE:  I don't think the industry admits
      there are any bad elements.  If there are bad
      elements, through our laboratories, through the
      Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts
      of God and luck, we hope we may find them.  And
      if they are found, they will be removed.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  And this is a typical statement.
      That is the most callous statement from the president of the company where Philip Morris is
      saying, what they're saying right there, right
      then and throughout the decades, and I tell you
      it was not a one-time thing, for decades knowing
      what they were doing, knowing the effect that it
      would have, having no regard, no regard for
      Stuart Hess' life.
          They were putting their profits, their
      corporate greed over the life and health of
      Stuart Hess.  And that is wrong in any language
      you want to say it.  You do not put corporate
      greed and profits over people's life and health
      and safety like they did with Stuart Hess.  That
      cannot be tolerated.  That must be punished.
          We're not talking about a mistake here.
      We're not talking about a one-time mistake.
      We're talking about a conspiracy that went for
      decades, decades and that punitive damages need
      to be warranted.
          The '70s, we've seen more of the same, and
      we remember that -- you'll see the memo when you
      go to the jury room -- that talks about their
      holding strategy, again, has been one to create
      doubt.  And that has been their holding
      strategy. And the statement in the '70s was something
      like this that we've seen.
          (Video clip played.)
          VOICE:  We do talk to the question of
      whether or not cigarettes are hazardous.  We do
      not believe that cigarettes are hazardous.  We
      don't accept that.  Because when, as and if any
      ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as
      being injurious to human health, we are
      confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
          VOICE:  Do you believe that cigarettes are
      safe?  Have they been proved to be safe,
      Mr. Cullman?
          VOICE:  I believe they have not been proven
      to be unsafe.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  He knew they were unsafe.  He
      knew what he was saying.  He was lying.  His
      conduct is the worst of the worst.  You
      cannot -- there's no worse conduct, or almost
      none, that compares to what they did, what these
      corporations -- this corporation and their
      executives were doing.  They had no regard for
      Mr. Hess and his family.  They ruined his life.
      They took his life and they did it all in the name of profits, greed and lack of consideration
      for the human being that Mr. Hess was.
          And then we move to the '80s just to show
      you how long it went on.  And in the '80s is
      when the Surgeon General Report came out on
      nicotine addiction.
          And we've seen their memos, you all have
      seen them, about what they knew about nicotine
      since 1959, that they knew it was a drug, it was
      as addictive as heroin and cocaine.  They knew
      all this.  They knew people smoked for the
      nicotine.  You would think that they would come
      out and say, look, we know this.  This is true.
      Maybe they would promote people wanting to quit.
      These were choices that they made.
          They talk a lot about Stuart Hess' choices
      in this trial, and they don't want to talk about
      their choices.  They made choices every dary,
      every year, every decade.  This was their choice
      to do this.  They did not have to do this.
          And they talk about Stuart Hess' motivation.
      Why wasn't he more motivated?
          What motivated them?  What would motivate
      somebody in their right mind to do what they
      did?  And that's greed.  Their greed motivated them to have a lack of regard for Mr. Hess and
      his family, and that's wrong.  There's nothing
      more wrong than that.
          So in the '80s.
          (Video clip played.)
          VOICE:  These pictures are from Superman 2.
      Marlboro by Philip Morris is shown at least 13
      times.  I asked the Tobacco Institute why
      Marlboros were shown so often in Superman 2.
          VOICE:  Do you think cigarette manufacturers
      had something to do with that?
          VOICE:  Yeah, I think that --
          VOICE:  Cigarette manufacturers don't make
      movies.
          VOICE:  What do you think, that the
      moviemaker showed Marlboro on his own?
          VOICE:  Perhaps the moviemaker was a
      Marlboro smoker.  The case is still open.  The
      jury has not come out on it.
          VOICE:  It may be harmful, you're not
      convinced?
          VOICE:  It may be or it may not be, we don't
      know.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  You are the jury today.  You need to come in and let them know by your
      verdict that you will not tolerate this conduct,
      that you know that this is an important issue,
      you know that they cannot -- you cannot just
      give them a pat on the back and tell them it's
      okay.  That would -- we're here for justice
      today.  We're here for accountability.  And you
      all know that.  It's not an easy job.  And we do
      appreciate what you're doing, but you've seen
      what they have done and we cannot excuse that.
          One of the things for punitive damages, or
      for conspiracy and concealment that we must
      prove is reliance.  It's one of the elements
      that the Judge is going to talk to you about.
      And what we have to prove on the conspiracy
      theory -- and this has nothing to do with the
      negligence and the strict liability, the
      apportionment of fault.  The reliance, what I'm
      going to talk to you about right now, has
      nothing to do with that.  This is more in regard
      to the concealment issue.  The negligence,
      strict liability, the apportionment of fault we
      don't need to prove reliance.  That's not
      necessary.  That's not required by law.  But it
      is required by law for us to prove that Mr. Hess relied upon these statements.
          And we know he was an impressionable young
      kid.  He was 15 years old when he started
      smoking.  We know the Surgeon General Report
      came out in 1964.  And we know that he did not
      try to quit until 19, I think, '75.  We know
      when all this was going on these were the
      statements that Philip Morris was making.
          1954, they published A Frank Statement.
      "There's no proof that cigarette smoking is one
      of the causes."
          In 1964 it was the memo, the confidential
      memo, that nobody could have known about where
      they wanted to provide psychological crutches
      and self-rationale so people will continue
      smoking.
          In 1966 a memo that talks about the illusion
      of filtration is so important.  We know Mr. Hess
      smoked filters.  He thought they were helping
      him.  They know in their memos that people are
      doing that.  They know it's the illusion of
      filtration.  They're concealing the truth.
      They're not telling the truth.
          In each one of these memos they're lying.
      They're telling you internally, we're not telling the public what we know.  We're not
      telling the public in 1964 that the Surgeon
      General Report we agree with it, that we have
      internal documents saying that it's true.
      They're not telling the public in 1966 that
      filters don't work.  They're concealing crucial
      information.
          1968, 1972, this is the internal memos where
      they're talking about all the doubt that they
      created and how it's working.  And they know
      that.  They know they're creating doubt by
      keeping quiet, by not telling the truth.  It's a
      game:  Hey, we're not going to come out and
      start telling people this, but we just won't
      tell them everything we know.
          When you're selling a product and people's
      lives are at stake, that's not a game that
      anybody should play.
          In 1977, this is one of the nicotine
      documents.  All of these documents are in
      evidence.  But this was an interesting quote
      where they said, "I'm very much afraid that the
      direction of the work being taken by CTR is
      totally detrimental to our position and
      undermines the public posture we have taken to outsiders," like Mr. Hess.
          So they have this whole 30 years, 40 years
      of conspiracy, of concealment where they're not
      telling the truth and they know their product is
      deadly.  They know their product is addictive.
      And they know what will happen.
          And they know that the polls -- a lot of
      these polls they worked with the pollsters, but
      they know in 1957 the poll showed that 55
      percent of smokers did not believe that smoking
      caused lung cancer because of this doubt,
      because of the crutches, because of the
      confusion.  That was about 30 million people at
      that time.  There's 30 million smokers who
      relied upon them, who believed them.  It's
      absurd to think that Stuart Hess was not one of
      them.
          In 1964 there was almost 50 percent of
      smokers did not think that smoking was one of
      the causes of cancer.  Today in 2009 it doesn't
      seem rational, but back then with the crutches
      and the doubt and the public statements, there
      were millions, 25, 30 million smokers like
      Mr. Hess who relied upon their statements.
          And in 1970 the poll showed that 58 percent of smokers like Mr. Hess thought that filters
      reduced the risks of smoking cigarettes.  That's
      literally millions and millions of people.
          And Stuart Hess, according to his wife --
      he's not here, just like they didn't have him
      here to apply the DSM.  They wanted to use that
      DSM criteria to his disadvantage when he's not
      here.  That was no problem for them to use the
      DSM when he's not here.
          We can't call him to tell you that he
      believed them, that he relied upon them.  We
      don't have those words; all we have is the
      evidence that millions of people relied upon
      them and the word of a widow, Elaine Hess, who
      told you that he did.
          Maybe she can't recall -- they asked her, I
      remember, on cross-examination:  You don't
      recall one specific statement that he made from
      three or four decades ago, do you?
          And she said, no, I don't remember the
      specific statement.
          Who could remember a statement that somebody
      said in 1975?  You only remember the general --
      generally what occurred, and that's what she
      said. So to think that Stuart Hess was not one of
      the majority, was not one of the millions, does
      not make sense.  And Philip Morris, who did all
      this on purpose, who did everything to conceal,
      to create doubt, to create crutches, is now
      going to come to you and say, well, Stuart Hess
      didn't believe it.  They haven't proved that
      Stuart Hess believed it, so we should not be
      punished.
          And I submit to you that that does not
      conform with the evidence, and I submit to you
      that doesn't conform to statements that they've
      made.  They're not very credible.
          In the '90s -- I didn't show this one, but
      in the '90s it showed that the fraud continued.
          We have 40 years of them publicly denying
      that nicotine is addictive, 40 years of denying
      that cigarettes caused cancer, we have sworn
      denials to Congress, 40 years of doubt,
      crutches, rationale to their customers like
      Stuart Hess.  And to think that he wasn't one of
      them, it only benefits Philip Morris in the
      courtroom, Philip Morris.  And they're not here
      in the courtroom, other than their attorneys.
      And this is the type of statement they would give in the '90s, by the way.
          (Video clip played.)
          VOICE:  Mr. Campbell, you were also deposed,
      and you said, quote, To my knowledge it has not
      been proven that cigarette smoking causes
      cancer.
          This is a rather passive and puzzling
      approach, especially in light of the consensus,
      not by some, but all of the scientific
      community.
          Will you ever be convinced, and what
      evidence are you waiting for?
          Let's have the microphone passed over.
          VOICE:  Yes, I may be convinced.  We don't
      know what causes cancer in general right now, so
      I think that we may find out what causes cancer
      and we may find out some relationship which has
      yet to be proven.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  Their credibility they've proven
      time and time again through their experts like
      Dr. Nace, who told you -- who swore to tell the
      truth and told you he didn't know what
      chain-smoking was, to the executives who go to
      Congress and say they don't believe cigarettes cause lung cancer.  They have no credibility.
      They don't.  They're liars.  They did this for
      decades, and they knew the effect it would have
      on families like Mr. Hess.  And that's not to be
      tolerated.
          So the amount of punitive damages you have
      to decide.  You have to look at, how bad was the
      conduct?  How bad was it?  Was it intentional?
      You know, this was a choice.  They made choices
      to do this.  There's no worse conduct.
          They ruined -- they took the husband of
      Mrs. Hess.  She loved her husband.  There's no
      doubt about that.  She still loves him.  They
      took a father.  He never saw his grandkids.  You
      cannot do any more harm than what they did to
      this family, and they need to be punished for
      it.  We cannot just tell them, it's okay, don't
      do it again, better luck next time.  That would
      not be right.  That would not be justice.
          So I submit to you that because nothing can
      be worse than what they did, I don't think
      anybody would say otherwise, because the
      punishment must fit the crime, I can't ask you
      to just give a number, I can't just make up a
      number.  They're a big corporation, you know that.  They're a big corporation and under
      Florida law I really cannot ask -- I really -- I
      said I would not ask and I won't ask for more
      than three times the compensatory damages.  And
      that's -- you can't bankrupt a company with
      punitive damages.  You will not, you will not do
      that.
          If you give an award three times the
      compensatory damages, if you give 25 million,
      the punitive damages should be 75 million.  That
      will punish them, that will deter other people.
      That is the purpose of punitive damages.
          If you give 35 million, it should be 100
      million in punitive damages.
          If you award punitive damages of an
      insignificant amount, it will do nothing to
      punish them.  It will do nothing to deter other
      people who are watching.
          This is a big case.  You know that.  This is
      important what you've done.  We appreciate that.
      But you must fulfill your duty as jurors and
      punish Philip Morris and deter others from doing
      what they've done and let them know this is not
      right, this will not be tolerated in this
      courtroom or any courtroom. THE CLERK:  Two minutes.
          MR. PAIGE:  You people need to know that
      they cannot lie, they cannot steal.  They will
      be punished if they do that.  That's the right
      thing to do, that's what's right.
          I wanted to say this, because it was
      interesting, but now that Alex read a poem, I
      don't know if I should read a poem, too.
          But I will tell you, I was exercising this
      weekend.  I have a young daughter, she listens
      to this stuff like Rihanna, the one who does
      "Umbrella."  And I have this song on my iPod.
      I've heard it a hundred times and I never paid
      attention to it.  I was listening to it this
      weekend.  I'm going to read only a small part of
      it.
          The song is called "Take a Bow," and it's
      about a guy who gets caught cheating.  He's a
      deceptive guy.  He's cheating on his girlfriend
      and he gets caught.  And he puts on a big show.
      And she says, "You really had me going, that was
      quite a show, very entertaining, but it's over
      now, go on and take a bow.  Don't tell me you're
      sorry, 'cause you're not.  You're only sorry
      'cause you got caught." And they haven't even said they're sorry.
      Nobody from Philip Morris has walked into this
      courtroom, has ever apologized to Mrs. Hess.
      They're too big for that.
          You know, Mr. Reilly is a nice man.  I
      respect him very much, but he's not Philip
      Morris.  He's not them.  They never apologized.
      They never came here.  They never showed their
      face here.
          The last thing I'll say and I'm going to sit
      down is -- and, again, I think the 40 or 50
      years of lack of credibility could be summed up.
      Mr. Reilly is going to get up here and speak in
      a moment.  I want to play this one last clip for
      you so you know it's obvious what we're dealing
      with.
          (Video clip played.)
          VOICE:  Let me begin my questioning on the
      matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive.
      Let me ask you first -- and I'd like to just go
      down the row -- whether each of you believes
      that nicotine is not addictive.
          I heard virtually all of you touch on it.
      Just yes or no.
          Do you believe that nicotine is not addictive?
          VOICE:  I believe nicotine is not addictive,
      yes.
          VOICE:  Mr. Johnson.
          VOICE:  Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine
      clearly do not meet the classic definitions of
      addiction.  There is no intox --
          VOICE:  We'll take that as a no.
          And, again, time is short.  If you could
      just -- I think each of you believe nicotine is
      not addictive.  We'd just like to have this for
      the record.
          VOICE:  I don't believe that nicotine or our
      products are addictive.
          VOICE:  I believe nicotine is not addictive.
          VOICE:  I believe that nicotine is not
      addictive.
          VOICE:  I believe that nicotine is not
      addictive.
          VOICE:  And I, too, believe that nicotine is
      not addictive.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  These people showed no regard
      for anything, for the life of Stuart Hess or
      anything at all. But on behalf of Mrs. Hess and Stuart Hess
      and David Hess, I thank you so much for your
      time.  This is such an important case.  It's the
      most important case I've ever worked on in my
      career.  And I thank you very much for listening
      to me.


          MR. PAIGE:  Hi.  I'll be very short.  I
      think I have 10 minutes, so I don't think I'll
      use it all.  But I'll do my best to finish
      within 10 minutes.
          I just want to go through -- I took some
      notes when Mr. Reilly was speaking and I want to
      be able to respond to you on a couple of them,
      just like he responded to me.
          It seems like when he did get up here at the
      beginning he -- I don't want to say he
      criticized me, but he stated that Phase II was
      too short, we only put on one day of testimony
      when we told you it was going to be two days.  I
      apologize.  I don't think you all wanted to stay
      longer.  We put on the best case we could.  We
      put on all the evidence -- you saw all the
      evidence in Phase I, and the Judge instructed
      you in Phase I that evidence that came in in
      Phase I would be admissible and relevant in
      Phase II.  So it wasn't necessary to waste your
      time and keep showing you the same evidence over and over again.  We showed you testimony that we
      felt was important.
          Obviously, we had more important things to
      say in Phase II, because they didn't say one
      word, they stated that I did not tell you in
      Phase I about our admissions.  That's not true.
      That's not true.  In Phase I, I stood up in
      closing arguments, I did, and I looked all of
      you in the eyes and I told you that we were
      admitting responsibility in Phase II, and I said
      that, I know I did.  I said, when we get to
      Phase II, we will accept responsibility.  And,
      you know, I'm getting criticized because I
      admitted something that I told you about that I
      don't think that anybody's perfect, nobody's
      perfect.  And that's it.
          But that's different than what they did.
      They lied, they cheated, we know what they did.
      And there's findings that you all know about
      that they concealed or omitted material
      information.  It was false and misleading.  They
      agreed to conceal information.  They knew the
      public would rely upon it to their detriment.
      Those are the findings.  They didn't tell you
      about that in Phase I either.  There's rules as lawyers --
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor, I
      couldn't have --
          MR. PAIGE:  Right, that's what I'm going to
      say.
          THE COURT:  Which is the same thing you're
      both saying.  Neither one of you could because
      you were instructed not to.
          MR. PAIGE:  Right.  There's rules -- we're
      lawyers.  We go to school, study.  There's
      certain rules we have to follow.  One of the
      rules are the Judge instructed us before we
      start the case that we can't tell you certain
      findings in Phase II.  I would have loved to
      have told you about the findings in Phase I, the
      findings that you heard about as soon as Phase
      II started.  I would have been the happiest
      lawyer in the world if I could have, but I
      couldn't.
          And the admissions that I made in the
      initial pleadings, make no mistake about that, I
      told you, I did not keep that secret from
      anybody, I did not.  And this is exactly what I
      pled.
          If I could see the pleading. This is exactly --
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor, that's
      not in evidence.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PAIGE:  We admitted -- the Judge will
      tell you, we admitted that Mr. Hess bears some
      responsibility, partial fault, just like I told
      you, in combination with their acts, their acts
      of concealment, their acts of conspiracy, their
      acts of being negligent, their acts of strict
      liability that we bore some responsibility.
      That's it.  There's nothing more to it.
          Mr. Reilly said -- I think he said I was
      yelling at you, and I apologize if I was yelling
      at you, I don't know if I was.  But he could say
      over and over again how many times I admitted on
      behalf of my client that a smoker bears some
      responsibility.  I think we would all agree.
      I've spoken to a lot of people about this issue
      around the country and every smoker could try
      harder, every smoker could try more.  He tried
      as much as any smoker I know.  He tried the
      patch.  He tried the gum.  He tried medication.
      He tried hypnosis.  He tried special filters.
      He tried hole punching. On comparative negligence you have to
      compare his actions against their conduct, and
      that's all I'm saying, is that we will accept --
      I'm getting criticized because I'm saying to you
      and I said to you at the end of Phase I, we
      accept some responsibility, I said that.
          What they did is they lied for 50 years, for
      40 years they lied knowing people would rely
      upon it to their detriment, and all he could
      talk about is that I was foolish enough to come
      before you and admit something that may be so.
      For that I will not apologize, for admitting
      something that's true.  That's okay, I can live
      with that.
          Remember when Alex did that comedian Jeff
      Foxworthy?  I was going to do a couple of those,
      but I'll spare you guys that.
          Mr. Reilly told you that nicotine was from
      God.  You know, God, comes from God, it kind of
      implies that it's okay.  God says, Thou shalt
      not kill.  That's not okay.  And God says, Thou
      shalt not bear false witness, thou shalt not
      lie, that's not okay.  So when we're going to
      talk about God and what God says, we need to
      remember everything in this courtroom, not just little pieces of Mother Nature that Mr. Reilly
      wants to point out to you.
          I want to be clear on the verdict form.
      There's questions of conspiracy and concealment
      before and after 1982.  I showed you.  You'll
      see all the evidence.  This went on for 40
      years.  It did not stop in 1982.  That date
      means something else.  But the conspiracy and
      the concealment occurred throughout the entire
      smoking life, the entire life of Mr. Hess.  He
      never heard, never heard one time Philip Morris
      say nicotine was addictive, never heard them say
      one time smoking causes lung cancer.  He was
      dead before that occurred.
          And smokers, people who are addicted to
      smoking, nowadays it's different, but in the
      '70s, '80s if you're smoking and you hear things
      that are good, that's good, that's reassuring.
      And all the lies mattered to his life.  None of
      them are inconsequential.  They should not be
      excused for their conduct at all.
          You know, he really didn't dispute the
      numbers that we put on the board.  Everybody
      knows this is a significant case.  These are
      significant numbers.  Mr. Alvarez, or Alex, he asked you for 25 to 35 million dollars for
      compensatory damages for both David and Elaine,
      for both of them.  I submit that you do not give
      one penny less.  If you want to give more, you
      can, but those numbers are fair and reasonable.
          The punitive damages as well, to not give
      less, the three times compensatories is a fair
      amount to punish them for what they've done, to
      let them know and let others know that this will
      not be tolerated by you or by anybody.
          And, lastly, I want to say, you know,
      Mr. Reilly made a point of bringing up the fact
      of what Mrs. Hess will do with the money, what
      she's going to do with the money.  It's going to
      her.  It's nobody's business.  If she does
      something good with the money, which I think she
      will --
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained as to what you think
      she'll do with it.
          MR. PAIGE:  I really don't have anything
      more to say.  I know you all have paid
      attention, and I'm going to sit down now, and I
      know you'll do the right thing and look at the
      evidence and follow the law.  And on behalf of my partners and Mrs. Hess and David Hess I thank
      you so much.  Thank you.
          I'm sorry, one second.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.  I don't
      think you get to divide this again.
          THE COURT:  If you have a minute, you can
      talk to your partner.
          MR. PAIGE:  Believe me, every time I get up
      here, I get back there, "You didn't say this and
      you should have said that."
          There's a question on the verdict form that
      asks about information that was concealed before
      and after May 5th, 1982.  We just wanted to be
      sure that you know that.  I think I said that
      the concealment was both before and after, and
      both of those answers should be yes.
          Thank you.
