                 DEFENDANT'S CLOSING
          MR. REILLY:  It's still morning.
          THE JURY:  (Collectively.) Good morning.
          MR. REILLY:  Good morning, everybody.
          I, along with Mr. Trop, Mr. Paige,
     Mr. Alvarez, Mr. Brenner, they're all correct, that
     we've observed you, although I know Mr. Brenner and
     I tried very hard not to look at you while we're
     doing our presentations, I just sort of feel like
     it's invading your privacy to look at you, so I
     frankly don't do it.
          But it's clear from the fact that you've been
     taking all these notes and been paying very close attention to all the witnesses that have come to
     the stand; that when I started this case, when I
     started this trial, I said to you, you folks have a
     tremendous amount of power and a tremendous amount
     of responsibility.  And obviously you've been
     performing your task in the very manner in which we
     would hope jurors do because that's what makes our
     system work.  So everybody here I'm sure
     appreciates your effort.
          There is -- at the very beginning of the case
     I did say that there was one sentiment that
     everybody in this room would feel, and that was the
     sentiment of sympathy for the Hesses because
     they've lost a loved one.  Of course that's an
     absolutely natural thing for everyone in this room
     to feel, and I'm sure everyone does.  But what you
     guys all said was we can set that aside and we will
     focus on just the issues in the case, the evidence
     that you hear from the witness stand and the
     issues, the law that Judge Streitfeld gives you.
     And so that's all we're asking you to do now.
          What are the issues in this case?  During my
     opening statement, I indicated that -- I showed you
     this board and I said the plaintiff is going to
     have to prove that two things, that Mr. Hess was addicted; and that if they proved that Mr. Hess was
     addicted, they were also going to have to prove
     that Mr. Hess' addiction was a legal cause of his
     death.
          Now, at the beginning of Mr. Alvarez's closing
     argument, he put this slide on the screen and he
     said -- you can see where he's drawn through legal
     cause of, he's just basically drawn through those
     words.  And he said to you we've already proved
     that.  But, in fact, they haven't.  And they have
     to.  If they had already proved it, it wouldn't
     be -- it wouldn't be on the instructions that Judge
     Streitfeld will give you just as soon as these
     closing arguments are over.
          But this is what the verdict form is going to
     look like, and it's going to say:  "Was Stuart Hess
     addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if
     so, was such addiction a legal cause of Mr. Hess'
     death?"  It's still there.  They still have to
     prove both, that Mr. Hess was addicted; and that,
     if he was addicted, that his addiction was the
     legal cause of Mr. Hess' death.
          It's not sufficient to simply prove that
     cigarette smoking caused him to get lung cancer and
     die; we've already stipulated to that, that's not even an issue.  So no, they still have to prove,
     they still have the burden of proof on both these
     issues.
          So now, what has the evidence been on the
     issue?  Let's take them one at a time.  What's been
     the evidence on whether or not Mr. Hess was
     addicted?  Well, yes, there's no question that
     there were a number of folks who came here, family
     and friends, who said Mr. Hess was addicted.  But
     in all reality, we both recognize, both plaintiff
     and defense, recognize that that really wasn't
     going to get the job done.
          And we both brought experts here.  We both
     brought the psychiatrists here, people who claimed
     expertise in determining whether or not someone, a
     smoker, was truly addicted.
          And in addition to, there's one other doctor
     in this case to address the issue of whether or not
     Mr. Hess was addicted, and that was Dr. Ross, the
     treating physician, Mr. Hess' family doctor, his
     internist.  But Dr. Ross said -- and his records
     reflected a number of things, I think, that
     eliminate him from consideration in determining
     whether or not Mr. Hess was truly addicted, truly
     addicted. First of all, Dr. Ross very early on indicated
     "I am not an expert in addiction."  He must have
     said that two or three times during the course of
     his examination, both direct and cross examination,
     a very candid statement by a person who practices
     internal medicine.  It's true, he's not an expert
     in addiction.  He also said there are true experts
     in addiction.
          And I asked him:  So who are the true experts
     in addiction?
          And he said:  Like board certified
     psychiatrists, like psychiatrists, people who
     specialize in addiction psychiatry.  And of course
     you would expect them to be the experts, that's
     what they are trained to do, that's what they are
     educated to do, that's what they practice doing.
          And in the case of Dr. Nace, that's what he
     researches, that's what he writes about, that's
     what he writes books about.
          Dr. Ross told us some other things that were,
     I think, very interesting on the issue of whether
     or not Mr. Hess truly was addicted.  You remember,
     there's a medical record -- and you're going to
     have -- because all of the evidence that was
     presented in this case will be given to you and you'll have it in your jury room to review if you
     choose to -- and among the items that you'll have
     are all the medical records.
          And there in the medical records is a record
     dated 8-25, August 25th, 1992, in which -- this is
     the one and only time that there is an indication
     in Dr. Ross' records -- or in any of the medical
     records, for that matter -- where anyone said to
     Mr. Hess, hey, would you like some sort of
     intervention?  Would you like, in this case, the
     patch?  It's called Habitrol, in the medical
     record.
          And you may remember that we asked Dr. Ross
     whether or not Mr. Hess said yes, yeah, I would
     like that?  And did Mr. Hess get a prescription
     from it from Dr. Ross?  And the answer was no.  The
     answer from Dr. Ross was "I have no recollection of
     that," no recollection of that.
          Did Dr. Ross make a referral to an addiction
     specialist?  Did he make a referral to a counseling
     outfit, to a smoking cessation group, to anything?
     No.
          Did he offer Mr. Hess Nicorette gum, for
     example?  No.  No.
          He agreed that Mr. Hess was a strong-willed, headstrong person who made his own decisions
     regarding his health and his healthcare.
          Now, Mr. Paige expended an awful lot of energy
     standing approximately where I am right now talking
     about what I'm going to accuse Mr. Hess of.  And in
     fact what I'm going to tell you right now is that
     these are just decisions that people make.  These
     are the decisions people make about how they live
     their lives.  And I'm not going to say it loudly
     and I'm not going to say it energetically; I'm just
     going to say it matter-of-factly, and now I just
     did.
          Dr. Ross, his family members, virtually
     everybody who addressed this subject in this case
     said, look, Mr. Hess had lots of stress.  Now
     whether you call it your woobie or you call it
     something else, people deal with stress in
     different ways.  In Mr. Hess' case, he dealt with
     stress through the prescription medication that
     Dr. Ross gave him, through the cocktails he had at
     the end of the day and through the cigarettes.
          Is there any debate about that?  No, there's
     no debate about it.  Is that how many people deal
     with stress?  I mean, I agree with Mr. Paige, life
     is stressful.  There is no doubt about that, life is stressful.  And we'll talk a bit about how
     stressful Mr. Hess' life was and how he reacted to
     it, but it's just life.
          Dr. Ross also said that Mr. Hess was a
     conflicted smoker, sure, he knew about the health
     risks of smoking and through about and sometimes he
     took steps towards and sometimes he quit smoking.
     As a matter of fact, at the end of the day,
     Dr. Ross wrote in his medical records -- and you'll
     see them -- you've seen them already.  I'm not
     putting it up now because I've shown you these
     records so many times.  The Judge said, you know,
     sometimes jurors get put off by that, don't show
     them again; and I agree, I agree wholeheartedly.
          But Dr. Ross referred to Mr. Hess as an
     intermittent smoker.  He said, you know, he stopped
     when he wanted to, he started when he wanted to.
     He stopped and started.  And that's right in
     Dr. Ross' medical records.  As a matter of fact,
     I'll show you that note here in a little bit.
          And do I tell you that Mr. Hess was
     strong-willed, headstrong person who made his own
     decisions as a negative thing?  Do you know what,
     it's just how we live our lives.  It's just how we
     live our lives. And about Dr. Glassman, Dr. Glassman was an
     interesting fellow because Dr. Glassman has written
     on the topic of nicotine.  There's no question
     about that.  But he's written on it in two areas.
     Depression and smoking, which is -- you heard him
     say my real area of interest and expertise is
     depression.  And he has studied how depression and
     smoking can work together, what's the interaction
     there?
          But Ladies and Gentlemen, there has not been
     one minute of evidence in this case from that stand
     or anywhere else that Mr. Hess suffered from
     depression.  That's not what this case is about.
          And in addition to that, Dr. Glassman has done
     a lot of work in doing drug trials for
     pharmaceutical companies that make products to help
     people quit smoking, they market their products to
     people to quit smoking.  So when they talk about
     all the papers that he's written, those are the two
     areas in which they've been written.  That's all
     right.
          But is he really -- I mean, we're here, the
     issue of the day is was Mr. Hess addicted, was he
     addicted?  And if he was addicted, was his
     addiction so strong that it actually was a legal cause of his death?  A legal cause of his death?
          And is Dr. Glassman an addiction expert?  No,
     he's not.  As a matter of fact, he readily admitted
     it.  I asked him:  Are you board certified by the
     American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology in
     addiction medicine, in addiction psychiatry?
          He said:  No.
          Do you remember, I asked him:  Do you treat
     addicted patients?
          He said:  No.
          I asked him:  Do you treat people who come to
     you to quit smoking?
          He said:  No, I haven't for years.
          If a person comes to him and wants to quit
     smoking, what does he do with them?
          He said:  I send them to somebody else.  And
     that's okay.  That's okay.  But that doesn't make
     you an addiction expert.
          There are -- as a matter of fact, do you
     remember I asked him, aren't there people who have
     Board certification in addiction medicine?
          And he said:  Yeah, I think there is, but I'm
     not really familiar with it, I'm not really
     familiar with it.
          Dr. Glassman has testified in a number of tobacco cases and in each and every one, whether
     he's testified in the case or whether he's just
     consulted, you know, he's been sent a file,
     Dr. Glassman has always found that the smoker in
     the case is addicted, every time.
          Now, why is that?  Well, it's actually pretty
     easy to answer because by his definition everybody
     would be addicted, literally everybody would be
     addicted.  All he wants to know is when do you have
     your first cigarette and how many cigarettes do you
     smoke and that's all I need to know, really.
     That's all I need to know.
          However, it was interesting that when we asked
     him about his own father, do you remember, I said:
     Well, but your dad was a pack-a-day smoker for
     decades, right?
          And he said:  Yeah, he was.
          And I said:  Do you remember in your
     deposition when you told me that you didn't think
     he was addicted?
          He said:  Well, yeah.  But I don't know
     exactly when he started, when his first cigarette
     was in the morning.  I've tried to remember
     whether -- I mean, didn't that seem like something
     of a double standard? I mean, everybody's addicted; if they're a
     smoker and they're filing a lawsuit, but my own dad
     was not addicted, even though he smoked a pack a
     day for years.
          His test, did you see his test in a book?  Did
     you see his test?  Did you see -- did you see a
     manual like this that said Dr. Glassman's test is
     the test that's generally accepted and widely used?
          You know, I thought it was fascinating that
     plaintiff's counsel -- I think it was Mr. Paige
     that put Dr. Glassman on -- never even brought out
     this book, never even brought it out.  Never even
     said, Dr. Glassman, there's the DSM for TR, it has
     a section in it, it's put out by the American
     Psychiatric Association.  It's a manual.  It's got
     a whole section in here on nicotine dependence or
     nicotine addiction, do you accept it, like the
     Surgeon General does?
          Does Mr. Hess meet the criteria?  Does he meet
     the test?  Did he ever ask him that?
          Not once.  Not once.
          Why not?  Well, I'd suggest to you there's a
     reason why not.  And I think you probably already
     know it.  And that is when you don't ask an expert
     something like that it's 'cause you already know the answer, 'cause you already know the answer the
     person's going to say.
          And that second question, the one that
     Mr. Alvarez said is already resolved:  Did they
     ever ask Dr. Glassman, hey, was his addiction a
     legal cause of Mr. Hess' death?  Was it so powerful
     that without addiction Mr. Hess would have quit
     smoking and not gotten lung cancer, be alive today?
     No, he never asked that question.  That question
     never got asked of anybody.  All right.
          I brought you Dr. Nace.  Actually, more
     correctly, Andrew and I brought you Dr. Nace.  I
     don't think I give Andrew enough credit.  We went
     to the University of Texas School of Medicine, we
     asked Dr. Nace, first time he'd ever testified in a
     tobacco trial.  You heard how much money he's been
     paid in this case.  I think it was like $8,000 or
     something.  In terms of what psychiatrists make, it
     was nothing.
          He was a Board certified addiction specialist.
     It's the type of medicine he's been practicing for
     decades, he teaches it at the University of Texas
     Southwest School of Medicine and has for -- what
     did he say -- 35 years.  They said he doesn't treat
     smokers, but he said he did.  What he said was, you know, I don't often times have people come to me
     only because they want to quit smoking.
          But he said I have people come to me every
     week who are there to see me for a variety of
     reasons, who I say do you want to quit smoking and
     when they say yes, I help them quit smoking, and I
     don't care whether they're addicted or not, I don't
     care, it's not important.  If they want to quit
     smoking, I want to help them.
          Does he treat -- he said I treat hundreds of
     people every year for -- on direct examination when
     I asked him -- he said:  I treat hundreds of people
     every year for smoking addiction -- for quitting
     smoking.
          He uses the DSM test to determine whether
     people are addicted, the same as the
     Surgeon General.  They said this is a flawed -- how
     many times did they criticize the DSM, this flawed
     test?  But I guess they just overlooked the fact
     that in the Surgeon General's 1988 report on
     nicotine addiction, there it is.
          And what does the Surgeon General say?  The
     Diagnostic & Statistical Manual, then which is
     1988, and what we've been dealing with is the most
     current edition, right, the 200 edition.  He said the DSM-IIIR of the American Psychiatric
     Association provides a useful example of the
     objective criteria, the objective criteria.  This
     is not guesswork.  This is not, gosh, I'm addicted
     to video games and I'm addicted to whatever.  This
     is an objective criteria in determining whether or
     not someone is truly addicted.  He used it to
     define drug dependence.
          So it isn't just Dr. Nace who says use the
     DSM -- oh, and you remember, one of the articles
     that they showed Dr. Nace to criticize the DSM, do
     you remember I had them highlight the part that
     said -- I think it was widely accepted -- widely
     accepted and generally used.  That's how they
     describe the DSM test, widely accepted and
     generally used.
          Now, Dr. Nace, after reviewing all the medical
     records, all the depositions in this case -- unlike
     Dr. Glassman who didn't do that -- he said look,
     I've reviewed it all and I have sufficient
     information to make a determination, a reasonable
     determination of whether or not Mr. Hess was truly
     nicotine-dependent or addicted.
          And he said, frankly, he doesn't meet the
     criteria.  Now, is that unusual?  He went on to say, you know, the most recent literature --
     science goes on, science goes on -- and he said the
     most recent literature shows that roughly half of
     the smokers, even though they maybe smoking a pack
     or two or three packs a day, half the smokers do
     not meet this objective criteria for being
     addicted, half.  It was undisputed in this room,
     undisputed.
          Dr. Nace said Mr. Hess does not meet the
     DSM-IV diagnosing criteria.  Did Dr. Glassman come
     in and say, oh, yes, he does?  Did you hear that?
     Of course you didn't hear it.  Did anybody come in
     and say that?  No, nobody did.
          And you heard Mr. Paige say -- when he was
     talking about meeting the withdrawal criteria,
     Mr. Paige said, okay, I concede, he doesn't meet
     the withdrawal criteria.
          Could Mr. Hess stopped smoking?  Yes, because
     he did.  Dr. Nace said, yes, because he did.  And
     we showed you those medical records.  I have them
     on boards here.  I almost -- I almost don't want to
     show them to you because they're just -- as a
     matter of fact, I don't think I will.  You'll have
     the records, they say over and over again, in
     November -- maybe I'll show them to you later -- sorry.
          But they show that in November '93, December
     '93, January '94, February '94, based on the
     leukoplakia situation, Mr. Hess comes in and says
     to his physicians, I have stopped smoking.  And
     then in December of '94 when he's talking about
     what he's done in the last year or so, he repeats
     it, he repeats it, he said, you know, back when I
     was -- when I had my leukoplakia, I quit smoking
     and I started again, then I quit a while ago, and
     now very recently I started again.
          Now, they tried to convince you -- they have
     tried to convince you that Mr. Hess was
     embarrassed, too embarrassed to tell the truth.
     But I suggest to you, Ladies and Gentlemen, that
     for all the times Mr. Hess told his physicians I am
     smoking or I am doing what I want to do, you've
     told me what I should do, and I'm telling you what
     I will do, the idea that Mr. Hess -- the fellow
     that Dr. Ross described as headstrong and
     strong-willed -- the idea that in this tiny moment
     in time he all of a sudden became too embarrassed
     to tell Dr. Ross that he was still smoking is
     really, I think, without basis, without basis.
          Mr. Hess, without debate, smoked to deal with the stress of his life.  And Dr. Nace explained to
     you that after a couple of months, whatever changes
     occur in the brain have returned to normal.  If
     there are changes that have occurred in the brain,
     they returned to normal.
          Is it for nicotine that people go back?
          He said:  No.  Two or three months down the
     road, that's not why people go back.
          Why do they go back?
          They go back because, guess what, if you
     smoked for stress, if you encounter a stressful
     situation again, it's entirely possible that if you
     gave up drinking or you gave up smoking or you gave
     up whatever you do to help you give up stress you
     may go back to it because, guess what, you're under
     stress again.
          Is that a shock?  Is that a surprise?  I don't
     think so.  Is that what we human beings do in our
     stressful lives?  Of course it is.
          I already mentioned that current science shows
     that 50 percent of all regular smokers aren't
     addicted by the DSM test.  And we showed you that
     chart undisputed, this chart, undisputed that over
     time what they keep talking about is, when they
     talk about the five percent or the three percent or the 20 percent that quit in any given year, that's
     that snapshot, right?
          But Dr. Nace is the only one who took you
     about how people live their lives.  We don't live
     our lives in a snapshot.  I don't take your picture
     today and then not revisit you next week, not
     month, next year and the year after that.  But
     there have been folks, scientists, medical
     scientists, who have followed people over, in this
     case, 30, 35 years to see whether or not -- well,
     you may not have quit this year, but do you quit?
     And the answer is 80 percent of folks quit.
          Now, a hundred percent of them want to quit?
     No.  You've already been told that there is some
     portion of the smoking population that doesn't want
     to quit, so is it any -- I mean, this is a huge
     percentage of smokers that quit over time, a huge
     percentage.  And that's what Dr. Nace explained to
     you.  All right.
          Frankly, it seems that the evidence in this
     case demonstrates that from an objective standard,
     from an objective standard, that the answer to this
     first question, have they proved to you by
     sufficiently strong evidence to convince you that
     Mr. Hess was, in fact, addicted?  I think the answer is no.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Excuse me, Judge.  Objection to
     proper instructions.
          THE COURT:  Correct, that's not consistent
     with the issue, sufficiently strong.  The word is
     "greater weight."
          MR. REILLY:  Greater weight.  That's how
     strong it has to be, by the greater weight of the
     evidence.
          Have they proved to you that Mr. Hess was
     addicted?
          And I think the answer to that question is
     "no."
          But because there are two issues here, I'm
     going to talk about the second issue, too, because
     they have to prove both of these things to you.
          Now, what's the instruction on legal cause?
     You remember in my opening statement -- I actually
     read from the actual instruction to explain to you
     what it was:  "Addiction" -- and it's addiction,
     not smoking -- "addiction is a legal cause of an
     injury if it directly and in natural and continuous
     sequence produces or contributes substantially to
     producing such injury so that it can reasonable be
     said that" -- and this is the key phrase here -- "but for the addiction" in other words, without the
     addiction -- "the injury would not have occurred."
          And that's true regardless of whether or not
     there may be some other concurring cause.  It still
     has to be addiction contributes substantially to
     producing such loss.  So regardless of whether
     there are multiple reasons why Mr. Hess developed
     his lung cancer or just one, addiction has to be so
     important in that process that if Mr. Hess had not
     been addicted --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge, this is an
     improper argument.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  Continue.
          MR. REILLY:  If Mr. Hess had not been
     addicted, he wouldn't have gotten lung cancer and
     wouldn't have died.  It's just that simple.
          Well, so what's the evidence on that?  Do you
     remember during voir dire -- actually, during voir
     dire, and I used this during my opening statement,
     but during voir dire we talked about, would you
     guys only want to know about somebody's smoking
     history or would you really want to know about the
     whole person?  And during voir dire, the answer was
     the whole person.
          Then in my opening statement, I told you, we're going to bring you the whole person, this
     headstrong, strong-willed, in-control person.
          Now, Mr. Paige during his presentation in a
     very energetic way, indicated that I'm going to be
     really critical of this and I'm going to say all
     these things about Mr. Hess, but I'm not.  This is
     neither the time nor the place.
          What I'm going to tell you about is, in order
     to understand how Mr. Hess lived his life, you have
     to understand the issues in his life.  You have to
     understand the medical conditions in his life, you
     have to understand his employment, otherwise, how
     will you understand the stresses of his life?  How
     will you understand why Mr. Hess smoked?
          If you only knew his smoking history, you
     would have never learned about Mr. Hess being
     self-employed with the stress that goes along with
     that, you would have never learned about his family
     and the stress that goes along with that.  Of
     course, the joy goes along with it, too, but you
     have never learned how he dealt with stress, would
     you?  You would have known none of that, none of
     that.
          And, of course, if you don't know how he deals
     with the medical issues of his life and the recommendations of how to care for himself that the
     doctors give him, than you would have a very
     difficult time understanding exactly how he
     addressed his smoking, it seems to me.
          So did I bring you Dr. Bishopric, for example,
     to say that losing weight is easy?  Dr. Bishopric
     said losing weight can be very hard for people.
     That isn't why I brought Dr. Bishopric here.  I
     brought Dr. Bishopric here to explain to you how
     Mr. Hess addressed his medical issues so that you'd
     have an understanding of how Mr. Hess dealt with
     the issues in his life that came with the potential
     for long-term health consequences, including
     smoking.
          And that included, yes, I have a hamburger
     here, it's hard to depict a diet, right?  But you
     know that one of the issues for Mr. Hess -- in
     spite of the fact that they continually said his
     diet, his weight was never an issue -- the medical
     records say it's an issue.  Why?  Because of his
     particular cardiac problems.
          Now, why they run away from that, I have no
     idea.  It's documented in the medical records.  I
     agree completely that if you want to know an
     unbiased, not memory-dependent source of information by folks who were there at the time
     talking and dealing directly with Mr. Hess, we have
     such a source, we have such a source.  And what is
     that?  It's the medical records in the case.  Those
     caregivers, the doctors and the nurses and the
     respiratory therapists, they didn't write in their
     charts information because they thought there was
     going to be a lawsuit 13, 14, 15 years down the
     road, no.  They were writing in their charts what
     they were saying to Mr. Hess, what Mr. Hess was
     saying to them, and what was going on with Mr. Hess
     for one reason only, and that was to effect care
     and treatment to Mr. Hess, that's it.  They have no
     stake in this case.
          But what those records will show are how
     Mr. Hess dealt with diet, exercise, alcohol,
     following doctor's recommendation regarding
     medication -- and I don't mean did he take the last
     penicillin pill in the container -- smoking, going
     in the hospital, because only when you know that,
     only when you see that will you understand the
     mind-set of Mr. Hess.
          They spent a great deal of time -- Mr. Paige,
     in particular, spent a great deal of time -- again
     with great animation -- telling you that Mr. Hess was one of the folks that never got the message,
     didn't get it for decades, about whether or not
     smoking came with the risks of health consequences.
          But I think, frankly, that whole notion was
     completely dispelled by one of his long-time
     friends, Robert Frankenberg.  Do you remember the
     guy?  I think his deposition was taken in
     Las Vegas.  And Frankenberg -- if Mr. Paige calls
     it the cat's out of the bag -- then he spilled the
     beans; whatever phrase you want to use.
          Do you remember that Mr. Frankenberg said
     Mr. Hess was a very smart guy, and he would remind
     you that he had two masters' degrees and he met him
     when Mr. Frankenberg and Mr. Hess were both in
     their early 20's, early 20's, both students in
     universities on the East Coast.
          And he said Mr. Hess was incredibly current on
     current affairs, that he was a voracious -- he read
     a ton, that he kept up to date, that he knew more
     about what was going on than Mr. Frankenberg.  And
     Mr. Frankenberg said -- here's what he said.  "He
     certainly was aware" -- this was his exact language
     from the video -- "he certainly was aware if there
     were -- I would say he was aware of smoking being
     dangerous, but, you know, you poo-poo things, when you were young, when you were in your early 20's."
          Any question as to when this conversation
     happened?
          "When you're in your early 20's.  They got
     married, very young, you get -- you don't think,
     you're indestructible."
          That's okay.  It's just a decision we make.
          You remember during voir dire we were talking
     about the decisions we make in our '20s versus our
     '30s versus '40s, and I couldn't find anybody that
     would say they were in their '50s, as I recall.
     But, you know, it's just the way we live our lives.
          But to say that Mr. Hess was somehow incapable
     of learning what was going on, that he was one of
     the folks that didn't know, here's Mr. Frankenberg,
     hasn't seen him in years, yet he remembers, he
     remembers the two of them conversing in their '20s,
     early '20s:
          Did you express to him that you thought that
     smoking too much would be bad for his health?
          Yeah.
          I'm asking you:  Do you recall what Stuart
     would say to you the one or two times you told him
     that he should quit?  He should cut back on his
     smoking because it was bad for him. Answer:  I just think he sort of agreed with
     me.
          Now, he's not -- this isn't a poll of some
     unknown people.  This isn't a statistic.  This is
     one friend talking about another old friend.  And
     remembering, amazingly remembering a conversation
     that occurred in the early '60s, that's what 45, 6
     years ago?
          And this is the timeline I showed you in my
     opening statement.  And here's Mr. Hess when he
     meets his future wife, Elaine, and you remember
     that she didn't like his smoking and she told him
     you got to stop if you want to kiss me or you're
     going to have to brush your teeth or wash your
     mouth out.
          Now, did anybody come in and say in 1962
     Mr. Hess couldn't quit, he was addicted and he
     couldn't quit?  No.
          How about 1963, or thereabouts, when he meets
     Mr. Frankenberg and they have this discussion,
     anybody come in and say he was addicted and
     couldn't quit?  No.
          Well, how about in 1964 when the
     Surgeon General's report came out and you saw Harry
     Reasoner look right at you, you saw the Surgeon General look right at you through the eye
     of the T.V. and tell you what was going on, did
     anybody come in and say he was addicted then and
     couldn't quit?  No.
          How about in 1966 when the warnings were on
     the packs?  No.
          How about in 1970?  How about in 1970 when
     Mrs. Hess said, we're going to have our first
     child -- Allison -- I'd like you to quit.
          And he said, well, I'll try.
          And then -- remember, I asked her:  Did he
     try?
          And she finally said:  No, he didn't try.
          Did anybody say he was addicted then and
     couldn't quit?  No, nobody.  Nobody.
          And that's, of course, the same year that the
     warning changed on the cigarette packs.  But now
     things change in Mr. Hess' life, don't they?
          And in 1973, he comes down here, becomes
     partners with Mr. Dorfman in a business enterprise,
     something he's always wanted to do, right?  He
     always wanted to own his own business, he always
     wanted to be in charge.  But along with being in
     charge comes the risk of being in charge, right?
          Now, for folks who have been self-employed, they know if the phone doesn't ring, if the truck
     doesn't run, if the bill doesn't get paid, it goes
     right to the bottom line, right?  If you don't make
     a sale, if you -- there's no revenue and the
     pressure's pretty great.
          And we know that in this time frame Mr. Hess
     begins to deal with stress, just as -- he took on a
     behavior, a habit, whatever you want to call it,
     that Mrs. Hess' father had taken on, which was to
     end the day with some cocktails.  Now there's
     nothing wrong with that.  You can drink too much if
     you have IHSS -- and, by the way, Mr. Alvarez said,
     well, this guy meets this criteria on the DSM
     because he's smoking after he's been diagnosed with
     heart disease.  But I guess Mr. Alvarez forgot that
     for that to be part of the test, it has to be a
     smoking-caused disease.  You have to continue
     smoking after you've been diagnosed with a
     smoking-caused disease.
          And if you remember the definition of IHSS,
     the "I" stands for "idiopathic," which means no one
     knows what causes it, so -- and the bronchitis,
     nobody said that his bronchitis was caused by
     smoking, nobody.  Look in the medical records, you
     have them, look in them, if you choose to, no one says his bronchitis was caused by smoking.
          So -- and you remember that while today they
     say Mr. Reilly is trying to distract you, I'm
     trying to distract you with this talk of Mr. Hess'
     lifestyle choices.  But during the course of the
     trial, remember how much time they spent focused on
     disapproving the idea that Mr. Hess was being told
     by his doctors to lose weight, that Mr. Hess was
     told to exercise, that Mr. Hess was told to reduce
     his drinking?
          You remember that Mrs. Hess spent time on the
     stand testifying they had an exercise bicycle in
     their home, that they had a rowing machine, and
     David Hess and Mrs. Hess talked about bicycling
     around the neighborhood for exercise to satisfy
     these requirements?
          But then you remember that it was Mr. Trop
     during the cross examination of Dr. Bishopric when
     he said:  Don't you know that he did all these
     things?
          And Dr. Bishopric said, boy, that's not what I
     read.  I read all the deposition and that's not
     what I read.  That's right, because this is what
     Dr. Bishopric read.  This was the testimony of
     Mrs. Hess in the deposition that was taken and you remember that she said -- she was asked by
     Mr. Brenner:  Did he have a weight problem
     throughout his life?
          Even today when they showed the pictures, they
     said he has no weight problem.  But here's
     Mrs. Hess acknowledging later on he put on weight.
          Did he try dieting to address that problem?
          Her answer was:  Not really.
          Did you ever ask him to?
          Not that I recall.
          Did he ever exercise to address his weight
     problem?
          No.  No.
          Did he think he had a weight problem?
          I don't remember.
          Do you recall any of his doctors ever telling
     him he had a weight problem?
          I think one or two of them might have said you
     should lose some weight.
          Well, we know from a review of the medical
     records that because of his IHSS he was told
     repeatedly over years to lose weight.  You saw them
     tracking his weight.
          And what -- I'm sorry -- would he say?
          Just dismiss it.  It was a non-issue to him. Why is that?
          I don't know.
          Was it an issue to you, his weight problem?
          Personally?
          Yes.
          His weight problem, no.
          Now, if that isn't in direct conflict with
     what Mrs. Hess described, a rowing machine, an
     exercise bicycle, and if this is inconsequential in
     this lawsuit, then why spend the time?  Why spend
     the time?
          THE CLERK:  Twenty more minutes, counselor.
          MR. REILLY:  I guess I will show you.  Do you
     remember I brought Dr. Jones here?  Another fellow
     who -- he got paid $2500 to come here total.  Was
     he here for the money?  That's ridiculous.
          Medical records that show that when Mr. Hess
     was sufficiently motivated, could he quit?
     Absolutely, he did.  The medical records tell us he
     did.
          1993 December, he stopped smoking.  He feels
     it is slowly resolving since he stopped smoking.
          Recently stopped smoking, December 22nd, 1993.
     That's two different doctors.
          January 14th, 1994, he's not smoking. Can he stop smoking?  When he is sufficiently
     motivated, he can stop smoking.
          February 11th, 1994, this is Dr. Maliner, "his
     vocal cords are almost normal."
          If this is unimportant, then why did they
     spend so much time trying to establish that
     Dr. Maliner must have cured this leukoplakia by
     some sort of surgical procedure?  Why were they so
     intent on that?  Ask yourself that, why were they
     so intent on that?
          I think the answer's pretty clear, because
     everyone recognizes that Mr. Hess could stop and
     did stop, and it wasn't just for the two weeks that
     Mrs. Hess described.  It was for months.
          Here's the look-back.  This is the December
     '94 medical record, "stopped smoking a couple
     months ago but started smoking recently."  He had
     leukoplakia of the vocal cords and was biopsied
     about a year ago by Dr. Maliner.  He was advised to
     stop smoking at that time and he did for a while
     but resumed.
          And now, what does Dr. -- this is Dr. Ross'
     note -- how does he describe him now?  Does he say
     he's an addicted smoker?  No.  He says "he smokes
     intermittently." Now, they said he resumed smoking and smoked
     all the way through his care and treatment for
     cancer.  What they forgot to tell you -- and the
     medical record -- you will have the medical
     record -- in the medical record there is -- and I
     forget the date of it, but I believe it's in about
     May of is the '97 -- I forget exactly the date so
     don't hold me to it -- but there's a medical record
     explaining what happened.
          And it says, "when Mr. Hess got his diagnosis,
     the prognosis, the likelihood of a cure was
     explained to him, and he was told, the type of
     cancer you have and how it's spread already, there
     is no probability of cure.
          And so Mr. Hess said -- he had already quit
     smoking, and he said, well, would it be all right
     then if I went back to smoking?
          And his treating doctor said yes, it would be
     all right.  So that's what happened.
          Now, is that a sign of addiction or is that
     assign of a guy who clearly at that point is under
     stress and says, do you know what, I only have a
     certain amount of time left, I'm going to live it
     like I want to live it.  I'm going to rely on --
     does he stop drinking?  No, he continues to drink alcohol, too.  Is there anything wrong with that?
     Absolutely not.  Absolutely not.
          Now, Mr. Paige spent virtually all of his
     presentation up here talking about documents that
     you saw during the course of this trial generated
     at Philip Morris or related sources.  And you have
     to ask yourself -- Mr. Paige kept saying, this is
     not about choice, this is not about fault, this is
     not about -- then why was he showing you all that?
     Why was he doing that?  He's right, this is not
     about fault.
          This is about -- we have two questions to
     answer.  Was Mr. Hess addicted?  And was
     Mr. Hess -- if he was addicted -- was his addiction
     an essential reason why he developed his lung
     cancer and died?  Those are the questions before
     you.
          So unless they're going to stand up here --
     they have eight minutes or six minutes, or five
     minutes, I don't know how much they got left after
     I sit down.  But unless they're going to come back
     up here and say, oh, well, do you know what, if
     Philip Morris had simply said something different
     than it did, Mr. Hess would have quit and he
     wouldn't have gotten his lung cancer, then all of this is unimportant to the issues that we have
     before us at this moment, completely unimportant.
          Ask yourself, how is it whether or not
     Philip Morris said yes, smoking causes lung cancer,
     or yes, smoking is addictive -- addicting in 1994,
     in a -- in Mr. Hess' case, how will that help you
     in any way answer the question of whether or not
     Mr. Hess was addicted or whether or not -- if he
     was addicted -- his addiction was so important that
     if he'd not been addicted, the stress wouldn't have
     caused him to continue to smoke, the -- nothing
     would have caused him to continue to smoke and he
     would have quit smoking and he would have not
     gotten lung cancer and he'd be here today.
          What does it have to do with those two
     questions?  And the answer is, not a doggone thing.
          And there's an instruction which you're going
     to get from Judge Streitfeld that tells you you can
     ignore all that.  It says:  "Some of the evidence
     you have heard on the issue presented" -- that
     should be issues presented -- "for your decision
     may also relate to other issues that are not before
     you."  And that's exactly what that is, not before
     you.  "You should consider such evidence only as it
     relates to the" -- it should be -- "issues."  My fault, my fault.  All right.
          And frankly, I'm not going to spend any more
     time on it because it isn't the issues of the day.
          So let me go back to the verdict form.  You
     can see I'm out of boards, you're probably all
     happy about that.  But here are the questions.
          Was Stuart Hess addicted to cigarettes,
     including nicotine?
          I think the evidence has shown that the answer
     to that is no, based on an objective test.
          If you think that he was addicted, was such
     addiction a legal cause of Mr. Hess' death?
          Was his addiction shown in this case by the
     greater weight of the evidence to be so important
     that if Mr. Hess has not been addicted, that the
     stress of his life wouldn't have caused him to
     continue smoking and unfortunately develop lung
     cancer and die?
          I think the answer to both those questions,
     frankly, is no.  But a "no" answer to either one of
     them is a "no," and that will end your service in
     this case.
          Now I'm going to sit down.  How much time do I
     have left?
          THE CLERK:  Fifteen minutes. MR. REILLY:  Fifteen minutes?  Wow, I am never
     that good.  I am going to sit down, though.
          And because they have the burden of proof in
     this case -- I have no burden of proof in this
     case.  Because they have the burden of proof in
     this case, they get another chance to get back up
     and talk to you one more time, one more time.
          And I'm not, neither Mr. Brenner nor I will,
     get a chance to come back again and address you
     again.  And so I would just ask you -- frankly, I
     was talking to Mr. Brenner last night about this.
     This reminds me of when you have a child in -- just
     starting little league baseball, for example, and
     they ask you to come coach your child's team.
          And you go, you meet with the players for the
     first time, and you're checking them out, you see,
     well, this one seems to field pretty well, this one
     throws pretty well, this one bats pretty well and
     you're trying to decide your line up, right, you're
     trying to figure out where you're going to put
     everybody.
          And this one, because he bats very good, you
     put him in the line up -- anybody who's made a line
     up before, you know you put him pretty high in the
     line up.  But you don't know yet whether or not these kids have ever played in a game.
          So when you get to the game, the very first
     game, your kids get up to bat for the very first
     time and -- I don't know if this still -- I'm older
     than anybody in the box, so I don't know if this is
     still the case -- but used to be that when your
     team's up to bat, the team out in the field when
     the pitcher starts to pitch the ball, there's a
     chant, and the chant runs something like this:
          The pitcher starts to pitch and the ball
     starts to come across the plate.  Everybody starts
     to yell, "hey, batter, batter, batter, batter."  I
     don't know if it's still the same anymore.
          But as the ball gets closer and closer and
     closer to play, the chant gets louder and louder
     and louder.  And right about the time the batter's
     got to decide whether to swing or not swing,
     everybody out in the field yells "swing," right?
          Now, I know that Mr. Paige would have done
     that a lot differently than I just did.  But a
     little boy, he never played in a game before and
     guess what he does?  Three pitches, three chants,
     three swings, he's out.  And he does it three
     times.  Gets up to bat three times in the game.
     He's out three times. And so now you're the coach and you got to
     take him back, and you got to say, gosh, how do I
     resolve this?  And you put him in the box.  You
     take the bat out of his hand and you get down on
     the mound and you have him just throw balls.
          And you tell the little boy, look, I don't
     want you to swing -- you don't even have a bat --
     all I want you to do is watch the ball come right
     into the catcher's mitt, right into the catcher's
     mitt, that's all I want you to do.  And you know --
     you know he's going to flinch the first two, three,
     four, who knows how many times.  But if you do
     that, you know that eventually he will just watch
     the ball come right into the catcher's mitt.  He'll
     keep his eye on the ball.  And that's all I ask you
     you to do.  And I give you the bat back.