          MR. REILLY:  Good afternoon.
          Before I start my closing argument in this
      Phase II, let me say that on behalf of Andrew
      and myself and Philip Morris and on behalf of
      everyone in the room, obviously, we all are very
      thankful for your service.
          At the very beginning of this case when we were just conducting voir dire, remember that I
      said to you guys, I said to everybody, I said,
      what do jurors have?  Because we ask you to
      resolve our civil disputes, right?
          And they said on the one hand you come with
      great power.  Great power.  And I said on the
      other hand you come with great responsibility.
      Great responsibility.  And we put that in your
      hands.  And now, very shortly from now, when I
      finish my closing argument and when the
      Plaintiffs -- I don't know who's going to get up
      and speak, whether it's going to be Mr. Alvarez
      or Mr. Paige, but when they have their
      additional few minutes after I sit down, then
      the case will be yours.
          And it will be each one of yours case to
      decide.  You're all independent voters in that
      process.  Independent voters.  But it would
      be -- well, it's appropriate for me to say that
      on behalf of us we appreciate your efforts.
          Now, I was going to say when I thought we
      were going to have a longer Phase II, you know,
      the Plaintiff's lawyers said, well, Phase II's
      going to take a couple of days and we're going
      to enlighten you about everything, we're going to show you all this stuff, but then what
      happened in Phase II?
          I apologize, but I think Friday you worked
      for, what, an hour and a half, two hours
      altogether?  And what is it that the Plaintiff
      showed you that was new and different in Phase
      II?  Well, they showed you the congressional
      hearings, which you just saw, but you had
      already heard about those from their historian
      Dr. Kyriakoudes, so that wasn't new.
          They showed you, or Judge Streitfeld read
      you the findings from a prior proceeding, but
      that didn't give you any new evidence.  Those
      findings are binding on everybody, sure, but
      they didn't provide you with any new evidence,
      did it?
          And Mrs. Hess and David Hess came back to
      the stand and they told you how much they missed
      Stuart Hess.  And they had already told you that
      to some degree during Phase I of this trial.
      And, of course, it's no surprise that they miss
      Stuart Hess.  We're all sympathetic for their
      loss, but that really wasn't anything new
      either.
          And that's everything the Plaintiffs provided you in Phase II, isn't it?  That's it.
          So now what is something that was new and
      different and surprising probably for you from
      Phase I to Phase II?  What was that?  Well, I
      think it was the fact that you learned for the
      very first time that when they brought this
      lawsuit, when they brought this lawsuit on the
      very first day this suit was filed -- Mr. Paige
      just told you a minute ago that he's the one
      that signed the pleadings.  Mrs. Hess admitted
      on the very first day this lawsuit was filed,
      back when they knew all the things they were
      going to allege, all the things they were going
      to accuse Philip Morris of that Mr. Hess was
      addicted and they were going to say couldn't
      quit.  They were going to say Philip Morris had
      been bad and in all sorts of manners.  They knew
      that.  And they knew about the prior findings.
      They knew all about that.  And yet on that very
      first day, a year and a half ago, they said,
      Mr. Hess is a legal cause, a partial legal
      cause, but a legal cause of himself getting lung
      cancer and dying.
          MR. PAIGE:  Your Honor, objection.  That's
      not the entire admission or the instruction. THE COURT:  I'll instruct the jury.
          Please try to be faithful to my
      instructions.
          MR. REILLY:  Your Honor, I believe I will
      show --
          THE COURT:  Thank you.  Continue.
          MR. REILLY:  Here's what you're going to
      see.  I'll just read along with you.  "The Court
      also instructs you that the Plaintiff has
      admitted in their pleadings that Stuart Hess is
      partially at fault and bears responsibility for
      the frequency and duration of his quit attempts
      and that this fault was a concurring legal
      cause," concurring legal cause, "in combination
      with acts or omissions of the Defendant of his
      smoking-related injuries and death."
          Now, in all of Phase I, in all of Phase I
      did you ever hear such a concession?  Did you
      ever hear such a statement?
          Mr. Paige just said in Phase I he couldn't
      tell you about the prior findings.  In Phase I I
      couldn't tell you about this admission, this
      concession, couldn't tell you.
          It says, you're also going to read, it says,
      "The conduct of Stuart Hess and Philip Morris USA can be considered a legal cause if it
      directly and in natural and continuous sequence
      produces or contributes substantially to
      producing a loss so that it can reasonably be
      said that but for" -- that didn't work.
          -- "but for it, the loss would not have
      occurred.  Accordingly, you must assign some
      percentage of responsibility on your verdict
      forms to Mr. Hess."
          Did you hear anything like that in Phase I?
          What does that mean?  What did the evidence
      in this case show you, and what does this mean?
      What does the evidence in this case show you
      about who was in control of Mr. Hess' behaviors,
      including smoking?
          Now you know.  Now you know, including
      smoking, what they admitted the very first day
      they filed the lawsuit.  The very first day.
          So what does this lawsuit really boil down
      to now?  I think it boils down to three words.
      And what are they?
          They are control.  What does this mean?
      What does this mean?  It means, quite literally
      and, frankly, and logically, that they knew the
      first day this lawsuit was filed that Mr. Hess had it within his control to quit smoking and
      quit smoking in time to avoid getting lung
      cancer.
          Why is that inescapably logically true?
      Because if all Mr. Hess could do was try one
      more time but failed, if all Mr. Hess could do
      was try one more day and failed, then he can't
      have been a legal cause of his own injury,
      because his efforts would still not have
      prevented him from getting lung cancer, right?
          That's the only way it works.
          The evidence in this case, what we showed
      you about who was in control of Mr. Hess'
      lifestyle decisions -- and that's why I showed
      you -- I couldn't tell you in Phase I, look,
      pretty soon you're going to find out that
      they've known all along that Mr. Hess had this
      power in his hands.  But why do you think I
      showed you all those other controls that he
      exercised, all those other controls that he had?
      Because I knew that one day I'd be able to stand
      here and put it all together for you.  One day
      I'd be able to stand here and say, what is this
      case about?  This case is about these three
      words, control, causation, and responsibility. Now you know who was in control of Mr. Hess'
      ability to quit smoking, his other lifestyle
      choices.  Did I show you all that just to show
      you whether Mr. Hess could or couldn't lose
      weight?  That's crazy.  Mr. Paige stood up here
      and said, this is crazy, that's crazy.  That
      would be crazy.
          This is a case about smoking, but what I was
      showing you was a pattern of behavior on the
      part of Mr. Hess, a pattern of control, a
      pattern of behavior that is absolutely confirmed
      the day they filed this lawsuit.  The day they
      filed it.
          So what do these three words stand for?
          Control.  Who is in control of Mr. Hess'
      ability to stop smoking?  Now you know.  When
      you know who's in control of the ability to stop
      smoking, that will tell you what was the cause
      of him getting lung cancer, won't it?  And then
      you'll be able, because we're going to ask you
      to, to apportion or assign responsibility,
      percentages of responsibility for Mr. Hess
      developing his lung cancer.  And that's going to
      be one of the responsibilities that you guys
      have. So that's what this case is about.
          You remember throughout Phase I all you
      heard over and over and over again was Mr. Hess
      couldn't quit.  Mr. Hess couldn't quit.
          Here was Mrs. Hess.
          "Was it hard for him?
          "Impossible to quit."
          This is right out of the trial transcript.
      Impossible for him to quit.  It really was
      impossible.
          Mrs. Hess -- this is Alex Alvarez asking:
      "Mrs. Hess, my last question to you is:  Was
      your husband addicted to cigarettes containing
      nicotine?"
          Her answer was, "A thousand percent, yes.
      He couldn't quit if his life depended on it, and
      it did, his life depended on it and he couldn't
      quit."
          That was Mrs. Hess.
          All the time this admission existed from a
      year and a half ago.
          David Hess, "I think he tried as hard as he
      could."  Trial transcript, Phase I.
          This was Alex Alvarez's closing argument,
      closing argument.  "Told he had lung cancer, he couldn't stop.  Chemotherapy, he couldn't stop."
          Now, that was last Thursday, that was last
      Thursday.  Do you remember?
          And then what happened the very next day,
      Friday, when Mr. Trop got up and gave his
      opening statement in this phase?  Did he
      continue to say Mr. Hess couldn't quit?  Did he
      say to you, Mr. Hess tried as hard as he could
      and he couldn't quit?
          No, he didn't.  No, then he said, when Phase
      II started he said, "And make no mistake about
      it, Mrs. Hess is admitting that Stuart Hess bore
      some responsibility for his smoking habits and
      perhaps not trying more times, even more times
      to quit."
          From Thursday to Friday we went from he
      can't quit to he could have quit.  And now you
      know why.  Because we had an admission, an
      admission you didn't hear about.
          MR. PAIGE:  Your Honor, I object.  And it
      doesn't conform with actually Phase I.  There
      were statements in Phase I contrary to this.
          THE COURT:  You can respond in your
      rebuttal, sir.
          MR. REILLY:  Now I don't know.  You guys are the deliberators.  It's possible that when you
      deliberated that some of you may have thought, I
      think Mr. Hess could have quit.  I think it was
      in his power.  And some of you may have thought,
      well, but I didn't hear that testimony in
      Phase I.  All I heard was he couldn't quit.
      That's all I heard over and over and over again.
      But now you know.  And those admissions were
      made, like I said, those admissions were made
      when they filed their lawsuit.
          And they made all the allegations of all the
      acts of wrongdoing of Philip Morris.  They knew
      he could quit then.  They said, we know all
      about these findings that the Judge has read to
      you.  No evidence comes with those, but the
      findings are binding.  And they knew all about
      that and they said he could quit.
          And they knew all about what they were going
      to present to you as his level of addiction.
      And they said he could quit.
          But that was all before Phase I, right?
          Now, what was the evidence, because this
      is -- we are asking you to assign responsibility
      between Philip Morris and Mr. Hess, right?
          And so I've tried to put together the actual allegations.  Mr. Paige was just here and he was
      saying over and over again they acted so bad,
      they acted so bad, they concealed this
      information, but you saw very little facts,
      right?  You saw very little facts.
          What was it?  And what I've tried to do is
      condense what they've been talking about in such
      general terms into specifics.  And what are
      those specifics?
          What is it that they've really complained
      about?  What they've basically complained in
      Phase I, because you didn't see anything in
      Phase II, but in Phase I what they basically
      complained about was that Philip Morris kept
      secrets and didn't reveal information on four
      topics, four topics basically.
          The first one was whether cigarettes were
      addictive.  And what I wanted to do was -- and
      this is what I did on cross-examination of their
      Dr. Proctor.  Remember him?  The very first
      witness, the professor of the history of science
      from Stanford?  The guy who said, I'm here to
      help Mrs. Hess win.  Remember that guy?  That
      was a long time ago, I know.
          But he was here to say it was a secret, right.  But on cross-examination on this
      subject, are cigarettes addictive?  I asked him
      about whether such an idea was a secret.
          Here's my question and here's his answer:
          "So if, in fact, there was an article
      published in 1943 in Good Health," remember I
      stood right there at the podium and I had all
      these articles, Reader's Digest and all these
      other magazines and I said, for goodness sakes,
      these things were being published all the time
      here in America, not in scientific publications,
      but in everyday reading materials of the
      everyday person in this country.
          And I asked him, look at Good Health.  In
      1943, a year after Mr. Hess was born, I said,
      "that spoke in terms of the use of tobacco as a
      real addiction."  I said, "that wouldn't
      surprise you."
          And Dr. Proctor said, "No, not at all."
          Is this a secret?  It's not a secret to the
      American public.
          The fact that 20 years later somebody at
      Philip Morris writes in an internal memo, "I
      think that cigarettes are an addiction or
      smoking is an addiction," that's not a secret kept from the American public.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.  It's
      contrary to the findings --
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          Which one of you is doing the objecting?
          Thank you.
          MR. REILLY:  Our Dr. Schaller, the historian
      from Arizona, showed you a Life Magazine article
      from 1958, probably the year that Mr. Hess
      began -- took the first puff on a cigarette.
      Was this some sort of a secret?
          Well, here's an article in Life Magazine.
      It's a picture magazine.  This is nothing
      scientific or secretive.  And it said, "British
      addicts gasp nobly through anti-tobacco
      experiment.  As they trudged up the hill to
      Garfield House, the addicts took a last hungry
      drag on their cigarettes."
          Did the American public think of smoking as
      an addiction?  Sure they did.  I realize we have
      to take you back in time, but you couldn't write
      something like that and put it in Life Magazine
      if it didn't resonate with the readers.  You
      wouldn't talk to them about some concepts that
      were foreign to the world.  But here in 1958, Life Magazine, they're talking about smoking
      addicts.
          And here's Newsweek, another absolutely -- I
      mean, you can go to the newsstand today, I don't
      know if they still sell Life, I know they had a
      lot of pretty photographs in them, but I know
      you can go to the newsstand and get Newsweek.
      It's just a general news magazine for the
      American public.  And that article said,
      "Smoking is a most serious drug addiction and
      with a real psychological basis."
          Did Philip Morris have a secret?
          Did Mr. Hess -- they said at 15 he was this,
      that or the other.  And there was no testimony
      about what Mr. Hess did at age 15, because
      nobody was there.  Nobody was there.  Think
      back, the first time Mrs. Hess meets Mr. Hess is
      when he's 20 years old.  Nobody was around when
      Mr. Hess smoked his first cigarette.  We don't
      even know what it was.  We don't even know what
      the circumstances were.  But one thing's for
      sure, in America, average people were talking
      about cigarettes as addictive in 1958.
          Second secret.  Nicotine is the reason
      people smoke.  Remember all the documents Mr. Paige put up, internal documents from Philip
      Morris from '68 or '72 or -- well, nicotine is
      the reason people smoke has been known forever.
          Again, I was cross-examining Dr. Proctor and
      I said, "Doctor, to spare a little time, let
      me -- you'll agree with me that there were
      scientists that were looking at the decisive
      factor and the effects of tobacco being nicotine
      in the '30s and '40s and '50s, correct?
          "Yes.
          "And they were publishing their findings and
      opinions in the '30s, '40s and '50s, correct?
          "That's correct.
          "And their opinions always were, 'Yes,
      nicotine is the decisive factor in why people
      smoke,' right?
          "I don't think they all were, but that was
      certainly one element of the discussion, yes."
          I said, and here it is, the key, "No secret
      within the scientific community either, was it?
          "No, it certainly wasn't a secret."
          Certainly wasn't a secret.
          "Is it any surprise to you that people at
      Philip Morris in the '70s or the '60s or the
      '80s would write that they think that nicotine is why people smoke?
          For goodness sakes, they could have read the
      Reader's Digest in 1950 and found that out.
          There it is, an article in Reader's Digest.
      "Nicotine is the essential ingredient in
      tobacco.  It is what makes tobacco tobacco and
      not just another weed."
          1958, Reader's Digest.  I mean, this is no
      scientific publication and it's no secret
      publication either, is it?  "Nicotine is
      tobacco's characteristic ingredient, unlike the
      tar, which is produced by burning tobacco,
      nicotine is a natural chemical that concentrates
      in the growing leaves."
          Somebody asked me the other day, so where
      does nicotine come from?  And I said, it comes
      from God.  And they said, oh, please, don't say
      that, say Mother Nature, say something other
      than God.  But the fact is it comes from God.
      It's in the plant.  It's in every tobacco leaf.
      That's where nicotine comes from.
          "Primary action is the central nervous
      system, including the brain and the autonomic
      nervous system which controls all bodily
      functions." A secret?
          You got shown a whole bunch of documents by
      Dr. Proctor, internal documents from Philip
      Morris that said basically this very same thing,
      but they come from the '60s and the '70s and the
      '80s, and Dr. Proctor acted like this was some
      big deal, some secret.  Well, he should have
      read Reader's Digest in 1958.
          You know, I said at the very beginning of
      this case in the first five minutes of my
      opening statement, remember I went through all
      those things that we weren't going to debate.  I
      said, there isn't going to be any debate that
      smoking causes lung cancer.  And one of the
      things I said, was, look, there's not going to
      be debated in this case that you're going to see
      some things in old Philip Morris' documents from
      years and years ago that today you wouldn't do
      and I wouldn't do and you wouldn't say and I
      wouldn't say.  There's no debate.  But do they
      really relate to this lawsuit?  Are they really
      secrets?
          There's another secret.  Smoking causes
      cancer, especially lung cancer.  A secret?
          Again, I asked Dr. Proctor on cross-examination, "But, in fact, in public
      literature like this in the '30s people talked
      about getting cancer, lung cancer, from smoking
      and they just didn't have the scientific proof
      of it, did they?"
          He said, "I think that's one way to put it,
      yeah."
          Yeah, in the '30s.  But that's us public.
      Now, they didn't have the scientific basis to
      say, okay, we've proved it or we're proving it.
          But did the American public in the '30s say
      smoking causes cancer?  There's their expert
      saying yes.
          Secret?  No secret.
          Reader's Digest 1950.  Dr. Ochsner saying,
      hey, there's a relationship between smoking and
      cancer of the lung.
          Time Magazine, 1952, both of these are years
      before Mr. Hess takes the first puff on a
      cigarette.  I can't make this up.
          You have these as exhibits.  If you want to,
      you can look at them in the jury room.
          "There's a definite relationship between
      smoking and lung cancer, conclude two
      statisticians working for British Medical Research Council."
          The one that Mr. Paige -- look, I have great
      respect for all the lawyers involved in this
      litigation.  There's no question about that.
      That's not what's in issue in this case.
          But Mr. Paige was just up here and he said
      filtration.  How long have people known that
      filters may not eliminate the risk?  How long
      has the American public spoken in those terms?
      How long have common, everyday publications
      said, filters may not eliminate risk?  Well,
      here are three examples from '54, '57 and '62,
      all out of Reader's Digest, the most widely
      published everyday common person publication in
      the United States.  Some obscure scientific
      journal?  No way.  This is what you -- if you
      wanted to read a condensed version of Gone With
      the Wind, you went and got Reader's Digest
      version, right?
          This was by everybody's bed stand,
      nightstand.  If you're like me, you read and
      fall asleep in about a minute.
          '54, "So if filtration is the protection of
      the future, the tobacco companies will have to
      produce a more efficient filter than any they offer today."
          1957, "Medical authorities say that these
      tar reductions ranging from 7 to 17 percent are
      too small to be really significant in terms of
      health protection."
          Now we begin to see what's wrong with
      filtration.
          Did these people all have the sense that
      there's an illusion of filtration?  Sure.  Is it
      a secret?
          Twenty years later a guy at Philip Morris
      writes something about an illusion of
      filtration.  You could have called any one of
      these guys on the phone and said, do you think
      filtration is an illusion?  They'd have said,
      sure, look at what I just wrote in Reader's
      Digest.
          And, you know, I say this, I say this
      because it doesn't take a Rhodes Scholar to
      figure out that if it's smoke that has the
      substances in it that cause you to get sick or
      that cause you to get -- that's where the
      nicotine is, in the smoke, right, that's where
      the carcinogens are, in the smoke, right?  I
      don't care how big of a filter you're putting on it, if you're still inhaling smoke, you're still
      inhaling the stuff, right?  I mean, you don't
      have to be a Rhodes Scholar to figure that out.
      And you're still taking a chance.  And, of
      course, Mr. Hess was taking a chance.
          Now, you saw Harry Reasoner.  We're going to
      play his clip right now, 1964, after the --
      this was about both filtration and how that
      won't protect you and about the American public
      knowing that smoking causes lung cancer, 1964,
      after the Surgeon General's Report.
          (Video clip played.)
          VOICE:  Almost from the moment that
      cigarettes were being produced they were
      attacked, but the attack took a new turn 10
      years ago and culminated in today's report by
      the Surgeon General's committee.
          This, in summary, is what the committee
      says, Cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung
      cancer in men and data on women smokers points
      the same way.  Cigarette smoking is a
      significant cause of cancer of the larynx and
      probably the most important cause of chronic
      bronchitis.  Cigarette smoking may be related to
      other lung diseases.  Smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it's not
      proven that smoking is the cause.
          On the question of filters, the committee
      says there is no evidence that they do any good,
      but it didn't exclude the possibility that an
      effective filter might be developed.
          In short, the committee says, if you smoke
      cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying
      early.  The sooner you start, the more you
      smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your
      chances are.
          In this kind of a country it comes down to
      you, whether you like it or not.  No one is
      going to forbid an adult to smoke.  And it is
      now quite clear that no one is going to tell him
      it's good for him either.  The decision is his,
      the decision and the health that may depend on
      it.
          This is Harry Reasoner.  Good night.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. REILLY:  That was 1964 when Stuart Hess
      was 22 years old.
          Now, in this lawsuit we actually had a
      personal friend of Mr. Hess and Mrs. Hess come
      and tell you, not what the general public knew, not what someone else knew, but actually what
      Stuart Hess knew.  And not a statistic like
      Mr. Paige was just talking about.  You remember
      he just said, well, how can it be that Mr. Hess
      wasn't in the 50 percent that didn't know,
      didn't believe, or the 59 percent that didn't
      know, didn't believe?  But we don't have to
      guess at it.  We don't have to guess at it in
      this case because we had an eyewitness who is
      not a friend of Philip Morris, who is a close,
      close personal friend of the Hesses.  Matter of
      fact, you'll remember him, he called Mrs. Hess
      by a nickname.  He didn't call her Mrs. Hess or
      he didn't call her Elaine, he called her Lainey,
      remember?  And that was Bob Frankenberg.
          Now, you're going to hear Bob Frankenberg's
      testimony on what level of intelligence Mr. Hess
      had, what knowledge he had and what his response
      was to Bob Frankenberg's recommendation that he
      stop or at least slow down his smoking.
          (Video clip played.)
          VOICE:  Stuart had -- he used to read a lot.
          VOICE:  Like what kinds of things?
          VOICE:  Periodicals, newspapers.  He
      certainly was aware if there were -- I would say he was aware of smoking being dangerous.  But,
      you know, you poo-poo things.  When you're
      young, when you're in your early 20s -- they got
      married very young -- you get -- you don't
      think -- you're indestructible.
          VOICE:  And you also told me he read
      periodicals?
          VOICE:  Yes, he did.  He was much more up on
      current events than I was.  He had very good
      opinions about what was going on.
          VOICE:  And I'm asking you, do you recall
      what Stuart would say to you the one or two
      times you told him that he should quit, he
      should cut back on his smoking because it was
      bad for him?
          VOICE:  I just think he sort of agreed with
      me.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. REILLY:  "I just think he sort of agreed
      with me."
          Did he say to Mr. Frankenberg, you know
      what, you're wrong, you're wrong, I don't need
      to worry about this; I've seen what cigarette
      companies are saying; you're dead wrong; it's
      not right; I don't need to worry? No, this is Mr. Frankenberg, what, in his
      early 20s, he was talking about this
      conversation in his early 20s, periodicals,
      newspapers.
          Was he well-read?
          He certainly was aware, I would say he was
      aware of smoking being dangerous.
          So now is he a statistic?  What side of the
      statistics is he on?  Is he on the side of
      people that don't know and don't believe, or he
      is on the people who, says a very good friend
      and very good friend of his wife, said 50 years
      later, he knew.  He knew.
          You know, it's not consistent with
      Mrs. Hess' testimony.  There's no question about
      that.  And I've thought about that.  I thought
      about that really hard, because on the one hand
      you see Mr. Frankenberg, close personal friend
      of the family's, saying, the guy knew and when I
      told him he ought to stop or he ought to quit or
      he ought to slow down he says, yeah.
          Well, you got Mrs. Hess who says up to a
      point in time he would fight with me, right?
      And he would say, no, no.
          And I thought, how can you explain those two conflicting pieces of testimony?
      Mr. Frankenberg has absolutely no stake in this
      case, right?  What he had to say isn't
      particularly helpful to Mrs. Hess' case, is it?
          I thought maybe the explanation is it's like
      when you go to the doctor and the doctor says,
      you know what, you're smoking, you ought to quit
      smoking.  So what do you say to the doctor?  You
      say, yes, sir or yes, ma'am.  You don't want to
      quit.  You're not interested in quitting, you
      enjoy smoking, but you said yes.
          Why did you say yes?  The impression you
      gave to the doctor is you want to quit, right?
      The impression you gave to the doctor was, I'm
      ready to quit.  But why did you do that?  You
      did that because you just wanted to move on in
      the conversation, right?  You came there for a
      flu shot.  You didn't come there for a lecture,
      right?  You came there for a physical.  You came
      there for a broken toe.  I don't know why you
      came there, but you came there for a completely
      different reason.
          And maybe, I mean, you know, you know, from
      the day she meets him, Elaine Hess tells Stuart
      Hess, I don't like your smoking.  You got to quit smoking, or if you want to kiss me you're
      going to have to brush your teeth or wash your
      mouth out, right?  So you know from that moment
      on, you know whether Mrs. Hess let Mr. Hess
      know, maybe not every day, maybe not every week,
      but periodically she did not like his smoking.
      You know that.
          And so does Stuart Hess adopt a way of
      responding to those requests?  Like going to the
      doctor and saying, yes, sir, yes, ma'am.  Maybe
      that's the only explanation I can have for how
      Mr. Frankenberg can be right and Mr. Hess can
      have had the conversations that Mrs. Hess
      attributes to him.  That's the only way I can do
      it.  Maybe you've got another explanation.  I
      don't know.
          But Stuart Hess, well-read, very intelligent
      man, two master's degrees.  In all candor, in
      all honesty, do you really think he falls into
      the category of people who don't know that
      smoking comes with a risk?  Do you really think
      he falls into the category of people who are
      going, no, I don't think so?  Do you really
      think that?
          I mean, here he is with Bob Frankenberg in 1963, '64, the Surgeon General's Report,
      Mrs. Hess and Mr. Hess talk about it, of course
      they talk about it.  1966 the warnings go on the
      packs, "Caution, Cigarette smoking may be
      hazardous to your health."  Every time Mr. Hess,
      regardless of whether he was a chain-smoker or
      smoked a pack a day, doesn't really matter -- if
      it's a pack a day it's 20 times a day, if he's a
      chain-smoker and he smokes two it's 40 times a
      day -- he has the opportunity to see the pack,
      remind himself of what?  Remind himself that
      with every cigarette he's taking a chance.  He's
      taking a chance of what everybody's talking
      about, that you might get cancer.
          Is this a shock?  It's not a shock.  But
      it's not inflammatory.  It's not Mr. Paige
      standing here and saying, that's not right.  I
      mean, I could stand here and shout at you, but I
      don't think that helps.
          I think facts help.  I think Mr. Hess -- I
      mean, being realistic about Mr. Hess, really,
      let's not alter his intelligence level.  He's
      got a master's in psychology, he's got a
      master's in business administration.  Let's not
      say, gosh, the guy can't get it. 1970, that's when Mrs. Hess said, we're
      going to have our first child, I want you to
      quit smoking.  And you remember he said, I'll
      try, but Mrs. Hess said he didn't try.
          1970 is when the warnings on the packs get
      even stronger.  "Warning:  Surgeon General has
      determined that smoking is dangerous to your
      health."
          Now, let me show you what Mr. Trop said in
      his opening statement.  In his opening statement
      he said, "So at that point Stuart Hess had a
      choice.  He had an informed choice in the early
      '70s."  By their own lawyer's admission in his
      opening statement.
          Now, you can see that Mr. Frankenberg says,
      you know what, the guy was making an informed
      choice all the way back when we were in our
      early 20s.  We think we're, what did he say,
      indestructible?  But he's making an informed
      choice all the way back when he's in his early
      20s.  But here's the lawyer in this case, and,
      you know, this is no -- this is no mistake.
      This is no, oh, gosh, I forgot what I was
      saying.
          You know, in all candor, we practice, we practice these opening statements.  You may not
      get much practice in preparation for your
      closing statement because it comes pretty quick,
      but I can tell you, you practice, whether it's a
      mirror or --
          MR. PAIGE:  Your Honor, objection, improper
      statement.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. REILLY:  Let's go to the verdict form.
      I don't have this on a board because we just
      finished these.  But I'm going to walk you
      through the verdict form, through the first
      three questions that you're going to get asked.
      And the first one is:  "What percentage of
      responsibility do you place on Philip Morris USA
      and Stuart Hess?"
          And you know what, they gave you a --
      Mr. Alvarez gave you a 95/5 split.  You know
      what, I'm not going -- this is your sound
      discretion.  This is your judgment.  And I think
      you'll handle it.  But I have to say that in a
      case where you now know that they admitted the
      first day they filed this lawsuit that Mr. Hess
      could have quit and quit in time to avoid
      getting his lung cancer, I think you can figure out what the apportionment --
          MR. PAIGE:  Your Honor, I object.  It's
      improperly stated.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Sustained.  The jury
      is to disregard the last statement of counsel.
          MR. REILLY:  On the day this lawsuit was
      filed they made admissions as to what
      Mr. Hess -- that Mr. Hess had responsibility in
      this case, from the day they filed the lawsuit.
          The next question -- and you kind of go like
      this (indicating.)
          You can see -- it's probably pretty small
      print.
          Can everybody see that?  Okay.
          I have to put my glasses on.  Sorry.
          "What is the amount of any damages sustained
      by Elaine Hess" --
          THE COURT:  Don't smile, Mr. Brenner.  It's
      going to happen to you sooner than you think.
          MR. REILLY:  That's right.  The youth of
      America.
          "What is the amount of any damages sustained
      by Elaine Hess in the loss of her husband's
      companionship and protection and in pain and
      suffering as a result of Stuart Hess' death?" Well, obviously they asked you for an
      enormous figure, an enormous figure, but I'm not
      going to offer you a figure.  Because, again, I
      think you folks in your sound discretion can
      figure out what the number ought to be.  I think
      you can do that.
          I would only say this, I would only say
      this, when you're thinking about it, there is no
      claim here for lost wages, there's no claim here
      for medical expenses, there's no claim here for
      anything like that.  So if you were thinking,
      gosh, what is all that?  I need to factor that
      in.  There's no claim here for that.
          David Hess, same thing.  I'm not going to
      offer a number to you because you guys are --
      you're all bright folks, you'll figure it out.
          Let's move to the next question.  "Did
      Stuart Hess rely to his detriment on any
      statement by Philip Morris USA that omitted
      material information which caused or contributed
      to his injury or death?"
          Well, if you believe Mr. Frankenberg, and I
      have no idea why you wouldn't, he's a close
      personal friend, remains a close personal friend
      to this day, there wasn't any reliance on the part of Mr. Hess for anything at any time from
      Philip Morris, nothing at any time.
          In his early 20s Mr. Hess had all the
      knowledge he needed.
          What does it mean, rely to his detriment?
      To his detriment.  Well, that would mean he
      would either have to begin smoking, and we know
      nothing about that, or he would have had to have
      postponed quitting.
          Now, did they present any testimony to you
      in this case that Mr. Hess postponed quitting
      and that he would have quit at a particular
      time?  None.  There is none.  Because only by
      quitting in time to avoid his lung cancer could
      Mr. Hess have relied to his detriment, right?
      That's the only way it works.  That's the only
      way it works.
          So the answer to that question, if you
      believe Mr. Frankenberg, if you believe
      Mr. Frankenberg and if you take a look at all
      the information that was out in the public about
      all the things we've been talking about and if
      you look at the time line showing Mr. Hess'
      life -- remember, Mr. Hess didn't grow up in a
      family that wasn't medically oriented, did he? His dad was a dentist.  His brother was a
      dentist.  This was a very -- and you remember,
      you saw from his historian what the dentists
      were doing in 1964 as soon as the Surgeon
      General's Report came out.  The American Dental
      Association said, hey, get the word out, tell
      everybody, smoking is dangerous.  Make sure
      everybody knows.  Make sure your patients know.
          Do you think Mr. Hess' father would have
      kept that a secret from him?  Or his brother?
      No way.
          I would suggest to you that looking for
      specifics, the answer to question number 4 is
      no.
          Now, it says, before May 5th, 1982.  The
      answer's still no.  All you've got to do is ask
      Bob Frankenberg, ask him.
          How about after May 5th, 1982?  Ask
      Mr. Trop.  In his opening statement he says, "So
      at that point Stuart Hess had a choice, he had
      an informed choice in the early '70s."
          How could it be otherwise?  I mean, 1982,
      that's a decade after the early '70s when
      Mr. Trop says he's making an informed choice,
      right?  I mean, they said he began quitting in the early '70s when he became partners with
      Mr. Dorfman, remember?  He becomes partners with
      Mr. Dorfman in the locksmith business and
      together they begin quitting smoking.  They
      don't do it because they're not informed.  They
      do it because Mr. Trop knows he's fully
      informed.  He's making decisions.
          So the answer to those, both those dates is
      no.
          And that makes 4c no as well.
          THE CLERK:  Ten minutes, Counselor.
          MR. REILLY:  Thank you very much.
          Let me talk about punitive damages.
          In order to award punitive damages the
      burden of proof goes up, way up.  How high?
      Well, it's no longer merely by the greater
      weight of the evidence.  The Plaintiff now has
      to prove to you by clear and convincing evidence
      that Mr. Hess was injured as a result of conduct
      of Philip Morris that needs to be punished.
          What is clear and convincing evidence?  It's
      precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and it
      produces a firm belief or conviction without
      hesitation.
          Do you have a clear and convincing, precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, producing a firm
      belief or conviction without hesitation belief
      that Mr. Hess was injured as a result of conduct
      of Philip Morris?  Well, here's the testimony of
      Mrs. Hess.
          This is why I asked her.  I said, "You can't
      recall any specific statement that Mr. Hess may
      have relied on from any cigarette manufacturer
      to come to the conclusion that cigarettes are
      safe, correct?"
          "It was a general feeling."
          Is that precise?  Hardly.
          "You don't have any specific recollection of
      Mr. Hess telling you ever that he thought that
      filters made smoking safe, did you?
          "The general feeling was that he believed
      that."
          Is that precise, explicit, lacking in
      confusion, producing a firm belief or conviction
      without hesitation?  It's all in the court's
      instructions.  You'll see it.
          So I think that the answer to that question
      is no.
          Now, if you answer this question no, you
      stop and you don't go on. If you answer that question yes, then you
      have to answer these questions.
          It's an interesting question, if you answer
      all three of those no, it's an interesting
      question whether you go on, I don't know.  The
      Judge will tell you.
          If you answer this question number 5, no,
      then you don't go on.
          THE COURT:  I'm sorry, but that is not the
      way I instructed that question 4 to be written.
      So I think you need to stop explaining it that
      way.  I'll correct it before it's given to them.
          MR. REILLY:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
          MR. REILLY:  If in your good judgment you
      decide that punitive damages should be awarded,
      I just want to talk about that for just a
      minute.  I want to make sure you know some
      things.  I want to make sure that you know that
      when you award some compensatory damages,
      whatever number that is, whatever number you
      give to the Hesses you would have fully
      compensated them for the loss of Mr. Hess.  So
      this is not a class action.  This is any money
      awarded is going to be given to Mrs. Hess and her son David.  There isn't going to be any
      money that goes to cancer research or to prevent
      people from smoking.
          MR. PAIGE:  Objection, Your Honor, that's
      argumentative --
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PAIGE:  -- as to where the money's
      going.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. REILLY:  I have to tell you that any
      amount of punitive damages simply goes to
      Mrs. Hess and her son, period.
          I'm done.  My time's up.  I just want to say
      that now, because, again, they have the burden
      of proof, either -- depending upon which the
      issues are -- by the greater weight of the
      evidence, or if it relates to punitive damages,
      the clear and convincing standard.
          They get to get back up again, just like the
      last time in Phase I, they get to get back up
      again and talk to you one more time and I won't
      get to get back up again.  But remember the
      story I told you at the end of Phase I about
      coaching the little boy.  So now I'm going to
      tell you, I would just like you to keep your eye on the ball and give you the bat back again.
      Thanks.