          MR. KAISER:  Thank you.  May it please the
     Court, Counsel, ladies and gentlemen.  Good
     afternoon.  If you don't mind, I'm going to be
     brief.  Just a few topics I want to cover.
          The fact that you heard testimony from
     Dr. Borgerding that their company has spent all
     sorts of money since 2000 or whatever should
     not absolve them from punitive damages for what
     they did 50 years ago.
          It took them up until 2000 to publicly
     admit what they had been doing since 1953.
     And, for that, alone, they need to be punished,
     because their admissions in 2000 and their
     subsequent conduct from 2000 doesn't do
     anything to David Ellsworth.
          They didn't make these concessions to
     David Ellsworth in 1994 or before.  That
     doesn't do him any good.
          So what I want to go over is just the
     extent of their misconduct, and we've already
     proved our case, and you have recognized that when we proved to you, by clear and convincing
     evidence, the conduct that warrants entitlement
     to punitive damages.  We don't need to address
     that.
          But we need to address the amount of
     punitive damages.  Punitive damages, in this
     case, they need to be imposed that's going to
     sting R.J. Reynolds.  It's going to hurt them.
     Not break them, but hurt them.  That's what
     punishment is for, so you don't forget it.  Not
     a slap on the wrist.
          And these are a couple of things I'd like
     to talk about for you to consider.
          Number one, this was not misconduct that
     just went on for a day or a month or a year.
     This was misconduct that went on from
     December 14th of 1953 until well after David
     Ellsworth's death in 1994.
          So, we're talking about, just in David
     Ellsworth's lifetime, 40 years that R.J.
     Reynolds was lying to the public, including
     Mr. Ellsworth, and we know that he was exposed
     to that and heard it by your verdict.
          Forty years they were lying.  Forty years
     they were concealing information.  This is a large amount of time, and that's why it
     warrants punishment on R.J. Reynolds and
     significant punishment.
          It's not a one-time deal where it deserves
     a slap on the wrist and a don't do that
     anymore.
          This is 50 years where a company has to be
     punished for 50 years of misconduct.  Think of
     the lives that would be saved and that would
     have been saved if --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Objection.
          THE COURT:  Grounds?  You want to come
     sidebar?
          (Discussion sidebar.)
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection to counsel's
     comments in closing.
          Number one, highly inflammatory and
     intended to arouse prejudice and passion on the
     part of the jury.
          Number two, the reference to lives that
     might have been saved, that's not relevant.
     That's inappropriate because that's not one of
     the factors to take into account in punishing
     Reynolds. There is a jury instruction that
     specifically says that this is -- would be
     punishment for conduct that caused injury to
     Mr. David Ellsworth.
          On those grounds, I move for a mistrial.
          MR. KAISER:  In your instructions, it
     specifically talks about --
          THE COURT:  You're talking about
     reprehensibility?
          MR. KAISER:  Yes.
          THE COURT:  Just make sure you tie it up
     to reprehensibility.
          That motion will be denied.  Thank you.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          MR. KAISER:  And so from 1953 until R.J.
     Reynolds publicly admits some of the things
     they did, there were millions of people that
     got sick and died.  Mr. Ellsworth was one of
     those people who got sick.
          So you got to consider the
     reprehensibility, their conduct, what was
     caused by their behavior.  It's not just, you
     know, nothing happened.
          And you also have to consider the fact
     that we showed you these documents, and when you look at these documents, you see, they
     didn't care, they didn't care about the public.
     They cared about lining their pockets with
     money.
          You can see, when I showed Dr. Borgerding,
     those questions, what did they do?  They knew
     this stuff was bad.  They knew that their
     product could kill people.  And when they met
     at the Plaza Hotel on December 14th of 1953, it
     was not out of health concerns.  They hired a
     public relations firm.
          It was a PR campaign because of their
     sales that had dropped and their stock prices
     that had dropped.  They could care less about
     the safety of the community and the people,
     because they didn't say a word to them.  So
     that's another consideration.
          Their callousness, their indifference,
     their intentional indifference to human life.
     Not for a day or a week, but for 50 years.
          And just think of the money they were
     making during that time.  We know they're still
     making money.  That's a money-making operation.
     So they sacrificed human life that they didn't
     care about and, instead, they were worried about the bottom dollar.  And they had that
     information from 1953 on, and they didn't tell
     the public.
          And what did Dr. Borgerding say?  Oh, that
     was well-known.  That's the same company line
     we heard from 1953, that information was
     well-known.
          So these are reasons why R.J. Reynolds
     needs to be punished, and these are reasons why
     they need to be punished severely.
          When I say "severely," well, how much?
     How much?  Well, how do we figure that out?
     I'm going to show you how to figure that out
     and make a suggestion.
          What Dr. Raffa testified about --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.  May
     we have a sidebar?
          THE COURT:  Sure.
          (Discussion sidebar.)
          MR. PERSONS:  This board -- these boards
     that were used in Dr. Raffa's direct, we had
     earlier objected to them because financial
     resources is only relevant to the issue of the
     defendant's ability to pay a punitive award.
     That is not an issue.  We never contended that Reynolds Tobacco would be unable to pay a
     punitive award.
          It's highly prejudicial and inflammatory
     to put numbers in billions in front of the
     jury.  And revenues, free cash, that is not the
     proper metric under case law.
          The proper metric is net worth at the time
     of trial, and that's the only relevant metric,
     so that's the basis for the objection.
          MR. KAISER:  Dr. Raffa testified today he
     doesn't know what the net worth of the company
     is because they don't publish it.  But I'm just
     making a suggestion, based on how much profit
     they make in a day, how much they make in sales
     in a day and to suggest how they should punish
     in this case based on some of those figures.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  That's overruled.
     Thank you.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          MR. KAISER:  So this case, at this
     juncture, only concerns the conduct of R.J.
     Reynolds and punishing R.J. Reynolds, and it
     has nothing to do with anybody else except R.J.
     Reynolds for their conduct as it applied to
     David Ellsworth. And so I have suggestions as to punish
     R.J. Reynolds so they're going to feel it, so
     it's going to sting them, not break the bank,
     not break them, but so that they're going to
     feel it, because there's two reasons.
          One, just punishment.  You did something
     wrong, you got to be punished.  You did
     something wrong for not a day or a year, but 50
     years.  For that, you got to be punished.
          Secondly, you need to be punished so that
     others in similar circumstances might be
     deterred and think twice before doing the same
     thing, because if they see you got slapped
     pretty hard, they might think, we better not do
     the same thing, and maybe R.J. Reynolds won't
     do the same thing.
          So there's two reasons, deter this future
     behavior and punish for the past.
          What did Dr. Raffa tell you?  In one day,
     in one day, R.J. Reynolds sells almost
     $20 million in sales of cigarettes.  That's one
     day, all right?
          Punishment, take one day of sales away
     from them, and that's still basically a slap on
     the wrist.  You think that's going to hurt them?  Take one day of their sales away when
     you come up with that number.  That's one
     suggestion.
          Alternative number two, they make, every
     single day, from 2009 until 2014, on average,
     which means less or more, over $5 million of
     pure profit, $5 million of profit.  Take a
     week's profit from them.  That's not going to
     break the bank.
          You see how much money they spend and
     they're still able to pay dividends, according
     to Dr. Raffa.  So all this money you heard
     Dr. Borgerding talking about that they're for
     the master settlement agreement and for FDA
     regulation and to settle and to pay for
     punitive damages, that's not doing anything to
     break the bank, because they're still paying
     dividends at the same time, which means what?
     They're making a profit.
          And so every day, averaging out from 2009
     until 2014, R.J. Reynolds is making over $5
     million in profit in one day.  Take a week's
     profit away from them.  That's another
     suggestion for punitive damages.
          You can do what you want, but those are two suggestions.
          So I sum up, consider the length of this
     misconduct, consider the breadth of this
     misconduct, consider their callousness and
     indifference and their behavior in that regard
     and consider the money that they make every day
     on sales and on profit, and consider that,
     look, this is punishment and deterrence and
     it's not a slap on the wrist.
          And for that, I suggest punishment in
     either a week of the profits made from sales or
     the straight profit, a day of the sales of a
     week of the profits.


          MR. KAISER:  This idea of remoteness,
     yeah, it's remote going back to 1953.  But when
     it took R.J. Reynolds until 2000 to make some public statement, that's not very remote in
     time.  That's in this millennium.  That's not
     very long ago.
          There's no issue of remoteness.  When you
     pick up these instructions and you read them,
     you're not going to see, nor have you heard any
     evidence about money going anywhere.  Punitive
     damages going to an estate?  You've not heard
     evidence of that.
          All you're going to see in these
     instructions is this is to punish R.J.
     Reynolds.  It is to punish R.J. Reynolds.
          $300,000?  $600,000?  What's all relevant
     here is this case.  These other thousands of
     cases that are pending have no relevance to the
     imposition of punitive damages here.
          What's relevant is you've heard
     Dr. Borgerding say, of all these cases, they've
     paid punitive damages in less than ten, less
     than ten.  So whatever is imposed here as
     punitive damages doesn't mean a thing with
     respect to other damages.
          You heard talk of regulation, FDA
     regulation, master settlement regulation.  You
     heard that the regulation prohibits certain conduct.  RJR can't do X, Y and Z.
          And the thing is, RJR was doing X, Y
     and Z, and they were doing it until it became
     regulated.  They didn't voluntarily stop doing
     it until they got caught, when they got
     regulated by the FDA.  They were doing these
     things.  They got caught.  The only reason
     they've changed their conduct is because they
     got caught.
          The only reason they changed is because
     these private documents that were supposed to
     be confidential came to light.
          Like Robert Heimann said, as an executive
     of the American Tobacco Company, didn't work
     for RJR, but RJR is responsible by virtue of
     Robert Heimann being an executive for American
     Tobacco Company, remember what he said?  If it
     wasn't for Congress mandating the warnings on
     cigarettes, he wouldn't have warned the public.
     Their company wouldn't have warned the public
     with warnings on cigarettes.
          So, you see, RJR got caught, and that's
     why their conduct has changed.  And RJR has
     been regulated for years.  They were regulated
     in the '50s or in the '60s when they were told by Congress, you've got to put warnings on your
     cigarette packs.
          It didn't stop them from lying.  It didn't
     stop them from still creating doubt for 50
     years.  Regulation did nothing.
          They were regulated when they were told
     that the commercials were going to go off the
     airwaves in 1970.  Didn't do a thing.
     Continued to lie.  Continued to create doubt
     for 50 years.
          So regulation doesn't mean a thing by
     their past.
          Another thing, you know, a leopard does
     not change its spots.  You've got evidence in
     this case, 50 years of behavior, 50 years of
     lying, 50 years of this willful conduct for
     money's sake.  That's what's in evidence.
     That's what you've heard in this case.
          And now you heard Dr. Borgerding telling
     you, their company is new.  What evidence do
     you have to trust that information?
          The evidence you have is 50 years of
     lying.  How do you know what those executives
     are doing now?  How do you know to believe one
     word of what Dr. Borgerding is saying to you? MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Come sidebar.
          (Discussion sidebar.)
          MR. PERSONS:  Object to the comment on the
     credibility of a witness, casting aspersions on
     the credibility of a witness, highly improper,
     inflammatory and I move for a mistrial.
          MR. KAISER:  Based on the evidence, what
     the record has shown so far, is 50 years of
     lying, and that doesn't give the jury a basis
     to believe anything this witness is going to
     say.
          THE COURT:  If you make it clear that's
     where you're going, overruled and denied.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          MR. KAISER:  And so, all you've heard
     throughout this trial is the misconduct of R.J.
     Reynolds for 50 years, of their lying, of their
     taking money over health and safety.
          And so with that frame of reference, how
     can you consider the testimony of
     Mr. Borgerding?  Where is there any evidence,
     of all of a sudden, R.J. Reynolds becoming a
     good citizen?  How can you bank on that with
     the evidence that you have heard in this case? See, that's the thing.  You've got a
     history.  You've got a 500-year history, and
     now you've got a company employee, not some
     independent person getting on the stand, but a
     paid employee telling you how wonderful R.J.
     Reynolds is now that they've gotten caught.
          You don't know what's going on with the
     executives of the company.  That man is not an
     executive.
          MR. PERSONS:  Same objection, Your Honor.
     I'd ask for a curative.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. KAISER:  You just don't know.  What
     you have is a frame of reference that did go on
     for 50 years.  So there's no guarantee that
     these changes have been made or are going to be
     made.
          What does regulation do?  We know that
     regulation in the past did nothing to the
     conduct of R.J. Reynolds.
          As I said before, you have to impose
     punishment in this case that's going to have an
     effect on R.J. Reynolds and others who might
     want to do this same behavior.  $300,000, based
     on the amount of money that R.J. Reynolds makes, is pocket change.  They would laugh at
     you if that's what you think is punishment.
     $600,000, the same thing.
          When they're making $5 million a day in
     pure profit, and you take a week of that away,
     you think that's going to hurt them?  When
     they're making $10 million in sales, almost
     $15 million in sales a day, do you think that's
     going to hurt?
          But that's the numbers.  Those are the
     true numbers that you need to consider when
     you're going to deter other conduct.
          You know what?  Even if R.J. Reynolds is
     going to be hurt by this, not broke, but hurt
     by this, the message has to be sent.  Even if
     they're trying to be good citizens now --
          MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Objection.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. KAISER:  The message has to be sent.
     By your verdict in this case to impose punitive
     damages, you are sending a message.
          MR. PERSONS:  Your Honor, may we have
     sidebar?  Sidebar, please.
          THE COURT:  Okay. (Discussion sidebar.)
          MR. PERSONS:  The appellate courts in this
     state have ruled that to send them a message
     argument is so inflammatory and highly
     prejudicial that it warrants a mistrial, and I,
     therefore, so move.
          MR. KAISER:  That's with respect to
     compensatory damages, but there is a deterrent
     effect, certainly there is a message that can
     be argued.
          THE COURT:  Well, this is a punitive
     damages claim, and I don't think that that's
     what they're talking about.
          This is to deter, and that's what
     deterrence does, it sends a message to deter
     this company and others like it, so overrule
     and deny the motion.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          MR. KAISER:  Not only will the imposition
     of a punitive damages sum in the amount of 20
     or $25 million adequately punish R.J. Reynolds,
     but it will, indeed, send a message to other
     companies or people that might think of
     engaging in this same type of behavior.
          And so based on the evidence in this case, by a greater weight of the evidence, we have
     demonstrated the need for punishment in the
     amount of 20 to 25 million, as well as to deter
     others from that same conduct.
          Thank you.
