          MR. GEARY:  Your Honor, thank you.
          Ladies and gentlemen, once again good
     afternoon.  This being a lawsuit, it's probably
     understandable that there's things that you hear
     that are disagreed to but there's some things that
     you can find agreement on.
          Earlier Mr. Wilner said thank you, thank you
     very much for the responsibility you take in this
     case.  I agree with him with that and we all do.
     You've worked hard.  You've been here every day,
     and we know it's not been easy.  It's taken you
     away from your lives and your families, everything
     that's important to you, and you came here to
     exercise responsibility, and you're here because
     you said you can decide the facts, apply them to
     the law, and come up with a decision.  Thank you for working hard every day.
          Now, this case is Mrs. Jewett's case, it's not
     about -- it's not about somebody else.  And what we
     know about Mrs. Jewett is this, she didn't hear
     company statements about smoking, that didn't
     affect her.  You heard a lot talk about advertising
     and marketing.  There's no evidence that she smoked
     because of ads or marketing.  No evidence at all.
          As far as Lorillard goes, you heard evidence
     about different brands.  The only brand she smoked
     was Old Gold, that was it, not Kent, not True, not
     the others.  Old Gold.  Now, she was someone who
     was able to quit.  She did.  Now, it's not about
     somebody else's case.  It's not about somebody that
     smoked unfiltered cigarettes or somebody that
     smoked low tar cigarettes.  It's not somebody that
     wasn't able to quit.  It's not about somebody that
     looking at advertising and heard statements and
     made decisions.  It's not about those kinds of
     folks, it's about Mrs. Jewett.
          Now, let's talk about Old Gold for just a
     second.  You heard that she started smoking in
     1967.  What's the Old Gold evidence?  Mr. Jewett
     meets her in July of 1973.  And when he meets her,
     he doesn't know what brand she smoked.  They moved to Virginia shortly after Christmas 1973, and it's
     then that he recalls Old Gold, so that's the first
     time there's evidence of Old Gold smoking.  Then he
     said it was hard to find.  Very hard to find.  And
     he said that when he came back from the deployment
     on a ship, he saw that she'd switched to a menthol
     brand.
          When we showed you the military record, two
     deployments, the second one ended in June 1979.  So
     at that point she's not smoking Old Gold.  So the
     Old Gold time frame here is December '73 to no
     later than June '79.  And that's -- that's less
     than six years, that's about five-and-a-half years
     of Old Gold during that window of time.  We'll talk
     about what that means in just a few minutes.
          Now, you heard the word "reliance" in the
     judge's instructions that he spoke to you.  And
     that means do you do something because you hear
     something or see something?  This is not about the
     public being confused.  It's about Mrs. Jewett and
     did she rely on something that the company said?
     Because they've got to prove that reliance.  Well,
     we know that that's not the case because of what
     Mr. Jewett said.  So, now, she never -- she never
     told him she was relying on anything about what the tobacco company said.  So there's no evidence of
     reliance in this case.  The plaintiffs have to
     prove that.  It doesn't exist.
          You heard about the Engle findings.  That's a
     different case, had nothing to do with Mrs. Jewett,
     nothing.  Didn't know about her history, her facts,
     what she smoked, what she didn't, or her ability to
     quit.  And the issues here involved what caused her
     disease.  That's specific to her.  Did negligence
     cause it, did a defect in her cigarettes cause it?
     That's about her and her history.  The findings
     don't answer that.  This case is about why did she
     have disease?  Why did she have disease and what
     caused it?  So the findings, they don't answer
     those questions.
          Now, let's take a look at a timeline here.  I
     think it's No. 3.  I want to talk to you a little
     bit about her life and what she did and what she
     experienced and when things happened that are
     meaningful in this case.  In 1966 before she
     started smoking, warnings go on the packages and
     you heard that she started in '67, and if that's
     the case, when she started smoking the warnings
     were already on the packages.  There's no evidence
     of her brand history back in the '60s or until late 1973.  We don't know what brands she smoked because
     there's no evidence of it.  In 1970 a different
     warning goes on.  And you heard about that.  That's
     the warning that was on every pack of Old Gold that
     she smoked.  The warning that was put on in 1970.
     "Warning: The Surgeon General has determined that
     cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health."
     Every pack.
          In 1971 she marries Mr. Tisdale and she's 17
     and she has a daughter Jeanette.  In 1972 warnings
     goes on all print ads.  All print advertisings
     have -- had that warning.  And in '73 she meets
     Mr. Jewett and December of '73 they moved to
     Virginia and she's 19.  Later she gets married and
     she has her son, Tom, and then later daughter
     Sarah.  And then in 1979 she switches from Old Gold
     to another brand, no later than June.  So those
     are -- those are just some of the important times
     and events that connect to this case, to this case
     specific to Mrs. Jewett.
          Now, I want to talk to you about one of the
     court's instructions, legal cause.  And you've
     heard it since the case started, legal cause and
     what does it mean?  Legal cause has a specific
     meaning and there are certain requirements.  It's more than just two things happening at the same
     time or one after the other.  And it's more than
     something influencing something else.  It's got to
     be more than that.  The event that's in question
     has to directly cause the result.  It's got to be
     direct.  The event needs to be a substantial factor
     in causing the result.  Substantial, not just
     contributing, substantial.  That means in a big
     way.  It's got to be direct and in a big way,
     that's the instruction, that's the law.
          And you hear but for causation.  What does
     that mean?  It means if you look down and you can
     change the facts and subtract something, that
     changes the outcome.  If that hadn't happened, the
     result wouldn't have happened.  That's what but for
     causation means.  We'll talk about in terms of the
     theories in just a minute.  But that's legal cause
     and that's what the plaintiff has to prove on their
     theories in this case, that something caused
     something else directly and in a big way that had
     meaning so that if the event didn't happen, neither
     did the result.
          If I spill soup on my tie, then I've got a
     spot because I spilled soup.  But if I subtract the
     spill out of the equation, then I don't have a spot on my tie.  Spill in the soup was a but for cause,
     without it I don't have a spot.
          Now -- so what are the claims here?  Well, the
     first question is separate to each defendant.  Did
     each defendant's products cause her death?  It's
     not combined.  And, in fact, the first question on
     the verdict form says this, "As to each defendant
     state whether the cigarettes manufactured by that
     defendant was a legal cause."  Then there's a
     separate line for each.  So it's not about whether
     the companies' products combined for Lorillard,
     it's about whether Old Gold during that time frame
     was a legal cause of her disease and death.
          In the first phase was about its smoking
     cause.  This is a different question.  This the
     question for Lorillard is:  Did Old Gold cause in a
     direct and substantial way?  We'll talk about that.
     But there's other theories, too.
          Negligence.  Well, the plaintiff has to prove
     that without negligence Mrs. Jewett wouldn't have
     disease.  Without a defect in her cigarettes, she
     wouldn't have disease.  That's but for causation.
     If she had more information, she wouldn't have
     disease.  Plaintiff has to prove that, that's what
     but for causation means, without the -- without the event, and the mistake, the result didn't happen.
     And that's not the case here.  It's not about a
     defect, it's not about a little more information
     would have changed the outcome.  It's not.  And the
     plaintiff has to prove that and it's just not the
     case.
          Now, I want to go Question 1 I just talked
     about that one.  And the question there is:  "Did
     Old Gold smoke legally cause Mrs. Jewett's
     emphysema and death?"  Again, it's not about
     smoking in general, it's about this brand at this
     time.  Direct and substantial.  Well, let's take a
     look at this slide.  This lays it out on a
     timeline.  Her total smoking time begins in '67 and
     ends in 2001.  And that's 34 years.  So where does
     Old Gold stand on the timeline?  Well, it's -- it
     says six years, it's actually five and a half.
     We'll call it six.  It's 15 years -- it's 15 years
     before '95, it ends 15 years before '95.
          '95 she's diagnosed by Dr. Wyzan, and I think
     the message from Phase 1 was that she didn't get
     sick until '95.  So she stops smoking Old Gold 15
     years before her diagnosis and 22 years before she
     quits.  There's no evidence in this case that that
     type of smoking in that amount, that long ago, directly and substantially caused her disease.
     It's not about whether it contributed.  That's not
     the burden here.  It's about did it directly and
     substantially cause her disease.  There's no
     evidence that it did.  And, really, it makes sense,
     it was too long ago and too little to directly
     cause and substantially cause it.  So as to
     Lorillard, the answer to Question 1 is no.
          Now, I want to talk about the burden of proof
     here because the plaintiff has a burden of proof on
     all their claims.  On this issue the plaintiff has
     to prove it by evidence that's persuasive and
     convincing.  There just wasn't any evidence about
     that.  No one said that amount of Old Gold directly
     caused, that was a substantial factor.  There was
     an absence of evidence.
          Now I talk to talk about Question 2.  The
     question there is:  "Did Mrs. Jewett have emphysema
     because of negligence by Lorillard?"  Well, what's
     negligence?  It's about not being careful enough.
     But the plaintiff has to prove more than just
     cigarette smoke caused her emphysema.  That was
     Question 1 as to Old Gold.  Question 2 is
     different.  Now the plaintiff has to prove
     negligence legally caused her disease.      Well, what about but for causation?  Let me
     give you an example.  Let's say that someone has a
     car and the windshield wipers aren't working and
     they say, "I'll fix that some other day."  A week
     later they still haven't fixed and it's a rainy day
     and they go for a drive and somebody walks in front
     of them.  Because they can't see through the
     windshield, there's an accident and an injury.
     That negligence is the but for cause because if the
     windshield is clear, the driver sees, and there's
     no accident.
          Now, here's the difference here, here's an
     example of negligence, it's not a but for cause.
     Same situation but it's a sunny day.  It's not
     raining.  And the windshield is not obscured but
     for whatever reason, I walk into the street,
     there's an accident and I get hurt.  Was the driver
     negligent for not fixing his windshield wipers?
     Yes.  Did that cause the injury?  No, because it
     would have happened anyway.  The driver fixed his
     windshield wipers, it still would have happened.
     So the negligence there wasn't but for cause.
     That's what the plaintiff has to prove.
          Now, what about -- what about here?  If
     somebody in 1993 says something about cigarettes in whatever context and it's not heard by Mrs. Jewett,
     that can't be a but for cause.  That's not a cause
     at all.
          So what did you hear about negligence?  Well,
     you heard there was evidence about ads in marketing
     by Lorillard.  And you heard evidence about
     different brands, Kent, True, something called
     Embassy, you saw ads from the '30s, the '40s,
     brands she didn't smoke.  You heard about a
     document about the Newport brand in 1978.
          And in 1978 Mrs. Jewett -- she wasn't smoking
     that brand.  She wasn't an underage smoker then.
     She was 24 years old, been married twice with three
     kids.  Not underage in '78.  Why were you being
     shown ads of brands she didn't smoke and documents
     about brands she didn't smoke?  Maybe it's to make
     you mad.  And what I'm telling you is the issue
     here is different.  The issue is what caused her to
     smoke and what caused her disease, that wasn't it.
     The brand here is Old Gold.
          Let's go to -- let's go to eight.
          So what kind of a brand was that?  It was a
     brand that was geared towards -- it was a brand in
     decline, is what it was.  1956 the brand starts
     tailing off.  It's a brand that's focused on flavor and older demographic men, medium tar and nicotine,
     and it advertises on the basis of taste and that's
     from, I think, 1973.  So it's not about health
     claims, it's not about low tar.  It's a medium tar
     and nicotine brand, and it's marketed on the basis
     of flavor.
          Let's go to the next one.  Let's go to nine.
          And starting in '71, every print ad had to
     have a warning on it.  So she's smoking Old Gold
     between '73 and '79.  So every Old Gold ad that she
     would have seen, if she saw it, would have had that
     warning on it.  So the only health claim in the Old
     Gold -- Old Gold ads that she would have seen
     during the time, would have said, "Warning:
     Cigarette smoking is hazardous, is dangerous."
     That's the only health claim that would have been
     in those ads.
          Now, let's go to ten.
          You saw -- you saw TV ads.  Those were stopped
     in '71.  She hadn't seen TV ads about Old Gold when
     she's smoking Old Gold.  You heard about cartoons.
     Not about Lorillard.  Lorillard didn't -- doesn't
     use cartons in its ads.  You heard about product
     placement in movies and TVs -- TV shows.  Not
     Lorillard.  Since the early '70s Lorillard has said, "No, we're not doing that."  You heard the
     evidence, that's the evidence as to Lorillard.
          Again, you heard about low tar ads, health
     claims and so forth, ads from the '50s, the '40s,
     the '30s, had nothing to do with Mrs. Jewett.
     Nothing.  The answer to Question 2, negligence, not
     about Lorillard.  Not saying that you should agree
     with everything they did.  That's not what I'm
     saying.  Negligence by Lorillard is not why she
     smoked, not why she's got disease.  The answer to
     that question is no.
          What about the defect, that's Question 3.  The
     question there was:  Was there a defect in her
     cigarettes, Old Gold, defect in her cigarettes?
     And the question to you is:  In her cigarettes that
     were put on the marketplace?  It's not about
     experimental designs, it's not.  It's about her
     cigarettes and defect means something different
     than the ordinary consumer would expect, that's in
     the instructions.  It's a cigarette.  It has a
     warning on the packs.  What's an ordinary consumer
     expect, it's dangerous, it causes disease.
     Something is defective if it's different than what
     you expect in a way that can cause you a problem of
     whatever type.      If you buy a cell phone and -- and the key
     number eight's not working and it's supposed to,
     that -- that's a defect.  There's other examples of
     that because that's not what you expect.  This is a
     cigarette and you heard that they can't be made
     safe.  Companies have tried, the government's
     tried, all kinds of people have tried for years,
     it's not through lack of effort.  They're just
     inherently dangerous.
          So let's talk about Lorillard and its work
     with the Tobacco Working Group.  You heard the
     evidence from lots of different witnesses.  The
     group was put together to try to make a safer
     cigarette.  And one of the things they tried to do
     to see if a medium-nicotine, low-tar cigarette
     could be developed, and the Tobacco Working Group
     was in cooperation with the U.S. Government
     launched by the National Cancer Institute.
     National Cancer Institute is part of the
     government.  It was the idea of the NCI to try to
     make a safer cigarette with medium nicotine.
          The documents from Lorillard's research files
     that you saw are about that project and Lorillard
     trying to design a cigarette for a good purpose, to
     make a safer cigarette.  It didn't work, couldn't sell it because it didn't taste like a cigarette
     would.  But it didn't reach the marketplace and
     that's not a defect that would have had anything to
     do with Mrs. Jewett.
          Now, what about -- let's go to the next one.
          Let's go back to Old Gold.  It had a filter on
     it.  It had a medium level of tar and nicotine.
     Lorillard didn't use ammonia.  You heard talk about
     ammonia, not Lorillard.  You also heard it didn't
     have anything to do with pH.  Lorillard didn't use
     ammonia.  The compound they used, they tested and
     determined that doesn't affect pH because it has a
     low base.  No nicotine added.  Not by Lorillard to
     its commercial cigarettes.  Nicotine is in
     cigarettes because it's in the tobacco leaf, and a
     lot less comes out in smoke today than it did in
     the '50s and that's because of filters and porous
     paper and designs that went into it.  That process
     removes nicotine, it doesn't -- it doesn't add.
     And that's true with the Old Gold cigarettes.  We
     saw the tar and nicotine numbers from the ads
     during -- during the day.
          And let's go -- let's go to -- yeah.
          Ads have tar and nicotine levels.  And there
     you see it.  It's in the middle, 18 milligrams tar, little over one milligram nicotine.  A lot lower
     than in the '50s but not a low-tar cigarette.  It's
     in the middle.  And the data is right there on the
     ads, those are FTC measurements.  Lorillard wasn't
     selling a cigarette with a higher level of nicotine
     than tar.  That wasn't happening.
          Question 3 as to defect.  There's no defect in
     her cigarettes that caused her disease.  Think
     about this, if the complaint is about the filter,
     well, if you take the filter off, does she not
     have -- does she not have emphysema?  That's not
     the case.  The filter didn't cause her emphysema.
     It's not about defects.
          Concealment.  Question here is:  Did Lorillard
     conceal something from Mrs. Jewett that would have
     made a difference that would have caused her to
     quit?  The answer to that is no.  The question here
     is was there information material to Mrs. Jewett
     that would have made a difference?  Material is
     something that you would act on.  If the bailiff
     says, "All rise," and we stand up, that's material
     information.  Mrs. Jewett had a lot of information
     that didn't cause her to act.  Didn't cause her to
     quit.  There was a warning and you'll see it again
     in 17.  That was the warning on the packs that she smoked when she smoked Old Gold.  That didn't make
     a difference.
          Let's go to the next one.
          And the question is:  Would different
     information have made a difference to Mrs. Jewett?
     It's not about different information.  She had --
     she had lots of it.
          Let's go to the next one.
          She had -- she had warnings on the packs.  Her
     kids told her that smoking was bad and she should
     quit.  Friends did the same thing and so did her
     doctors.  Dr. Wyzan, "You should quit."  That
     didn't cause her to quit.  She quit when she did
     for her own personal reasons, but it wasn't because
     she lacked information from '73 to '79 and that's
     the Lorillard time frame.  She didn't lack
     information.  She had information, she made her own
     decisions.
          You heard about Reader's Digest.  The
     information was there available every day, everyday
     magazines and newspapers.
          Now, in the instructions you heard this that
     really concealment is, you know, do you need more
     of a warning?  Do you?  The instructions you're
     told, after '69, plaintiff has no claim for failure to warn.  Well, this is after '69.  It's '73 to
     '79.  So the answer to that question is no for lots
     of reasons.
          Conspiracy is the next question.  It's the
     same issues, materiality, reliance, post-'69.  The
     answer to conspiracy is the same as to Lorillard,
     it's no.
          Question 6 is comparative fault, comparative
     responsibility.  And there you're asked to compare
     the fault of Mrs. Jewett to the companies.  You
     heard Mr. Jewett talk about responsibility and how
     she's got some.  I think that's a better way of
     saying it, comparative responsibility.  We're
     not -- we're not blaming Mrs. Jewett for buying
     cigarettes, that's not -- that's not the issue.
     The question here is who is the best person to
     prevent her disease?  Who's the best person?  It's
     Mrs. Jewett.  She smoked when she smoked and she
     made her decisions.  She was smart, intelligent,
     decisive, hard working.  She ran the family when
     Mr. Jewett was gone on deployment.  Those are great
     periods of time.  She was very capable and she made
     her own decisions.
          Let's say I've got a spot on the arm and the
     doctor says, "That could develop into skin cancer, use protection, cover up."  A year later I don't
     and he tells me the same thing, and I go back
     another year and he tells me the same thing and
     later on I get skin cancer, what's the cause?
     What's the direct cause?  Because that's what this
     is about, is it the sun or is it my decision?  It's
     my decision.
          Now, Mr. Jewett --
          Let's go to 23.
          -- said that in '84 it was common knowledge
     that smoking was bad for you.  In '85 she got a
     warning saying, "Smoking causes emphysema, and if
     you quit now, it really reduces your risk."  And
     Dr. Feingold said, "Quitting could have prevented
     her emphysema."  That's what he said.  And here's
     the transcript.  "There's a chance she might not
     have gotten emphysema at all if she quit in '85."
     Yep, that's right.  He said there was a chance and
     I'd say if he said it, there's a pretty good
     chance.  She was 31, and if you're smoke free for
     ten years, your risk goes down.  If she quit then,
     pretty good chance she wouldn't have had disease.
          So who's in the best position?  Who's in the
     best position to prevent her disease?  It wasn't
     her kids, her friends, her doctors, none of those people.  And it wasn't the companies.  When she
     quit, she quit for a very personal reason.
     Responsibility, with no criticism Mrs. Jewett, it's
     100 percent hers, and she never said anything
     different from that her whole life.
          Now, almost done here.  I want to talk to you
     about punitive damages.  As you heard, the punitive
     damage claim cannot be based on the findings.  You
     have to act like they don't exist.  Damages in
     addition to compensation and some people wonder,
     Well, do they go to the plaintiff?  Yes, they do.
     They don't do somewhere else.  Punitive damages go
     to plaintiff.  And the issue here is where the
     companies -- was Lorillard indifferent and
     disregarded safety, indifferent, disregard.  That
     means you don't care at all.
          The plaintiff has to bring this evidence
     that's clear and convincing.  Clear means there's
     evidence of disregard and nothing else.  That's not
     the evidence.  Lorillard was not indifferent to
     safety and that's the question on the punitive
     damage claim.  How do we know that?  Well, I want
     to go back to indifference for just a second.
     What's an example of indifference?  Just not
     caring.  You drive through an intersection with a blindfold.  You don't care, maybe there will be an
     accident, maybe not.  Complete disregard,
     indifference.  That's not the evidence.
          In 1963 the Surgeon General's committee says,
     "Bring us your information." Lorillard says,
     "Tobacco smoke has got carbon monoxide in it,
     phenols, and benzopyrene, which has the potential
     to be carcinogenic."  Tells the Surgeon General
     that.  Wants the Surgeon General to know that.
     That's not disregard.  That's trying to help.
          Next slide.
          And when the public health authorities in the
     '50s said, "Let's try to reduce tar and nicotine,"
     Lorillard did that with the other companies and you
     heard the evidence, and that's why today smoke has
     a whole lot less -- 60 percent less than back in
     the day.  That's not disregard.  Lorillard
     developed filter technologies and published about
     it trying to remove phenols, benzopyrene from
     smoke, researched it try to figured out.  Published
     how to do, that's not no disregard.  When the
     question is about additives and ingredients, you
     heard the evidence.  Lorillard has tested its
     ingredients, tells the government what they are and
     the testing shows it doesn't increase the risk. Not the ingredients.  Cigarettes are dangerous
     because they have tobacco in them.
          Lorillard's work started in the -- really, the
     '40s with Ohio State University and researchers
     there trying to identify benzopyrene.  It took a
     while to do it, but they did and they published
     about it.  Worked with Dr. Wynder, the famous
     scientist that you heard so much.  Lorillard worked
     with him, shared information, did a lot of work in
     the '50s and '60s.
          The Tobacco Working Group, and you hear a lot
     of initials, TI, CTR, and all that stuff, Tobacco
     Working Group is different.  That's the National
     Cancer Institute, that's the government.  Lorillard
     worked with the Tobacco Working Group to try to
     make a safer cigarette for many, many years.  In
     the last decade the Institute of Medicine, trying
     to develop safer cigarettes, Lorillard's working
     with them.  So for many, many years Lorillard is
     doing things to try to look into how can a safer
     cigarette be made and publishing a lot on the
     subject.
          The question on the punitive damage claim
     is -- is this:  Were the companies indifferent, did
     they just not care at all?  That's not the evidence, and the plaintiff has to prove by
     evidence that's clear and it's not clear because
     there's evidence to the contrary.
          I'm just about finished.  Go back to the
     start.  This case is about what caused
     Mrs. Jewett's disease, not somebody else's.
     Negligence, defect, concealment, that's not why
     she's got disease.  She smoked cigarettes.  That's
     really not what this case is about.
          Mr. Wilner is going to get rebuttal.  Those
     are the rules.  They've got the burden of proof,
     that's fine.  And he's going to talk to you about a
     lot of things.  And when he does, I want you to
     think, if you would, please, about two slides.  One
     is the last one that we showed, that one, 50 years
     of trying to help on the subject.  Think about that
     one, if you would, please.  And the other one I
     would ask that you think about is this:  Where does
     Old Gold fit in the picture?  Five-and-a-half
     years, many years before she got sick, many years
     before she quit, too little and too long ago to
     directly and substantially cause her disease.  And
     there is no evidence, none, that that kind of
     smoking directly and substantially caused her
     disease.      I thank you for your time.  I thank you for
     your patience.  I thank you for being here.  Thank
     you for your hard work.  I would ask that at the
     end of this case, your verdict be for Lorillard on
     these issues.


         MR. BIERSTEKER:  Thank you, Judge.
         May it please the court, counsel, ladies and
    gentlemen of the jury, good afternoon.
         We're coming to the end of what's been kind of
    a long process and before I discuss the evidence and
    issues, I want to thank you again.  I do it a second
    time, I know it's important, I know we've kept you
    here a long time.  I know that you've endured some
    inconvenience and probably for some of you it's a
    financial hardship if your paycheck stops.  You've
    paid attention, you've taken notes, you've been
    concentrating, and it's something that we all very
    much appreciate.  So I wanted let you know that.
         And now comes the hard part.  And Mr. Wilner said in his closing statement, you know, that you've
    got some power and you do.  But he also said you've
    got some responsibility and you've got that, as
    well.  And your responsibility is to be fair and
    impartial and dispassionate judges of the facts.
    You've got to put aside your emotions, including the
    sympathy that we all feel for Mr. Jewett and you've
    got to decide the issues in this case based on the
    evidence and the instructions that His Honor has
    given to you and that you'll take back into the jury
    room just like you did in the first phase of this
    case.
         Now, I told you in my opening in this phase of
    this case that this case is about Mrs. Jewett and
    the choices that she made.  And I still think that's
    right.  There are three groups of issues.  The
    bridge I was talking about, the findings and legal
    cause, responsibility or fault, and damages, and
    there are two parts to damages as Mr. Wilner said,
    there are compensatory damages and then there's the
    question of punitive damages.  And I'm going to talk
    to you in this closing argument about Mrs. Jewett
    and the choices she made and how it relates to all
    three of these issues.
         I'm also going to talk about some corporate conduct and how it relates to these issues.  But
    before I begin there's a couple things I want you to
    keep in mind.  Unlike Phase 1, Phase 1, as you guys
    will probably remember, the defense had the burden
    of showing that Mrs. Jewett had COPD and that she
    should have known it was due to her smoking before
    May 5th, 1990.  So the defense had that burden.  And
    plaintiff had the burden of showing class
    membership.
         Well, in this phase of the case, the defense
    has no burden.  All the burden of proof lies on the
    plaintiff.  The plaintiff bears the burden on every
    issue.  He's got to prove his case by the greater
    weight of the evidence on every issue that you
    confront and, and on the issue of punitive damages
    the plaintiff has an even higher burden, it's not
    just greater weight of the evidence, it's clear and
    convincing evidence.  He's got to show you that in
    order for there to be an award for punitive damages.
         Now, the court has defined those terms for you
    and what they mean.  But, again, plaintiffs start at
    the basement, starting at zero and he's got to carry
    you guys with him every step of the way until he
    reaches those thresholds.
         Second thing, and I know you guys did this the last time around, because you came out and you asked
    questions about the judge's instructions but it's
    the same thing here.  The instructions are the
    roadmap to completing the verdict form.  You've got
    to follow it.  That's the law that His Honor has
    given you.  So you've got to take those instructions
    and work through the questions on the verdict form
    with the instructions in hand.
         Okay.  Now let's talk about the issues and the
    evidence.  The court has instructed you about the
    findings that were made in the previous class action
    and remember that the court's instruction during
    that, I think it was voir dire, and that you've
    heard again here, and, that is, that the findings do
    not mean that the plaintiff is entitled to prevail.
    There's more to it than that.  And Mr. Wilner was
    sort of saying, Well, you know, the findings, and,
    you know, it's not that hard.  Well, I respectfully
    disagree and I'll tell you why.
         You have to take those findings and you have to
    apply the evidence that you've heard and you have to
    decide if the plaintiff has met his burden in this
    case of proving that the breach of those legal
    duties was a legal, a but for cause, of
    Mrs. Jewett's smoking and her getting COPD and dying.  That's what they've got to show.  And you'll
    see this repeatedly in the instructions.
         If I could have the next demonstrative, Steve,
    if you have it.  You don't have it?  Oh, it's in the
    instructions?  Okay.  Do you have the instructions?
         I'm sorry, I thought I had a demonstrative for
    this.  There it is.
         This one happens to pertain to negligence but
    it gets repeated each time for each cause of action.
    It's right here.  And so whatever the wrongful
    conduct is that the findings relate to, is a legal
    cause of loss, injury, or damage, if it directly and
    in natural and continuous sequence produces or
    contributes substantially to producing the death so
    that it can be said that but for, in other words, if
    the wrongful conduct hadn't occurred, Mrs. Jewett
    would not have smoked, would not have gotten COPD,
    and would not have died.  And every time that legal
    cause is used in these instructions, that's what it
    says.  That's what it says.
         And so plaintiff has to build that bridge that
    I talked about both in voir dire and in my opening
    in this phase of the case, that causal bridge.  He's
    got to link these generic findings that the
    defendants breached certain legal duties and he has to show that but for those breaches of duties,
    Mrs. Jewett would not have smoked and gotten COPD
    and died.  That's what he's got to show.
         Now, I submit that plaintiff did not build that
    bridge in this phase of the case and I think Mr.
    Wilner sort of said as much in his closing argument.
    He said, Well, you know, we don't really know so
    much about what Mrs. Jewett did and why she did it.
    Then he wanted to talk about the public at large.
    That's not good enough, ladies and gentlemen.  It's
    not.  The instructions don't say, You have to show
    it was a legal cause of somebody's behavior outside
    this courtroom.  They have to show that it was a
    legal cause of the injury to Mrs. Jewett, to
    Mrs. Jewett.  That's what they've got to show.
         And let me talk, then, about Mrs. Jewett's
    choices and what she did and this case, after all,
    is about her.
         Okay.  The next demonstrative, Steve.  I think
    it's C2DEM2.  Got it?  Okay.
         All right.  Here's some of them.  There was the
    choice to start smoking.  There was the choice to
    become a regular smoker, and the choice to continue
    smoking until 2001.  And I'm going to talk about
    each of them and I want to review the evidence that you've heard and what that teaches you about these
    issues, not what speculation is.
         Let's talk about the choice to start smoking
    and to become a regular smoker.  You didn't hear
    from anybody who knew Mrs. Jewett before 1973.
    Nobody.  That's when Mr. Jewett met her.  So there's
    no evidence, none, that she started smoking because
    of anything a tobacco company said in its
    advertising or anything that a company -- a tobacco
    company or a tobacco industry spokesperson said in
    the media or anything else that these defendants did
    or did not do.  We don't know that.  What we do know
    is that her father smoked, three of her sisters
    smoked, all of which made it more likely that she
    would smoke.  That's the way it works.  You heard
    that from the witnesses on the stand that peer
    pressure and family smoking are very important to
    smoking initiation decisions.
         And after Mrs. Jewett started smoke, whenever
    that was exactly, probably about 1967, she had to
    make another choice, and that was the choice of
    whether she wanted to become a regular smoker.
    That's a choice that every smoker must decide.  None
    of the experts told you that Mrs. Jewett became
    addicted when she smoked that first cigarette.  That didn't happen.  There's certainly no evidence that
    anyone, including the defendants, forced Mrs. Jewett
    to continue to smoke and to become a regular smoker.
    She had that ability to decide and this is well
    before there was any addiction.  There's no evidence
    at all about why Mrs. Jewett first started to smoke
    before 1973 and why she decided to become a regular
    smoker.  We do know this, though.  Mrs. Jewett
    neither started smoking, nor became a regular smoker
    out of ignorance of the health risks of smoking.
    You know, what you heard was that in the New York
    schools smoking and health was something that was
    required be taught to the kids starting in the
    fourth grade.  And in 1967 we know that one of the
    things that students were being taught was that
    smoking is detrimental to health and that cigarette
    smoking -- if I could have the next demonstrative,
    Steve -- is the most important of the causes of
    chronic bronchitis in the United States and
    increases the risk of dying from chronic bronchitis.
    Smoking of cigarettes is associated with increased
    risk of dying from pulmonary emphysema.  And that's
    before, that's not even taking into consideration
    everything that was already out there with respect
    to lung cancer.  We also know that in 1964 the Surgeon General warned the country about the health
    risks of smoking and he also told them it's a
    habituation, it's tough to quit.
         Now, Mrs. Jewett was only ten in 1964, but even
    Mr. Jewett assumed that Mrs. Jewett had heard about
    the report.  And Dr. Parssinen had told you that the
    release of the Surgeon General's Report in 1964 was
    covered in the national media extensively, both
    before it came out, when it came out, and after it
    came out, that it was one of the top 100 stories in
    the news in the last century, and as you also heard,
    it was even referred to in Welcome Back, Kotter, and
    I think it was 1977, more than ten years after the
    report came out.  It was that well known.
         Another thing, in 1966, before there was any
    evidence Mrs. Jewett picked up her first cigarette,
    in 1966 there was a warning on the pack, a caution,
    Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health.
    And in 1970 that caution was one that Mrs. Jewett
    saw every time she picked up a pack of cigarettes
    and the warning changed and said, It's dangerous to
    your health.  And two things occurred when that
    warning changed.  TV and radio advertising ended for
    cigarettes, and the warning that appeared on
    cigarette packages also began to appear on every print ad.
         And in 1968 you heard about, you know, the
    public service announcements that were aired and you
    remember the PSA in 1968 involving the guy who, at
    least on television, played opposite Perry Mason and
    lost every case, Bill Talman, that was pretty
    powerful stuff.  Don't be a looser.
         And remember what Dr. Horn said.  Remember Dr.
    Horn was with the U.S. Government Clearinghouse on
    Smoking and Health, he said, you know, Look, in 1968
    you could stand on a rooftop and you could shout
    smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs and
    you wouldn't be telling anybody anything they didn't
    already know.  I could go on but I think you
    understand the point.  This was the type of
    information that surrounded Mrs. Jewett when she
    decided to become a regular smoker.
         Again, there's no evidence about why she
    started smoking before 1973.  Dr. Feingold, though,
    allowed that it turns out children like to do things
    that are dangerous, adolescents do, at least.  There
    was no evidence from anyone that Mrs. Jewett became
    a regular smoker out of ignorance that smoking was
    dangerous or that it could be hard to quit.  There
    was no evidence that Mrs. Jewett chose to start smoking and to become a regular smoker because of
    any wrongful conduct by R.J. Reynolds or Lorillard.
    There's no bridge.  In fact, there's no evidence she
    even smoked cigarettes that were made by the
    defendants in this courtroom, Lorillard and
    Reynolds, before 1973.  Old Gold in 1973, Kools
    starting, it's a little unclear, '79, '80, somewhere
    in there.
         Okay.  Let's talk about the next -- I had three
    choices up there when I started.  It was the
    decision to start smoking, the decision to become a
    regular smoker.  Now let's talk about Mrs. Jewett's
    decision to continue to smoke.  That was the next
    choice, the last choice in this line.  And it was a
    choice that she had to make every day multiple times
    each day, to take the cigarette out of the pack and
    to light the next one up, looking at the warning,
    instead of trying to quit or quitting.
         And you heard all the experts say, no one
    disagreed with this, just because a smoker is
    addicted, doesn't mean a smoker cannot quit.  Dr.
    Feingold said it.  Dr. Figlar said it.  Everybody
    said it.  Even addicted smokers can quit.  Quitting
    is a question of motivation and commitment.
    Sometimes it takes more than one shot to do it but everybody can do it.
         Okay.  Well, after 1973 and throughout the
    1980's and the 1990's Mrs. Jewett continued to smoke
    despite the Surgeon General's warning that were on
    each and every pack and as you heard the warnings
    changed in 1985.  You've seen them a bunch of times,
    specific warnings about lung cancer and other
    diseases, including a warning that says, Quitting
    smoking now, you know, reduces serious -- the
    chances of serious risk to your health, and that was
    also on the packs.
         And there's no dispute in this case that each
    pack of cigarettes that Reynolds and Lorillard made
    had those warnings or -- and that each print ad that
    they put out starting in 1971 had those warnings.
    And Mr. Jewett testified that he was sure that his
    wife saw those warnings and he assumes that she also
    heard of the Surgeon General's reports.  So when
    Mrs. Jewett chose to continue smoking, she didn't
    just ignore what was going on in the media.  She
    just didn't ignore what was before her eyes on the
    warnings on the packs or in the ads.  She ignored
    her friends and family and her doctors, too.
         And let's look at that evidence.  You heard
    from her daughter Sarah Milliken.  And she came in and testified that when she learned that smoking was
    bad for you in the fifth grade, she came home and
    told her mom about it, and she also told her mother
    and her father that she wanted them to quit.  And
    Sarah remembers that her mother was seeing a doctor
    in the 1980's.  Well, and we know from the medical
    records that Mrs. Jewett had some symptoms, COPD,
    coughing, chronic bronchitis, and that when she went
    to the doctor, Dr. Feingold said, Well, it would
    have been the standard of care, you know, if
    somebody comes in and they're smoking, for a -- to
    tell a patient not to smoke, and if you've got some
    symptoms, even more so.
         And Mr. Jewett's testimony confirms what we all
    must -- what we all know is true.  And, that is,
    doctors ask their patients whether they smoke.  You
    do, it's on every, I think, background checklist you
    fill out when you go to see the doctor.  And, of
    course, Mrs. Jewett's medical records that we have
    confirm that her doctors asked her that question,
    too.  And it's also been Mr. Jewett's experience
    when he goes to see the doctor that the doctors have
    been telling him not to smoke.  And I think that
    makes common sense, too, and tis reasonable to
    assume that's exactly what Mrs. Jewett's doctors were telling her, especially when she was pregnant,
    as she was three times in the 1970's.
         She also didn't listen to her friends, the
    Coles, when you heard about them warning her.  And
    we know from Mrs. Jewett's children some of the
    magazines that she read over the course of years and
    Dr. Parssinen came in and told you those magazines
    carried story after story about the risk of dangers
    of smoking.
         If we could have demonstrative 10, please,
    Steve.  There we go.  That's Good Housekeeping, one
    of the magazines that we know Mrs. Jewett read, and
    then there was also Redbook and Family Circle.
         During the '70's and '80's and '90's, the
    public service announcements continued to air on
    television.  And, again, they were very powerful.
    Some of them focused more on getting folks to quit
    so there was the Larry Hagman, one the actors from
    Dallas who appeared with his mom.  And we know from
    Sarah that Mrs. Jewett was a fan of the Dallas show.
         In 1986 there was Yul Brenner.  Remember the
    guy was bald, and he said, Now that I'm gone, I tell
    you don't smoke.  I mean, that's powerful stuff and
    it's a strong warning to people.  And Sarah also
    told her -- told us that her mother read the Times-Union and that it was delivered to their home.
    And we also know that Mr. Jewett who, again, had
    referred to cigarettes as coffin nails and cancer
    sticks never told Mrs. Jewett, never told her,
    anything about the health risks of smoking and we
    know why.  And as Mr. Jewett testified on the stand,
    he didn't tell her because it was something she
    already knew.  It was something she already knew.
         So all of the evidence tells you that
    Mrs. Jewett knew smoking was dangerous and despite
    that she chose to continue to smoke and she never
    even tried seriously to quit smoking until after her
    diagnosis.  Not once prior to her diagnosis did she
    seriously try to quit.
         Okay.  Now let's talk about the legal cause
    stuff some more.  I kind of want to go through it
    with each of the different causes of action that you
    guys are going to be asked to review.  So let's
    start with the design defect issue.  Here's the
    finding.  Do we have it?  There's the findings.
         Defendants R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and
    Lorillard placed cigarettes on the market that were
    dangerous and defective.  And I would submit that
    this finding doesn't help the plaintiff that much.
    And why do I say that?  Well, it doesn't say what the defect was.  It doesn't say that the specific
    brands that Mrs. Jewett smoked, Old Gold and Kool,
    were defective.  It doesn't say when the defendants
    placed defective cigarettes on the market.  Doesn't
    say any of that.  And as you heard repeatedly during
    the course of this trial, there's no such thing as a
    safe cigarette.  It can't be done.  It can't be
    done.  You can't make a safe cigarette, one that is
    not capable of causing addiction or cancer or COPD.
    Cigarettes are inherently dangerous.  Smokers are
    warned about those dangers and, nonetheless,
    cigarettes are legal.
         The defendants are permitted to manufacture and
    to sell and to advertise cigarettes despite the fact
    that they are inherently dangerous.  There's nothing
    wrong with that.
         All right.  So what evidence did plaintiff
    produce that showed that Reynolds and Lorillard
    cigarettes had a defect that was a but for cause of
    her continuing to smoke and her death from COPD?
    Let's talk about it.  One of the first things that
    they suggested was, Well, they ought to have a
    nicotine-free cigarette, something that doesn't
    addict people.  And you heard about that.  As the
    1964 Surgeon General's Report observed, as Dr. Feingold testified when he was on the stand,
    nicotine-free cigarettes were on the market, the
    problem is nobody bought them.  And, you know, I
    guess Mr. and Mrs. Jewett bought one back of lettuce
    cigarettes one time as a joke and for grins, but it
    certainly wasn't something that they were about to
    buy every day.  And there is no evidence whatsoever
    that Mrs. Jewett would have avoided her COPD if only
    R.J. Reynolds and Lorillard had made nicotine-free
    cigarettes.  Why?  Because she wouldn't have smoked
    them.  Very few people ever did.
         Let's say that Lorillard and R.J. Reynolds
    Tobacco Company made only nicotine-free cigarettes,
    the only thing they made, what then?  Does anybody
    seriously doubt that Mrs. Jewett wouldn't have
    smoked those cigarettes and she would have gone out
    and bought somebody else's?  After all, as Dr.
    Feingold said, she was already addicted in 1973
    before there's any -- any evidence that she smoked
    cigarettes that were made by R.J. Reynolds or
    Lorillard.
         So that leaves us with conventional cigarettes.
    And they're inherently dangerous but they, too, are
    legal.  As Dr. Figlar testified, cigarettes with
    nicotine all have the potential to addict.  But they're still legal products.  The evidence has been
    that starting in the 1950's and continuing all the
    way through 2001 when Mrs. Jewett quit, and beyond,
    the public health community encouraged smokers to
    switch from the higher tar to the lower tar
    cigarettes.  And the cigarette companies were
    encouraged by the public health community to make
    them.  Reynolds and Lorillard did that.  You heard
    testimony about cigarettes like Carlton and Now,
    some of the very lowest of the lowest tar cigarettes
    that were made.  And how most people don't really
    buy those either because there's so little nicotine
    in them and they're so hard to smoke.
         And Dr. Feingold testified that, you know,
    lower tar and nicotine cigarettes with filters
    provide some benefit to smokers over the much higher
    tar and nicotine cigarettes that were sold in the
    1950's.  And, indeed, the excerpt from the Surgeon
    General's report kind of acknowledges that in a
    grudging way, too.  And you heard Dr. Figlar say the
    same thing, but they didn't offer as much benefit as
    everybody hoped they would when they were first on
    the market.
          But in a way it's kind of beside the point
    because Mr. and Mrs. Jewett didn't really purchase their cigarettes based on safety.  Nobody said that.
    And their conduct tells you otherwise.  They never
    smoked as their regular brand any of the lowest tar
    and or nicotine cigarettes that were around and that
    the public health community was advising them to
    smoke at the time.  Indeed, they didn't even smoke
    the lowest tar and nicotine cigarettes in their
    particular brand.  Remember, Dr. Figlar was in here
    and he showed you the Kool full flavored and he
    showed you the other varieties of Kool including the
    ultra low and the light and the others, but
    Mrs. Jewett chose to smoke the highest tar and
    nicotine Kool that was made.  And I think Mr. Jewett
    testified he continues to smoke Marlboro Reds,
    again, the strongest Marlboro made.
         Now, there were claims that were made that the
    defendants manipulated nicotine and made design
    changes that made cigarettes more addictive.  And
    Mr. Wilner and Dr. Feingold showed you the 2010
    Surgeon General's Report that they said supported
    their views.  But that report spoke in terms of
    possibilities and potential.  It didn't say it
    actually happened.  And Dr. Feingold made three
    specific allegations that flowed from this and each
    and every one of them was laid to rest.  Let's go through and talk about what they were.  First, Dr.
    Feingold said, Well, there's a theory that pH could
    be raised, it was even -- even was mentioned in the
    Surgeon General's report, a theory that pH could be
    raised to increase free nicotine in cigarette smoke
    and to make folks more addicted.  And he showed some
    documents from the early 1970's where scientists at
    Brown & Williamson's competitors, you know, were
    saying, Well, the Kools' pH was elevated.
         But Mrs. Jewett didn't smoke Kool cigarettes in
    the early 1970's and Dr. Feingold couldn't tell you
    what the pH of Kool cigarettes were in the
    cigarettes that Mrs. Jewett did smoke starting in
    about 1979 or 1980.  Dr. Figlar did.  Their pH was
    around 6.5, that's not in the range that Dr.
    Feingold considers manipulation.  Instead that's in
    the range where the U.S. Surgeon General has said
    there really isn't any appreciable free nicotine in
    the smoke.  Indeed, Dr. Feingold admitted that
    virtually all commercial cigarettes fall into
    arrange where the pH is such that there's very
    little free nicotine in smoke.  You heard it from
    Dr. Figlar, it's about 2 percent.  2 percent.
         Second, Dr. Feingold told you that cigarette
    manufacturers must be manipulating the design of their cigarettes to make them more addictive because
    smokers today are more addicted than smokers were
    decades ago.  And you'll remember that I asked him,
    I said, Well, Doctor, isn't it true that the
    National Cancer Institute has specifically looked at
    this issue of whether smokers today are more
    addicted than smokers were decades ago and that they
    concluded they weren't?  And he said, well, he
    wasn't familiar with it, and even if it said it, he
    would dispute it.  Well, let's take a look.  It's
    National Cancer Institute monograph No. 15, it was
    released in 2003 and they ask:  Is there evidence
    that the nation's annual quit rate, that's the
    portion of current smokers who quit each year, is
    smaller?  Nope.
         Is there evidence that in United States the
    cessation rates, the rates at which people quit,
    have fallen among groups in which more ever smokers
    have already quit?  Nope.
         Is there evidence that the levels of
    dependency, addiction, you've heard that, estimated
    by cigarettes per day or vapors from scores have
    increased as the number of smokers has decreased?
    Nope, not there.
         And if we go to the next slide.  I think there's one more, right?  Yeah.  Because the mean,
    and CPD is cigarettes per day, so that the average
    cigarettes per day reported in surveys has fallen so
    people are smoking fewer cigarettes per day, which
    might kind of make sense given smoking restrictions
    and stuff, but that number has fallen over the last
    decade, this logic would argue that the target is
    not hardening.  This was entitled -- there was a
    chapter in here called "The Hardening of the
    Target."  The question they were looking at was
    whether or not people had become more addicted --
    are more addicted today than they were in the past.
    Not so.  So much for that theory.
         Finally, Dr. Feingold showed you some documents
    internal will to the tobacco companies that related
    to the tar-and-nicotine ratio, I think by now you've
    got it well in your mind, that that was an effort to
    try to make a safer cigarette.  Tar isn't good for
    you, people smoke for the nicotine.  Let's see if we
    can change that ratio and have more nicotine
    relative to tar to reduce people's exposure to tar
    and that was something that was suggested by the
    public health community that most of the tobacco
    companies, including these defendants, tried in
    their labs and they could never make it work.  Never got marketed, not manipulation of nicotine at all.
         And then there was the comment, Don't be
    fooled.  I guess it was -- I've forgotten which
    witness it was, but there was a document and it was
    up there, Mr. Wilner talked about it, that Kools had
    the highest nicotine level of any cigarette on the
    market, and the document he showed you was from, I
    believe, a competitor in 1972.  Mrs. Jewett didn't
    smoke Kools in 1972.  Again, it was sometime around
    1980.  And when she did start smoking Kools, you saw
    the FTC report on the tar and nicotine yields of the
    Kool cigarettes and you'll remember it was
    1.2 milligrams per cigarette and there are 43 other
    cigarettes that had higher levels of nicotine
    compared to Kool.
         Okay.  Last point on this design issue.  And
    that was a theme that emerged in the
    cross-examination of Dr. Figlar and it was
    basically, Didn't you research how to make nicotine
    less addictive?  That was the question.  Now, you
    didn't hear Dr. Feingold or anybody else tell you
    how you could make nicotine less addictive.  And,
    again, try to make nicotine less addictive is sort
    of like trying to make water less wet.  It's not
    something that can really be done.  You saw the document from Claude Teague, I think it was "The
    Crucial Role of Nicotine," and you must have seen
    that about a dozen times during the course of this
    trial.  But one of the things that Dr. Teague said
    in there is nicotine is unique.  Nicotine is unique.
    And it is.  It is unique.  It's like water.  There's
    nothing else like it.  And so what Dr. Figlar told
    you was that other than lowering tar-and-nicotine
    yields, which they did about as low as you can go,
    and which Brown & Williamson had already done, he
    doesn't know how to make a consumer-acceptable,
    less-addictive cigarette.  He doesn't know how to do
    it.  And that makes sense.  Ask yourself, if there
    was some magic pill that you could take and that
    would replace the satisfaction that smokers get from
    nicotine in cigarettes, if there was some magic pill
    that could do that and wasn't addictive at all,
    don't you think some tobacco company or some
    pharmaceutical company would have already invented
    the magic pill?  No one has, because no one can.
         Indeed, when you think about it, what is it
    that most people use when they want to try to quit
    smoking?  It's not something else, it's nicotine
    replacement.  I mean, sure, there are pills like
    Chantix which block the receptors in the brain but that doesn't give the satisfaction that nicotine
    does.  You can block receptors in the brain with
    some of that but it's nicotine replacement therapy,
    nicotine gum, nicotine patches, nicotine sprays in
    the nose, it's nicotine because it's unique, because
    it's unique.
         Okay.  So where is the proof?  Where is the
    proof that the Old Gold or Kool cigarettes that
    Mrs. Jewett smoked had a defect, something that the
    defendants could have fixed, something that they
    could have fixed, as opposed to something that's
    inherent in the product, that was a but for cause of
    Mrs. Jewett's COPD and death?  There wasn't any.
    Tobacco products are dangerous by nature, not by
    design, and the defendants' design efforts, as you
    heard, were aimed at reducing risk, were aimed at
    reducing risk the best way they could.
         Okay.  So much for design.  Let's talk about
    negligence.  Negligence could include design, but I
    want us to sort of think about negligence in a
    little different way.  Here's the finding:
    Defendants R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and
    Lorillard were negligent.  And, again, the finding
    really doesn't help you too much.  It doesn't tell
    you what the defendants did that was negligent and it doesn't tell you when they were negligent.  Now,
    what was plaintiff's proof that any negligent act by
    R.J. Reynolds or Lorillard was a legal, but for
    cause of Mrs. Jewett's continued smoking and her
    COPD and her death?  Well, plaintiff talked a lot
    about advertising.  Advertising was legal.  There's
    nothing wrong with advertising.  But what did
    plaintiff claim was wrong with the defendants'
    advertising?  Well, first, plaintiff paraded out a
    number of ads from the 1950's and earlier that have
    absolutely nothing to do with Mrs. Jewett.
         She wasn't born until 1954, and as you heard
    several times from several different witnesses in
    this case, the old ads that made health claims, Play
    it safe with Lucky, I think, was one, or, More
    doctors smoke Camels, was another one.  Those kind
    of health claims disappeared from cigarette
    advertising in 1955 when Mrs. Jewett was one because
    the Federal Trade Commission issued guidelines and
    said, No more.
         Okay.  Second, Mr. Wilner showed you ads that
    had celebrities in them or holiday themes.  And
    those ads are commonplace for consumer products in
    the 1950's and early 1960's.  What you also heard
    was that in 1964 the tobacco industry voluntarily adopted an advertising code and among other things
    it prohibited the use of celebrities in ads.  It
    stopped in 1964.
         Third, Mr. Wilner showed you pictures of ads in
    some films, film clips of ads, that had good-looking
    men and women in them.  Yep.  Yep, they did, but
    nobody uses homely people to advertise consumer
    products.  I suppose the exception of Wendy's
    "Where's the beef" proves the rule, because you've
    got to search long and hard in your memory to find
    that.
         Now, in his closing argument, Mr. Wilner said,
    Well, the ad -- they were negligent in the ads
    because they didn't tell people that, you know, a
    significant percentage of the people who use them
    their whole life are going to get sick.  The ads
    didn't tell you that.  Now, wait a minute.  Wait a
    minute.  What car commercial says, you know, If you
    drive this car, you could get in a wreck and you
    could die?  What beer advertisement says, Hey, you
    know, if you drink a case of this a day, you're
    going to get drunk silly, you're going to run into
    the lamp pole or you might even get addicted and you
    might die when you try to stop drinking?  And what
    McDonald ad says, you know, Let's have a break today or whatever the most current slogan is says, you
    know, If you come in and eat these greasy fries and
    greasy burgers, you're going to clog up your
    arteries, an X percentage of our consumers have high
    cholesterol?  It's not realistic.  It's not
    realistic.
         And, finally, Mr. Wilner and Dr. Kyriakoudes
    spent a whole bunch of time on youth advertising.  I
    want to address that, too, because I know it's a
    hot-button issue.  I know it's a hot-button issue.
    So, initially, let me try do it in a way that I did
    on cross-examination with Dr. Kyriakoudes, in a way
    that I think addresses most of those issues.  Do you
    think the companies put out ads for products without
    a marketing plan?  They develop these formal
    marketing plans and it defines the target audience,
    it defines them by -- you know, consumer products
    help you split up the markets six ways from Sunday.
    They've got -- they do it by race or ethnicity, they
    do it by gender, they do it by age, they do it by
    where you live, they do it by income.  I mean,
    consumer products are split up into all these tiny
    little boxes, market segments.  Nothing wrong with
    that, that's the way it always happens.
         Okay.  So where are the marketing plans for the cigarettes that were sold in this case?  You didn't
    see any.  In fact, you didn't see a marketing plan
    for any cigarette and defendants have those formal
    marketing plans, Dr. Kyriakoudes testified to that,
    and the marketing plans that identify the target
    audience by age, among other things, he didn't show
    that you either, and why didn't he?  Because he
    didn't have a single one that showed a marketing
    plan where the people the targeting of the plan were
    folks under the age of 18.  They were all 18 and
    older.  He testified to that.
         He also admitted that before you go out and you
    roll out an advertising plan, you know, you test it
    with the focus group, the folks that you want to
    reach, you know.  And you bring them in, you sit
    them down, you show them the ad, and you want to
    make sure they're taking away from the ad the
    message you're trying -- you're trying to put
    forward, that you're trying to communicate.  And so
    those focus groups happened with every single one of
    these advertising campaigns and Dr. Kyriakoudes,
    who's testified on the stand he didn't have any
    evidence, not one shred of evidence of focus-group
    research that was done with anybody under the age of
    18.  It didn't happen.  It didn't happen.  And I could stop right there but I won't because there's
    more.
         Dr. Kyriakoudes testified that he wasn't even
    qualified, he wasn't even qualified to talk about
    whether advertisements get people to start smoking.
    Couldn't do it.  There's still more.  Most of the
    documents that Mr. Wilner was showing to you with
    Dr. Kyriakoudes about youth advertising were from
    the 1970's and 1980's, a time period when
    Mrs. Jewett was already an adult woman, married at
    least once and maybe twice, with kids.  She was not
    a kid.
         Finally, the specific examples didn't hold
    water.  I don't have time to go through them all but
    I want to talk about a couple of them.  One of the
    documents they showed you was from Claude Teague.
    This was in 1973.  His proposal for cigarettes to
    appeal to the youth market and you had to wait for
    my cross-examination to find out that he was
    recognizing right up front the first sentence of the
    memo, the first sentence, At the outset, it should
    be said that we are presently, and I believe
    unfairly, unfairly constrained from directly
    promoting cigarettes to the youth market, that is,
    to those in the approximately 21-year -- 21 year old and underage group.  And even Dr. Teague went on to
    say that he wasn't proposing advertising or
    cigarette designs to get kids started smoking, what
    he wanted do to was to get those who already were to
    switch to a Reynolds brand.  Okay.  I mean -- but at
    the end the day, you learn that Dr. Teague wasn't in
    marketing, he was a chemist, he wasn't even
    responsible for cigarette design, and that Dr.
    Kyriakoudes had no evidence that this proposal that
    was made, that was a guest company policy at the
    time it was made, was ever acted upon.
         Did Dr. Teague have that idea?  Was it a good
    idea?  No, it wasn't a good idea.  Did anything
    happen?  There's no evidence that it did.  None.
         All right.  Next one, Dr. Kyriakoudes suggested
    that The Meet the Turk Campaign for Camel in the
    late 1970's, again, back when Mrs. Jewett was an
    adult, not for a brand she ever smoked, but he said,
    The Meet the Turk Campaign was directed at kids and
    I put up the ads on the ELMO up one at a time.  And
    I asked him for each one, and I -- and at the end of
    the day he couldn't testify that any of these ads
    were ads that appealed to kids.  I think you guys
    have got some common sense.  Look at those ads, do
    they look like they're for kids?  I don't think so.      Finally, Dr. Kyriakoudes played the Winston ad
    that ran during the Flintstones TV show, you
    probably remember that.  And, again, you had to wait
    for the cross-examination to find out that the
    Flintstones when it first came out was an adult
    comedy.  It aired at 8:30 in the evening.  It was
    based on The Honeymooners and the other sponsors of
    the show were Alka Seltzer and One-a-Day Vitamins,
    not kids products.  And when the Flintstones did
    change from an adult show that ran in the evenings
    to a show that ran on Saturday mornings, Reynolds
    dropped its sponsorship.  Dropped its sponsorship.
         And so when you retire to deliberate, you go
    back through that door, ask yourself, Where is the
    evidence that Mrs. Jewett started to smoke or
    continued to smoke because of any ad?  Where was
    that evidence?  It's got to be about her.  Where was
    that evidence?  And I don't think there was any.  I
    mean, Dr. Kyriakoudes said he's never even done any
    scientific research on the effects of ads and he
    certainly had little he could say about Mrs. Jewett.
    He said, I can't identify any ad that she even saw,
    read, or heard.  I mean, I know there's a lot of ads
    of out there and she had to have seen some, but what
    ones, he doesn't know.  Nor could he say that anything about the advertising made her start.
         Then there was Mr. Jewett.  You know, and he
    did know his wife, and he admitted that the only
    discussion he ever had with his wife about a
    cigarette ad from 1973 until 2006 when she passed
    away, was that sometimes they would say to each
    other, It was a cute ad.  That's it.  There's no
    evidence that advertising had anything to do with
    Mrs. Jewett's decision to smoke.
         And I want to say a little bit about The Frank
    Statement.  You heard about that.  It was that Frank
    Statement that came out January 4th, 1954, and ran
    for one day and one day only before Mrs. Jewett was
    ever born, she probably never saw it.
         I'll talk about the not-proven statements later
    on when we get to concealment, because that's where
    I think that kind of belongs, but I did want to
    address part of The Frank Statement that Dr.
    Kyriakoudes addressed when he was here.  He kind of
    climbed out on a limb and testified on direct
    examination with Mr. Wilner that the tobacco
    industry -- and I wrote this down at the time?  In
    no way cooperated with the public health
    authorities.  Now, am I here to tell that you the
    tobacco industry were model corporate citizens who did everything that they possibly could to cooperate
    with the public health authorities?  No, I'm not
    going to tell you that, but in no way cooperated?
    Golly, you know, that's not true.  I mean, you know
    that they provided materials to the Surgeon General
    in 1964 and that they are acknowledged in the 1964
    Surgeon General's Report for their contributions.
    There's been plenty of evidence that they cooperated
    in other areas, for example, in the design of their
    cigarettes and in their participation in the
    National Cancer Institute's less hazardous working
    -- less hazardous cigarette Tobacco Working Group,
    which lasted over a decade and explored ways to try
    to make cigarettes safer.  They cooperated by
    publishing and when Dr. Figlar was on the stand, I
    think he almost, you know, disappeared from sight as
    the stacks of publications mounted around him.
         They cooperated by funding independent research
    through CTR and the scientific advisory board, we
    talked about that at some length, members of the
    scientific advisory board included people from the
    National Cancer Institute and Harvard and Columbia
    and other prestigious universities and the
    researchers included Nobel Prize winners, and there
    were a bunch of articles published in the peer-reviewed literature, many of which were cited
    in the Surgeon General's reports, several hundred
    million dollars' worth.
         Okay.  Let's talk about concealment.  Here are
    the findings with respect to concealment.  That's
    the first one.  Defendants R.J. Reynolds and
    Lorillard concealed or omitted material information,
    et cetera, not otherwise known about the health
    risks of smoking and their addictive nature.  And
    then there's another finding that they agreed to do
    so with others, including Philip Morris and Liggett,
    and other institutions.
         Okay.  Let's talk about that.  During this
    trial, you know, you heard evidence that there are
    60 million pages of tobacco company documents that
    are now public.  And you didn't see very many and
    time after time Mr. Wilner had a witness saying,
    Well, they're representative.  They're
    cherry-picked, they're cherry-picked.  Do you think
    they just reached into in the bag, pulled out one at
    random to come and talk to you about?  They're
    cherry-picked from millions of internal documents
    that are now publicly available, that's what they
    were.
         And plaintiff's -- plaintiff's witnesses talked about them and I want to talk to you about it.  It
    is very important that you keep in mind that this
    case is still about Barbara Jewett and that means
    that you must determine what all those documents and
    all that testimony you heard about, company conduct
    and concealment, what that had to do with her, with
    her decisions, with her decisions to start, with her
    decisions to become a regular smoker, and with her
    decision not to really seriously try and quit.
    Where's the bridge?  Where's the bridge?
         Okay.  Now, the court has instructed you on
    this issue.  If you go back and look at the
    instructions, what plaintiff has to prove is that
    Mrs. Jewett relied, relied, to her detriment, on the
    failure of these defendants or others with whom they
    acted pursuant to an agreement.  That they re- --
    that she relied on their failure to disclose
    information that plaintiff argues was concealed and
    not otherwise known, that's what he's got to show.
    They have the burden of proof to show that not only
    did that occur, but there was reliance and it was a
    but for cause, if that hadn't happened, Mrs. Jewett
    wouldn't have smoked, she wouldn't have gotten COPD,
    and she wouldn't have died.  That's what they got to
    show.  It's a tall order.  It's a tall order.      Ask yourself this, Does it make any sense at
    all to say what Mrs. Jewett already knew about the
    health risks of smoking didn't matter?  The warnings
    didn't matter that were on the pack.  In fact, every
    pack of cigarettes she ever smoked from.  What her
    doctors likely told her didn't matter.  What she
    must have read in the newspaper and had watched on
    television from public health authorities, that
    didn't matter.  The Surgeon General in his reports,
    didn't matter.  What friends and family had to say
    to her, did not matter.  But, whoa, wait a minute,
    wait a minute, wait a minute.  It would have made
    all the difference in the world if R.J. Reynolds
    Tobacco Company or Lorillard Tobacco Company had
    ever said, Smoking's addictive, smoking causes
    disease.  Does that make any sense?  Does that make
    any sense?
         All right.  Let's talk about -- there's two
    categories of concealment, roughly.  One on
    addiction and one on the health consequences of
    smoking.  I want to talk to you about each of them
    separately.  So let's start with addiction.
    Plaintiffs showed you documents concerning nicotine
    and addiction.  I don't have time to go through each
    of them individually, but I want to start with five basic points, five basic points that were clearly
    established during testimony of Dr. Feingold and
    others.
         The first one, It can be hard to quit.  It's
    been known for a long time.  You've got Mark Twain,
    I love this picture, him sitting in that rocker,
    this is in the 1800's, easy to quit smoking, done it
    thousands of times.  Dr. Feingold testified that it
    was understood prior -- long before 1964 that
    smoking can be difficult.  And remember that
    plaintiff produced no evidence, none at all,
    whatsoever that the tobacco industry generally or
    R.J. Reynolds or Lorillard ever denied that fact
    that it can be hard to quit.  No evidence of that at
    all.  It was no secret, there was not even a denial
    that it could be hard to quit.
         Well, okay, secondly -- second point I want you
    to keep in mind, interchangeable terms.  Remember,
    Dr. Feingold admitted that for a long time, and
    certainly prior to 1964, people tended to use the
    words dependence, addiction, and habit
    interchangeably.  Just the way it was.  So it's not
    surprising that if you go through the 60-million-odd
    pages of internal tobacco company documents there
    will be examples where the author used the word addiction or addictive, but that doesn't mean that
    the author really meant anything more than it's hard
    to quit.
         Third point, Dr. Feingold testified very, very
    clearly in my cross-examination that prior to 1964
    the scientific community already knew that there
    were pharmacological properties of nicotine, that
    they already knew before 1964 that tobacco contains
    nicotine, that they already knew before 1964 that
    nicotine had effects on the brain, and that they
    already knew before 1964 that nicotine was an
    important reason why people smoked.  All known.  In
    fact, you'll recall that the tobacco industry
    collected and summarized all the publications on a
    bunch of different issues, including addiction and
    nicotine, in the book that was sometimes referred to
    as the Green Monster, and that they gave that book
    to the 1964 Surgeon General's advisory committee.
         There's no evidence that any defendant in this
    case or the tobacco industry, generally, denied that
    nicotine has effects on the brain.  That was not a
    secret.  Not a secret.
         The fourth point, it's long been known that
    tobacco contains nicotine and that people smoke for
    nicotine.  I mean, the 1964 Surgeon General's Report said it and I talked about it with Dr. Feingold.
    Denicotinized tobacco has not found general public
    acceptance as a substitute.  Not a secret.  People
    smoke for nicotine.  At least a lot of them do.
         Fifth, the whole dispute about whether to label
    nicotine an addiction as opposed to a habit was
    about definitions an labels.  The 1964 report called
    it a habit.  You heard this from Dr. Feingold.  As
    he admitted, in 1988 the Surgeon General adopted a
    different definition and the definition was changed.
    No intoxication required, no sort of socially
    deviant behavior and no severe withdrawal effects,
    that's what changed.  That's what was required under
    the definition in 1964.  In 1988 those elements of
    the definition of addiction got removed and smoking
    changed from a habit into an addiction.  It wasn't a
    change in the science -- it wasn't a change in the
    science, it was a change in the definition.  I'm not
    saying there weren't scientific advances, but I
    asked Dr. Feingold -- I mean, I asked him
    expressly -- and I thought this was keen,
    demonstrative 33.
         Okay.  I said, Basically, if you take the '64
    Surgeon General's definition, the one that was used
    back then, and you apply it not to what we know -- knew in 1964, 1966 or 1967, but what we know today,
    today, is smoking addictive?  No.  Take the '64
    definition, apply it to what we know today, it's not
    addictive.  Okay.  Let's do the opposite.  Take the
    definition that was used in 1988 and apply it to
    what everybody knew in the public health community
    including that which was recited in the '64 Surgeon
    General's Report, take the definition today, apply
    it to what we knew back in 1964, smoking was
    addictive.  It was about definitions, it was about
    labels.
         All right.  Now, if I remember that the tobacco
    industry, including R.J. Reynolds and Lorillard,
    were unhappy about getting lumped together with
    heroin and cocaine.  I think that's understandable.
    So starting in 1988 the tobacco industry began to
    publicly deny that smoking was addicting and they
    cited real differences between nicotine and drugs of
    abuse like heroin and alcohol in terms of
    intoxication and the withdrawal effects.
         Okay.  Keeping those points in mind, I want to
    talk to you about one specific set of documents that
    were used not once but twice.  Once in Phase 1 and
    once in Phase 2, and they were the so-called HIPPO
    documents.  As you'll recall, HIPPO was a study that the British American Tobacco Company which owned
    Brown & Williamson, British American Tobacco was in
    London, they hired the Battelle Research Group in
    Geneva, Switzerland, an outside laboratory to take a
    look at the effects of nicotine in rats.  That's
    what they did.  And in his direction examination
    with Mr. Wilner, Dr. Feingold mentioned the 1960
    HIPPO study.  In Phase 1 and again in Phase 2 as
    sort of the poster child, the example of the
    defendants hiding important secret information about
    nicotine and addiction.  But I thought it was pretty
    clear in cross-examination what really happened and
    there's no there there.
         Okay.  In Phase 1 Dr. Feingold read from the
    internal BAT document in 1962 where a consultant
    said that through HIPPO they had learned new and
    important things about nicotine.  And then on
    cross-examine -- examination he said that, Well, you
    know, the tobacco companies wanted to send to the
    Surgeon General's advisory committee the reports on
    HIPPO because they thought that it showed that
    nicotine had beneficial effects and it would be
    something positive that they could put forward to
    the Surgeon General instead of all the negative
    information that they knew the Surgeon General had about smoking and disease.
         And at the end they didn't submit the
    information to the Surgeon General in 1963 because
    they had had it reviewed, and the reviewers said
    it's not publishable in any form, there's errors in
    here.  Okay.  And then the work was continued and
    when that continued work was completed, it was
    published.  That was the Phase 1 testimony.
         Then Dr. Feingold came back to HIPPO a second
    time in Phase 2 and then he testified on direct that
    contained secret information about the biological
    effects of nicotine on the brain that finally came
    out only decades later.  And on cross-examination I
    asked Dr. Feingold, What are you talking about?
    What was that discovery?  He said, Well, it was the
    -- in the HIPPO study about nicotine's effect on the
    brain, it affected the level of a hormone -- and I
    wrote it down and I'll probably mispronounce it,
    adrenocorticotropic, remember that?  I stumbled over
    it the first time, too.
         But then Dr. Feingold said, Nobody on the face
    of the planet, that's a quote, nobody on the face of
    the planet believes that nicotine's effect on this
    hormone is an important reason why people smoke.  In
    short, the secret information in the HIPPO studies was one of those things that was wrong, that was
    wrong.  It was just plain wrong.
         Okay.  But let's return to Mrs. Jewett.  Again
    that's our focus and that's where our attention
    belongs.  So the earliest public statement by the
    tobacco industry, not just these defendants, denying
    that nicotine was addictive, that's in evidence, was
    from 1988.  1988.  And that's not surprising because
    that's when the Surgeon General changed the
    definition and nicotine changed from being
    habituating to an addiction.
         What difference would those denials starting in
    1988 have made to Mrs. Jewett?  Where is the
    evidence of that?  There was zero evidence that
    Mrs. Jewett's choices about her smoking behavior
    would have been different if only the tobacco
    industry said, That quitting smoking could be hard
    and it was an addiction.  She must have known that
    already.  After all, there was the testimony from
    Mr. Jewett about those News Year's Eve attempts to
    try to quit smoking.  Mrs. Jewett probably had a
    sense about how easy or hard it was for her to quit
    smoking personally.
         All right.  Let's talk about disease.  This is
    our last bridge issue involving the findings and I'd like to start off as I did with nicotine and
    addiction by setting a little bit of context and
    after that we'll again focus on Mrs. Jewett as we
    must since this case is about her.  Let's talk about
    the tobacco industry's denial that it had been
    proven that smoking caused disease before 1964.  And
    you heard Dr. Feingold talk about the publication in
    1981 by Ochsner and DeBakey on the subject of
    smoking and lung cancer as if that answered the
    question.  But then you learned on cross-examination
    that Drs. Ochsner and DeBakey seven years later in
    1948 authored an article concluding that the cause
    of lung cancer was unknown, they had changed their
    mind.  What did other scientists and public health
    advocates have to say?  I went through a long
    laundry list with Dr. Feingold on the stand of all
    these people, all of them, Dr. Heller at the
    National Cancer Institute.  And I believe the quote
    was, Any connection with heavy smoking and lung
    cancer has not been definitively established.
         1954, Dr. Cuyler Hammond from the American
    Cancer Society, the guy who ran a lot of these
    studies, he said, Well, laboratory investigation,
    he's talking about the mouse skin painting, have so
    far not yielded very much definitive information of a convincing nature concerning the causes of lung
    cancer in the human population.
         Dr. Feingold acknowledged that there was a Dr.
    Walter Martin who was president of the AMA, who in
    1954 said, No conclusive evidence that smoking
    causes lung cancer.  There was Dr. Wynder at
    Sloan-Kettering, he of mouse skin painting fame.
    And you heard what he had to say about his own
    study.  Present mouse data did not influence the
    proof at hand linking smoking to lung cancer in man.
    The mouse skin tests cannot give definitive proof
    for human carcinogen.  Dr. Houper, at the
    environmental cancer section of the National Cancer
    -- of the National Institute of Health.  And Dr.
    Feingold called his dissent from the view that
    smoking caused cancer in the 1950's -- he labeled
    him as member of the flat earth society, I don't
    know if you remember that.
         There was Dr. Charles Cameron, who was the
    scientific director of the American Cancer Society,
    and in 1956 he said, The American Cancer Society has
    resolved to support research efforts to identify
    whatever inciting substances may be in tobacco and
    to find ways to eliminate them.  The American Cancer
    Society does not hold that smoking causes cancer of the lung.  It does not propose to tell the public
    not to smoke.  Dr. Cameron.
         Dr. Burney in 1957, he expressed doubts.  Dr.
    John Talbot, who was the editor of the Journal of
    the American Medical Association, expressed doubts.
    Dr. Robbins, who I asked Dr. Feingold about on
    cross-examination, in 1962 said that there wasn't
    enough evidence to conclude causation at least from
    the perspective of the scientific investigator.
         All these individuals were writing and saying
    that there was simply not enough evidence to
    conclude that smoking caused cancer in that time
    period.  So the tobacco industry was in pretty good
    company before 1964.  And as you learned, the reason
    why there was this debate going on in the scientific
    community in the 1950's and in the early 1960's,
    that debate -- there was a debate going on.  What
    was it about?  It really was not a dispute about
    what the evidence was.  Really wasn't a fight about
    that.  By the mid-1950's scientists, the public
    health authorities, and even the tobacco industry
    knew that smokers got more lung cancer than
    non-smokers.  They knew that cigarette smoke
    contained very tiny trace amounts of certain
    carcinogens, a billionths of a gram.  And they knew that mice, when they had their back shaved, and they
    took tobacco tar that had been collected and they
    put it on the backs of mice, they got tumors.
    Everybody knew that, I don't think there was really
    a fight about that evidence.  The fight was about,
    What does it mean?  What does it mean?  It was a
    dispute about whether that was sufficient to
    establish that smoking caused disease or whether you
    also needed this animal model or you needed to show
    a mechanism.
         And that might seem kind of silly to us today.
    But that was the dispute, that was the debate.  It
    was a genuine scientific dispute of the '50's and
    '60's and that's why we have a Surgeon General's
    Report in 1964.  The authors of the report,
    themselves -- can we have the next one, please,
    Steve, the next demonstrative?  Yeah.
         Various meanings of the conceptions of the term
    cause were discussed vigorously at a number of
    meetings of the committee and its subcommittees.
    The Surgeon General was grappling with this very --
    with this very issue.  And even after 1964, as you
    heard when I cross-examined Dr. Feingold, doctors
    often did not understand the epidemiological
    evidence or get on the antismoking bandwagon.  The American Medical Association didn't officially get
    on board until late 1960's and so prior to 1964 and
    for some years afterwards, the tobacco industry had
    pretty good company in saying, Not proven.  And
    there was no evidence that those beliefs were not
    honestly held.
         In fact, this came up with Dr. Kyriakoudes and,
    for example, when the tobacco industry got together
    in late 1953 and was working on getting ready to put
    out The Frank Statement, they met.  And The Frank
    Statement, as you'll recall, said, We do not believe
    our products are injurious to health.  But that's
    also what the tobacco industry executives were
    saying internally to one another.  I mean, look at
    the document.  The industry is strongly convinced
    that there is no sound scientific basis for the
    charges that have been made.  There is no evidence
    that they didn't honestly believe it and, as I said,
    in that time period they were in pretty good
    company.
         And then I don't want to go through the
    individual documents but I want to talk briefly
    about two.  One was Claude Teague, 1953, remember,
    that was discussed with Dr. Feingold and what it was
    was a survey of the published literature, a survey of the published literature.  Another was Rodgman,
    1962, the "Critical and Objective Appraisal."  And
    there's two versions of this document.  But if you
    use the short one, it's clearly a draft, it's got
    handwriting all over it.  No evidence it went to
    anybody.  But there's an excerpt that followed the
    one that plaintiff read that you haven't heard
    before, and it went on to say, The evidence from all
    these different disciplines that lung cancer is
    caused or associated with cigarette smoke is
    paralleled by similar evidence supporting the
    proposition that lung cancer is caused by or
    associated with air pollutants.  In some instances
    the evidence seemed to be stronger in support of
    cigarette smoke as a causative or associative
    factor.  In other instances, the evidence seems to
    be stronger in support of air pollutants as a
    causative or associated fact.  It's not like Dr.
    Rodgman had it all figured out in 1963.
         After 1964, in the Surgeon General's report,
    the tobacco industry still refused to accept 6that
    cause had been shown.  It clung to the position that
    it had to have a mechanism or an animal model for
    too long, for far too long they clung to that
    position.  But, you know, after 1964 the notion that smoking caused disease, was that a big surprise to
    anybody?  Was that some secret that was known only
    to the tobacco industry?  In fact, the not-proven
    statements as time went on, and you guys saw this in
    the video clips that were played, it was -- it was
    something that people were using to ridicule the
    tobacco industry for.  They there statements that
    they were on the defensive about.  I mean, they
    could show up on a show to talk to excise taxes and
    the first question that they're going to get asked
    is, You still don't think smoking causes lung
    cancer?  Put them on the defensive.
         Okay.  So as we discussed, 1964, that's the
    year in which the Surgeon General tried to end the
    scientific dispute about what it meant to say
    smoking caused lung cancer or some other disease.
    And before that there was a genuine dispute.  There
    was a genuine dispute.  But what about the public?
    What about the public?  In 1957 the Surgeon General
    didn't think a warning was necessary because of all
    the media coverage that the emerging science had
    received in the media.
         The American Medical Association didn't think a
    warning was necessary on cigarettes in the
    mid-1960's when they first came out.  Daniel Horn, you heard about his stand-on-the-rooftop quote.  And
    what was the net effect?  I mean, let's just step
    back from it all.  I mean, you heard Dr. Parssinen,
    in only 10 percent of the news stories carry
    anything from the tobacco industries on -- on
    disease, the other 90 percent didn't have anything.
    The 10 percent that did, you had to get down kind of
    to the bottom of the article to find it.  But what
    was the net effect of all that?  What was the net
    effect of what the public health community, the
    Surgeon General, the doctors, everybody else was
    saying about smoking and health on the one hand and
    what the tobacco industry was saying either through
    advertising, if you want to follow plaintiff's
    argument, or through their not-proven statements?
    What was the net effect?  What was the bottom line?
         And Dr. Seltzer told you.  He came in looked,
    he at the world as it was, not some hypothetical
    world, the world as it was with all of this
    divergent information out there, all of the
    information.  What did people -- what were they
    aware of?  What did they believe?  And he showed
    you.
         Okay.  Let's take a look at demonstrative 43,
    please.      He showed you.  This is the first one.  1977,
    81 percent of smokers think that smoking is the
    cause of lung cancer.  1964 -- did we skip one?
    Okay.  Yeah.  No, we didn't.  Next one, please,
    you're right.
         1964, 81 percent of the people believed, not
    are aware of, but believed that smoking was harmful.
    81 percent.  There wasn't any lung-cancer-belief
    question in 1964.  Well, then what happened after
    this early period in the '60's.  There were the
    warnings.  93 percent of smokers saw them, that's
    what doctor -- Professor, rather, Seltzer showed you
    earlier today.  And in 1970 while Mrs. Jewett was
    still in high school the New York schools were
    teaching students about all those dangers and the
    warning changed to, Smoking is dangerous to your
    health.
         What about the ads?  What about the ads that
    plaintiff would have you believe turned everybody
    into a hapless victim?  Well, in 1971, as you heard,
    they disappeared from radio and television.  The
    print ads remained and the print ads carried the
    warning.  So by 1974 Mrs. Jewett's information
    environment, everybody's information environment was
    dominated, dominated by the message that smoking is harmful to your health.  Tobacco company statements
    to the contrary were deemed pathetic by Reader's
    Digest as early as 1962.  And as Dr. Kyriakoudes
    admitted and as Dr. Parssinen testified, the tobacco
    industry just wasn't a source that most people
    looked to for information about smoking and health.
         I mean, what was the number?  I think it was 3
    percent through all these decades, thought that the
    tobacco industry was a reliable source of
    information and everybody else thought it was the
    American Medical Association, the American Cancer
    Society, the Surgeon General, the public health
    authorities.
         And so what was the net effect of all of this?
    Well, okay, Dr. Feingold admitted that he didn't
    have any empirical evidence or study that showed
    that the not-proven statements altered consumers'
    decisions to smoke.  That was his testimony.  And
    what was the net effect of all this on the beliefs,
    the beliefs of the American public?  Dr. Seltzer
    showed you again.
         Let's take a look at demonstrative 45.  Okay.
    There we go.
         Astronomical, astronomical beliefs that it's
    harmful.  Gallup pole 1977, 90 percent.      How about the next slide, 46.
         Cause of lung cancer.  I mean, you just don't
    get people -- if you ask the American public what
    they believe, I mean, I don't know that -- I'm not
    sure that you can get -- if you ask people who is
    the president of the United States, I'm not sure
    90 percent of them could tell you it was Barack
    Obama.  And that is the sole levels of belief we
    have for smoking causes lung cancer.
         In short, the statistical evidence shows that
    despite what the tobacco industry said or did not
    say, the clear message from a host of other sources
    had gotten through, had gotten through loud and
    clear to the American public and not only did it get
    through, but people believed it.  People believed
    it.
         Okay.  Now, let's come back and talk about
    Mrs. Jewett, because at the end of the day plaintiff
    doesn't win if they want to prove that somehow or
    another the conduct of the tobacco industry
    influenced the world at large.  They have to prove
    legal cause, but for the tobacco industry's conduct
    Mrs. Jewett, not the world at large, Mrs. Jewett
    would not have smoked, would not have continued
    smoking, would not have gotten COPD, and would not have died.  That's what they've got to show.
         Okay.  So let's bring it back to Mrs. Jewett.
    You know, very simply, there wasn't really any
    evidence of the effect of any of this on
    Mrs. Jewett.  Plaintiff did not build the bridge.
    Mr. Jewett could not tell us.
         Demonstrative 47.
         Why Mrs. Jewett started smoking or when, what
    brand or brands she might have smoked before he met
    her.  Whether Mrs. Jewett relied on anything a
    tobacco company may have said about the health risks
    of smoking or addiction, there is nothing that Mr.
    Jewett can tell us about Mrs. Jewett before 1973.
    He can't tell you what she knew or didn't know, what
    she saw or heard or read about the risks of smoking,
    why she started, why she smoked the brands that she
    did, whatever they were.
         What about after 1953 -- 1973 when Mr. Jewett
    met the future Mrs. Jewett?  He can't tell us very
    much about time after 1973 either.  He didn't know
    whether his wife ever saw or heard any statement by
    the tobacco industry about the health risks of
    smoking or the addictiveness of smoking, not one
    statement.  He didn't know whether Mrs. Jewett saw
    or heard any statement by the tobacco industry about addiction.  He said, She never told me she heard of
    the Tobacco Institute.  She never mentioned the
    Council for Tobacco Research.  She never mentioned
    the Tobacco Industry Research Committee.  There's no
    mention she even heard of them, but we do know, we
    do know what Mrs. Jewett never told her husband.
    Mrs. Jewett never told Mr. Jewett that she was
    relying on statements from the tobacco industry.
    Never said that.  She never said that the tobacco
    industry withheld information from her.  She never
    said that only if -- if she had only known some
    information about smoking, that she didn't already
    know, she would have quit earlier.  She never said
    that either.  And that's powerful evidence about
    Mrs. Jewett.
         That's who they've got to build the bridge to
    between those findings.  They've got to build it to
    Mrs. Jewett.  And there's really nothing in the
    record before you about the effect on Mrs. Jewett.
         Now let me talk about responsibility or fault.
    It's the third major issue, I think.  You only get
    this far, you only get to responsibility or fault if
    you find that the plaintiff has proven that the
    defendants' wrongful conduct was a but for legal
    cause of Mrs. Jewett's continued smoking and her COPD and her death.  And if you get this far in the
    verdict form, I'm going to ask you to allocate
    responsibility to Mrs. Jewett, to R.J. Reynolds and
    to Lorillard and I want to talk about that.  Nobody
    forced Mrs. Jewett to start smoking or to become a
    regular smoker.  Nobody forced her to continue
    smoking when her family, friends, and doctors were
    telling her to stop and that smoking was bad for
    her.  But she continued.  And not only did she
    continue but she never seriously tried to quit until
    after she was diagnosed.
         Sure, Mr. Jewett took the stand and he talked
    about several New Year's resolutions.  They weren't
    that memorable.  In his deposition, if you'll
    recall, he didn't remember them at all, it's only
    when he got here to court.  When he got here to
    court, I said, Well, you k now, how many were there?
    Well, several.  When?  When did you try to quit?
    Well, I can't really remember when.  Well, when you
    tried to quit, did you throw out your ashtrays, did
    you throw out your cigarettes?  Did you tell your
    friends and family members that, you know, you were
    trying to quit?  No, I can't remember.  I don't know
    if we did that.  At the end of the day, not only
    weren't they memorable, but Mr. Jewett said they weren't that serious, they weren't that serious.
         Now smokers, even addicted smokers, not only
    can try to quit smoking seriously but they can, they
    can quit.  And that's unchallenged, it's undisputed
    in this case.  For example, Dr. Feingold said it.
    That's a quote from his testimony.  In fact,
    everybody who is addicted to nicotine can stop.
    That's what he said.  Mrs. Jewett had that ability.
    She did quit.  And you heard the data, 50 to 60
    million Americans have quit smoking.  95 percent
    without any assistance.  More former than current
    smokers today and the vast majority of former
    smokers today were addicted.
         Let me start with the simple concept, with the
    ability to quit, comes the responsibility to quit.
    With the ability to quit, comes the responsibility
    to quit.  And Mrs. Jewett bears responsibility for
    not making serious attempts to quit and for actually
    quitting sooner.  The fact that she tragically died
    of COPD doesn't lessen that responsibility.  Indeed,
    that was Mr. Jewett's attitude.  Remember, he never
    asked his wife to quit and he never helped her to
    quit.  When he was up on the stand and I asked him
    why.  Why didn't you do that?  And his answer was,
    She was a mature or grown woman.  She could make up her own mind.  It was her personal choice to quit or
    not.  That was his testimony.
         And what if Mrs. Jewett had quit sooner?  You
    heard testimony from Dr. Feingold.  Well, if she
    quit in 1995, she would have lived a little longer,
    perhaps a year or two.  That's what he said.  We
    went back in time.  We said, Well, what if she quit
    in 1985?  And Dr. Feingold told you that Mrs. Jewett
    would not have developed severe emphysema when she
    did and there's a chance she might not have gotten
    emphysema at all.  And I said, Well, isn't it true
    that if you look at big populations, people who
    smoke fewer than 20 pack years, generally don't get
    emphysema?  He said, Yeah.  And I said, okay.  When
    did Mrs. Jewett hit that 20-pack-year mark?  And
    even if you give plaintiff the benefit of the doubt
    on the high side of smoking, a pack a day from '67
    to '73, one-and-a-half packs a day from '73 forward,
    Mrs. Jewett didn't hit the 20-pack-years mark until
    1981 or 1982.  So if Mrs. Jewett had quit before
    1981 or 1982, chances are she never would have
    gotten COPD.
         All right.  But, again, she didn't try to quit.
    She didn't seriously tried.  She continued smoking.
    And as Mr. Jewett and plaintiff's counsel agree, she bears some responsibility.  I would submit she --
    she had the best chance to prevent her COPD.  She
    had plenty of opportunities to do that.  Don't start
    smoking, don't become a regular smoker.  Quit.  At
    least try seriously to quit.  Now, if she had seized
    any one of those opportunities, we wouldn't be here.
    So I think she bears the greatest responsibility,
    not 10 percent like Mr. Wilner suggested, or 15
    percent.  I think she bears the greatest allocation
    of fault in this case.  I think at a minimum she's
    probably 80 percent at fault or more for what
    happened here.
         It's a simple acknowledgment of the personal
    responsibility each and every one of us bear for the
    choices we make, especially when we make them being
    aware of the risks.
         Okay.  Now let's talk about R.J. Reynolds.  At
    the outset I don't think plaintiff has built that
    bridge and, again, you don't get here, to the
    allocation of fault, unless you first find that they
    built that bridge showing that the wrongful conduct
    of the defendants caused, but for cause of
    Mrs. Jewett's smoking and death.  But before I go on
    I want to make a point about something Mr. Wilner
    has talked a lot about in his opening, and, that was, Dr. Figlar's comment yesterday that he didn't
    know that addiction had anything to do with the
    public health consequences of smoking.  There's a
    context to that answer.  And Dr. Figlar gave it and
    he made two points.  The first point he said, was,
    well, he was merely saying that what causes
    cigarettes to be addictive, the nicotine, is not the
    same as what make them cause disease, that is, the
    tar and gas-phase components of cigarette smoke that
    cause disease.  That was his first point.
         And his second point was even addicted people
    can quit.  Even addicted people can quit.  Again,
    that's not disputed.  Now, if you get to Reynolds'
    responsibility, I want you to consider this,
    cigarettes are inherently dangerous and they cannot
    be made safe.  They're still legal products and they
    always have been.  R.J. Reynolds and the defendants
    generally have tried very hard since the 1950's to
    reduce the health risks of smoking by responding to
    suggestions that appeared in scientific literature,
    all reasonable suggestions were pursued.  And in
    1966 the dangerous but legal cigarettes were
    plastered with warnings on every pack and in 1971 in
    every ad.
         Mrs. Jewett was an adult, she could and did make her own decisions in life.  Remember, she was
    strong willed, she kind of ran the household.  And
    as a consequence, I think the defense responsibility
    should be very small.  I think it should be zero but
    it could be higher, but not more than 20 percent.
         And if you decide to allocate responsibility to
    the defendants, you should keep in mind the evidence
    of Mrs. Jewett's smoking history.  I want to do this
    pretty quickly.  Prior to 1973 nobody knows what she
    smoked.  From 1973 when Mr. Jewett met Mrs. Jewett,
    she was smoking Old Gold.  She smoked Old Gold until
    about 1979 or 1980, then she switched to Kools.  She
    smoke Kools until about the mid-1990's, according to
    Sarah, late 1990's, according to Mr. Jewett, and
    then she switched to Marlboro menthol.
         Okay.  Damages.  You heard a lot about that
    from Mr. Wilner.  There are two kinds of damages,
    compensatory and punitive.  Let's take compensatory
    first.  Compensatory damages are meant to compensate
    the plaintiff.  And Mr. Wilner's right, there's two
    components.  The first component is what he sort of
    called the hard numbers, what were the medical
    expenses, the funeral expenses, the lost wages,
    that's fine.  He's right.  Those are hard numbers.
         The other part of it, though, is to compensate the plaintiff for his loss and you have to decide
    what amount will make Mr. Jewett whole.  If you
    decide that plaintiff has met his burden on all
    these issues, you've got to decide how much money
    you should award to make him whole and that's pretty
    hard.  That's a difficult task.  And this is perhaps
    the most difficult area where you have to separate
    your emotions from your reason.  Your duty is to be
    just and fair to both sides.
         So a few thing to keep in mind as you think
    about it.  Mr. Jewett claims damages for his loss of
    companionship -- companionship, support and services
    and the pain and suffering that accompanies that
    loss.  Under the law, as His Honor instructions will
    make clear, you are not allowed to consider the pain
    and suffering of anybody else, only Mr. Jewett.  So
    you cannot consider the pain and suffering, for
    example, of Sarah Milliken, who is clearly upset by
    her mother's death.  She undoubtedly feels her loss,
    but that's not a compensable item of damages in this
    case.  Nor is the pain and suffering that
    Mrs. Jewett suffered.  Not a compensable loss in
    this case.  It's only Mr. Jewett.  Only Mr. Jewett.
    His loss of companionship, support and services and
    the accompanying pain and suffering.      Okay.  So Mr. Jewett is asking you to award him
    money for the loss of Mrs. Jewett's companionship
    after her death in September of 2006.  And I would
    submit that that means you need to consider evidence
    of Mr. and Mrs. Jewett's life together before she
    passed away in September of 2006 and Mr. Jewett's
    life after 2006 when she died.
         Okay.  Well, before 2006 Mr. and Mrs. Jewett
    were often apart for long periods of time, including
    Mr. Jewett's stint in Saudi Arabia starting in 1995
    after his wife's diagnosis.  Now, Sarah came in
    here, Sarah Milliken, and she sort of idealized her
    parents' marriage as maybe kids are wont to do, but
    Mr. Jewett's own testimony suggests that it really
    wasn't perfect.  Remember the odd story that Mr.
    Jewett told on the stand about his tennis partner,
    Mr. Matthews elicited, and I was listening to that
    and, you know, if your wife tells you to stop
    playing tennis with a younger women, you say, Yes,
    you say, No, but what you don't do is pack up your
    bags and leave the house.
         What about Mr. Jewett's life after
    September 2006?  Well, I'm not saying that first
    year wasn't tough.  But after about a year he began
    dating and he dated several women.  Wasn't anything serious, then in late 2007 or early 2008 he began to
    see Betty and that's a steady romantic relationship
    now for over three years and Mr. Jewett talked about
    how they talked about getting married.  And what I
    would suggest you need to consider that time has
    healed or has helped to heal Mr. Jewett's loss.  The
    evidence has shown you that Mr. Jewett has gone
    through that healing process that started with
    Mrs. Jewett's death about five years ago, a little
    less.
         So in light of what this evidence is, what do
    you think is fair and reasonable?  Well, Mr. Wilner
    has a far different view on that question.  He's
    asking for an extraordinary amount of money, a
    minimum of $6.9 million is what he's asking for.
    That's an extraordinary amount of money to anybody
    and it would be to Mr. Jewett.  Based on the
    evidence, let me suggest some numbers that I think
    would be fair and reasonable.  I only ask that you
    consider them.  I only ask that you consider them.
    That's all I can ask.
         Again, it's understandable and reasonable that
    the first year after Mrs. Jewett's death was
    probably the toughest one for Mr. Jewett.  So should
    you decide to award any compensatory damages to Mr. Jewett for that year, I would suggest a fair amount
    would be $150,000 for that first year and after that
    first year, after Mr. Jewett began dating and
    entered into a steady romantic relationship with
    Betty Clark, I think the calculation changes.  I was
    going to suggest $50,000 a year for each of those
    three years, that's another 150, brings us up to
    300.
         And what about the future?  What will Mr.
    Jewett's life be like?  We don't have a crystal
    ball, we can't look into it and see what his life is
    going to be like going forward, but this much we
    know, he will continue to enjoy life with his
    friends and his family and perhaps Ms. Clark.  He'll
    still have the opportunity to travel and visit with
    friends and relatives and play golf and play tennis
    and live a full and complete life.  So for the
    remaining time I think another $150,000 is not
    unreasonable.  That's a total of $450,000, plus the
    hard money, about a million dollars in total.  It's
    a significant sum of money and I ask that you
    consider it, if you get this far.  If you get this
    far.
         Let me turn last to punitive damages.  As
    you've already heard from His Honor, punitive damages serve two purposes, punishment and
    deterrence.  The punitive damages are not to
    compensate Mr. Jewett.  That's what compensatory
    damages are for.  As the court explained, punitive
    damages cannot be imposed for conduct that was not a
    legal cause of Mrs. Jewett's death.  So if you go
    through that list of all the conduct and say, Gosh,
    concealment, not a cause of her death.  Negligence,
    well, it was and it was gross negligence.  Okay.
    Well, what was the gross negligence?  It's up to you
    guys when you go back there.  And if you find that
    there was gross negligence, gross negligence, not
    just negligence, but gross negligence, and you find
    that by clear and convincing evidence, then that's
    the conduct for which you award punitive damages,
    that's the one you've got to look at.
         If you find concealment is out, not part of the
    case, didn't cause her death, you can't award -- you
    can't punitive damages for that conduct.  It's only
    the conduct that you find caused, but for cause
    Mrs. Jewett to continue to smoke and to get
    emphysema and die and it has to be gross negligence
    or the intentional misconduct.  Okay.  So you've got
    to focus on that.  And they've got to show that that
    conduct was -- amounted to reckless disregard, conscious indifference, or intentional violation of
    Mrs. Jewett's rights, and it's got to be by clear
    and convincing evidence, not the greater weight of
    the evidence, an even higher standard of proof.
    There is not absolute, automatic right to punitive
    damages.  Plaintiff has got to meet that burden.
    Has he?  I think the evidence is no.
         Let me talk a little about that, specifically
    with respect to my client, R.J. Reynolds.  Remember,
    R.J. Reynolds is in this case because it bought
    Brown & Williamson in 2004.  2004.  That's not to
    say that Reynolds isn't responsible for Brown &
    Williams -- Brown & Williamson's prior conduct.  It
    is.  But let's talk about how that affects the
    purposes of punitive damages.  Mr. Wilner is up
    there and he's saying, We've got to deter them.
    We've got to get them to change.  Well, Brown &
    Williamson doesn't exist.  It disappeared.  It no
    longer exists as of 2004.  There's no company in
    existence to deter.
         There is also no need to punish or to deter
    R.J. Reynolds.  As you heard, for over a decade,
    R.J. Reynolds has said on its website publicly,
    Smoking causes all these diseases, it's addictive.
    R.J. Reynolds -- you heard that The Tobacco Institute, the Council for Tobacco Research, gone
    starting in 1998.  The people that authored many of
    the documents that Mr. Wilner has shown you during
    the course of this trial, Claude Teague, Frank
    Colby, Murray Senkus, Alan Rodgman, gone, gone.
         Let's talk about what Dr. Figlar told you.  He
    told you about R.J. Reynolds' consistent efforts to
    reduce the inherent risks of conventional
    tobacco-burning cigarettes.  They did the best they
    could.  He told you about Premier and Eclipse, the
    tobacco-heating cigarettes, a billion dollars spent
    to develop them and they lose money on them and they
    still sell them.  He talked about encouraging
    smokers who will not quit to switch to smokeless
    tobacco products such as Camel Snus.  And he told
    you why, smokeless tobacco products are far less
    risky than cigarettes.
         And, finally, he testified about this in
    cross-examination with Mr. Wilner.  He told you
    about Niconovum, the sister company that sells
    nicotine replacement products to help smokers quit,
    the nicotine gum, the nicotine patches, and the
    inhaler.  Reynolds, of course, is still a tobacco
    company, there's nothing wrong with that.  Congress
    has said we can sell cigarettes and tobacco in this country, that's legal.  But given what you've heard,
    the company's decades-long pursuit of harm
    reduction, given its encouragement of those to
    migrate to reduced-risk products, smokeless
    products, given the plan to provide assistance to
    Niconovum to those who want to quit, given its
    position on its website that not only does smoking
    cause disease and addiction, which has been there
    for over a decade, but the advice to smokers to
    quit.  That's the first thing they tell them, Quit.
         I submit there's no reason to punish R.J.
    Reynolds and to deter R.J. Reynolds on account of
    conduct of Brown & Williamson decades ago.  Decades
    ago.
         Okay.  I'm basically -- as before I don't know
    what Mr. Wilner's going to say when he gets up,
    please listen carefully to him, and as you do, think
    about how I might respond.  And, last, thanks again.
    Thanks for being fair.  Thanks for being impartial.
    Thanks for being dispassionate judges of the facts.
    Thank each of you, truly, for your service.  Thank
    you very much.
