    Could you get my chart there while I begin?  Thank
    you so much.
          Hello again.  And strange situation to be in, but
    I know we can't really talk.  But we're going to have a
    chance to have a one-way conversation here a little bit.
    Appreciate --
          MS. CUSTER:  Sorry about that.
          MR. WILNER:  And I -- I -- I look forward to it,
    though it is an odd situation, having a one-way
    conversation.
          I'm going to start with the verdict form.  Before
    I do that, I'm going to have maybe a couple remarks.
          You know, we -- we're constantly bombarded with
    the news on what goes on outside the courtroom.  We've
    had our own little world in this courtroom for a couple
    of weeks now.  And as I say, it's kind of a strange
    world, but in -- in a way, it's -- it's a very good
    world because we -- we get to study something really
    more than -- than any -- any people have studied it.  I
    mean, you -- you have a graduate degree in cigarette
    medicine and have a graduate degree in cigarette
    science.  You know, you knew more -- you know more now
    than most -- honestly than most doctors know and most
    public health people.  I mean, you -- you know a lot
    because it was our job, as good as we can, within the time we've got, you know, to -- to give you this
    information and -- and to call the witnesses and to go
    through all that we went through.  And it's -- it's a
    big war, but -- but we -- we did it.  And I -- there
    isn't much -- we could go on for another year, but
    probably you -- you got the message of what was going
    on.
          And before I go into the verdict form, I'm just
    going to take a moment to talk about what I think the --
    the message was and is.  Because it's an important
    message.  It really is.
          You know, we live in a -- in this great country.
    I just want to talk about the news.  And we hear all
    sorts of things.  And -- and we -- it's interesting
    because we -- we live in this country.  We hear a lot
    about what the president does.  We hear a lot about what
    Congress does.  We've got three branches of government,
    and one of them is these courts.  And you don't hear
    much about them, once in a while maybe.  But the Supreme
    Court, you do hear about the Supreme Court.  You don't
    hear so much about what happens in a courtroom like
    this.  Maybe -- maybe you do but not as much as the
    other stuff.
          But, you know, funny thing is about -- in this
    country about this is that the court system, the jury trial system, what we're doing now, the civil trial
    system, is really powerful.  It is -- it is actually --
    you know, that when they set up the country, they --
    they tried to make it so all the three were sort of
    equal and that they all work together and they did.  And
    so the -- the voice that can come from a -- a small
    courtroom like this is just as important in the -- in
    the -- in the world than in -- in this country for a
    time, as the voice of the president.  It's funny but
    it's true.
          And in this case, we -- we have the opportunity.
    You have the opportunity.  You're empowered with this
    responsibility to -- to exercise, you know, your
    judgment -- in a -- in a -- in a way -- in a careful
    but -- but proud way.  You have responsibility and you
    should also have courage.  You know?  And so what comes
    out of a courtroom in Jacksonville, because of the way
    we set up the court system here, may be of -- of huge
    importance.  It may be very important.
          And we believe that -- that -- and I suggest to
    you that the issues raised in this case are important.
    They're very important to Tom Jewett in Barbara's
    memory.  They have importance beyond that.  And I'm
    going to try in the next few minutes to indicate what I
    think the -- whatever it means, why I think it's important and what I suggest the right course of action
    is.  Not going to jump up and down, maybe not until
    later.  For now I'm not.  I'm going to go over the facts
    a little bit.  I'm not going to go back through a lot of
    the testimony because I think that -- I think you've
    heard enough.  I think -- I think that it's pretty clear
    what's going on.
          So let's -- let's -- let's look at the verdict
    form first.  It's always a good place to start.  They
    say if you wonder about where to start, start at the
    beginning so we'll try.
          Okay.  So this is the verdict form and you'll be
    asked to --
          Thank you.
          So it says:  We, the jury, return the following
    verdict.  And in the first --
          Thanks.
          In the first part of -- it says:  We -- in your
    verdict of May 12th, 2011, you found -- that means you
    already found -- that Barbara Jewett was a member of the
    Engle class because she was addicted to cigarettes
    containing nicotine, and smoking cigarettes because of
    such addiction was a legal cause of her death.
          That was -- that was the first battle in this war.
    And the implications of that, we believe that is correct, and that is now your verdict for that -- that
    part of the case.  And the -- and how -- and the
    implications of that are very -- are large on how we
    proceed now, and I'll explain that a little more.  But
    one issue -- or one -- one point is that you have
    determined correctly that Barbara Jewett was a member of
    the Engle class, and that means that there are certain
    findings that occurred in that class action that are now
    binding and that are not subject to challenge according
    to what His Honor, Judge Arnold, has -- will -- has read
    to you.
          And -- and I have a slide about what those are
    because I can't remember every one of them, but they are
    basically that it has been found in this class, which
    she is a member of, that R. J. Reynolds and Lorillard
    were negligent.  That -- that's been found.  It's been
    found that they manufactured a defective product and put
    it on the market.  So we don't -- we don't have to go
    back to that.
          It's been found that they concealed information
    that was not otherwise known.  And it's been found that
    they did that in concert with others, meaning that they
    conspired.  So, I mean, that isn't -- you don't have to
    approach those subjects with a -- with a new idea that
    we're going to have to start from the beginning. So you say, well, Mr. Wilner, why did all this
    evidence go on?  What's the purpose of redoing all this
    again?  Kept us here for weeks.  Well, I didn't myself
    but that was the process.  So what was the point of all
    this?  So a couple of things.
          Number one, there is a question on the verdict
    form that you'll see that says if you find that there --
    certain things.  And you'll go down and you'll say --
    apportion the negligence -- or the fault, rather,
    between the tobacco companies and Barbara Jewett.  So in
    order to apportion it, we have to show you what it was.
    So that's the reason we did that.
          Secondly -- and I -- there's a question at the end
    of the form that says was -- should punitive or
    punishment damages be assessed, be awarded against
    R. J. Reynolds or Lorillard.  And that requires us to
    show you by -- by the evidence in this courtroom.  In
    other words, that's -- that was part of the reason we
    did that.
          And when we get to that -- and I'm going to -- I
    may start -- I may -- maybe I'll go to the last page of
    the verdict first and talk a little bit about that.
    Because I'm going to suggest to you here that that is
    really what we're talking about, that it is -- there has
    come a day and -- and this may -- this is the day. Punishment is -- some of us are not comfortable with the
    idea of punishment.  But there is a role for it.  At
    least, it's in the legal system.  That's what we do.
          And I'm going to suggest to you that in -- in this
    context, in -- in -- in what we have here, that
    R. J. Reynolds and Lorillard need punishment to get to
    change, that I'm going to suggest to you that there has
    to be a change, that we do -- we need to have a change
    in Reynolds and Lorillard.  We need to have them -- we
    need to have a change in their culture.  We need to have
    a change in the cigarette culture.  We need to have
    something else for the next 10 years or 20 years than
    we've had so far.
          When Dr. Figlar got on the stand, he had an
    opportunity to -- to change.  You know, he had an
    opportunity to say, this is a -- a new Reynolds.  This
    is a new world.  We no longer are denying everything.
    We no longer are trying to hide everything.  We no
    longer are -- are trying to make believe that we don't
    know what cause is, and, oh, that doesn't cause this and
    that doesn't cause that.  And I'll -- I'll go into that
    in a little more detail.
          But -- but did he do that?  He did not.  It was
    very disappointing.  Instead of saying we now accept
    that we were wrong in the past; we accept that we did not tell the truth about our product; we accept that we
    kept making arguments about cause that were long since
    left in the dust of medicine; instead of saying that we
    know that we make an addictive product that harms
    people, instead of saying all that, what does
    Mr. Figlar -- or Dr. Figlar say?  I wrote it down and
    I'll get to it in a minute exactly what he said.
          He said he doesn't believe that addiction has
    caused harm basically.  He's willing to give addiction
    the lip service because I guess everybody else does and
    he can't really say.  But he's not willing to say that
    it caused harm.  And as long as he's not, then they're
    not doing what they need to do to help the people that
    are addicted.  It's as simple as that.  As long as the
    R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company holds to this view that
    addiction doesn't cause disease, which is a discredited
    view, as long as they keep holding on -- and you heard
    from him.  You heard what he said.  He's not even
    working on an addiction cure.  They're not even in the
    same world as everybody else.  They're in another world.
          As long as they stay -- when they stay in that
    world, when they came up here and said, we are -- we --
    we wanted you to think we were going to do -- we were
    anew.  We wanted you to think -- and as their counsel
    said, it wasn't our finest hour, those -- those years that passed when we denied that cigarettes even caused
    disease entirely.  But now we're different.  We're
    modern.  We've bought different -- we're bringing out
    snuff.  We are -- or snew (phonetic) or whatever it's
    called.  We -- we're trying to steer people away from
    our products oddly.  And we -- and we now accept that
    they cause disease.
          I thought, well, now, we're on the road to
    something, aren't we?
          However, the next sentence was, oh, well, yes,
    it's addictive but, no, it doesn't hurt anybody.  The
    addiction doesn't hurt.
          Facing the kinds of -- and -- and, oh, yes, we
    wrap ourselves around the public health community.
    We -- we -- we're just buddies with the public health
    community.  And then -- but I haven't bothered to read
    the Surgeon General report today.  After the Surgeon
    General has had an opportunity to look through our
    documents that are now -- used to be secret now are --
    now are public and now writes as -- I'll put it up in a
    minute, the details -- now writes that all of our
    attempting to reduce tar and so forth was all kind of a
    sham, that nobody really -- public health was not
    improved, that all it did was get people to keep smoking
    and -- and furthermore, that addiction, the fact that most people, 80 or 90 percent of regular smokers, are
    addicted, would like to stop but can't, that that is
    causing an epidemic and continuing epidemic, a
    horrendous epidemic of disease.
          So until the R. J. Reynolds and Lorillard -- they
    said the same thing basically -- till the R. J. Reynolds
    Tobacco Company fesses up and says, not only is nicotine
    addictive but we realize that most of our customers are
    in a situation where they're locked into our product --
    we've got a heck of a -- of a battle to get out -- that
    most of them will smoke them for most of their lives,
    not all but most, and that many, many of them, because
    of that addiction, will end up in a terrible disease or
    a terrible death.  A large majority of our customers,
    over 50 percent of them, will have a terrible death from
    our products because of the addiction.  Until they're
    willing to say that, they have not reformed.
          So I'm going to suggest that it's going to take
    something from this court, this courthouse, to get that
    change.  And I'm going to suggest that the only way to
    get that change is to mark that yes, they do need
    punishment.  They -- they do need a punishment that will
    be received by the -- the -- the -- the managers of
    R. J. Reynolds, and they will not be able to take it in
    stride.  They'll say, this is something that we have to deal with.  We've gotten something.  It's been --
    something has happened.  It's not business as usual.
          That will be -- that's going to be the theme of
    what I'm -- I'm going to talk about in the next few
    minutes.
          Next, please.  Or not next.  Just this.  Sorry.
          Okay.  So here's the verdict.  The question is:
    As to each defendant below, state whether cigarettes
    manufactured are -- was the legal cause.  Well, you've
    already determined that the cigarettes caused the death,
    so this is kind of a formality.  All that you have to
    determine here is whether the Old Golds and the Kools
    combined to cause this death, and we don't -- I don't
    think there's any real controversy over that.  And this
    is -- there are formalities that we have to do in the
    law, and as we submit, this is a formality.  There
    aren't any other brands that -- that really competed
    here.  She smoked Marlboro after the illness, so we
    don't even think that's -- that's a factor, but
    certainly both of these were substantial factors.
          And, you know, we're going to talk about this idea
    of legal cause.  It's the same as before.  A legal cause
    is a natural continuous sequence.  Doesn't mean the only
    cause.  It just means that it operates in conjunction,
    and it -- in the natural continuous sequence, like we had in our old chart, getting around to -- to it.  And
    each of these were significant contributing causes.
          Slide that down a little, please.  Okay.  Next
    page.
          Negligence.  State for each defendant whether the
    defendant's negligence was a legal cause.  Well, okay.
    Another formality we submit.  You're still -- you're
    bound by the class determination that they were
    negligent.  You're bound by the class determination
    that -- that smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of her
    death.  The negligence here does not concern, you know,
    something -- something they did unrelated their product.
    It doesn't concern anything to do with, you know, with
    the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, I mean, you know,
    driving their trucks wrong.  Their negligence is exactly
    what we've been talking about.  Their negligence is the
    way they designed the product, that it was addictive,
    that it caused disease.  Their negligence is in their
    failing to be honest about it.
          So all of those things led to -- and another --
    it's another one of these legal causes.  We don't say
    that it's the only cause.  We say that it is a
    contributing cause along with other causes.  And
    certainly there are other causes of things.  People
    respond to a -- to -- to many, many different things. But a -- a cause is that -- of -- of -- that they
    manufactured the cigarettes.  The cigarettes killed
    them.  That's a cause.
          And next.  Slide that up a little, please.
          The same thing for strict liability, whether the
    defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed
    on the market were a legal cause.  It seems to me we've
    already said that, so I -- I think that that's pretty
    clear.  The -- if there's any question about what the
    defect is, I think we've heard plenty.  The -- the
    cigarettes are defective not because they fall out or
    they're damaged.  They're defective because it's one of
    the few consumer products that is both extremely
    dangerous and also addictive.
          Caffeine may be addictive but it isn't dangerous.
    Illegal drugs are both dangerous and addictive.  But
    as -- in -- insofar as a -- as something you can just
    buy in the store -- because we wouldn't be here if it
    wasn't a legal product.  Of course, it's a legal product
    and it's defective on that ground.  And it's already
    been determined to be defective by the class
    determination.  So we -- we don't really have much of a
    thing there.
          Next is fraudulent concealment.  State for each
    defendant whether the concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects or addictive
    nature of smoking were a legal cause.  Well, I mean,
    we -- we don't know exactly what Barbara Jewett listened
    to, but we do know that she was a member of the public.
    And as a member of the public, we have some idea what
    was -- what was thrown at her.
          And what I suggest here is that by buying their
    product, that's how you rely on what a manufacturer
    does.  There isn't any other way to do it.  You don't --
    she didn't call them up and say, guess what, I just
    heard your commercial and now I rely.  They don't do
    that.  And they don't tell other people.  People rely on
    what's out there because that product goes out, and they
    trade their money for that product and they use it.  And
    that is reliance in a -- in a product situation where
    we're selling products.
          This isn't a -- this isn't a land deal where
    someone went up to her and whispered, hey, I got some
    land to sell you.  This is a product that's put on the
    market, and they don't interact directly with her.  They
    don't -- they don't walk to her house and say, here, you
    know, let's do this -- this private contract.  This is
    a -- this is a situation where they're all sold -- where
    the -- where the product is pushed nationally.  And
    there's no way to know what any individual at any one time on the thousands of commercials and so forth and
    how they interacted.
          I'll put my map up there again, my little, you
    know, line drawing about these things.  But that -- this
    is kind of a -- and I think the -- in keeping with the
    cigarette companies' policy of being confusing rather
    than being open, in keeping with the cigarette company's
    policy of being -- of looking at the tiny, tiny piece
    instead of the big picture, which is what they do do.
    When they say cause, they say, well -- just like before,
    when they said that TTP was not caused by cigarette
    smoking.  Well, it was but -- but not directly.  It's --
    it's a natural continuous sequence.  We talked about
    that.
          And this is the same thing.  They said, well, you
    didn't hear the Tobacco Institute tell you -- tell the
    public that smoking didn't cause cancer, so therefore it
    couldn't be a cause.  Not true.  The statements, the
    counterattack affected the temperature of the atmosphere
    of the cigarette century.  The design of the product was
    part of this -- of this entire situation.
          The -- the -- the advertising, the billions of
    dollars a year.  Every ad showing a beautiful person was
    a representation that the product was acceptable.  And,
    you know, there's so many -- there's so many things that prove that, including the last -- one of the last things
    you heard today -- and you'll have it in evidence -- the
    Federal Trade Commission's report.  They didn't like it
    because -- you know, whatever, but it's Federal Trade
    Commission, accepted by Congress.  And it says its
    advertising has been so good -- and that was back in the
    '60s -- been so effective, gets people to smoke, changes
    their beliefs.  They -- they -- it soaks in.  It just
    soaks into you.  You have don't even have to think about
    it.
          And then their argument is, well, you know, she
    never said she saw it and doesn't operate like that.  Or
    believe it, you don't have to believe it.  It emulated.
    You see it.  It isn't even that you want to be that
    beautiful person who's smoking a cigarette consciously.
    It just shows that it's part of reality, and it's part
    of the cigarette world.  And we lived it.  We're coming
    out of it now.  We're coming out of the cigarette world
    in this country.  But we lived it.  Barbara Jewett was
    in it.  70 percent of men smoke, great percentage of
    women.  It was the cigarette world.
          And, of course, everything soaks into you from the
    cigarette world.  Everybody's smoking.  Models smoking.
    Television.  So sure, all of that, that's all a legal
    cause, and that's all involved in concealment of a material fact because where does it say in these
    beautiful commercials -- for instance, 50 percent of the
    people using this product are going to die a terrible
    death.  Where does it -- I didn't see that.  That alone
    is a material fact.  That is not represented.  Every
    single commercial they put on.  And they say, well, it
    shows the warning.  Well, that doesn't say it.
          That's a material fact that the product's
    addictive.  When did they say that?  2000?  We heard
    them now say it.  And, again, we haven't even heard it
    now.  We've heard a half confession and not a full
    confession, and there needs to be a full confession.
          Can you slide that?
          That's fraudulent concealment.  That's an easy
    one.
          Next page, please.  Thank you.
          Okay.  So now civil conspiracy to fraudulently
    conceal.  Okay.  That's basically the same thing, only
    if you do it alone, then you've just fraudulently
    concealed.  If you do it in combination with others,
    then you've done it together.  When I get to my little
    slide show, I'll show you how they did it together and
    we've already heard.  It starts way back in the '50s
    when the -- after the mouse painting gets -- gets to be
    a problem in their public relations, and they get together at the Plaza Hotel, the famous meeting.  And
    they lock arms.  And Dr. Kyriakoudes, I submit to you,
    was open, honest, answered questions, didn't have a
    script, you know, nice -- nice.  I mean, he told it like
    was.  Didn't try to keep coming back after every
    question with a -- his little prepared speech and
    everything else (demonstrating), you know.
          But anyway, he said -- he said that the -- that
    the meeting, that -- that the fact that they got
    together and formed the TIRC and the TI and all that,
    that that was -- that gave them more power than if they
    had worked alone.  Because if they had worked alone, one
    company could spill the beans and basically say, hey,
    come on, we know -- we know this is terrible.  So by
    linking arms, they gained power.  As soon as you do
    that, that's conspiracy.  That's what it means.  As soon
    as you link arms and power up one another, stand
    together, then that's -- that's it.
          And it doesn't take -- it doesn't take much more.
    But, I mean, there was so much more.  I mean, it just
    kept going and going, and later we showed how there
    was -- how they coordinated not to turn over certain
    research to the Surgeon General.  There is --
          Thank you, Janna.
          When I miss -- when I miss things, Miss Janna will correct me, I hope.
          Conspiracy was -- you are bound by a finding that
    there was a conspiracy, so, I mean, we're kind of -- in
    a little bit we're going around and around on -- on
    things.  I don't know how many angels dance on the head
    of a pin.  There was a conspiracy.  We know that.  It's
    proven.  We proved it again.  It had huge effect on --
    on the public over time.  It seeped in.  It was a factor
    course.  And -- and -- and -- and it affected everybody
    but not -- not all the time.  It -- that's -- we don't
    need to prove that.  And -- and that -- and it was a
    conspiracy, among other things, to conceal.  Of course.
    So that isn't a hard one.
          Then it says -- go to Number 6.
          And here's -- this is where it gets interesting.
    I think the beginning of that, we're kind of, you know,
    whether you say kissing your sister -- I don't know if
    that's a good term to use anymore.  I apologize if I
    offend anybody.  But it's kind of like, you know, we
    already know it.  So what is -- you know, we have to
    work through some language, like what is reliance and
    all that.  It's not -- it's okay.  Those three -- those
    are givens.
          This is interesting because here we have something
    that may be in all of civil justice.  It's very unusual. We have a manufacturer who wants to blame their customer
    for buying their product.  They want to say you're
    negligent for -- for believing us.  We handed you the
    product.  We advertised it.  We said Kool cigarettes,
    here they are.  They're so great.  You bought them?  How
    dare you.  And we suggest that's a stretch.  But you
    know what?  We're willing to take the responsibility in
    that.  Willing to take it because nobody is perfect.
          And all we ask is that you be fair.  Just be fair.
    There is a percentage.  Tom Jewett got up there and said
    it.  Barbara Jewett cannot speak directly; she speaks
    through us.  And she says -- through us, she says I -- I
    take whatever is fair.  Give me a percentage.  I should
    have tried harder to quit.  Okay.  Okay.  I shouldn't
    have tried to smoke in the first place.  Okay.  Some of
    us never did.  Some of us did.  Okay.  Okay.  Blame her.
    Take it out.  Get it out of -- get it out of our
    systems.  We -- we believe that -- that no one is -- is
    perfect.  No one is pure here.  No one is without some
    fault.  And Tom Jewett says it.
          What's a fair percentage?  I don't know.  I don't
    know.  I mean, is it -- you want it -- you want to -- is
    it 10 percent?  Is it 15 percent?  It -- it -- it's
    totally up to you.  I don't even -- consider only this.
    Consider first how weird it is that a manufacturer will blame its customers for buying them and using a product.
    Weird but okay.  Consider that -- that -- what this is
    like when you start at age 13.  Okay.  Should have known
    better.  Fine.  Some of us at age 13 knew better.  Some
    of us didn't.  But if -- if she didn't know better,
    blame her.  All this stuff about public knowledge in the
    polls, that's all designed to blame her.  And fine.
    Blame her.  If -- if the polls showed that people knew
    about the whatever, the Surgeon General report or God
    knows what, who knows whether she knew but blame her.
    Give her some fault for that.  It's okay.  It's fair.
    It is fair.  That's all we want.  I'm not making a big
    hard sell on this at all.
          And consider also that once you get in this
    product, sometimes the exit gate is not there.  If you
    remember what Claude Teague said, if you -- how could we
    be comfortable making a product that most people would
    stop using if they could?  If the exit gate to this
    product were ever really open, we'd go out of business.
    So consider the exit gate.  For Barbara Jewett, there
    really wasn't an exit gate that came up.  Blame her if
    she didn't find the exit gate earlier.  Okay.  Was there
    really help for her at the -- at the time that she was
    smoking?  Was there really good drugs?  Probably not.
    But blame her if she didn't go to enough doctors.  Maybe she should have kept going to find a doctor who would --
    who would work with her, find a psychologist, find
    something.  Keep trying.  Why not?  It's okay.  If
    that's the problem, then she deserves some -- something.
          I started at the bottom because I wanted to be
    fair.  I want you to be fair.  The top two say:  What is
    the negligence of Reynolds, and what is the negligence
    of Lorillard?  And they have to -- they have to add up
    to 100 percent.  And, of course, that's the rest of what
    we've been saying.  And I'll -- you know, I'm going to
    list some of the things that go into that, but that's --
    you know, they add up to 100 percent.
          And if you feel that -- and I can't repeat this
    enough.  If you feel that -- that, you know, that
    you've -- people who smoke shouldn't -- you know,
    shouldn't smoke, I agree.  And it -- and -- and that is
    where you put that percentage, subject to the other
    things we've been talking about, subject to who know --
    you know, another thing to think about is who knew first
    whether cigarettes caused harm, Barbara Jewett or
    R. J. Reynolds?  Who knew the most about the product?
    Obvious questions.  I don't mean to be overdramatic
    about it but, you know, come on.  Who had the
    opportunity to fix it?  Well, Barbara Jewett, I guess,
    could have quit at -- at some point. R. J. Reynolds, did they -- what opportunities did
    they have?  Well, certainly they had the opportunity not
    to hand her this stuff with these -- with 3 billion
    dollars a year in advertising to try and get people to
    do it.  They had the opportunity not to show these
    images of wonderful healthy people.  They had the
    opportunity to do serious research, not the kind of
    stuff they did but to do real research in -- in
    addiction.  They had the opportunity to come clean.
    They had the opportunity not to go chase scientists like
    they did Dr. Wynder when they tried to run after -- go
    to his boss and say, we're troubled by him; we don't
    want him fired.
          They had the opportunity to do a lot of things, an
    endless amount.  They had an opportunity to change the
    cigarette century from what it was.  They were one of
    the cornerstones of the cigarette century.  They made
    the cigarette century largely on their own profits, and
    they had this opportunity to do it.  And they also had
    the opportunity, interestingly, to come into court a few
    days ago with Dr. Figlar and say that we were going to
    go to the next step and -- and the old ways were done.
    And the cigarette century was over, and now we have a
    new day and it's a day of honesty.  And they had that
    ability and they didn't take it. That -- if that's the end of the page, could we go
    to the next one?  Thank you.
          So then we get down to damages.  What is the total
    amount, 100 percent of any damages lost by the estate?
    Well, those -- actually we've got some numbers for that,
    so I thought maybe I could fill them in.  There are
    actually some numbers.  And I'll write them down.
    Whoops.  I'll write them down.  Find a sheet.  Let me
    see if this will work.
          The medical bills that are claimable -- and you
    heard another number before, but these are the ones that
    are actually claimable.  460,271.  That's Exhibit J 30.
    And the funeral, well, that's 1,007.  Well, these are
    just -- this is just kind of a formality also.  And then
    the evidence issue, worked full-time at $11,000 a year.
    We don't know what she would have made in the future,
    maybe more if she hadn't been sick but who knows.  She
    was forced to quit eight years before she died.  She
    died at age 52 with 13 working years left.  If you total
    all of that, lost wages for 21 years, it's $231,000, and
    if I total all that, I get 692,981.  That's just hard --
    hard -- hard and fast.  Well, not -- it's not totally
    hard and fast because I had to estimate the -- you know,
    the value of her working but it -- but it's -- it's just
    hard and fast. And you say, well, Mr. Wilner, what -- you know,
    what do I do with that?  Because that really isn't the
    number that makes any -- you know, that doesn't -- that
    doesn't mean much.  That's -- that's not the human side
    of things.  That's just the -- you know, that's --
    that's the -- what they call a line item.
          The real human side comes next, and that's the
    total amount of damages sustained by Thomas Jewett with
    the loss of the wife's companionship and protection and
    for his pain and suffering as a result of Barbara
    Jewett's death.  And that's got to be 10 times that, or
    we're not -- you know, we're not living in the world of
    humanity.
          And we're not asking for sympathy, not a dime.
    This is a -- this is a case that does not have any need
    for sympathy at all.  I mean, I will not stand up here
    and recount the kinds of agony that this case involved.
    I'm -- I'm not going to do it because I couldn't -- I
    probably couldn't go through it.  And I'm not standing
    here and doing that.  I'm not.
          You just use your imagination and your
    recollection and be fair.  I mean, that's -- that's all
    I can tell you about that.  I'm not -- I -- I just don't
    know any way to say how you -- how you deal with these
    years lost and this life wrecked and the lungs wrecked and the -- and that momentary hope, you know, when you
    get a lung put in you from somebody else, and maybe
    you're going to be able to live your life and then that
    goes.  And I -- I don't know how to -- how to tell you.
          But I suggest it's got to be at least 10 times
    that, maybe more.  I -- I don't say more.  I mean, I --
    I don't know.  It's almost impossible to deal with this
    kind of -- this kind of -- of agony.  It's just...
          So let's -- what's -- what's next?
          Okay.  Next is punitive damages and this is really
    the question that I started with.  And the word punitive
    means punishment.  And I'm going to repeat myself a
    little here because this is really -- I think this is
    really what -- what I want.  This is my message, my
    message to you.  I'm going to say it again.  We saw the
    result of 50 years of a cigarette company who didn't
    tell the truth and who didn't care and who continued to
    do things that an American industry shouldn't be doing.
    American industry must be honest with its products,
    honest with its customers.  It's really important.  We
    rely on that.  We -- we -- we need it to happen.  We
    can't be running around checking everything they say.
    They have to be honest.  They know more about their
    products than anybody.  They keep hiding behind the
    public health community. And then we learn at the end of this trial,
    they're -- they're totally at odds.  Read you the 2010
    Surgeon General report, and it was like night and day.
    Mr. Figlar goes, oh, yeah, well, I know the Surgeon
    General said that.  I didn't really bother to read it.
    We've been trying to tell you that we're -- we --
    we'll -- we're now with the Surgeon General but not with
    that because now they understand and everybody is
    beginning to understand that -- that all their stuff
    about how they reduced tar and all that stuff mean --
    meant nothing except to try and keep people smoking.
    Because they would say, look, a filter, a filter, you
    can keep smoking.  Low tar, it's going to be safer for
    you.  It's going to be -- you're going to be better off.
    Menthol, it'll cool your throat.  Look -- look at that.
          And we don't really think it's paused anyway so
    you can take that.  When you smoke, it's not really
    cause, and we'll go send out 270,000 copies to the
    doctors.  Huh?  Why would you send anything to doctors?
    So they go, well, you know, maybe they don't quite
    believe it as much.  You come in smoking; maybe they
    don't tell you exactly as hard as they should.
          So my -- here's -- here's my -- my -- my message.
    And I'm -- I'm going to start some slides and we'll go
    into some details.  But -- but this is the big picture. What will it take to get -- let's start with Reynolds,
    you know, big company.  What's it going to take to get
    them into the modern world?  Because I make a joke that
    they're the flatter of society, you know.  It would be
    funny if it weren't involving the potential death of
    millions of people.  It would be a riot to hear this
    stuff.  It would be hilarious to get -- have somebody on
    the -- on the stand and tell us what they've told us.
    Oh, no, addiction doesn't -- doesn't matter.  I just
    don't believe it.  I don't do this, I don't do that.
    I've got my script.  We would laugh.
          But have you ever heard that saying, we would --
    we laugh because the alternative is crying?  And that's
    where we're at now because we've got 40 million smokers
    in the United States, most of which, not all, but most
    of which would like to stop and either can't or don't or
    can't get the resources for it or can't figure it out or
    are -- are buying a pack a day and smoking it to
    their -- to their demise.  I mean, we -- 50 percent of
    those will -- will die of some disease.
          MR. BIERSTEKER:  Objection, Williams.
          THE COURT:  Objection's overruled.
          MR. WILNER:  And -- and 50 percent will die from
    that condition, from a condition from smoking.  And many
    more will have a disease that doesn't happen to kill them but it will get them.
          Lock into this thing.  On and on in the cigarette
    century.  At least we're at the tail end of this.  You
    remember those graphs that, you know, went up and up,
    came back down a little, but, you know, it's time to
    move away from this whole cigarette century.  It's --
    it's time to be a new country, a new -- it's time to
    have a new cigarette company sitting there where
    Reynolds is -- is sitting.  And by that, I mean it's
    time that they change what they -- what they tell us.
          It's time to change -- let me submit to you it's
    time to change their management.  I think that they have
    to change their management.  I think they cannot do this
    anymore.  They can't come in and say -- and believe and
    act that -- that addiction, one of the most horrible
    addictions we know about -- because it's so easy to
    catch it when you're a kid, and it's so easy to keep it
    going and it's so bad.  And so they can't keep their --
    their head in the sand about this and say, we don't --
    we -- no, no, addiction -- you know, it's so funny
    because when I asked Dr. Figlar, do you accept this; you
    know, do you know what's going on out there, he said,
    well, we know many of our people have difficulty
    quitting.
          And the whole mindset then is to turn it away from them on to their customers.  Make it their difficulty,
    not -- not Reynolds' difficulty.  Turn it to them.  Oh,
    they have difficulty.  How sad.  I'm so sorry you have
    difficulty.  And then I asked him, I said, well, wait a
    minute, Dr. Figlar, what about your product?  You're --
    you make it.  You are the ones that decided to put
    ammonia, whatever, nicotine, control the nicotine.
    You -- you -- you make design changes and whatever you
    do, you know that -- that that nicotine is what keeps
    you in business.  It's what keeps your money in the
    bank.  And you knew that.  You know that well.
          And so I ask you, Dr. Figlar, who's not there
    anymore -- I would like it if he were -- Dr. Figlar, you
    don't even realize that it's your decisions, your
    corporate decisions, that make that product the way it
    is and put it out for people's consumption.  Advertise
    it with billions of dollars.  Load it with the kind of
    stuff that they know is going to addict you.  And now
    you turn around and say, oh, those people out there,
    they have difficulty.  I'm really sorry.  It's not my
    problem.  If -- if you believe that that's what they
    said -- I made it pretty clear -- not my fault, not my
    job, not my fault, someone else's job.
          And, you know, here's another funny thing, every
    time we heard from them, it was always, oh, the public health authorities told people, the public health
    authorities.  Why not Reynolds?  Why not Lorillard?  Why
    didn't they ever tell them?  What is this constant
    hiding behind the public health authorities?  Since when
    did the public health authorities make cigarettes?  They
    don't.  It's the cigarette companies that have that
    responsibility.  You make a product in this great
    country we have, you can make a profit on it.
          And -- and no one's stopped the cigarette
    companies from making their product.  In fact, you heard
    the testimony.  Nobody told them what to put in it.
    Nobody told them how much ammonia or -- or not.  Nobody
    told them how much nicotine or not.  Nobody told them
    how much flavorant or not.  Nobody told them what it was
    supposed to look like or not.  Nobody told them they
    couldn't do this; they couldn't do that.  It's a free
    country.  It's good.  And you make money.  All I want is
    a bigger bag to carry the money to the bank.  That's an
    exhibit you'll have with you.
          But with that freedom comes responsibility.  And
    with that freedom is a huge responsibility because --
    because you have made a profit, sent it out, and you've
    caused the kinds of consequences you've caused.
          Now, you'll be instructed that you cannot award
    punitive damages for conduct that occurs to other people.  But you will also be told -- and I think you
    were -- I'm sorry.  Often the instructions are read
    after this, but this time they were read before so I
    made a mistake.  You were told that the -- that the --
    the conduct as it affects others may go in your
    evaluation of what is reprehensible.  And one of the
    things that -- that are on the -- the -- the description
    of what constitutes punitive damages is that kind of
    conduct.
          In fact, it's reprehensible conduct and exactly --
    let me see if I can get it right.  In determining
    whether punitive damages are warranted, you may not seek
    to punish conduct except as shown by the clear and
    convincing evidence to cause the decedent, Barbara
    Jewett's death.  That conduct certainly caused that.
    You are -- you are entitled to consider the conduct to
    others as it relates to reprehensibility.
          And here's what I wanted to read.  A defendant is
    subject to punitive damages for gross negligence,
    fraudulent concealment or conspiracy.  That's either
    gross negligence or fraudulent concealment or conspiracy
    to fraudulent conceal -- fraudulently conceal claims in
    this case, only if you find by clear and convincing
    evidence that the defendant engaged in intentional
    misconduct or gross negligence. Now, there isn't a separate part of the verdict
    form where you would mark, for instance, gross
    negligence or intentional misconduct.  That all comes in
    the last piece.  So you -- if you feel, as I suggest
    you -- you know, it's overwhelming in this case, that --
    that there has been intentional misconduct, then all you
    would need to do is mark the yes for Reynolds and
    Lorillard, or if you felt one of them was and one of
    them wasn't, yes to one and no to the other.  But there
    isn't a separate line.  That's -- I don't know why but
    there isn't a separate line for gross negligence, and
    there isn't a separate line for intentional misconduct.
    It's all included in that one thing.
          So intentional misconduct means the defendant had
    actual knowledge of the wrongfulness in the conduct and
    the high probability that injury would -- would result
    and despite that knowledge, intentionally pursued the
    course of conduct resulting in Barbara Jewett's death.
    Gross negligence is conduct that was so reckless or
    wanton in care that it constituted a conscious disregard
    or indifference to the life, safety or rights of persons
    exposed to that conduct.
          So what does that mean?  Okay.  And then I'll get
    to that in a second because it goes on and it says,
    Punitive damages are warranted if (a) Reynolds or Lorillard's conduct was so gross and flagrant as to show
    a reckless disregard or showed an entire lack of care or
    showed -- showed an entire lack of care such as an
    official must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded
    the safety or showed reckless indifference.  And those
    are all kind of legal terms.  But what do they mean?
          Well, here's -- here's a thought.  Nothing that
    R. J. Reynolds did was acci- -- an accident.  Nothing
    that Lorillard did happened by accident.  This isn't an
    accident.  This isn't like, you know, somebody just
    didn't see the car coming.  They saw this coming.  It
    was planned.  They -- they knew exactly what they were
    doing.  They knew that when the mouse painting studies
    came out, they would have to meet that challenge -- that
    problem to keep their sales up.
          And so they got together and they formed these
    committees.  And they -- and they hired people, you
    know, just to say that it's not proven, and they -- and
    they tried to go on with their stuff about how -- you
    know, how many researchers, and they hired people to
    come up and say it's not proven.  And they fought,
    fought, fought.  That was the counterattack.
          And at the same time -- and this was really --
    this is one of the most interesting parts of this case.
    This is really interesting.  Here's -- here's the second thing they did.  The first was the conspiracy to hide
    the ball.  Was it totally effective?  No, I don't think
    so.  I agree.  I mean, there was -- there were other
    people out there with -- getting the truth out.  I'm not
    saying that -- that, you know, that everybody stayed
    totally in the dark but it was a factor.  It's a factor.
    It's out there.  And they sure tried.  Bet your bottom
    dollar, they tried.
          The next thing -- and that was the -- the TIRC,
    also known as the CTR, also known as the Tobacco
    Institute, on and on and on and on.
          All right.  The next thing is -- move this.  The
    next thing is they said, well, you know what we should
    do?  We should start putting filters on.  And we'll say
    that the public health authorities really wanted us to
    do it so we started putting filters on.  Well, what they
    didn't say was the filters were a way of getting people
    to -- to feel okay and they advertised it like that.
    The best filter, the smoking man, the thinking man's
    filter, the Viceroy ad.  The thinking man's filter.
    What does that mean?  It means you're smart.  You're
    going to think, ah, okay.  All right.  Well, I've heard
    about some problems, but, you know, this thing's going
    to filter the smoke out.  I'll be able -- I'll be all
    right. And then they -- they went to this low tar stuff,
    which is, you know, you can smoke a cigarette that has
    less of the problems in it, they told everyone.  And now
    they come in and say, well, we did this for health
    reasons.  Uh-huh, you bet.  They did it because it
    helped their sales.  And that is exactly what the
    Surgeon General said in 2010 in the pass -- one of the
    passages that I read towards the end of this -- of my --
    when I examined Dr. Figlar.  They said exactly -- let me
    see if I can find it here real quick.  Because it's
    really fascinating that it's come full circle.
          So here's what the Surgeon General in 2010 said.
    "To reduce smoking attributable to death and disease,
    public health efforts since '64 have focused on reducing
    the prevalence of tobacco use," which incidentally, that
    wasn't Reynolds doing that.  That was -- that was other
    people.  They didn't want the prevalence, meaning how
    many people were smoking reduced.  "Reduced prevalence
    has been achieved through efforts to prevent tobacco use
    and promote cessation."  This -- this was one of the 10
    great health achievements.  So far so good.
          Then they say -- and this is the -- this is a
    quote.  This is the Surgeon General herself.
          So put that up, if you would, Laurie.  Thank you.
    Top one. Unbelievable.  "Unfortunately, it took public
    health research -- researchers and federal authorities
    many years to discover what the tobacco industry knew
    much earlier."  This is not me saying this.  This is the
    Surgeon General of the United States saying this, 2010,
    after looking inside the tobacco companies' warehouses
    that are now public.  "The health benefits of reductions
    of tar and nicotine were negligible and at best for
    persons using this product."
          Okay.  Next.  Thank you.  And continuing at the
    bottom.  Thank you, Laurie.
          Sentence continuing, "In 2001, a National Cancer
    Institute report concluded there is no convincing
    evidence that changes in cigarette design between the
    '50s and the '80s have resulted in an important decrease
    in the disease burden caused by cigarette use."
          And then the next one.
          It's all this -- they go on to say after -- it's
    in the Surgeon General itself and I must have never --
    and it says, basically, that the -- and you'll have it
    in evidence, that the -- that the cigarette industry
    used these changes to delay cessation attempts, in other
    words, to keep people from stopping.
          So although they say, oh, we were -- we did this
    for the public health, they did it because it helped them sell cigarettes.  If the public health was helped
    in some small measure, which now does not appear to be
    the case, fine and good.  Who cares?  They still had
    other products on the market that weren't even low tar
    products, like, I think, Kools was not even a -- not
    even that.  So they were happy to do that.
          But I'm coming to a really bigger problem --
    bigger issue than this.  I very -- look, whatever they
    did with low tar and filters, they definitely had a -- a
    profit motive.  If it -- if anyone wants to come in and
    say, oh, I think filters really helped, fine.  Who
    cares.  Doesn't matter.  They helped a little.  I don't
    think -- the Surgeon General now says it didn't help at
    all.
          All they did was sell products but here -- but
    they had no reason not to.  There was no reason why
    you -- you shouldn't make a filter because it's -- you
    know, you can say, oh, look a healthy, clean cigarette.
    Remember those ads?  Clean and white.  Oh, how nice.
    And you can sell them.  It's fine.  And they'd love to
    take all the cancer out and leave everything else in.
    Fine.  They'd love to take the -- whatever causes COPD
    or emphysema, it wouldn't hurt them to take it out.
    That doesn't hurt their sales.  It's okay.  So
    they're -- they're getting up there pumping themselves up.  Oh, we're so happy.  We've tried this; we've tried
    that.  Baloney.
          Here's why it's baloney.  The -- the one thing
    that they can't take out and stay in business, what do
    you think it is?  It's the addiction.  Problem with that
    is the addiction equals sales, and that is so obvious,
    it doesn't require much more writing.  Addiction is
    sales because it's taking your customers who would
    possibly buy cigarettes once in a while and making them
    into customers that buy 360,000 cigarettes in the -- in
    a lifetime, which is -- which was dramatically cut
    short.  And if that lifetime had gone on, people, I'm
    sure, have smoked a million cigarettes out of addiction,
    if they live long enough to do that.  So the one thing
    that could not be taken out of the product and have the
    cigarette company stay in business is addiction.
          And so we get to today.  And the cigarette
    industry and R. J. Reynolds and Lorillard has to make a
    faithful decision.  And that's why I'm suggesting to you
    the last question on the verdict form is so important.
    Because they're faced with a problem.  They've got -- on
    the one hand, they've got the revenue coming in from
    millions of addicted people.  And they've got the
    prospect that if they keep things as it is and people
    stay -- and they keep initiating smoking early and get people addicted early, they've got the prospect of a lot
    more money.  So the question is can they do that and
    should they do that?  Can -- can the legal system -- can
    the -- can the court system change that reality in some
    small way?  Can the change start somewhere where no
    longer will we have 30 percent of the country addicted
    to cancer-causing and emphysema-causing drug in
    cigarettes?
          And that is why I suggest to you that the last
    question on this verdict form is the key.  There is a
    need for a punishment.  It could be a severe punishment,
    to change the attitude of Reynolds, to change the
    attitude of Lorillard so that we get out -- we begin our
    way out of the cigarette century, the century of
    addiction, the century -- the century of cancer and the
    century of deadly emphysema.
          I'm going to -- I'll save the rest of my remarks
    for after the --
[#DELETED RECESS#]
          MR. WILNER:  Thank you.
          Well, I've heard it and I've just heard the
     same thing you have.  And either -- and somebody is
     crazy and I don't -- I don't think it's me.
     Because there was a lot of baloney that was just
     thrown in this room.  And I got a little -- I got a
     few philosophical things to say and then I'm going
     to run -- going to go through some -- some of the
     evidence which I wanted to show you the first time
     but got too involved in interesting philosophy, so
     I'll start with that.
          No. 1:  Lorillard Corporation, if you're
     listening, if you can hear me, you can't make a
     safer cigarette if you don't address addiction.
     Don't you get it?  Don't you get it?  You don't.
     That's the disconnect that happened in this
     courtroom.  And I use Dr. Figlar as an example
     because he was the disconnect.  That's the disconnect that these cigarette companies have been
     doing and have done in this trial with causation.
     They don't get it.  They don't get what it means to
     be a natural, continuous sequence of causation.
     And so they stand there and say, "Addiction didn't
     cause it."  And they say, "Okay.  Now we're out of
     that, we don't have to worry about addiction
     because it didn't cause because anyone can quit
     then we're done.  And now we'll just go fiddle
     around, we'll try and take a little of this and
     take a little of that, you know why, because it
     won't hurt our sales.  Because if we ever have to
     grasp addiction and really treat it, we're going to
     have to change.  We're not going to be the company
     that we are, we're not going to have 20 million
     people addicted buying it every day."  And
     that's -- they've refused.
          And that's why all this is happening like
     this.  They will not grasp the idea that is now the
     command center of the cigarette science.  And it is
     not a question just of what you inhale, they've
     tried, they've tried, they couldn't get out.
     There's too many things, we all know that, bully
     for trying.  But as long as you're smoking a pack a
     day or a pack and a half a day, as long as the product gets you to the point where you're in a
     wheelchair with destroyed lungs, cigarette smoke is
     your death, oxygen is your life, and you move the
     oxygen to take the smoke, as long as we're dealing
     with something like that, then taking out one thing
     or putting a filter on it, that's not going to
     help.
          We've got to become a nation that is not
     addicted to cigarettes.  And until Lorillard gets
     it, until Reynolds gets it, we're not going to
     change.
          Now, there are some signs smoking is
     decreasing, agreed, agreed.  We've still got
     40 million people that are in serious addiction,
     maybe not all of them, maybe some of them get out
     of it, fine, but you know how many people start up
     every day?  And what happens when they start?  And
     how soon do they become addicted and is this cycle
     repeating itself?  And, yes, because Lorillard can
     come in here and say, "We're trying to make a safer
     cigarette."  I didn't hear addiction once, not
     once, and yet everyone agrees, every medical
     scientist agrees, that over -- the dose over and
     over hundreds of thousands of times, grabbing the
     pack in the morning, having the nicotine need, whether you can -- whether you can quit or not,
     abstract term, sure, then you can all run a
     four-minute mile if you try hard enough, I guess.
     I don't know.  But the fact is 80 percent of the
     people are addicted and 80 percent of the people
     have heck of a time.  And the captains of industry,
     people who with great self-control people who have
     had wonderful lives, die from this and people smoke
     through holes in their throat and they smoke in
     wheelchairs, and they smoke when they know that
     it's killing them.  How can that be?  They all
     crazy?  No.  They're not crazy.  They're crazy,
     right over there.  They're crazy.
          All right.  I want to show -- first, I -- I
     forgot I -- when I was quoting from the Surgeon
     General of 2010 a quote that no one but us seems to
     be interested in and none of these cigarette
     company people are interested in, I missed it.
     Somehow it didn't get on my slide so I fished it
     out.  Remember, this is about all of this
     hullabaloo about how, Oh, we reduced tar levels,
     we're so good.  Well, let's see what -- what's the
     truth today.  And it's over here on the right.
          And blow it up, please.
          I already read all this.  There's no convincing -- that's enough.  Back it up.
     Thanks.
          There's no convincing evidence that changes in
     cigarette design -- this is 2010, you'll have it.
          Slide it down for a second, let me see the
     page.  No, the other way, please.  Twenty.  Thank
     you.
          Okay.  Page 20 of the 2010 report.  Okay.
     Let's go back to where we were.  Thank you.
     "There's no convincing evidence that changes in
     cigarette design between 1950 and the mid-1980s
     have resulted in an important decrease in the
     disease burden" -- a burden, it is, a burden.  It's
     a disease burden caused by cigarette use.  It's a
     burden that they don't want to have anything to do
     with.  They want to push it off.  That's your
     problem, not ours.  It's your problem.  "It's a
     disease burden caused by cigarette use either for
     smokers as a group or the entire population."
     Quoting NCI, National Cancer Institute.  "Thus, by
     the 21st century," which is where we are, not them,
     they're not in the 21st century yet, I want to get
     them there, "it was apparent that five decades of
     evolving cigarette design had not reduced overall
     disease risk among smokers." And now get this, this is what I had to say,
     "New designs were used by the tobacco industry as a
     tool to undermine prevention and cessation
     efforts."  So much for this high-sounding garbage
     that we -- oh, we just do what the public health
     community does.  And nobody wanted to bring that
     out.  This is not -- this isn't from a -- as they
     like to say, a plaintiff's lawyer seminar.  This is
     the Surgeon General of the United States.  They
     used it as a tool to undermine prevention and
     cessation efforts.  And they want to say, "Well, we
     didn't do anything wrong.  We didn't do anything
     wrong, we just thought" -- I mean, they almost
     don't even want to acknowledge that they sell and
     market the product.
          Now they say, "Well, Barbara Jewett, I don't
     know, nothing to do with us."  How did she -- why
     did she smoke Old Golds?  How did she even know
     about them?  Where did they come from?  What, did
     they come down from the sky?  They come out of
     their cigarette machine.  They design them.  They
     market them.  They put them in pretty boxes.  They
     decide how much nicotine goes in them.  They decide
     the smoke chemistry.  They decide what to advertise
     and when to advertise and they push all sorts of buttons to get you to buy.  Of course they do, it's
     a billion billion dollars, 3 billion, 6 billion, 8
     billion, who knows, of promotion.  This is big-time
     promotion, and now we hardly hear about it.  They
     don't want to talk about it.
          It's as if the cigarettes grow on trees out in
     the forest and people come out there and pick them.
     It's insane to say that.
          All right.  Now I'd like to play the -- some
     slides.  Just these slides.  If they don't hear a
     slide, if I don't play a slide, I'll have to
     philosophize.
          I do want to do that so I won't take the whole
     time.  Okay.  Could we start?  Thank you.  All
     right.  Next, please.  All right.  So my message
     here is a sea change is needed that Reynolds and
     Lorillard are insane and need to be changed.  They
     need to be brought into the 21st century.  They do
     not get it or at least they're telling us they do
     not get it.  As long as they do not get it, they
     need -- they need to be -- they need to be
     educated.  How do you educate them?  They need --
     the way we do it here, they need to be punished to
     be educated because it's the only thing they
     understand, they don't understand anything really but money.
          And so how do you get change of R.J. Reynolds,
     you have to -- you have to be ready to award them a
     sum that they can't ignore.  That's the bottom
     line.
          All right.  Next.  Oh, wait.  Wait.  Wait.  Go
     back.
          All those polls.  Did you ever see a poll that
     said, "How many people saw R.J. Reynolds announce
     that addiction to their cigarettes kills 50 percent
     of their customers?"  I wanted to ask.  Well, no,
     there's no poll because they never said it.
          Next.
          So this is a verdict form.  I'm not going to
     go over it again.  We've done it.
          Put next, please.
          And how long it will take?  Yes, next.
          I've heard lots of stuff from both attorneys
     as if there was no class action, as if they weren't
     bound by the findings of negligence.  Of course
     they are.  Our additional goes to punitive damages
     and comparing her negligence to theirs.  That's why
     all this went on.  They are bound by the findings.
          Next.
          That cigarettes were defective.  They did enter an agreement to conceal.  That's binding.
     They can't question that.  And they failed to
     exercise care.
          Next.
          Phase 1, you determined addiction to nicotine
     caused the death.  They seem to want to quibble
     with that, and this latest thing, that Ligg- -- I
     mean, that Lorillard's contribution to death, they
     want to question that and say, Well, I'll single
     that out.  What if you did that per cigarette?  If
     you said, Well, this cigarette, you can't prove
     that caused her death. What about the next
     cigarette?  That didn't cause her death.  What
     about this pack, on May 22nd, didn't cause her
     death.  That's not causation.  They're crazy to say
     that.  Causation is natural, continuous sequence
     and everything comes to -- there's no way -- a
     doctor doesn't say that cigarette number 22.  It's
     the continued dose, and it starts when you start
     and it ends when you die.  And that's what
     happened.  So to try to worm out of stuff like
     that . . .
          Okay.  Next, please.  We've got that.  Next.
          You know, I didn't hear anybody say, except
     Dr. Feingold, who proved it with Surgeon General and -- 1989 and thereafter CPS II, rock solid, this
     addiction's killing half the people that touch it.
     And there -- it's never been in an advertisement,
     that's for sure.
          Next.
          This was all preventable.  All this was
     preventable.  All of it, that's the cigarette
     century.
          Next.
          1941, I'm -- I'm not claiming that '41 ended
     it.  I'm saying '41 should have started it and it
     didn't.
          Next.
          Here's Dr. Wynder, they want to buddy up to
     him.  They tried to get him fired, insane.
          Next.
          And 1950, should have started something.  What
     it started was bad, not good in the cigarette
     companies.
          Next.
          The mouse painting, very important, prove it
     of itself.  I don't understand why Reynolds wants
     to come in now and argue about this stuff.  They
     were -- history's left them behind.  They were
     totally wrong.  They got up time and time again and they would say," Oh, but mice aren't men and
     statistic don't prove it."  Well, which one do you
     want?  Neither one proves it independently but
     together -- why were you debating it when you
     should have been working on it?  Same as today.
     Why are you debating addiction and finding little
     things, instead you should -- you should be
     directed at it, and I'll tell you, now they say,
     "Well, what can we do?  All cigarettes are
     addictive."  Well, I tell you what, first of all,
     cigarettes without nicotine would not addict
     nonsmokers.  So kids would not start with addictive
     products.  If they wanted to smoke just to smoke,
     fine.  As long as they don't get addicted, they're
     probably not go to die from it.
          Secondly, today and since the '80s, we've had
     a lot of research in brain chemistry and receptors.
     And now they're saying, "Oh, we can't do a thing
     about it."  Baloney.  You can do it, but you won't
     because it hurts sales.  You can block those
     receptors.  You can put that -- those blocking in
     those -- in those cigarettes and I'd like see them
     try but, you know what, they'll never try until
     they're pushed, made to do it.  Made to do it.
     They've never done anything except what they're made to do.  If they're made to do it, maybe
     they'll do it.
          Next.
          This is their own company, they found the
     carcinogens.
          Next.
          This is the undeniable epidemiology.  It is
     textbook and you've never seen anything like it in
     the world and they sat around denying it and they
     want to go, "Oh, well it didn't matter."  And other
     people denied it.  That isn't the point.  They
     should have been working, not denying.  Flapping
     their gums.
          Next.
          And here Reynolds says, their own people, the
     evidence is overwhelming.  So why they're trying to
     worm out now by saying, "Well, it wasn't -- it
     wasn't clear."  It was clear to their own people.
          Next.
          These are all -- this is evidence, as well.
     Lives can be saved if -- if this is known.  So
     evidently New England Journal in 1960 didn't think
     it was so well known in the public, and this whole
     business about the public, all that is is her
     comparative negligence.  They're just locked on to this thing of blaming their customers, and -- and
     blaming them for -- for buying their product and
     blaming them -- and, you know -- well, let me say
     it this way:  There's something really crazy,
     really worse than crazy, about the -- the
     manufacturer who with its -- with its product
     advertising and marketing, puts the thing out
     there, certainly tells you through those ads, don't
     quit, because they say use it, that's the opposite
     of quitting, has addictive substance in it, and
     then comes around and blames you, oh, you couldn't
     quit, you couldn't quit.  You were in your
     wheelchair, your hand was trembling, you chose to
     smoke the death over the life because you needed it
     but, ah, your -- your negligent, you couldn't quit.
     There's something wrong with that.
          Next.
          The secret meeting they want to forget about
     it.
          Next.
          And Clarence Cook Little.
          Next.
          And their joint action.  This is their
     conspiracy.  I'll -- I will tie this in more than
     you would believe. Next.
          And what they did with it -- and there was a
     lot of things they did.  There was propaganda to
     doctors, there was scientific fraud, there was
     messing with the science behind the scenes, there
     was going out to the -- to the newspapers and
     changing their articles and they want to go, Oh,
     that didn't matter.  You know why it didn't matter,
     because poor Mrs. Jewett died before anybody could
     question her about it and say, you know, how much
     did you really know back then?  Did you really know
     that 50 percent of the people were dying?  Did you
     really understand what emphysema was all about?
     And did you know it before you got addicted?  And
     if you did, blame her.  If she did, blame her, but
     who knows?  We don't know.  They're so happy to say
     that -- as if the Surgeon General called her on the
     phone for all those kind of things, she's a member
     of the public, but when it comes to advertising,
     Oh, we don't know what she saw.  Well, she saw what
     everybody else saw, which was tons.
          Next.
          We have a problem of public relations, not of
     health.  Bad.
          Next. It's an industry rather than an individual
     basis.  Conspiracy.
          Next.
          I told them, oh, this is -- this is
     Dr. Wynder, we're troubled by him.  That's
     meddling, that's -- that's an intentional act.
          Next.
          Putting baloney on with guys you didn't know
     and paying him it for, negligence.
          Next.
          Putting out this stuff to confuse the public.
     Bad.
          Next.
          Putting out these things, no substance has
     been found.  A half truth.  It isn't -- it doesn't
     matter which substance it is, that isn't -- wasn't
     the point.  People wanted to hear is it true, I've
     got to give up this addiction, it would be really
     hard to do?  Ah, maybe there's a doubt.  Ah, there
     you go, see, no substance.  They go to their
     friends and say, Oh, but I heard there's no
     substance.  There's nothing there.  It's all
     statistics.
          Next.
          New evidence, there wasn't any.  This is lies. Next.
          Management must take cognizance.  Wish it had.
          Next.
          A health image, a health reassurance
     cigarette.  You bet.  They all were, all the
     filters were, and then the low.
          Next.
          Here's the cigarette culture and it's really
     interesting we showed this before.  See right
     there, that's where the '53 mouse painting study
     was.  Then there was a drop.  Then they built it
     back up.  And I suggest to you they built it back
     up with all the -- with all the stuff they were
     doing.  Their counterattack built it up.  Here's
     what should have happened.  I'll trace the slope of
     that line on down.  That -- all this over here, all
     these resultant deaths, that's counterattack stuff.
     Even with addiction, it would have dropped off
     eventually, because it has, because the truth will
     eventually come out, it's just tough and the
     addicted smokers may have to die for it.  It's a
     terrible thing to happen.
          Next.
          Here is what I want to say about all this
     causation and they don't get causation.  The advertising and the marketing enters the fray.  The
     counterattack enters the fray.  Celebrities enter
     the fray.  All this stuff enters the fray.  It
     changes public opinion but it all competes, it's a
     multifactorial thing.  True, we can't draw a line
     from one ad down to -- down to Barbara Jewett, but
     we can draw lines that go to all these.  Who got
     her family interested in smoking?  Who got her
     parents interested in smoking?  Who got her peers,
     her friends interested in smoking?  It's all
     connected.  It's a seamless web.
          It produced the cigarette culture and then an
     individual smokes not only because of the culture,
     I never said that.  They smoke because they did
     make a decision, agreed.  And if you don't like
     that, put percentages on her.  They smoked after a
     while because of addiction, which was
     self-perpetuating and they smoked also because of
     genetics, there's no question about it.  It doesn't
     change anything and it doesn't get their
     counterattack out of it or their advertising or
     anything else.  It's all connected.  And that's
     causation.
          And they read you, incidentally, the wrong --
     they did not read you accurately from what the judge will tell you, His Honor, Judge Arnold, will
     say.  "Smoking a defendants' cigarette is a legal
     cause of death if it directly and in a natural and
     continuous sequence" -- they didn't want to read
     that -- "produces or contributes substantially."
     That's what we're saying.  "To producing such death
     so it can be reasonably said that but for smoking,
     those cigarettes, the death would not have
     occurred."  They say, Ah, well, what if -- how can
     you -- how can you say that but for?  Well, if you
     go out with your car and you just had -- had four
     tires put on, are you relying on all four tires?
     Well, are you relying on the front left, are you
     relying on the front right, are you relying on the
     back?  You need them all.  You need them all.  And
     the way all -- the way reality is put together
     is -- I mean, if you take out one thing, it's very
     complicated what happens.  We don't know exactly
     what happens but we know that the same thing
     that -- that happened in the real world, doesn't
     happen the same way.
          If you start pulling out these arrows and
     wondering what's going to happen if there was no
     advertising, well, there wouldn't be the cigarette
     culture that we know it.  Would there ever be any smoking?  Well, I don't know, we'd probably go back
     to 1910.  So to say that just because you can't
     draw the line directly down from here to here, it's
     just like they said, when they were arguing about
     the TTP, yeah, I don't know.  But I know that it
     all fed into the cigarette culture.
          Next.
          We forestall the preparation of unfavorable
     material.  Dirty business, really dirty, dirty
     business.  Who can say had they not, how much
     information there'd be?  And, you know, people
     aren't crazy.  If you ask people, Is driving your
     car dangerous at night in the rain?  They'll say
     yes.  But it's an acceptable risk, I do it, you
     know, I do it.  I got to get there, I do it.  But
     if I say to you, Well, you know what, you only have
     one lug nut left on the right wheel.  They're going
     to go, Oh.  Or you got -- you know, you got a big
     hole in your tire, and it's about ready to blow,
     then that's different.  So perception of risk
     depends on what you really think about it.  It's
     not just whether it's dangerous.  It's whether it's
     really going to kill you like right then, and there
     has been missing from this equation the idea that
     addiction causes 40 to 50 percent.  It is not part of the equa- -- has not been part of the equation.
          Next.
          Does this -- this garbage comes out.  It's
     just garbage.
          Next.
          And this -- this hiding this, the hiding their
     documents.
          Next.
          All right.  Let's talk about marketing.  Go to
     the next one.
          These are old.  But maybe they -- did they
     influence her parents?  Did they influence the
     culture?  Of course.  Does it matter what brand it
     is?  No, because if you think there is a brand
     that's safe, then, well, okay, you know, maybe
     another brand is safe, too.
          Next.
          And this kind of stuff, this is out of
     Lorillard, play safe or your voice of wisdom.  How
     can that be?
          Next.
          And doctors, really, did they really smoke
     Camels?
          Next.
          And physicians and Luckys. Next.
          And Rosalind Russell, these are old but
     they're important because they set the stage for
     what parents believed and what -- people remember
     these things from a long time ago.  How long did
     the magazines lay around?  Who knows.
          Next.
          And this kind of stuff.  You know, they want
     to say, Well, there's no health claim.  Well, we've
     talked about that, we don't want to be a
     psychologist, but I'll tell you, when that comes
     out, when stuff comes out, when good-looking people
     smoke, it's part of the culture.  It shows that
     it's acceptable.  It shows that it's what you're
     supposed to be doing.
          Next.
          How about that?  Is that telling someone to
     stop?  Let's look at it that way.  Is it?  Does it
     really tell somebody to stop?  That's crazy.  It
     says, "Come on aboard.  This is fun."  And the fact
     that, yes, there is a warning up there, they're so
     fixated on that, but this lady's telling us, "We
     know about that warning, but, ay, come on, you
     know, this is -- this is the right thing to do."
          And now they come back having put that out -- having put that out they come back and say, "I
     blame you for following it.  I blame you for
     forgetting that message even though we spent
     billions to give it to you."
          Next.
          Same thing.
          Next.
          And this really was crazy.  This says, you
     know, "All I've heard," meaning I'm worried but I'm
     still going to smoke because this brand or whatever
     offers me a way out of this problem.  But evidently
     I get blamed -- they blame her.  If she got sick,
     they come in here and blame her and say, "Ah, you
     shouldn't have smoked True.  Shouldn't have done
     it."
          Next.
          And they use celebrities.  Okay.  They say,
     "Well, everybody does, but not -- not to push this
     kind of a product."
          Next.
          Next.
          Next.
          Yeah.  That's a nasty one.
          Next.
          Nasty. Next.
          You saw this one.
          Next.
          A really important guy in the early days.  But
     who -- all right.
          So next.
          And this kind of stuff was very, very
     powerful.  And now they say, "Well, she couldn't
     have seen these -- the television ads, she was just
     growing up."  People growing up didn't watch
     television?  I don't think so.  People growing up,
     ten years old, eight years old, their minds are
     like -- you know, they remember everything and they
     grow up into the cigarette culture because that is
     what was real.  Reality is defined by television
     and they saw that and they -- who knows, and they
     believe it and people today can't get those jingles
     out of their minds.  Forty years later, they're
     still "Winston states taste good," you can still
     sing it.
          Next.
          And this kind of stuff said straight out, "Buy
     the filter, you won't worry."
          Next.
          Thinking man's filter.  Crazy. Next.
          There was no -- we just -- I mean, we just
     proved this was all a marketing deal.  Oh, they
     might have thought, Okay.  Maybe it will be, and
     maybe somebody did, did think it would be better,
     but still they loved it because it allowed them to
     sell, but they don't like if when you say it's
     addictive because that doesn't allow them to sell.
     Acceptable risk, even a little, you know, it's fun.
     And you can bet he made it back and he had -- got
     the girl in the end and so if you smoke, it's a
     little bit of a risk but it's an okay risk.  He
     didn't crash.
          Next.
          And the good life.  The good life.  Is it
     really a good life to have those cigarettes?  Is it
     really?  Is that false advertising?  I submit to
     you in light of what they knew internally that that
     is a false advertisement.  It is false and
     deliberately false.  It is -- it is a travesty and
     they want to compare it to beer.  You can drink
     beer safely.  You can drink beer.  I forgot what
     else they said, cars or something, you can drive
     safely.  You cannot smoke safely.  If you get
     addicted to cigarettes, as most people do, it is not safe.  There is no way to safely use that
     product.  And so comparing yourself to beer?  Go
     ahead.  Oh, thanks.  Okay.
          Next.
          And here's her Old Golds.  Now they want to
     say, "Well, we didn't really -- we didn't really
     care about this brand.  It was like an old brand.
     What do we care?"  Somebody put the idea of Old
     Golds in her mind.  She didn't make them.
          Next.
          So, okay.  How about this, now they want to
     say, "We didn't market to children because you
     didn't find our marketing plan," and it's been that
     way throughout this trial, it's always something
     else.  There's always something, "Well, okay.
     That's that, but what about this?  There's a detail
     over here, there's a snippet over here."  That's
     not -- that's not reality.  We have their evidence
     of their intent to market to children.
          When you're putting together a case against
     someone you look at opportunity, motive, intent.
     This is intent and opportunity and motive.  They
     want to increase their young adult franchise, the
     brand must increase its share penetration among 14
     to 24 age group, how can that be any clearer, that they intended?  Now they want to say, "Well, that's
     Camel."  Well, okay.  It's Reynolds.  You don't
     think they want to do it for all their brands?  You
     don't think -- you think this is an isolated
     incident?  Of course it isn't.  We can't go back
     through 8 million documents to find every single
     one.  This is clear intent.  This is a smoking gun
     and they want to say, "Well, but it may be smoking
     but you haven't analyzed the kind of smoke that's
     coming out of it."  Well, wait a minute, you know,
     this is -- this is a -- you know, something we
     found on the floor, a -- a note, and there's been
     some kind of a crime.  We found a note but we can't
     tell that it's the same brand.  So it -- it doesn't
     mean it's -- it's the company's intent.
          I challenge them.  I challenged them earlier,
     tell you what you mean by that if you're not
     marketing to 14 years old?  Give me a possible, a
     possible interpretation.  All I heard from -- in
     the witness stand from all their witnesses is this
     canned speech, any question that they weren't
     comfortable with, they turned to the jury and they
     give a canned speech, the result of years and
     hundreds of thousands of dollars of rehearsing and
     they all did the same thing.  Didn't get a chance to ask anybody because they wouldn't put them up
     there about this.
          Next.
          Newport, base of business --
          MR. GEARY:  Excuse me, Your Honor.  I'd like
     this taken down.  I want to approach, please.
          THE COURT:  Please take it down.
          MR. WILNER:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Pull it up.  Can you hear
     us?
          THE REPORTER:  I'll come over.
          (The following sidebar was held outside the
hearing of the jury:)
          MR. GEARY:  Your Honor, I object to the use of
     the last slide.  It's a Lorillard document from
     1978 that was the subject of the court's pretrial
     ruling saying that references to minority marketing
     would not be allowed, would not be a part of the
     documents.  There have been multiple attempts to
     use this document in its unredacted form, which
     says that the Newport base of business was blacks.
     We've offered them and given them redacted versions
     of that document on more one occasion, yet despite
     that, counsel has used that very document in its
     unredacted form in his closing argument. We have repeatedly pointed out the need for
     plaintiff's counsel to comply with this.  And it's
     repeatedly been ignored.  I've objected to its use,
     and I move for mistrial on that basis.
          MR. WILNER:  It's just a mistake and I didn't
     say anything about blacks.  It's not even
     derogatory.  I wasn't trying to push anything.
          THE COURT:  Has Mr. Wilner said there was no
     comment by him in his argument.  It did come up, I
     was watching it very close, and it came up so fast
     and we turned it off so quick I could not read
     anything, and I doubt a jury could read anything
     either.  So your motion is denied.
          (Sidebar concluded and the following further
proceedings were held in open court:)
          MR. WILNER:  Please the court.
          And this document --
          THE COURT:  Are you set up?
          THE REPORTER:  No.
          MR. WILNER:  And this document, so, no.  It's
     R.J. Reynolds 1984.
          THE REPORTER:  Hold on a second.
          MR. WILNER:  Attract the smoker at the
     earliest opportunity and let brand loyalty turn
     that smoker into a valuable asset.  So that's what they think of their smokers, they become assets.
     Children become assets after they get addicted,
     simple equation.
          Next.
          The 14 to 24 age group, tomorrow's cigarette
     business.
          Next.
          Kools' effort against the 16 to 25 group
     continues to be working.  How happy they are.  They
     say they're not marketing to children, how do they
     explain that?  How do you explain that document?
     You'll see it and have it as a document.  Kools'
     effort is working.  Are they saying it's bad?  No.
     They're saying they're happy with it.  That's
     wrong.  It's the wrong thing to do.
          Next.
          Here's -- we went through this.  This is the
     Surgeon General of 2010 telling them that this --
     that all their garbage about low tar and filters
     has all been just to sell -- sell not better, much
     worse, but at least no better products, to get them
     sold, to alleviate concern, to reassure, and hasn't
     helped at all.
          Next.
          I'll just -- we'll just go through this, I read it before.
          Next.
          Next.
          And no convincing evidence design was any
     better.
          Next.
          All right.  So now we're back to when did they
     know about this nicotine?  I don't want to take too
     much time about this but it's a fascinating story
     starting back in 1962, "We possess the knowledge
     that the effects of nicotine far more extensive
     than exists in the published literature."  That's
     their own document.  How do they explain that?
          Next.
          And here we went through this step-by-step,
     how this knowledge came down into Brown &
     Williamson, went to the TIRC, went to the other
     companies, and never made it to the Surgeon General
     who said, "There's a gap in knowledge and it's
     habituating and not addictive."  There's not a
     definitional question.  On the contrary, the issue
     was whether it was mental or physical and they did
     make that distinction back then, and we discussed
     this with Dr. Feingold who I think gave complete
     answers.  If it was a habit, it's your problem, it's -- it's the -- a habit is the customer's
     problem.  An addiction, it's at least partly the
     drug they're taking.  That's why they don't want to
     go -- they want to pay lip service to addiction but
     not really embrace it.  And until they embrace it,
     then we're never going to solve the problem.
          Next.
          Here we have the 2010, "Nicotine addiction is
     the fundamental reason that individuals persist in
     using tobacco products.  This persistent use
     contributes to many diseases described in this
     report."  Thank you.  Concise and totally
     contradicted -- their witnesses totally contradict
     that.  They hate to say.  They're double talk but
     their double talk contradicts it.
          Next.
          And we read this earlier in Phase 1 and
     they -- now they think potentially makes a
     difference.  We've proven that it's not potential.
     And in the documents to follow it's real.  So,
     sure, the Surgeon General talks, "Oh, yeah, it's
     potential," and we agree and it happened.
     Increased brain nicotine exposure.  I didn't make
     it up.  And I don't care it's even worse with their
     more modern cigarettes.  I don't care, it's not fixed.  It's still broke.
          Next.  Oh, I'm sorry, go back one.
          This is one of their early documents.  A
     tentative hypothesis, this unconscious desire to
     restore normal physiological equilibrium.
     Dr. Feingold said, "Yeah, that was -- that was the
     deal.  That's what we now understand.  Much later
     we got it."  Why didn't they give it to us then?
          Next.
          MR. GEARY:  Excuse me, Your Honor.  I object
     to that.  It misstates the evidence, that was a BAT
     document, not a document of the defendants.  I
     object to the characterization, misleading and
     misstating the evidence.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  You've got it in your
     rebuttal.  Go ahead.
          And BAT owned Brown & Williamson, sent them
     all this stuff.  We went through that.  Whatever.
     Okay.  This is an interesting document.  I think
     actually you'll find at N18 and it's a fascinating
     document written July 17th, 1983, by the vice
     president of Brown & Williamson when he gets all
     this stuff and he goes, "Nicotine is addictive."
     This is back in '63.
          Next. And then they go on to say how -- "What we're
     going to do with this knowledge, which is we can
     regulate precisely the nicotine and sugar levels
     almost any desired level management might require."
     So it's a management decision how much nicotine
     they're going to put in there and then the fun
     begins.
          Next.
          It's an addictive habit.  1967.
          Next.  Oh, and go back one.
          If there's no inhaling, there's no lung
     cancer.  That's a whole different thing is how they
     made it so easy to inhale.  Flavorants.  It's
     talked about in the Surgeon General report.  We
     haven't spent a lot of time but the inhalation is
     key to addiction, because it's the speed at which
     it hits the brain, that's why nicotine gum doesn't
     do it.
          Next.
          Charles Ellis, "We're in the nicotine
     business."
          Next.
          These are all evidence.  "The dominant
     specification should be nicotine delivery."  We
     didn't hear that.  You know, we've never heard it from Figlar.  He never came clean.  "Yeah, that was
     a -- oh, I don't know, yeah, it's one of the
     reasons."  Baloney, baloney, baloney, I call
     baloney.
          Next.
          The tobacco industry is a segment of the drug
     industry.
          Next.
          "A tobacco product is a vehicle" -- that is
     all their own stuff.
          Next.
          Happily for the tobacco industry nicotine's
     habituating.  This is their product motive.  How do
     they explain it?  And if you've got a motive and
     you've got opportunity you mean to tell me that
     you're not -- and you've got the ability to
     design -- now they say, "Well, we didn't do that,
     we design for addiction."  Wait a minute.  You said
     it was happily for you, you know how to do it, you
     know -- you know -- you've got the knowledge,
     people are getting addicted, and now you're saying
     it didn't matter or you didn't do it.  I didn't do
     it.  Someone else did.
          Next.
          Distribution to nicotine. Next.
          This is Lorillard.  Identify factors, means to
     manipulate --
          MR. GEARY:  Excuse me.  This is not Lorillard.
     This is Reynolds.
          MR. WILNER:  I went to -- I went -- your
     Lorillard was up just previous one, Counsel.
          MR. GEARY:  Excuse me.
          MR. WILNER:  Next.
          "The thing we sell most is nicotine."  Philip
     Morris 1980.  Same thing.
          Next.
          Other -- "unlike other high-risk activities,
     smoking is addictive."
          Next.
          "The goal is to determine the minimal level of
     nicotine."  That's Lorillard.  That's Lorillard.
          Next.
          "If the exit gates should open, we could be
     out of business."  Profit motive.
          Next.
          "The future of the tobacco industry would be
     less secure if -- if we did not have nicotine."
     Profit motive.
          Next. "Or if we did not design our product to -- to
     let the nicotine out properly" -- we'll get to that
     in a minute -- "our sales pattern has been
     positively correlated with nicotine."  Back in '63
     they knew that.
          Next.
          "High profits are related to the fact that the
     customer's dependent."
          Next.
          "Free nicotine is correlated with sales."
     Now, we had this big debate over this.  Oh, it
     doesn't matter.  Free nicotine doesn't matter.  Oh,
     oh.  And there was some later report, well, we
     never saw it.  It was all baloney.  Back in the
     '70s they figured this out and they compared and
     Kool, actually, had a lot of this free nicotine
     because it had been designed into it.  Now, am I
     saying Kool is the only bad cigarette?  Of course
     not.  It's just kind of interesting that Kool was
     identified here as being very powerful in producing
     this free nicotine, which is related to addiction
     and is related to sales and so we completed the
     circle.
          Next.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Wilner, you asked me to remind when you had five minutes.
          MR. WILNER:  Thank you.  Thank you.
          "Kool is the highest in nicotine delivery
     here."  I don't care if it's highest.
          Next.
          It could be next to highest.  And this is more
     review of smoke pH data.
          Next.
          And it talks about historically Marlboro and
     Kool have had higher smoke pH, higher free
     nicotine, higher potential addiction.
          Next.
          I wrote the -- that's a picture of the flat
     earth.  This is from their Web site.  "Nicotine in
     tobacco is addictive but it's not considered a
     threat to health."  When are they going to learn?
          Next.
          50 years of denial.  Back in 1953 there was
     proof of cancer, in '63 they had proof of
     addiction.  They made their admission of cancer in
     2000, when are they go going to admit addiction?
     Why does it matter?  Because until they admit it
     and start being serious about dealing with it,
     they're going to keep making new addicts and the
     existing addicts are doomed. Next.
          And here is -- this is from slide one.  This
     is from No. 1, and this just equals to us how they
     refuse to look at what causation is.  Again, it's
     just like the old TTP days, they want to say
     nicotine doesn't cause TTP, it does cause lifetime
     continuous cigarette smoking, which causes
     emphysema, which causes lung transplant surgery,
     which causes the complications, which causes the
     death, that's cause.
          You don't have to draw that arrow down.  That
     is tobacco speak to insist on.
          Next.
          "Addiction equals sales."  That's the
     bottom -- that is the equation they've lived by.
          Next.
          The final document is -- we've seen it before
     and it will be in evidence.  And they talk about,
     "It's a perfect pleasure, but it leaves you
     unsatisfied."  Meaning you go buy the next.  "Let
     us provide the exquisiteness and hope that our
     consumers continue to remain unsatisfied.  All we
     want is a larger bag to carry the money to the
     bank."  And I'll tell you, the only thing they care
     about is the money in the bank. And so if there's going to be a change coming
     out of this courtroom in Jacksonville, Florida,
     that's the way it's done.  And it's done by being
     fair, totally fair, be fair with the comparative
     negligence, give Mrs. Jewett whatever negligence
     she deserves, fine.  But when it comes down to
     punishment, there is only one kind of punishment
     they understand and you know what it is.  Thank
     you.