          MR. MATTHEWS:  Good morning.  I'm going to be
     giving you the plaintiff's side of this case on two
     points.  The first would be the statute of
     limitations, it's the time deadline to file the
     case, and second will be the cause of death and
     then Mr. Wilner is going to talk about this
     addiction thing that I don't understand.
          I'm not going to -- I'm not going to really do
     a whole lot of arguing, even though I do that to
     present Mr. Jewett's side of the case.  I'm not
     going to try to twist any words or use any artful
     language as has occurred some in this trial, and
     I'm just trying to go logically, step by step, see
     where that -- where we wind up when I do that.
          I don't think I'm going to change your mind,
     to tell you the truth, but we got to do this.  I
     think you already know what's going on, and I'm not
     going to be able to cover everything, but you've
     heard everything, and I'm sure if I leave something
     out, somebody will let you know or you'll remember.
          And this is my -- this is my first go at one
     of these tobacco trials, so this has kind of been
     interesting to me.  Kind of learning as I go along
     kind of like you are.  And it's kind of been an interesting eye-opening experience.  So I hope it
     hasn't been boring for you.  I don't think it has,
     to tell you the truth.
          Mr. Jewett doesn't get to speak, even though
     he wants to, so he asked me to thank you.  He's
     ex-military, kind of stoic guy, as you saw on the
     stand, but he asked me to thank you because he
     knows this is inconvenient.
          And it is inconvenient, but it's also a civic
     duty that's unique to the United States, and you
     could have lived somewhere else and you wouldn't
     have to do this, but it's probably better off that
     you're here and have to do this every once in a
     while.  Him being a military guy, he wanted to make
     sure I told you that.
          This is a serious, serious case.  You know
     what this lady went through.  You know what some of
     these issues are and -- go ahead and put up the
     first one.
          So let's just get to what you got to decide.
     And the first question you've got to decide, which
     the defendants have the burden of proof on is:  Did
     Barbara Jewett know or should she have known before
     May 5, 1990 that she had COPD and that it was
     caused by smoking cigarettes?      Of course, in brackets we put "no" because
     that's what we want you to say.  They're going to
     want you to say "yes" to that.
          But, in this case, that's the defendant's
     burden of proof.  That's a defense that they've
     raised.  They've got to show you enough evidence,
     the greater weight of the evidence has to play for
     them on this issue.  Now, on the other two issues,
     the plaintiff will have the burden of proof, but
     we'll get to those in a minute.
          Skip the next one and go to the third.
          So, to win on this statute of limitations
     issue where they have the burden of proof, the
     defendants have to show that Mrs. Jewett knew or
     should have known before May 5, 1990 that she had
     COPD, that's the first thing.  Did she know or
     should she have known before May 1990 that she had
     COPD?
          And then they also have to prove in addition
     to that that if she knew it or should have known
     it, that she knew or should have known that there
     was a reasonable possibility it was caused by her
     cigarette smoking, and she had to know that before
     May 5th, 1990 also.
          So let's look at -- you already heard the differing sides, but let's look at -- let's look at
     both sides of the evidence in this case.  And they
     say that she was diagnosed before May 1990 because
     she says she was, the doctors and on the PBS
     documentary.
          But they say but if she -- if she was just
     mistaken or confused then, well, that's okay too
     because even then if she was mistaken or confused,
     she should have diagnosed herself.  She should have
     figured this all out before May 1990.  So let's
     look at both sides and see where we wind up.
          So what I've done here is I went through
     everything I could find where the evidence about
     whether she knew or should have known before
     May 1990 was favorable to the defense and --
     because of course it is or we wouldn't be here
     talking about it.  It's a legitimate issue.
          And the first one that I came up with, and I
     think I got all of these, but you took notes --
     some of you took a lot of notes.  And if I didn't
     come up with them all, I'm sure the defense will
     point them out to you.
          But the first is there was Mr. [Power's who
     deposition was read and he said she had a smokers'
     cough in the mid-'70s, and of course we know that in the -- he must have had his dates mixed up
     because he lived in Virginia in the mid-'70s and
     the Jewetts lived in New Jersey during that period
     of time, so there must have been some time after
     that.  But he did say that she had a smokers' cough
     back then.
          And then she said in the PBS film that it was
     25 years ago, and that would have put her back to
     1980 or 1979, so you saw her say that, she -- had a
     deposition with Deborah Thorne.  She said she
     remembered Barbara having a cough after she moved
     to Florida in 1982.  Barbara actually moved to
     Florida in 1984, but that's still before 1990.  And
     it sounded like a bronchitis cough, so she had a
     cough.  That may have had something to do with it.
          Then Dr. Frazier, he said that according to
     her pulmonary function test, that from 1995 on,
     that she must have had severe COPD in the
     mid-1980s, and I'm going to come back and talk
     about that later.  He basis that on the rate of
     progression of the disease.  But we're going to
     talk about that opinion in a little bit.
          And then there's some testimony from
     Janet Dioguardi, Barbara Jewett's sister, about
     moving to -- I really didn't follow this, but moving to South Carolina in 1991 and maybe sometime
     before then when they spoke, that she used to get
     bronchitis a lot.
          Of course, they read part of that deposition.
     We read the other part where it said it was after
     1991, which I'll show you in a minute, but that is
     some evidence that they cited is favorable to them.
          In her deposition, Sarah Milliken, who you saw
     here who did a pretty courageous job, in my
     opinion, even though they tried to make her look a
     little bit bad.
          She testified in her deposition that was taken
     back in October 2010 that her mother's breathing
     difficulty started after a trip they took to
     New York, Niagara Falls, when Sarah was 12.  That's
     what she said in her deposition.  That would have
     been before 1990 because that was 1989.
          Later Sarah thought about it and said, "You
     know what, Tommy drove when we went and that means
     he was 16, so that means we didn't go to
     Niagara Falls until 1992."  But she did say that in
     her deposition.  So they brought that up as
     favorable to them.
          Go to the next one.  And then, we get --
     starting in 2001, we'll get to these questionnaires that she filled out or maybe it's some things that
     she told doctors, and there are several of these.
          She -- Dr. Ottaviani said, "How many years
     have you had this cough?"  Now, of course, a cough
     doesn't mean that you have COPD, but it could be
     evidence of it.  So they bring that up and she said
     she had a cough for 15 years, which means she would
     have had a cough in 1986, for whatever that's
     worth.
          And then they said to Dr. Ottaviani, "How many
     years have you raised phlegm or mucus?"  She said
     ten years, which of course would have been 1991,
     which is after 1990.  And then, "When did you have
     wheezing and whistling in your chest?"  And she
     said at age 34, so that's another thing that was
     brought up.
          Dr. Ottaviani also stated in his records -- go
     to the next page, please -- that she was diagnosed
     15 years ago, which would have been 1986, with
     severe COPD, she told him that, and that she had a
     cough, that she relates the cough productive of
     sputum, that would have been 15 years which would
     have been 1986.  So she told Dr. Ottaviani that she
     had severe COPD since 1986.
          Go to the next.      And then she told a social worker that she got
     COPD in 1989.  She told a psychiatrist, it was
     1987.  She told a thoracic surgeon it was 1988.
     She told Dr. Crossfield, I think he's at the
     Mayo Clinic, that it was 1984, and then she told
     another doctor at the Mayo Clinic she had been on
     Prednisone steroid for about 25 years everyday
     which means she would have been on steroids
     everyday since 1979.
          So that's -- that's what they say, they say
     that because of all these things, that shows that
     she knew about COPD or she should have known about
     it before 1990.
          Now, let's see what the evidence is that's
     favorable to the plaintiff.  Well, Deborah Thorne,
     they read her deposition and she said she didn't
     remember Barbara having a cough in '76 when
     Kevin Powers said she did.  Of course, she was
     mistaken about the date too because the Jewetts
     actually lived in New Jersey when all this was
     going on.
          Next is the life insurance questionnaire that
     I'll probably show you a little bit in a minute,
     but you remember the life insurance questionnaire
     that Barbara filled out in 1986 where she essentially says she didn't have anything wrong
     with her and she was a normal, healthy woman.
          When you fill out a life insurance
     questionnaire, it's a pretty important document.
     That's something she did in 1986, not in 2001, not
     when her memory may have faded.
          Then Sarah testified that her mother had a
     cough in the late '80s and used an inhaler for
     seasonal allergies.  And, again, that's -- this
     cough thing comes up.  You know, just because you
     have a cough doesn't mean you know that you have a
     severe lung disease.
          Sarah also said that her mom was normal,
     healthy mom.  They went on vacations all up and
     down the East Coast, and that she wasn't sick
     during that time, and she didn't show any symptoms
     until they got back, after they got back from
     Niagara Falls in 1992.
          In fact, she talked about her mom pushing her
     aunt around who was in a wheelchair, pushing her
     around in a wheelchair at Niagara Falls.  It
     doesn't sound like somebody who is severely
     impaired at that time from COPD or should know that
     she is.
          So, of course, we cite that as being favorable to us.  And that's direct testimony from Sarah.
     That's not a medical record written down a few
     years later.
          In Janet Dioguardi's deposition, she talked
     about how there was this bronchitis or she felt
     like she had bronchitis.  She talked about that
     that was -- eventually, as you got down the
     question, we find out, well, that wasn't until
     after 1991 when Barbara talked to Janet about
     bronchitis.  So it wasn't before 1990.  It was
     after 1991.
          And then Sarah testified some more that -- and
     we talked about the breathing difficulties started
     on a trip that she took to New York.  This is when
     she said she was 12, which would have put it in
     1989, but we know that trip to New York didn't
     occur, as you can see later down there, until 1992
     because Tommy drove and he was 16.
          Slide it down a little.
          Barbara saw Dr. Wyzan for the first time.  And
     Dr. Wyzan is probably a pretty important witness in
     this case.  There's one witness in this case who
     wasn't biased, and that's Dr. Wyzan.  He was a
     treating doctor.
          These other experts and doctors, some of them are paid by the plaintiff, some of them are paid by
     the defendants.  Sarah is the daughter, Thomas is
     the husband, but Dr. Wyzan is just the doctor.  And
     I would think, you may not, that his testimony
     should be given pretty good weight since he is her
     doctor, saw her 34 times, and said that she was
     shocked when he told her about COPD.
          Let's keep going on.
          You know, we're going to look at this again
     briefly, but you remember that Dr. Wyzan's records
     showed that she told him she had been having
     breathing problems for about three years and that
     was 1995.
          The only pulmonary function test -- and that's
     how you diagnose COPD, a pulmonary function test.
     The first one is 1995.  That's Dr. Wyzan's.
     Dr. Wyzan said she was shocked.  He said she had
     very severe emphysema.
          And Sarah testified that she -- she never knew
     about her mom having COPD until her mom told her in
     March of 1995 after Dr. Wyzan had diagnosed her.
          So, in order to believe the defense case, you
     have to believe that Barbara Jewett knew before
     1990 or should have known before 1990 that she had
     severe -- she had this severe COPD but she just didn't tell anybody.  She didn't tell her own
     husband, she didn't tell her daughter.  She just
     kept it a secret.  Which, of course, probably isn't
     really the case.
          Dr. Ottaviani's questionnaire, she put her
     COPD in -- or cough in 1986, her phlegm in 1991,
     after 1990.  And then Dr. Ottaviani's questionnaire
     said that she was diagnosed 15 years ago with
     severe COPD.  Well, where did that come -- that
     severe COPD come from?  That's because she heard it
     from Wyzan.  She told Dr. Ottaviani six years after
     she had been diagnosed by Dr. Wyzan with severe
     COPD that she had been diagnosed 15 years ago.
          And, of course, we say she got her dates mixed
     up because people get their dates mixed up.  The
     lawyers in this trial got their dates mixed up
     numerous times on both sides.
          Her questionnaire to Dr. Solomon when she was
     now going to be fitted for a lung transplant or
     worked up for a lung transplant in 2001, "How many
     years have you had this cough?"
          "Eight years."  Well, that puts it back to
     1993, that's after 1990, of course.
          "How many times have you raised phlegm?"
          "Eight years."  That would be 1993.      "When did you have this wheezing and whistling
     and chest tightness?"
          "1990."  We don't know if it was before May or
     after May 1990, but that's on the Solomon question.
          And then he says, "About 15 years ago, because
     her husband's job caused him to move to
     Jacksonville, Florida, she was seen by Dr. Wyzan."
          Of course, we know she wasn't seen by
     Dr. Wyzan 15 years before 2001.  She had her dates
     mix up.  Just like she did when she talked to these
     other doctors.  She told Dr. Hercl, the internist,
     that she had had COPD for ten years, which would
     have been 1991.
          So the reason I bring up the evidence as
     favorable to both sides, and I'm going to go
     through a little bit more of it again, is that
     isn't there evidence on both sides, but isn't the
     greater weight of the evidence, the testimony and
     the commonsense?  Doesn't that not favor the
     defendants?  They didn't meet their burden of
     proof.  It's iffy at best, but it's probable that
     she made a mistake when she was talking to these
     people.
          And it's interesting that she made these
     mistakes starting about 2001 in the records, not before then.  2001, after six years of having
     severe COPD, eventually going on oxygen, being
     debilitated, having respiration problems, having
     hypoxemia, which is lack of oxygen according to
     Dr. Wyzan, and going through all of the things she
     went through, it's no wonder she couldn't remember
     exactly what these dates were.  She made a mistake.
          And then she gets on the PBS thing and says 25
     years ago.  With her severe COPD, if she would have
     been diagnosed that long ago, she wouldn't have
     made it to Dr. Wyzan in 1995.
          I'm going to go through some of these things
     that we've already mentioned pretty quick and --
     next slide, please.
          First of all, we're going to hear this, but if
     you cough, you may have acute bronchitis.  Acute
     bronchitis, when you have periodic episodes of
     bronchitis, is not chronic bronchitis, when you're
     just doing it all the time.  And you may hear about
     that later on so I won't bring that up.
          This is the insurance application you've
     seen -- keep going -- where she says she's a
     normal, healthy woman and no emphysema.
          Next.  The questionnaire for Dr. Wyzan, she's
     not on Prednisone and she's not got any illnesses. She filled that out in 1995.  He says she had
     respiratory problems starting three years ago,
     1992, and that she had had this cough for 40 days
     back in 1995, that's when it had started being
     persistent.
          There's the questionnaire that we've talked
     about.  Keep going.  This is the Dr. Wyzan 15 years
     ago thing which, of course, she didn't move to
     Jacksonville 15 years before that.
          So remember that, you know, people make
     mistakes with dates.  Now, today it's easy to come
     in here and criticize her and say, well, she messed
     up her own case back then because she just
     misremembered these things.
          But she didn't really.  She knew exactly what
     she was talking about and she knew she was
     diagnosed back then.  That doesn't make sense.
          Dr. Frazier testified about the rate of
     progression -- keep going -- and Dr. Wyzan
     diagnosed her with severe premature emphysema.  She
     had severe emphysema.
          Dr. Frazier, I kind of like Dr. Frazier.  He
     wasn't one of these expert on being an expert.
     He's first time so he actually tried to do a pretty
     good job, I think.      He said there's this rate of progression and
     so he thinks she probably had this disease back in
     the '80s because of the progression of the disease,
     and she probably did have it some back in the '80s.
     The question is should she have known she had COPD
     back then?
          Dr. Wyzan said, if you'll remember, this was
     severe COPD and that she had progressed rapidly.
     So she could have gotten it in the '80s, but by the
     time it started progressing, it doesn't mean that
     she had it in 1979 or the mid-'80s or something
     like that.
          And Dr. Frazier admitted, he conceded that
     different people have different rates of
     progression.  So the fact that she may have had it
     doesn't mean that she knew she had it or that she
     was diagnosed with it.  It just means it was there,
     it hadn't come out yet, and nobody had figured it
     out yet.
          So I bring this up because she had these
     respiratory problems and went through comas and
     things like this, and then she had to start telling
     people and remembering dates.  No wonder she
     couldn't remember.
          Okay.  We're going to talk really quick about this cause of death thing.  And what I want to do
     is go to the death certificate.
          Now, you remember that -- can you pull it up a
     little bit?
          You remember that -- I'll read it.  I forgot
     where I'm talking about.  You remember that
     Dr. Alvarez stated in the Mayo records that the TTP
     was caused most likely by the infections, and so
     how do you connect the dots?  Let's do that.
          Let's skip this and keep going.  All right.
     Here we go.
          Now, you know you get a lung transplant, you
     got to take antirejection drugs, you've got to
     depress the immunity system, your body can't fight
     infection, you heard all that ad nauseam.  So she
     smoked cigarette.  That caused her to have COPD,
     that's undisputed.
          That caused her to have a lung transplant to
     try to prolong her life, which means she now
     couldn't cough.  She would aspirate things, get
     them in her lungs.  Sometimes she had episodes of
     that that can damage the lung.
          She developed this bronchiolitis obliterans
     syndrome, BOS.  That's irreversible.  It's
     eventually going to get you.  And she had these antirejection drugs which depressed her immune
     system and by the time she got there in August or
     September of 2006, she had pancreatitis, kidney
     dysfunction, severe headaches.  She had
     thrombocytopenia.
          Remember, she had had thrombocytopenia severe
     before in 1995.  It just hadn't tipped over into
     TTP at that time because she wasn't so worn out
     then, back in 2005.  By 2006, she was just worn
     out.  She had been through so much that she
     couldn't fight off these things and the TTP
     developed.
          She had bleeding ulcers, esophagus ulcers,
     stomach ulcers, and then she got these viral
     infections.  And it's the infections that everybody
     said caused the TTP, except Dr. Frazier, but then
     he conceded that he would defer to the
     hematologist, Dr. Ambinder, who I'm not a big fan
     of, but he said it was caused by the infections,
     and Dr. Alvarez at the Mayo Clinic said it was most
     likely caused by the infections.
          And so these infections that caused the TTP
     that led to her death were all caused because she
     got COPD and had a lung transplant, that's the end
     result of that.  And we see who said that.      Let me put this on the overhead.  This is
     going to be the last thing.
          There's a difference -- and you'll have the
     death certificate with you.  There's a difference
     on the death certificate's definition of cause.
     And I wrote this down.  I didn't have a -- I'm not
     a computer guy, I'm sorry.
          But the immediate cause on the death
     certificate is what's listed.  The immediate cause
     was TTP.  And it was the immediate cause, that's
     the straw that broke the camel's back.  But that's
     not what you have to decide.  The judge instructed
     you on legal cause.
          And legal cause is, was it naturally or -- was
     it directly connected to her death in natural and
     continuous sequence?  Did it contribute
     substantially to producing her injury or death?  In
     a natural and continuous sequence, there's no doubt
     that the TTP is related back to her getting COPD.
          I really said I wasn't going to argue, now I'm
     going to.  I don't think this cause of death thing
     is an issue.  The TTP was related to the whole
     thing.  It just didn't crop up all of the sudden
     and kill someone who had been through everything
     she had went through.  It was related to her infections.  It was all in the medical literature
     and all the witnesses told you.
          So three is an easier question.  On the
     statute of limitation, it's the defendants who have
     the burden of proof.  And when you weigh both sides
     and you -- one side is relying almost totally on a
     debilitated sick lady's memory and the other side
     is relying on testimony of her treating doctor and
     her family.  And I think even if the plaintiffs had
     the burden of proof, they would have carried it,
     but I wouldn't think the defendants would have
     carried it on that issue.
          Now Mr. Wilner is going to talk about
     addiction.  And I wish I could, but he's more of an
     expert on that.
          Thank you very much.  I appreciate your time.


         MR. WILNER:  Thank you, Your Honor. Well, it was nice to see Barbara Jewett back
    sort of, and counsel makes this dramatic thing about
    it, but, you know, the interesting thing, there's a
    couple reasons, I'll start with this -- with the
    diagnosis business, but -- because it's -- it's
    pretty clear when you put this together it's a bunch
    of -- it's a bunch of snipits here and there, and
    it's a lady who got her dates wrong pretty clearly,
    but...
         All right.  Item 1.  If -- people get their
    dates wrong all the time.  Look at what Barbara
    Jewett -- and this is no problem, there's nothing
    wrong with her except she was sick as could be.
    There was a lot wrong with her.  What she said about
    her -- her smoking history -- and you'll have this
    in the records -- is it jumps all over the place
    too.  Like she tells Dr. Wyzan she was a smoker for
    22 years in 1996, which isn't quite right, because
    she started earlier than that.  But okay.  Then she
    tells Dr. Ottaviana she smoked for 32 years in 2001.
    Well, that isn't quite right either, but it's
    closer.  But they both can't be right.  And then she
    tells at the USF Pulmonary Disease -- this is Dr.
    Solomon -- 20 years again.  So she's made a 12-year
    error in smoking history, you know. But the fact is that wasn't that important.
    She was a long-time smoker.  You know, I mean,
    they're not going to go, was it 20 years, 30 years.
    It doesn't matter because you know by that time the
    damage is done.
         Then there is an indication of 30 years from
    the same institution in 2001, another ten-year
    difference.  And it goes on.  So here's another one
    in 2002, says smoked from age 14 until 47.  That's
    even a different estimate.  Here's another one in
    2002, Octavia Pajaro:  She has a long history of
    smoking, she started when she was 13 and smoked
    35 years.
         So along with these various estimates of when
    she says she was diagnosed are wild estimates about
    smoking, which isn't unusual, because people have a
    hard time remembering back, and she had been through
    so much.  She had been -- she was at death's door by
    that time.
         So that's number one.  It's just more fodder
    for lawyers than it is for anything else that people
    are not challenged, of course, when they give these
    diagnose -- when they say, I was diagnosed a long
    time ago.
         But I have some really good proof of why -- why this -- this thing is all a -- all a big nothing,
    and Dr. Wyzan was the one who diagnosed her.  And,
    incidentally, we totally disagree.  As you might
    imagine, we disagree with the tobacco companies a
    lot, you know.
         She did need to be diagnosed.  You can't be --
    you can't walk into court -- you know what this is
    like, you know, all the -- all the experts and the
    digging into everything -- and, and just claim that
    you've got a cigarette-related disease and never get
    diagnosed.
         They're saying she should have filed a case on
    cough, because she felt bad, or coughed one day and
    didn't cough the next.  And remember, all the
    doctors have said emphysema is permanent.  It's the
    air sacs in your lung is gone.
         And so, yeah, sure she had coughs.  I don't
    know.  Everybody has coughs, I guess, at times with
    colds.  Big deal.
         She's supposed to go into court and -- and, you
    know, whenever that was, have this thing in 19- --
    before 1990, I have a cold, I have a cough, and go
    through this?  Ridiculous.  Ridiculous.
         All right.  But here's -- here's some -- here's
    something else.  Here's something to think about. In 1987 they were living here in Jacksonville.  Now,
    this is really interesting, because the more we
    thought about it the more we realized this is
    really -- there's no answer to it.
         I'm trying to find a blank piece of paper.
    Sorry.
         All right.  So in 1987 the Jewetts are here in
    Jacksonville where Dr. Wyzan is, and Dr. Ruedas --
    R-u -- help me -- R-u-e-d-a-s, Beethoven Ruedas,
    what a great name Beethoven Ruedas.  Anyway, he did
    see her.  I mean, he didn't have any records, but he
    saw her.  So they jump on that, oh, Dr. Ruedas must
    have diagnosed.
         No.  Wait, wait.  Hold on.  Dr. Ruedas is the
    one who referred her to Dr. Wyzan, because he's just
    a GP, and he refers her to Dr. Wyzan, and Dr.
    Wyzan's letter back to Dr. Ruedas says thank you
    for, you know, referring Ms. Jewett to her.  And
    guess what?  She's got emphysema.
         So if Dr. Ruedas was on top of that, knew about
    it, and diagnosed it, well, Dr. Wyzan wouldn't have
    sent the letter like that that says she's got
    emphysema, and he would've had the records from Dr.
    Ruedas at that time, or something, or he would have
    called Dr. Ruedas.  There would have been some communication there that Ruedas had diagnosed her.
         In all, what had happened is he followed her,
    she was getting worse, she wasn't responding, she
    was on the decline, and he went, over my head, go to
    a lung specialist.  Dr. Wyzan will take care of you.
    And she did.  And she was a lot worse than anybody
    thought.
         And I'll talk about that decline in a minute
    because that's real interesting.  The decline, this
    mathematical thing.  Look, Frazier was a good
    doctor, he was fine, but this little mathematical
    thing, that -- we didn't go into that in any detail.
    I'm going to go into it a little more.  That's not
    the whole answer to things.  Believe me.
         All right.  So what they're trying to say is --
    and Jacksonville is a small medical community.
    They're trying to say there's a phantom doctor out
    here.  So we don't know who he is.  He's never been
    mentioned.  Never been mentioned.  Nobody's said a
    word.  Nobody knows who -- who is this?  I should
    say she.  You don't always say he with a doctor
    today.  It's she.  There's just as many female
    doctors, so I apologize, I shouldn't have said he.
         So in 1980 -- in 19- -- in the late 80's, '87,
    '88 in Jacksonville, who diagnoses emphysema.  All right.  Now she goes in to see Dr. Wyzan.  Dr. Wyzan
    says, thank you, Dr. Ruedas, you've been following
    her.  Now I'll take it over.  It's serious.
         Wait a minute.  Remember, this was only -- if
    this is 1988 or '89, and this is '95, those records
    existed.  If they -- I mean -- I mean, they didn't,
    because there weren't any, but, I mean, those
    records would have existed, and Dr. Wyzan would have
    needed them.  He's not stupid.  He would have said,
    oh, you've been seeing Dr. Smith, you know, the
    phantom doctor, and I'll call over and get the
    records so I'll know what your history has been,
    because that's vitally important.  I've got to know
    how fast this is happening.  You know, he was
    surprised.  God, you're sick.  You are sick as a
    dog.  And I -- there's nothing.  I'm getting a
    history here.
         I'm sure he would have loved to see it.  But
    it's one thing to say, oh, old records are thrown
    away.  They're not thrown away in -- in 1995 they
    weren't old records, and they were right next door.
    They were in Jacksonville.  So it's nutty.  It is
    nutty, nutty.
         The fact is she was doing better than you could
    expect from someone with this bad of disease, and it was -- it was accelerating.  She hit that point in
    her life for genetics, God knows what, where things
    were really starting to go bad.  And they went bad
    on Dr. Ruedas, and he sent her to Dr. Wyzan, and
    that was -- and Dr. Wyzan diagnosed her, and that
    was it.
         And all this talk about, oh, there could have
    been some other doctor, ain't true, and all this
    talk about coughing back here in God knows when,
    isn't true, because Dr. Ruedas did see her.  If she
    had this COPD thing that would have been something
    that would have been noted there and sent to Dr.
    Wyzan.  I mean, it is simple, simple, simple.
         All right.  A couple things on the overhead.
    Thank you, Laurie.  Hated to surprise you.  You were
    all set to run a Power Point and I said overhead.
    Okay.
         All right.  Item Number 1 -- or maybe Number
    10.  I don't know.  And you've seen it before, but I
    love it.  I think it's so interesting, because it
    kind of explains it.  We talked about it before.  I
    won't belabor it, but here it is.
         This is -- this is Dr. Solomon.  This is 2001.
    He's in Tampa.  He's a good doctor.  He's a lung
    doctor.  He cares about the history a lot.  And he gets it totally wrong.  He says, well, she went in
    to see Dr. Wes Ratliff, who is an old friend of Dr.
    Solomon, because they trade at the same place.
         So he says, well, she was worked up by him.
    Well, we know that's wrong.  Where did that come
    from?  He didn't make it up.  He got it from poor
    Barbara, that she was first seen Dr. -- she must
    have liked him -- Wes Ratliff in Indiana.  She
    didn't see him until '99.  So a little bit -- a
    little bit of confusion.
         And then comes the next part.  And I'm sorry to
    have blocked you if I did.  Then comes the next part
    that lays bear this -- this fog.  You know, 15 years
    ago her husband's job caused him to move to
    Jacksonville.  She was seen by Dr. Wyzan.
         You know why?  Because Wyzan's name, Wyzan
    emphysema, Wyzan diagnosis, has never been changed.
    That's it.  She just got it wrong when she saw him.
    She just got it wrong.  And I understand that.  Do
    understand it.  She put Jacksonville, Wyzan.  They
    had moved several times.  They'd been up to Indiana,
    they'd been back.
         No other doctor.  If there's another diagnosis
    where is it?  I mean why didn't she mention it?
    Forget the records.  Why didn't she mention it ever in anything?
         All right.  One other interesting thing, then
    I'm not going to, like, go on an on about this
    stuff.
         Dr. Ottaviana -- you heard of him -- 2001 down
    in Tampa working her up basically for a lung
    transplant.  This is kind of the time when it's the
    end of the road.  And it's a joke to say, oh, yeah,
    she managed to cut down.  No lungs.  You can't smoke
    without lungs, and she didn't have any lungs by that
    time.
         So here we go.  This is fascinating.  So what
    happens here?  You saw the record, but I didn't
    point it out before.  All right.  So he works her
    up, blah, blah, blah.  This is one of these
    15-years-ago things:  15 years ago diagnosed with
    severe COPD.  The words came from Dr. Wyzan.
         Flip -- I think go down to the bottom, please,
    and flip it over.  It says continued.  And go down
    to the bottom.
         Recommendation.  We need to obtain records from
    Dr. Wyzan.  Well, yeah, because that's where it all
    starts.  She evidently did say Dr. Wyzan that time,
    or else he wouldn't say we need to get his records.
         If -- if she had said something else at all, or even something that led this doctor -- this was a
    lung doctor, Solomon was.  He was interested.  She
    -- we don't have a tape-recorder, but he must have
    said, uh-huh, you were diagnosed when, 15 years ago,
    and by whom, Dr. Wyzan.  So he says, well, we need
    to get the records.
         Now, I'm sure they did, but it didn't matter.
    She was being seen in extremis.  It didn't matter
    whether it was 15, 10, 8, 6, 2, she was there for
    her last chance at life, and they were trying to
    help her, and they almost did.
         They ended up doing the transplant up here at
    Mayo.  I think it was for reasons that -- you know,
    financial reasons, or something.
         All right.  One more interesting thing.  All
    these lawyers have been saying, oh, my God, look at
    this, this particular consult, a 60-minute
    consultation note with 40 minutes of face-to-face,
    as if they sat there and tried to dissect, well,
    now, was it 10 years, was it 15 years?
         You want to know what they were really doing?
    Here's what they were doing.  This patient, 48-year-
    old woman with severe chronic obstructive lung
    disease started smoking when she was 13.  And here's
    what they say -- Go to the next page.  I'm going to have to read
    it here, because it's just too far for me to read:
    I had a long discussion with her and her husband.
         This is -- this is not about when you were
    diagnosed.  This is whether you're going to live.
         I had a long discussion with her husband.  The
    transplant evaluation is still not complete.
         As you're sitting there wondering are they
    going to even accept you in this program.  There's
    no hope if you don't.  Can you imagine the
    discussion?  This isn't about, you know, a lawsuit,
    it isn't about when you were diagnosed, it's about
    whether you're going to live.
         She is scheduled for right an left heart cath,
    because her heart is failing too.  However, if they
    prove to show no significant pulmonary hypertension
    and no significant coronary artery disease I would
    be willing to list her as a lung transplant.  I did
    explain to them that with her severe debilitation,
    wheelchair bound and oxygen dependent, she's a high
    risk transplant, as she would be weak.  I'm not
    clear as yet as to whether she would be able to be
    done with a cardiopulmonary bypass -- because they
    have to take you off the -- they have to put you on
    that machine that breathes for you -- because it's not clear whether she would tolerate a single lung
    ventilation.  That's the machine.  This would make
    the operation risky, postoperative care difficult,
    the likelihood of lung injury higher.  She
    understands this.  I've explained to them -- and
    this is counseling -- about the end of life maybe
    for a risky procedure, whether you're going to do it
    or not.
         And they're making this into like, oh, yeah, we
    sat that and said, oh, what happened 15 years ago in
    Jacksonville?  That is just nonsense.  Just
    nonsense.
         All right.  I've got more.  Whoops.  I saw
    somebody deliberately do that just to get a rise out
    of people that time.  Somebody will have to come fix
    it.  I will.
         Okay.  Now I will ask you, if you would, to
    return to the Power Point, because I've sketched
    some things on some slides while I was waiting
    there.
         All right.  A couple more things on this topic,
    then I want to get to the meat of it.  So what I
    would like for you to do is put up Number 4 if you
    would, and I'll keep talking.
         All right.  So the next thing is, well, symptoms.  Symptoms.  Coughs and everything.  And,
    look, it's on the pack.
         Well, here's what I say about that.  Mr. Jewett
    said, and also Sarah, the daughter, we didn't know
    what emphysema is.  Sure it's on the package.  It
    says emphysema.  I don't know.  What is that?  Is
    that a cough?  No.  It's a serious irreversible
    disease that doctors diagnose because it goes on
    inside your lung.
         So it's one thing to say, oh, yeah, federal
    government makes us put it on the packs, so
    therefore everybody knows every time they cough
    they're supposed to file their case, or they come in
    here and they're too late.  That's quite a game,
    quite a game.  She was healthy.
         All right.  Let's go, yes, back one, I think.
    Great.  Thank you.  Thank you.
         These are my notes, okay, so if I've misspelled
    anything, I apologize.  She was healthy.  She had a
    cough.  She was pushing her sister around Niagara
    Falls.  She saw Dr. Ruedas, which I might have
    misspelled, and he didn't diagnose her.
         And before 1990, you know, where's the beef?
    Where's the beef?  It's their -- you know, it's
    their burden.  It doesn't exist.  There is no phantom doctor.
         Oh, okay.  Here's the big mathematical thing
    about the loss of lung.  And I need my -- here's my
    papers to prove this.  Remember they said
    24 percent -- this is really interesting --
    24 percent lung capacity in 1995.  I'm going to take
    on this little math business, because I ain't buying
    it.  It wasn't worked out.  There were no citations.
    It's not in the Surgeon General's report.  Let's see
    if it even makes sense.
         Here in 2001 -- can we go back to this?  You
    need to clone yourself.
         All right.  This is really something.  Remember
    24 percent in 1995.  In 2001 it's down to 8 percent,
    FEV-1, forced expiratory vital capacity 1 at one
    second, and Dr. Feingold explained all that.  8
    percent.  Am I right?  Says it right there.
         So what does this mean?  Well, how do you
    approach it mathematically?  One way is to say she
    lost two-thirds of her lung capacity between '95 and
    2001.  Just as valid as anything else.  Fine.
         And so if you want to back this up from 19 --
    another seven years and assume she lost that same
    two-thirds, which I don't think, I think it got
    worse at the end, but fine, she would have plenty of lung capacity.  She would have three times
    24 percent, or 70 -- roughly 75 percent back seven
    years.
         Because you know what?  Genetically this was a
    hammer.  This wasn't a normal progression.  This was
    early and powerful, and it was -- and she was
    genetically off the charts for early disease and bad
    disease.  So that's baloney.
         And I like Dr. Frazier, but he had her
    progressing just a little faster than an ordinary
    cigarette smoker that isn't even sick.  That's
    crazy.  Her lung fell apart from 24 percent to 8
    percent, and there were no more steps to go.  That's
    why they had to transplant.
         So where was I?  Where am I here?  Oh, yes,
    okay.  Can we -- Laurie, I'm so sorry.  Can we go
    back to the Power Point?  Thank you so much.
         So okay.  And there's nobody else who is going
    to come in and -- I mean, this -- this is a game
    where we can play a lot of different things.
    There's no beef here, and it's their burden of
    proof.  So where is it?
         And also, quit trying to put words in Mr.
    Jewett's mouth.  He never said she had symptoms
    before 1991.  He never said it.  That was a game they played.  They said, well, when she had her
    symptoms she knew it was due to cigarettes.  But
    they never went back and said when were you talking
    about.  And his -- and he was very clear later on to
    connect it up when these bullying lawyers stopped
    questioning him, and he cleared it up, he said after
    1991, that's when she had her symptoms.  So big
    deal.
         Maybe I'm -- I'm just beating a horse here.  I
    don't know.
         All right.  Next slide, please.
         And again, hindsight.  Can you imagine her
    coming in and filing this now with nothing?  They
    have the burden of proof.  No doctor but -- but Dr.
    Wyzan.  I already covered that.
         Next please.  Let's talk about addiction.
         This is really something.  I guess -- I mean, I
    listened to the last argument by counsel for
    Lorillard.  I thought I heard him say something.  I
    just went, what?  But then I understood.
         He said you got to lose control of your life to
    be an addicted smoker.  Lose control of your life.
    And you know where that comes from?  That's what Mr.
    Kaplan was saying.  Because remember, Dr. Kaplan is
    an old flat earther, a flat earther that used to work for the cigarette companies a long time ago
    when -- as I asked him, they used to come in and say
    nicotine is not addictive at all.
         MR. GEARY:  Your Honor, I object to that.  Dr.
    Kaplan has never worked for the tobacco companies.
         THE COURT:  Rephrase.
         MR. WILNER:  Well, he worked for the lawyers
    who represent the tobacco companies.  Pardon me,
    Counsel.
         And so he would come in and say nicotine isn't
    addictive at all.  And it's just -- you just choose
    to smoke, and you choose to smoke, and that whole
    line.  And then I realized this is what -- and if
    you get somebody like poor Mrs. Jewett, who smoked
    through oxygen in the last -- in the waning moments
    when she was facing a lung transplant, and she could
    barely get the cigarette to her lips, begging people
    to give her a cigarette, and you got to defend, you
    got to say she's not addicted, you got to defend,
    you call Kaplan.
         And he -- you know, soldier to the rescue,
    because doesn't believe -- he says he believes
    people are addicted, but never has been.  And so,
    oh, no, no, they didn't lose control of their life.
         You don't lose control of your life at all until you get sick and die, or get your lung -- get
    your lungs -- until your lungs fail you.  You can --
    the difference is this.  Heroin intoxicates you and
    you can't live a normal life.  Probably alcohol,
    maybe cocaine.  Don't know much about cocaine.
         Cigarettes are legal, and as long as you keep
    the nicotine up in your blood you can work.  Why
    not?  You got a smoke break.  Fine.  Come back.
    Okay.  You can do it.  That's the difference.
    That's what they're not getting.
         They're trying to make it the old way and claim
    it's like heroin, and we never said it was.  The
    disease in your brain can be a lot like it, but it
    doesn't intoxicate you.
         So how unbelievable can you be to say that you
    have to lose control of your life.  An addicted
    smoker cannot be a perfectly functioning person.
    They can until something really bad happens to their
    lungs.  Then they're not.  Makes perfect sense.
         Next, please.  I think we covered all that.
         Okay.  Oh, back to withdrawal symptoms.  8
    percent of her lung capacity.  Oh, good.  8 percent
    of her lung function.  And I'm beating a dead horse,
    but she's in a wheelchair, and these people come up
    and say, well, she didn't have withdrawal symptoms. How would you even know?  She was in a coma for
    three weeks.  Then she got out and they gave her a
    nicotine patch.  And they're saying she didn't have
    withdrawal symptoms.  She was dying.  No withdrawal
    symptoms.
         Remember they go away hopefully.  Smoke -- all
    right.  I'm beating a dead horse.  I'm sorry.  All
    right.  Let's go on to something else.  Next,
    please.
         Oh, this was funny.  Counsel gets up here and
    says, oh, well, yes, there are all these documents,
    and he said -- said that they weren't a secret.  The
    documents were secret, not -- not the concept that
    nicotine is important.  That wasn't a secret.  What
    was a secret was what they were doing about it.
    What was a secret was how they're designing the
    cigarette to be that way.  That's -- that's the
    secret.  It's not the abstract concept, nicotine is
    important.  We all know that.
         We also didn't know that as you -- as you fool
    with these -- with these -- and it's not just pH.
    Read the Surgeon General report.  You'll have it.
    It goes into a lot of design parameters.  We just
    skimmed the surface.  And what we tried to show with
    these documents that we brought -- and there were thousands of them, but this is just a little
    subset -- is motive.  They had the motive to design.
         Now, who else controlled it?  They knew how to
    design a cigarette.  They had the motive to do it in
    such a way to get the addiction.  That's the point.
    Motive, opportunity.  That's how you put things
    together.
         In terms of what -- where they poured the vial
    of this, no.  I'm not even trying to go there.  Not
    at this point.  What I'm trying to say is if you
    take companies that make these cigarettes and you
    expose from inside the company that they knew that
    their profits were related to whether they addicted
    people, and they knew how to addict people
    chemically, then by God isn't that incredible that
    they -- and they had the means, because they know
    how to do it.  And now we hear them saying, well --
    well, we didn't really -- I didn't hear anybody hear
    say they didn't do it.  They had a lawyer say it.
         Where was a witness from Brown & Williamson or
    Reynolds to say they didn't do it?
         MR. BIERSTEKER:  Objection, Your Honor.
    Violates Your Honor's ruling on the motion in
    limine, and also to Dr. Feingold, but I can show the
    transcript if I have to. THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, y'all rely on
    your recollection of the evidence.  The objection is
    overruled.
         MR. WILNER:  So it wasn't just a question of --
    it wasn't a question of secrecy of the concept of
    nicotine.  It was that now we know that it's part of
    a plan for this reason, to get -- to get and keep
    customers addicted, and the plan has worked.
         Next, please.  One last thing.
         I guess you can -- maybe we can evaluate the
    credibility of a whole side here.  Maybe the whole
    -- the cigarette side by their weakest argument, and
    this may be it.  This whole TTP thing, it is so
    crazy.  It didn't even occur until, I think it says
    on the death certificate seven days -- it only
    occurred seven days before death.
         She was dealing with these life-threatening
    complications for over a year, and this is just a --
    that's the last thing that happened.
         Now, I'll go back to the death certificate, and
    then I'll show x-rays, and then I'll be done.  All
    right.
         Can we -- should we show the x-rays first?  I
    think they're next.
         Okay.  Really quick.  At 2002 big lungs prior to -- prior to lung surgery.  They look good, but
    really they're bad.  There's no tissue up there in
    the top part of the lung.
         Next.  2003 just before the lung transplant.
    Again this doesn't look good technically.  Who knows
    the rest?  Let's go on.
         All right.  One day after the transplant, a
    nice looking lung.  Nice looking lung.  Little bit
    of fluid in it, but not bad.  This is really what
    you want.
         Next.  Doing well.  Six months.
         What's that?  Hate Windows.  Thank you.
         Doing better.  I mean, this is during the time
    when things were okay.
         Next.  Now we're beginning to get some
    infiltrate here.  This doesn't look so good.  And
    this is 6 of 2006.  So things are not -- are
    beginning, as Dr. Feingold said, to turn the corner.
         And, you know, slander him all he wants -- all
    you want.  Knowledge is knowledge.  There's nothing
    wrong with -- with getting on a witness stand in
    this great country and saying -- saying --
    explaining things and getting to the bottom of it.
    There's nothing wrong with that.
         So next, please.  Now a little bit of improvement, because maybe it comes and goes.
         Next.  Uh-oh.  Now you see what's happening.
    So this is happening.  What do you want to call it,
    bronchiolitis obliterans?  Does it include
    infection?  It does.  Dr. Feingold explained that.
    There's an infection going on and there's BOS going
    on.
         Next.  Here we are.  No one said that you could
    live through that.  Now, Dr. Frazier said, well, her
    lung gases were okay.  Well, 8 percent of course is
    not good, and that was the best she had pre-
    transplant, and so this is not satisfactory.  You
    cannot -- and remember this lung has no blood going
    through it, so it's finished.
         And common sense, anyone -- even -- even a
    nonexpert can see this -- the lung has failed
    through a combination of complicated things.  And
    nobody even -- even tried to deal with it because it
    was over.  They had given her the years.  They knew
    the years were limited.
         Next, please.  The death certificate.  If we
    could play that.  Or if we could show that on the
    overhead.  Thank you, Laurie.  It will be the last
    he request.  Thank you so much.
         And in conclusion, why this has been such an issue, I don't know, but it says this.  It says it
    in real small print, maybe you need a micro -- a
    magnifying glass to see it, but it does say it, and
    it says it right here above the bronchiolitis
    obliterans, post lung transplant.  I'll get up real
    close so I can see it.  Other -- I've got to read
    it.  I can't read it from there.  That's what it
    says.  All right.  I'm going to get a micro -- thank
    you.  I'm going to do it right here because I
    couldn't.  My eyes weren't good enough.  It's really
    small.
         All right.  Other significant conditions
    contributing to the death that are not resulting in
    the underlying cause given in Part 1.  Well, we
    totally agree.  What is this?  What's so silly.  We
    agree that bronchiolitis obliterans was a
    contributing cause of death, but, no, it didn't
    exactly cause the -- one more.
         Go back.  Oh, well, that's what we do.  So
    thank you.  Thank you, Laurie.
         All right.  And back up to where I had that
    little map, if you could.  The whole thing put
    together, and that will be it.  All right.  Thank
    you, Laurie.
         We agree that you can't draw a line from nicotine addiction directly to TTP, because that
    isn't how it works.  And doctors -- the immediate
    cause of death here, okay, fine, I mean, it doesn't
    matter.  It's a combination, but fine.  Give it
    that.  And was that due to cigarette smoking?  Maybe
    not in the medical sense, because you can't draw
    that line.  But the legal sense says natural
    continuous sequence.
         And so nobody -- and Dr. Frazier was on board
    with this too -- nobody said that these were not
    complications that all happened from this life-
    ending emphysema caused by 360,000 cigarettes,
    influenced by -- influenced by, not totally
    determined by, but influenced by nicotine addiction,
    nicotine addiction designed into the product,
    designed into the product intentionally and
    deliberately by the defendants.
         Your -- we ask that your -- you fill out -- do
    we have a verdict form?  Thanks.  And one more.  I
    said no -- I said no more, but I can't resist.  I
    just can't resist having you move around.
         So the verdict form.  Okay.  I was a little --
    when I showed you an earlier slide I had it worded a
    little backwards.  I mean, I had it right, the first
    part, but then I had a question at the end that was worded backwards.
         Did she know, or by the exercise of reasonable
    care should she have known that she had COPD?  No.
    So the rest of it doesn't matter.  The reasonable
    possibility that it was caused, because if she
    didn't know that she had it before 1990, then you
    then you would check no and go on.
         If your answer was no, please answer question
    2.  So was she addicted?  Yes.  Was cigarette
    smoking because of the addiction?  Yes, because it
    was contributed to a legal cause of her COPD.  So
    that would be yes, making her a class member, which
    she belongs.  Then next, and the last one is, did
    Barbara Jewett's COPD cause her death?  Which is
    what we're talking about.  And that's that whole
    thing about cause, natural continuous sequence.
    Nobody really disputes that.  It's just a word game.
         Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, it's been a
    privilege, it's been a privilege to be here in this
    great country today deciding these things.  Here's
    where we decide them, not on the streets.  It's the
    right thing to do.  Thank you very much.
