         MR. COFER:  Yes, Your Honor.  May it please the
    Court?
         THE COURT:  Yes, sir.      MR. COFER:  The first phase of this trial, you
    determined that Mrs. Jordan was entitled to recover
    compensatory damages.  And you awarded her the
    amount of money that you thought was fair to
    compensate her for her injuries.
         Now, this is Phase II and you have a different
    job.  The question before you now is whether
    punitive damages should be awarded to Mrs. Jordan
    today, in 2015, to punish Philip Morris for the
    things that it did in the past, things it will not
    and cannot happen again.
         Today you met Pete Lipowicz, my client.  He's
    the head scientist for research and product
    development and engineering at Altria.  He told you
    about the Philip Morris of today and how the company
    conducts itself in 2015.  He told you specifically
    how the company today cooperates with public health.
         You heard how Philip Morris is committed to
    ensuring that the public hear a single, uniform
    message on smoking and health and addiction.  Even
    Philip Morris says they agree.  Even if Philip
    Morris doesn't agree with everything the Surgeon
    General says, they don't voice that disagreement
    because they want the public to hear a single,
    uniform message, and that's different than what you heard in Phase II [sic].  That's different than what
    happened in the past.  Members of the jury, I
    suggest that's significant.
         You know, you heard about the Council for
    Tobacco Research.  You heard about TIRC.  You heard
    about The Tobacco Institute.  They're gone.  They
    have been gone for 17 years.
         You've heard for the last 15 years, 15 years,
    Philip Morris admits smoking causes cancer and other
    diseases; smoking is addictive and there's no such
    thing as a safe cigarette.  They've put it on the
    website to make it clear for the world to see.  No
    double talk.  Very clear statements about what
    Philip Morris believes and what they want the public
    to hear.
         Dr. Lipowicz talked with you about legislation
    that was passed in 2009 that Philip Morris
    supported.  Remember, Dr. Proctor told you in
    Phase I that one of the pillars of the conspiracy
    was that the companies did not want to be regulated
    by the FDA.  Well, 2009, Philip Morris supported it
    and they urged Congress and they urged our president
    to sign it into law.
         You've heard about what the FDA has done.
    You've heard how the regulations affect Philip Morris in very significant, material ways.
         Members of the jury, the bottom line is that
    the Philip Morris of today, in 2015, conducts itself
    much differently than the Philip Morris you heard
    about in Phase I.  It conducts itself much
    differently than it did 50 or 60 years ago.  Why?
    Because it's a different company with different
    people and different management, and it operates,
    importantly, in a very different environment, an
    environment that it helped urge that it embrace.
         Dr. Lipowicz told you that they want a seat at
    the table; they want an opportunity to participate,
    express their views and help address some of these
    challenging issues we have with cigarette smoking.
    It's a legal product but it's a dangerous product.
    Yet we, our country, decided it should be sold.  An
    adult should have the right to purchase it.  They
    said, we want uniform guidelines.  We want
    consistent standards.  We want to know what the bar
    is.  We want to know how to work to make it a safer
    product.  And we'll work with you.  Tell us.
         You know, the people that plaintiff argued were
    part of the conspiracy, they're gone.  They've been
    gone for a very long time.  They're not with the
    company.  Many of them are not even alive.  So why is that important?  Because in this phase, the issue
    is do you need to punish and deter today, 2015?
         So you met Dr. Lipowicz.  You heard what he had
    to say.  You heard about the company today.  And let
    me just ask you, really, to please think about this.
    Do you want to punish the Philip Morris of today, or
    do you want to encourage them?  Do you want to
    acknowledge the steps they've made in the right
    direction, and you want to encourage them to
    continue down that path?  I mean, think about the
    message that you want to send, now that you've heard
    all the evidence, the evidence of the past, and the
    evidence of today.
         You know, before I talk about the Court's
    instructions, I want to spend just a few minutes
    talking about comparative fault.  In your Phase I
    verdict --
         MS. SHAMP:  Objection, Your Honor.  I don't
    think it's appropriate to talk about comparative
    fault during this phase.
         MR. COFER:  Of course, it is.  May I approach
    and explain?
         THE COURT:  Well, I think that would be the
    best plan.  Please do.
         (A sidebar conference was held outside the
212-279-9424
Veritext Reporting Company
www.veritext.com
212-490-3430
a4eb1c4b-8dba-4aec-a8c5-dff266534867
hearing of the jury as follows:)
         MR. COFER:  All I want to tell them is that
    since they answered yes, there's no reduction.
    They're getting the entire amount.  So if they
    thought that they were only awarding 60 percent of
    the amount, that's not the case.  That's all I want
    to tell them.
         MS. SHAMP:  Your Honor, I think this line of
    argument that he's making is what do you want to
    encourage -- that you want to encourage Philip
    Morris.  They're not to consider whether they were
    to encourage them, they're supposed to consider
    whether they deter or whether it punishes them.
         And this whole idea you want to encourage their
    good behavior, I think is improper an line of
    argument.
         MR. COFER:  Your Honor, it's in the
    instructions.  The amount of punitive damages
    awarded will not be reduced by the amount you have
    found Elaine Jordan to be comparative at fault,
    so --
         THE COURT:  All right.  We have two issues
    right now.  The first issue is you wanting to be
    able to be able to --
         MR. COFER:  Sure.      THE COURT:  No, we're not going to reduce it.
    I'm going to let you do that.
         I also think your argument is fine.  We're in
    argument.
         MR. COFER:  Thank you.
         (The sidebar conference was concluded, and the
following proceedings were held in open court in the
presence of the jury:)
         MR. COFER:  During the first phase, you had the
    instructions read to you in the advance, as we
    talked about.  Here, you won't actually hear the
    instructions until after I have finished my closing
    argument and Ms. Shamp finishes her rebuttal.  But I
    do want to just refer to a couple things about
    comparative fault.
         In your Phase I verdict, you decided that
    Mrs. Jordan shares some responsibility for her
    actions in causing her COPD, and you allocated 40
    percent of the fault to her.  But because you
    answered yes to Questions 3 and 4 that Mrs. Jordan
    will receive 100 percent of the damages that you
    awarded, there will not be a reduction for
    comparative fault.  You awarded the total of
    $7,795,000 in damages to Mrs. Jordan.  And I don't
    know -- there's no way for me to know if you meant to award her 60 percent of that or 40 and --
         MS. SHAMP:  Objection, Your Honor.  I think
    this is an inappropriate line of argument.
         THE COURT:  You may proceed, Mr. Cofer.
         MR. COFER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         There's no way for me to know by looking at the
    verdict form if you meant to award her 60 percent of
    that or 4,677,000 or if you meant to award her the
    entire 7,795,000, I don't know.  But I just want to
    bring that to everyone's attention so everyone
    understands, we're all on the same page about the
    effect of the Phase I verdict and this verdict too.
         And the Court will instruct you that if you
    award punitive damages in this case, they will not
    be reduced by the amount of Mrs. Jordan's fault.
    And so obviously, it's your decision, but I just
    want to make very clear to everyone so everyone
    understands exactly what the effects are of the
    various decisions you make.  Okay?
         So in any event, in this phase of the trial,
    you will have to determine, based on everything that
    you've heard, whether there is a need for additional
    money to Mrs. Jordan to punish and deter Philip
    Morris and other companies.  It will be up to you to
    decide whether awarding Mrs. Jordan additional money is necessary, and that's the words you see in the
    instruction, whether it's necessary under the law
    that Judge Norton gives you.
         And the instructions tell you that it's not
    appropriate to award any money in punitive damages
    unless the plaintiff persuades you that today, in
    2015, punitive damages are necessary for punishment
    and to deter future conduct.
         You know, one thing we all know is that people
    change.  And people can change and companies can
    change too.  And the reason why is because the fact
    is what a company is are the people who work there.
    That's all Philip Morris is -- Philip Morris is.
    It's a sum total of the men and women who work
    there.
         Ms. Shamp spent time talking to you about
    evidence in Phase I, but today, we brought Pete
    Lipowicz.  And he talked with you about the Philip
    Morris of today.  He talked about the company that
    he works at.  He told you it's a changed company.
         And, members of the jury, we think -- those
    changes we think are significant.  We think they're
    important in your decisions whether to award
    additional damages to Mrs. Jordan to punish Philip
    Morris in the future.      So let's talk about the law and you'll have the
    instructions.  But -- and Ms. Shamp agreed and the
    Court will instruct you, you can only punish Philip
    Morris for the conduct that actually harmed
    Mrs. Jordan, and the law does not permit you to
    punish, in this case, Philip Morris for harms
    suffered by anyone other than Mrs. Jordan.
         So let's talk about that.  You know, throughout
    this trial, you repeatedly heard about other people
    who get sick and die each year from smoking.  And I
    know those numbers are disturbing but -- but here's
    the fact.  Under the law, you cannot punish for harm
    to others.  The law doesn't permit it.  And here's
    why.  Because if people -- if other people think
    they've been harmed by the actions of Philip Morris,
    they can bring their own lawsuits, and they can have
    their own juries, hear their claims and reach those
    decisions and many already have.  You've heard about
    that.  Many already have.
         And many others decide not to.  You know, there
    are many people who believe that the decision to
    smoke, that they make it with their eyes wide open
    and that they're willing to accept the consequences
    of their choices.  There are people who feel that
    way.  And, again, the fact is as a society, we've decided cigarettes are a legal but dangerous product
    and that adults are entitled to make their own
    decisions whether to use them.  I mean, there have
    been warnings on the packs for 50 years, yet people
    still choose to smoke, and they have for a long
    time.
         Believe me, I understand those numbers upset
    you.  But -- but let me tell you this:  If someone
    on the jury in the jury room argues that in this
    case that Philip Morris should be punished for harm
    to someone else, please, please tell them that's
    wrong.  Tell them that the law doesn't permit you to
    do that.  Tell them the burden of proof is on
    plaintiff to show that Mrs. Jordan is entitled to
    recover punitive damages based on the conduct that
    actually harmed her.
         You heard about the Engle class action.  This
    is an individual case.  This is Mrs. Jordan's case.
    Mrs. Jordan's representing -- Ms. Shamp is
    representing just Mrs. Jordan in this case.
         Now, also, you know, the Court has instructed
    you that you can't base your verdict on anger or
    emotion.  And I know when you hear these topics, you
    think about this stuff.  It's easy to get emotional.
    It's easy to get mad.  We talked about that in Phase I too.  But under the evidence and under the
    instructions of the law, you can't base your
    decisions on that.  It has to be based on the
    evidence that you as jurors heard on the witness
    stand and on the law that Your Honor instructs.
         So, again, we look at Philip Morris today
    and you make your assessment.  Ask, is it necessary,
    is it necessary to punish the company for things
    they did in the past so they won't do it in the
    future?
         You know, in Phase I, you heard about conduct
    in the '50s, the '60s, the '70s, the '80s, and you
    may feel that it would have been absolutely
    appropriate for someone to step in back then and put
    a stop to what was going on.  But, you know, with
    all the power the Court has, the one thing it cannot
    do is turn back the hands of time.  The past is the
    past.  What is important in this phase of the trial
    is the present and the future.
         Now, it's plaintiff's position that because the
    company has the same name, it still sells
    cigarettes, that nothing has changed.  But, you
    know, if you think about it, common sense tells you
    that the people who wrote the documents and made the
    decisions 50 or 60 years ago are different people than the ones who are writing the documents and
    making the decisions today.  They are literally
    generations removed from the people who currently
    work for the company.
         So what would happen if you went to Richmond
    today, knocked on the door at Philip Morris?  You'd
    probably meet someone like Dr. Lipowicz.  He was
    born in 1960.  He was three years old when the
    Surgeon General's Report came out.  He was five when
    the first warning was on the pack.  He's from a
    completely different generation.  He's literally a
    lifetime removed from the conduct that you heard in
    Phase I that concerns you.  Philip Morris may have
    the same name, but it's not the same company.  Just
    like I have my grandfather's name, but we're two
    very different people.
         You might want to ask yourself if it's
    appropriate to punish Philip Morris today for things
    that were done by different employees decades ago.
    What purpose would that serve?  With your verdict,
    you've already compensated Mrs. Jordan for her
    injuries.  You awarded her the amount that you
    thought was fair that to the extent the law can,
    would -- would compensate her for her injuries.
         Whatever additional money in punitive damages goes directly to her.  It doesn't go to scientific
    or medical research or stop-smoking clinics or
    programs that help people -- prevent them from
    beginning to smoke.  It doesn't go to sick smokers.
    It's extra money that goes to Mrs. Jordan.
         So let's talk about the Philip Morris of today,
    in 2015.  What is Philip Morris like today?  And
    what has it been doing differently for the last 17
    years?  Well, let's start with 1998.  You heard
    about the Master Settlement Agreement.  You know
    that that was an agreement to settle lawsuits with
    all 50 Attorney Generals across the states.  You
    heard that the Master Settlement Agreement imposed a
    number of permanent restrictions on the way which
    Philip Morris does business, and the Attorney
    Generals have the power to monitor and enforce those
    agreements.  You know the agreement imposed
    advertising restrictions.
         As a result of the MSA, the companies can no
    longer advertise on billboards.  They don't sponsor
    sporting events.  You don't see signs at stadiums.
    You don't see them on buses or public transit.  They
    don't sponsor concerts.  You don't see Marlboro hats
    or T-shirts anymore.
         In 2005, Philip Morris voluntarily pulled its ads out of the magazines.  Think about that.  Their
    competitors still advertised in magazines.
         In 2000, they took their ads off the back
    covers because they didn't want kids to see them.
    Their competitors didn't do that.
         Since 2005, members of the jury, for the last
    ten years, the only place you'll see a Philip Morris
    ad is an indoor display at the store where
    cigarettes are sold.
         Philip Morris is required to continually update
    plans to help reduce youth smoking, to communicate
    those plans to their employees in stores who sell
    their products.
         Each and every year, the companies have to make
    regular payments.  Since the MSA was entered into,
    Philip Morris -- Philip Morris, not the industry,
    Philip Morris has paid $70 billion to the 50 states.
    And those payments will continue as long as the
    company's in business.
         You'll learn that Philip Morris has rigorously
    complied with restrictions imposed by the Master
    Settlement Agreement.  In 17 years since the MSA was
    signed, not a single Attorney General in any of the
    50 states has ever brought a single action against
    Philip Morris for even one violation.  That's actions.
         And finally you heard that in 2009, a law was
    passed that gave the FDA regulatory authority over
    design, manufacture and marketing of all cigarettes
    in this country.
         We know from your Phase I -- Phase I verdict
    that you heard some things that concerned you.  And,
    you know, I didn't have a chance to talk with you,
    obviously.  I don't know everything that concerns
    you, but I wanted to try to put on the evidence
    today so that I could at least address some of the
    things might have troubled you.  So let's talk about
    that.
         If you were concerned about cigarette
    advertising, what we now know, we know that the Food
    and Drug Administration now governs, regulates and
    restricts when, where and how the cigarettes we
    advertise.  And the only place Philip Morris
    advertises is in-store displays.
         If what concerns you is the use of ingredients
    and additives of cigarettes, what's the evidence
    you've now heard?  Philip Morris provides the FDA
    with a complete list of every single ingredient it
    uses in any of its brands.  It's given them the
    Marlboro formula.  The FDA actually has the recipes to how cigarettes are made and, of course, the
    amounts aren't, but the ingredients are on the
    website for everyone to look by brand.  The FDA has
    the power to tell Philip Morris, take that additive
    out, take this additive out, if they think that's
    the right thing to do.
         If what concerns you is the level of nicotine
    in cigarettes, the FDA has the power to reduce it to
    an infinitessimal amount.  They can tell the
    companies, you know what, you don't sell cigarettes
    anymore above this level of nicotine.
         If what concerns you is filtered cigarettes,
    the FDA can say, take the filters off; you can't
    sell them anymore.
         If what concerns you is the companies didn't
    share their internal documents, now they do.  They
    sell them -- share them with the public health
    community, and they must post the documents on a
    website and Dr. Lipowicz told you basically in
    realtime.  They have a separate website that
    essentially as soon as they're writing a document,
    they're going to the FDA.  You've got instantaneous
    monitoring.  The FDA has a right to come in
    unannounced -- and they have -- and said, we're
    here.  We're going through your store.  We're looking at everything.  Dr. Lipowicz, others, let's
    go.  We're going to spend a week.  You know, I've
    got questions.  You're going to answer questions for
    me.  If they want additional information, they have
    the power to get it.
         The FDA has the power to seize Philip Morris's
    products, shut down Philip Morris factories and
    impose fines.
         If what concerns you was the public statements
    made by Philip Morris that didn't agree with the
    Surgeon General, they don't make them anymore.  They
    can and they don't and they haven't made them since
    1997.
         Now, Ms. Shamp and Dr. Proctor, in Phase I,
    talked a lot about youth smoking, and it's natural
    to be concerned about protecting our kids.  But what
    you now know is nationwide, adolescent smoking is at
    its all-time low.  The youth smoking rate in Florida
    is at 4.3 percent, an all-time low and much lower
    than the national average.  The number of kids in
    Florida who smoke has dropped by more than half
    since 2006.  So things are different now.  They are.
         And Philip Morris is different too.  There's no
    question that Philip Morris today operates in a much
    more transparent and restrictive and controlled environment than at any time in the past.
         The evidence is, members of the jury, it's not
    necessary to award punitive damages to get Philip
    Morris to change or to get them to stop conducting
    themselves in ways that upset you because they have
    changed.  They've changed dramatically.  Based on
    what you've seen, the conduct that upset you in
    Phase I can't happen again.
         So where does that leave us?  Where does it
    leave us on the question of whether it's necessary
    to punish -- to award Mrs. Jordan more money to
    punish Philip Morris today?  So you heard in Phase I
    that Mrs. Jordan smoked her first cigarette when she
    was 14, and she became a regular smoker when she was
    16, right around the age in 1966.  We quarrelled a
    little bit of whether it was the end of '65 or '66
    but you remember.  The world was different then and
    Philip Morris was different.
         And let me give you an example.  Consider
    Philip Morris and how it operates today.  So a
    15-year-old girl today would have been born in 2000.
    She would have never seen Philip Morris advertising
    on TV or radio or on a billboard, a stadium or on a
    bus.  If she walked into a retail store, her access
    to cigarettes would be severely limited.  To the extent she saw an ad for cigarettes, it would have
    the federally mandated warning on it.  She would
    never have heard any statement from The Tobacco
    Institute or the Council for Tobacco Research
    because they didn't exist in their lifetime.
         From the day she was born, millions of tobacco
    company documents and Philip Morris documents would
    be available on the Internet.  The only thing she
    would have heard from Philip Morris on smoking and
    health is cigarettes are addictive and that smoking
    causes cancer and other diseases, and there's no
    such thing as a safe cigarette.
         And during her lifetime, Philip Morris would
    have paid over $70 billion under the MSA, including
    $4 billion to the State of Florida to support
    tobacco prevention efforts.
         And I thought those two pieces of evidence I
    showed you from the -- the Florida Health
    Department, I thought those were important because
    what they showed was settlement money was used to
    actually get kids to quit smoking.  It showed the
    difference.  I mean, it showed that the settlement
    really made a difference.  You saw the real world
    consequences of Philip Morris' decision to enter
    into an agreement with the State of Florida and to fund those smoking cessation efforts.
         And this fictional kind of woman I was talking
    about would be growing up at a time when high school
    cigarette smoking rates in Florida are one of the
    lowest rates ever recorded by any state in this
    country.
         Not withstanding all these differences and all
    these changes, Ms. Shamp is asking you for -- was it
    $22 million? -- for $22 million over and above the
    amount that you've already decided was fair to
    compensate Mrs. Jordan for her injuries.
         Members of the jury, that's not a number that's
    tied to any evidence in this case.  That's a number
    you read about in a lottery.
         So think about the message that a $22 million
    punitive damages award says to companies today.  It
    says, even if you enter into legally binding
    agreements to fundamentally change the way you do
    business, even if you subject yourself to
    significant government oversight, even if you agree
    to pay substantial sums of money to address conduct
    of the past, you'll still be forced to pay
    significant punitive damages awards.
         So what's the incentive to change?  If you want
    to encourage other companies to change, that goal will not be served by a punitive damages award here.
    You'll be sending a message to companies that you'll
    be punished whether you reform or not.
         But, members of the jury, reform, it must make
    a difference.  Ms. Shamp has urged you to send a
    message to Philip Morris and other companies and I
    agree.  But the message I respectfully suggest that
    you send with your verdict, not just to Philip
    Morris but any company who's out there watching, is
    this:  Step up to the plate.  Be transparent and
    change your ways.  Sure, you have to compensate for
    the harms that you've done in the past.  That's
    really fair but you won't be punished today for
    moving in the right direction.  Awarding a large sum
    of money to Mrs. Jordan isn't going to send a
    message to make them -- to Philip Morris to make
    them change their behavior because they're already
    changing their behavior.  Philip Morris may have the
    same name but it's not the same company.
         But if you disagree with me and you think
    Mrs. Jordan has satisfied her burden of proof, that
    today, in 2015, there's a purpose in awarding
    punitive damages, then let me suggest this:  In your
    Phase I verdict, you awarded $7,795,000 to
    Mrs. Jordan.  And you know what?  No matter what the future holds for Mrs. Jordan, one thing you can be
    sure is financially, she'll never want for anything
    the rest of her life.
         MS. SHAMP:  Objection, Your Honor.  It's not
    relevant to the issue of punitive damages.
         THE COURT:  I'll overrule.  You can proceed
    with your argument.
         MR. COFER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Any money that you award at this phase is above
    and beyond that.
         So Ms. Shamp suggested you award $22 million.
    If juries in the state of Florida and even half of
    the 3200 Engle cases awarded that, it would equal
    $35 billion.
         Members of the jury, if you believe that it's
    appropriate to award punitive damages in this case,
    I suggest you award an additional $500,000.  That is
    an amount that would take an average household in
    Florida ten years to earn.  And if you do that,
    Mrs. Jordan will leave this courtroom with
    $8,295,000, and if you did that, the goals of
    compensation and punishment will be served.
         Now, this is the last time that I'm going to
    have a chance to speak with you, and I want to thank
    you again for your service in this case.  The fact that you found against my client does not in any way
    diminish my appreciation for your service or my
    recognition of the effort that you guys put in.
         You know, this is not always a seamless
    process.  I know that you get frustrated with our
    sidebars and with the breaks and that sort of stuff,
    but, you know, we're really trying to get it right
    so that we can give the evidence in a way, the
    evidence that you need, the evidence that's
    supported by the law and that everybody get a fair
    shot.
         So I'm going to sit down for the last time, and
    Ms. Shamp is going to have a chance to talk with you
    again.  I'm not.  You don't have to listen to me
    anymore.  But as you listen to Ms. Shamp, all I ask
    is just ask yourself, what purpose would be served
    by awarding a large punitive damages verdict in this
    case?
         Thank you very much for your time and
    attention.  I really appreciate it.
