          MR. GERAGHTY:  Thank you, Your Honor.  
May it please the Court and counsel, good 
afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
          THE JURY PANEL:  Good afternoon.  
          MR. GERAGHTY:  As you know, my name is 
Bill Geraghty, and on behalf of Lori Schultz, my 
partner, and Philip Morris, I want to thank you 
very much for your service.  
          It has been a long trial, for sure, and 
you know it's been a long trial when one of the 
lawyers in the case has to get a haircut and 
unfortunately a bad haircut at that.  
          But I really want to thank you for your 
service.  This process can't work unless good 
people like you are willing to give up your time 
and sit as jurors for us in this case.  
          And I really think I can speak on behalf 
of everybody in the courtroom that you have been 
extremely attentive.  
          You've listened to all the evidence over 
the part of the last two weeks, and we know you've 
been a very, very good jury, and we thank you very 
much for that. 5 We are getting close to the end of the 
case, and it's almost time for you to retire to 
deliberate.  
          Judge Donner is going to give you a 
verdict form and a set of instructions, and then 
you will be asked to decide the issues in the 
case.  
          But before you head off to deliberate, I 
want to take this time to talk with you about the 
evidence we've heard over the last two weeks and 
summarize that evidence for you.  
          Now recall that when I addressed you 
during opening statement I told you that Mr. Paige 
and Mr. Alvarez would spend a significant amount 
of their time talking to you about statements that 
Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds made 30, 40, and in 
some instances, more than 50 years ago.  
          And I told you I would not try to defend 
those statements.  That's what I told you when I 
first stood before you during the opening 
statement.  
          I'm sure some of the things you saw may 
have upset you, and I'm not surprised at all by 
that.  
          But, ladies and gentlemen, if that was 6 what this case was about, we would not have spent 
the better part of three weeks together.  
          Plaintiff has to prove -- this case is 
about Ms. Ingraham, and the plaintiff has to prove 
that any of those statements that you heard had a 
direct connection, a substantial impact upon 
Ms. Annie Ingraham.  
          And I respectfully submit to you, as we 
walk through the evidence, you'll see that they 
can't establish that, they can't bear their burden 
of proof.  
          Ms. Ingraham didn't rely upon anything a 
cigarette company said or did.  Let me say 
something about the findings from the earlier 
class action, and there is no debate about this, 
the findings don't tell you how to answer any of 
the questions on the verdict form.  
          That's because you decide whether those 
findings have any meaning in the context of this 
case, whether they have any applicability to Annie 
Ingraham, and you decide that based upon the 
verdict you render in this case, in this case.  
          After all, this case is about 
Ms. Ingraham, not all cigarette smokers, not the 
general public. 7 Remember that I told you this case 
really boils down to two things:  Control and 
responsibility, control and responsibility.  
          And I asked you a series of pointed 
questions, and I wanted to remind you of those.  
Who was in control of Ms. Ingraham's lifestyle 
choices?  Who was in control of her efforts to 
quit smoking?  
          Who controlled whether she was motivated 
to quit, whether she made a committed effort to 
quit?  If she was addicted, did her addiction 
overpower a committed effort to quit?  
          And, finally, did anything that Philip 
Morris or RJ Reynolds say or failed to say have a 
direct and substantial impact on Ms. Ingraham?  
          We've heard a lot of testimony about the 
lifestyle choices Ms. Ingraham made during her 
life.  You remember that Ms. Ingraham herself 
acknowledged on that videotape:  I've made some 
good choices, and I've made some bad choices.  
          Well, ladies and gentlemen, there's no 
doubt about it, Ms. Ingraham made those choices 
and no one else, no one else.  
          Her father wanted her to be a teacher.  
She chose another path.  She was unhappy in her 8 marriage.  She got divorced.  
          Her parents believed that drinking, 
smoking, and gambling were vices, and Ms. Ingraham 
decided to engage in all of those activities.  
          She was a strong, capable person who 
chose to live her life her way.  And that included 
smoking even though she knew and understood the 
warnings that were around her her entire life.  
          And you heard that Ms. Ingraham enjoyed 
smoking.  She liked to smoke while she was playing 
cards with her friends, while socializing.  She 
liked to smoke while drinking coffee, while 
drinking alcoholic beverages.  You heard about the 
enjoyment and the pleasure she got from smoking 
cigarettes.  
          Like many people, Ms. Ingraham knew that 
these lifestyle choices came with potential health 
risks.  She knew that, but she was not concerned 
about those risks until after she became sick.  
          She lived her life the way she wanted to 
live it, and she had every right to do that, and 
unfortunately those lifestyle choices have 
resulted in very serious consequences, no question 
about it.  
          But now plaintiff wants you to hold 9 Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds responsible for 
those decisions.  
          Ms. Ingraham made those decisions, and 
she chose to live her life that way, and plaintiff 
is asking you to award her millions of dollars for 
decisions that her mother and only her mother 
made.  
          Let me take a minute to talk to you 
about the burden of proof.  You've seen documents, 
medical records, interrogatory responses, and 
you've sat through about two weeks' worth of 
testimony.  
          And let me remind you that the plaintiff 
bears the burden of proof on every issue by the 
greater weight of the evidence, with the exception 
of an issue at the very end of the case, which 
I'll mention.  
          But the plaintiff bears the burden of 
proof by the greater weight of the evidence, and 
what does that mean?  Well, that does mean, ladies 
and gentlemen, that to tip the scales in their 
favor, they have got to bring a bigger mountain of 
evidence than the mountain of evidence we have 
presented to you in the form of the witnesses we 
called, the medical records we've introduced, and 10 our cross-examination of the plaintiff's experts.  
          And as we walk through the verdict form, 
I'm going to show you all the evidence we brought 
during the course of the last two to three weeks.  
          Now the first question you're going to 
be asked to address is -- and, Juan, could you put 
this on the board, please?  
          It's a little hard to -- I wonder if you 
could highlight that first question there, Juan, 
and just bring it up a little bit.  
          But I'll read it to you.  It says:  Was 
Annie Ingraham addicted to cigarettes containing 
nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal 
cause of her death?  
          You got it now?  There you go.  
          Was Annie Ingraham addicted to 
cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was 
such addiction a legal cause of her death?  
          And, ladies and gentlemen, it's really 
two questions, one question, but it's broken down 
into two.  Was Ms. Ingraham addicted, and, if so, 
was her claimed addiction a legal cause of her 
death?  
          It's important to note that this verdict 
form doesn't ask whether cigarette smoking was the 11 medical cause of Ms. Ingraham's COPD and death.  
          That issue has not been debated in this 
case.  There's no dispute about that.  
          So what does this question mean?  Well, 
first you have to decide whether Ms. Ingraham was 
addicted, and in a minute, we'll talk about the 
evidence that demonstrates she was not.  
          But even if you ultimately conclude that 
Ms. Ingraham was addicted, you still need to 
address the second part of the question and decide 
whether or not her claimed addiction to cigarettes 
containing nicotine was a legal cause of her 
injuries.  
          And I want you to remember -- and 
remember what we just talked about.  Plaintiff 
bears the burden of proof on both of these issues.  
          So when is addiction a legal cause?  
Well, the judge will give you an instruction.  
Mr. Paige showed it on there, but I really just 
want to pull out a few words.  
          You'll see these words in the 
instruction, and I just want to focus you on them 
so when you retire to deliberate, you'll see them.  
          You're going to see the word "direct."  
You're going to see the word "substantial."  So 12 there needs to be a direct connection and a 
substantial impact in order for there to be legal 
cause, ladies and gentlemen.  
          The plaintiff must prove to you that not 
only was Ms. Ingraham addicted but that her 
addiction was so strong that but for her 
addiction, but for her addiction she would not 
have developed COPD and she would not have died.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Excuse me, Judge.  
Improper argument and legal standard.  
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  
          Rephrase it.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Okay.  
          There must be a direct connection and a 
substantial impact in order for there to be legal 
cause.  You'll see the words "direct" and 
"substantial" repeated throughout that 
instruction, and I ask you to look for them.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection again, Judge.  
Improper.  
          THE COURT:  Wait.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Now I want to point 
out the significant admission that plaintiff -- 
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Wait a second.  She said 
wait.  She says to wait.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Oh.  
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  
          MR. GERAGHTY:  You'll see the words 
"direct" and "substantial" in the instruction for 
legal cause.  I ask that you look at it.  It's a 
long instruction, but those words "direct" and 
"substantial" are in there, and you'll see for 
there to be legal cause, the conduct, the 
addiction must directly and substantially produce 
the disease.  That's what you'll see when you look 
at the instruction.  
          Now the plaintiff has admitted that 
Ms. Ingraham herself was a legal cause.  You heard 
them talk about the fact that she -- they claim 
she's partially responsible.  
          So what does that mean?  That means that 
they've admitted that Ms. Ingraham could have quit 
smoking not only before 1995 but she could have 
quit smoking in time to avoid her COPD.  
          She could have quit at a time before she 
ever would have developed COPD.  That's what that 
admission means.  
          And that admission also means that 
Ms. Ingraham's decisions, her own decisions, were 
a direct and substantial cause of her COPD, and 14 that's what legal cause means.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.  
Improper standard on legal cause.  
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  
          Rephrase it.
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Again, you'll see in the 
instructions, ladies and gentlemen, the words 
"direct" and "substantial" are in there, and in 
order to be a legal cause, the addiction must 
directly and substantially produce the COPD and 
the death.  You'll see that when you see the 
instructions.  
          So why did they admit it?  Well, ladies 
and gentlemen, frankly, they had to.  
          Every one of the experts in the case 
told you that any smoker, even an addicted smoker, 
can quit.  
          And of course we know that Ms. Ingraham 
herself could quit because she did.  What this 
admission further means is that Ms. Ingraham was 
always in control.  
          I'm about to walk through the time line 
of Ms. Ingraham's life, just like I did in the 
opening, and before we do that though, I want to 
emphasize four points that I think you will see 15 are loud and clear in the evidence you've heard 
over the last two to three weeks.  
          Ms. Ingraham knew smoking was dangerous 
from an early age, and she received specific 
warnings from friends, family, and the government.  
          Ms. Ingraham was not influenced in any 
decision she made by Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds.  
          Ms. Ingraham controlled when, where, and 
how much she smoked during the course of her 
entire life.  
          And you know, ladies and gentlemen, 
Ms. Ingraham quit in 1995.  She quit for good 
without any craving, without any withdrawal, and 
with no mention of any difficulty.  
          And that's the evidence you're going to 
hear as we walk through the time line.  
          Now here's the time line, ladies and 
gentlemen, and during the course of this trial, 
you've heard about everything we've put on this 
time line.  
          It is a somewhat shortened version of 
the time line that I showed you during the opening 
statement and it's shortened in order to save 
time, but it has on here all the things you need 
to know to decide the issues in this case. 16 And before I start, I want to reiterate 
something:  Nothing I say, ladies and gentlemen, 
is intended to be a criticism of anything that 
Annie Ingraham did or did not do during her life.  
          Everyone has the right to make 
decisions, even decisions that are not in our best 
interests.  Everyone has free will.  That is a 
fundamental principle upon which this country was 
founded.  
          You have the right to make your own 
decisions in life, and with that right comes the 
obligation to accept personal responsibility for 
the consequences of those actions, and not partial 
responsibility, full responsibility.  
          So let's get started.  You've heard 
Ms. Ingraham was born right here in Miami April 
12th, 1939.  You heard about her parents, Melvin 
and Hattie Jackie.  You know that she grew up in 
an antismoking home.  
          You heard that Ms. Ingraham was told:  
Don't smoke, while she was growing up.  And she 
was told:  Don't smoke, by her parents, by her 
teachers, and, frankly, by her friends.  
          And they were told:  Don't smoke, 
because it was:  Bad for your health, bad for your 17 health.  That's what they her taught growing up.  
You heard that from Dr. Glover.  
          You heard Dr. Glover tell you that Annie 
Baker, her friend from grade school.  They went to 
school together since they were in first grade, 
Annie Baker told you:  There is no doubt in my 
mind, no doubt in my mind that Ms. Ingraham heard 
those same warnings.  
          We know that Ms. Ingraham's friends had 
heard terms like "cancer stick," meaning 
cigarettes cause cancer, while they were in junior 
high.  This is 1951, 1952, 1953, years before she 
ever picked up a cigarette.  
          And at the end of the day, ladies and 
gentlemen, what more do you need to know about 
cigarettes?  
          You heard that her friends also heard 
people use the term "nicotine fit" to describe the 
behavior of people smoking cigarettes.  This is in 
the early to mid 1950s.  
          Now let's move forward.  You know that 
in 1957, Ms. Ingraham graduates from high school.  
She goes off to college in Ohio with the intention 
of becoming a teacher.  You heard about that.  
          Ladies and gentlemen, there's no dispute 18 that when Ms. Ingraham started smoking, she was 18 
years old.  She was an adult.  No dispute about 
that.  You saw the date, June 1957.  She was 18 
years old.  That's when she started to smoke 
cigarettes.  
          You heard that she meets Jimmy Ingraham 
who later becomes her husband, and when she would 
come back home from college during the breaks, her 
and Jimmy Ingraham would go out and they would go 
to parties and they would smoke cigarettes.  
          Dr. Glover acknowledged to you that 
Mr. Ingraham is the only person who would know 
about Ms. Ingraham's smoking when she was 18, 19, 
20, 21 years old.  
          And you heard Dr. Glover tell you that 
Jimmy Ingraham said, back in this period of time:  
We were smoking every now and then, every now and 
then.  
          After two years of college, Ms. Ingraham 
returns from Miami -- returns to Miami.  You'll 
recall she talked about this in the video, she 
decides she doesn't want to be a teacher.  She 
decides to take control.  
          On that video you saw, Ms. Ingraham 
said:  I never wanted to be a teacher.  It had to 19 be -- my father said it had to be his way or no 
way.  
          And Ms. Ingraham said:  It had to be my 
way, and she chose not to be a teacher.  
          Now you will recall that in the video, 
Ms. Ingraham tells us about her life, and I told 
you in my opening that if the plaintiffs didn't 
play that video that we would, and we knew it 
would be a very emotional and sympathetic moment.  
          It's only natural for each of us in this 
courtroom to feel sympathy.  We're only human.  
Only natural to feel those feelings of sympathy.  
          But you have to let those feelings go.  
Judge Donner will instruct you that you have to 
set the natural feelings of sympathy that you have 
aside and decide the case based solely on the 
evidence you hear in this courtroom and the 
instructions you receive from Judge Donner.  
          Now, as I've heard said, this case is 
about Ms. Ingraham and her decision to smoke, and 
because this is her case, we thought it was 
important for you to hear from her, in her own 
words, and see the type of strong and capable 
person that she was.  
          She was in control of her decisions in 20 her life, every one of them, and when you are in 
control, ladies and gentlemen, you are 
responsible.  
          Now that brings us to 1961, and you know 
that in 1961, Ms. Ingraham becomes pregnant, and 
when she does, you heard Dr. Glover testify she 
quit or substantially reduced the amount she 
smoked.  That's in 1961.  
          In 1962, she marries Mr. Ingraham, and, 
again, they're smoking every now and then.  
Mr. Ingraham characterized his wife as a light 
smoker, an on and off smoker.  
          He said she was not a habitual smoker.  
He said she was not addicted.  That's from her 
husband, the man that lived with her for the first 
15 years that she was smoking.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection.  Improper 
characterization.  
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  
          MR. GERAGHTY:  That brings us to 1964, 
ladies and gentlemen.  I won't belabor the point.  
You've heard this, but in 1964, the Surgeon 
General issues its landmark report.  
          It declares that cigarette smoking 
causes lung cancer and chronic bronchitis.  That's 21 what the report said.  
          You saw lots and lots of newspaper 
articles.  You know it was on the front page of 
the Miami Herald, and there were stories on 
television about the report.  
          Every American, including Ms. Ingraham, 
was told in January of 1964 that smoking causes 
lung cancer and smoking causes chronic bronchitis.  
          Dr. Glover told you that Ms. Ingraham 
discussed the 1964 Surgeon General's report with 
her friend, Annette Hutchinson.  Ms. Hutchinson 
said Ms. Ingraham's reaction was:  We better stop 
smoking.  We better stop smoking.  
          You heard Mildred Carlow last Friday 
testify in the other courtroom.  She said the same 
thing, the very same thing.  
          Could you show that, Juan, please?  
          This is Ms. Carlow's testimony on the 
screen.  
          Did you guys have a discussion about 
that?  
          Answer:  We did.  What I recall is that 
when we heard about it, we talked about this 
Surgeon General's report, and we both decided that 
we needed to quit. 22 Question:  And what happened?  
          Answer:  Nothing.  We didn't quit.  
          That was the testimony of Mildred Carlow 
about her conversation with Annie Ingraham in 
1964, when Ms. Ingraham is 25 years old and a 
light cigarette smoker.  
          You know that two years later in 1966, 
the warnings first appear on cigarette packages, 
and the warning says:  Caution:  Cigarette smoking 
may be hazardous to your health.  
          And Dr. Glover again told you that 
Ms. Ingraham had discussions with her friends.  
They had discussions with their friends about the 
warnings, and, again, Ms. Ingraham told her 
friends, including Annette Hutchinson, including 
Mildred Carlow:  We better stop smoking.  
          This is in 1966.  Now the plaintiff is 
somehow claiming that the risks of smoking were 
hidden from Ms. Ingraham.  
          You heard testimony from both 
Dr. Proctor and Dr. Riddel.  Dr. Riddel showed you 
that the information about the risks of smoking 
were widespread and that people got the message.  
          And at the end of the day, both 
Dr. Riddel and Dr. Proctor told you that people 23 fell into two buckets, the people who believed 
smoking caused lung cancer and the people who 
either didn't believe it at that point or weren't 
sure.  
          But what they both told you was that 
over time, the number of people in the bucket who 
believed smoking caused lung cancer increased and 
increased and increased and that 1964, the Surgeon 
General's report was the turning point.  That's 
what Dr. Proctor told you.  
          Now this case is about Ms. Ingraham, and 
you know, based on the discussions that she had 
with her friends in 1964 and in 1966, that 
Ms. Ingraham not only understood but believed that 
smoking caused diseases like chronic bronchitis 
and like lung cancer.  There's no question about 
that.  
          Now the plaintiff has also told you that 
Ms. Ingraham switched to a filtered Benson & 
Hedges cigarette because she thought they were 
somehow safer for her.  
          But when we look at the evidence, ladies 
and gentlemen, you'll see, based upon what we 
know, that that makes no sense in terms of 
Ms. Ingraham it simply makes no sense. 24 First, based on the sworn interrogatory 
answers that you heard Mr. Faxon read just a few 
moments ago, we know that Ms. Ingraham was already 
smoking filtered cigarettes in 1964, when she 
heard about the Surgeon General's report, and in 
1966, when she had discussions with her friends 
about the warnings.  
          She was already smoking filtered 
cigarettes, so when she told her friends:  You 
know what, we better stop, she was referring to 
her own filtered cigarettes.  She didn't think 
they were safe or safer.  
          Second, Philip Morris never made any 
statement, never made any statement that Benson & 
Hedges cigarettes were safer than other 
cigarettes.  
          Let me show you the Benson & Hedges ads 
that have been put into evidence.  They are part 
of a composite.  It's Exhibit 58.  
          And, Juan, if you could show those one 
at a time.  Just pause on that one.  
          I'm going to show you the four they put 
into evidence.  
          You see on the screen:  Three puffs, 
four puffs, maybe five puffs longer than king 25 size.  
          The next one:  Three puffs, four puffs, 
maybe five puffs longer than king size.  
          The next one:  Tastes three, four, maybe 
five degrees cooler.  
          And the next one, please:  The 
cigarettes that made extra puffs popular is now 
also available in king size.  
          Ladies and gentlemen, if anything, the 
overriding message of these ads suggest that with 
Benson & Hedges, you were getting more cigarette, 
more smoke, the exact opposite of telling you that 
somehow they were safer.  
          There is not any message in here that 
these filters are safer than any other cigarette.  
We know that Ms. Ingraham understood that filtered 
Benson & Hedges were not safe in 1964 and 1966.  
That's the evidence you've heard in this case.  
          Now that brings us to 1967.  You know 
that Ms. Ingraham was working as an administrative 
assistant at the University of Miami School of 
Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, surrounded by 
people, by doctors, psychiatrists, health-care 
professionals who were acutely aware of the health 
risks of smoking. 26 You heard that she began playing card 
games with her friends Annette Hutchinson, Mildred 
Carlow, Valentina Falco, and that they enjoyed 
smoking, drinking, and playing cards on the 
weekends.  
          And you heard the testimony that 
Ms. Ingraham smoked more on the weekends, a pack, 
a pack and a half, and in some instances, two 
packs of cigarettes.  That's what you heard so far 
in terms of the evidence in the case.  
          And we know that Ms. Ingraham enjoyed 
cigarettes.  Her friend Mildred Carlow told you 
that.  
          Juan, can you show the next passage, 
please?  
          This is Ms. Carlow's.  
          Well, didn't she tell you that she 
enjoyed having a cigarette with coffee or an 
alcoholic beverage?  
          The answer of Ms. Marco was:  She said 
that she -- I think I do recall her saying that 
she -- when she would have coffee and/or a drink, 
she enjoyed having a cigarette.  
          And we know that Ms. Ingraham was 
smoking more during these card games when she was 27 having fun and enjoying herself.  
          Of course that makes sense, ladies and 
gentlemen.  The evidence you hear is that people 
are going to smoke more cigarettes.  They're going 
to drink alcohol when they're doing things that 
they enjoy with their friends and family.  
          Now moving on to 1968, you know that 
Ms. Ingraham becomes pregnant with her daughter, 
Toni Junious, and I want to remind you what 
Dr. Glover said about that.  
          If you could put Dr. Glover's.  
          Remember, Dr. Glover was plaintiff's 
expert on addiction and I asked him very 
pointedly:  
          Question:  All right.  Now Ms. Ingraham 
quit smoking or substantially reduced the amount 
she smoked during the two times she was pregnant 
in the 1960, right?  
          Answer:  Yes, uh-huh.  
          That's Dr. Glover's testimony after he 
had read all of the depositions taken of the 
friends and family members of Annie Ingraham in 
this case.  That's the plaintiff's own expert.  
          So once in 1961 and again in 1968 when 
the plaintiff was born, Ms. Ingraham quit smoking 28 or substantially reduced the amount she smoked for 
roughly a nine-month period.  
          She then decides to resume smoking in 
1969.  At this point in time, ladies and 
gentlemen, she's 30 years old.  
          She decides to resume smoking for 
reasons that have nothing to do with nicotine.  
Remember you heard the testimony of Dr. Neal 
Benowitz?  He was on video.  We played him two 
days ago.  
          You heard that he was the senior 
scientific editor of the 1988 Surgeon General's 
report and an expert on nicotine addiction.  
          He told you the effects of nicotine are 
temporary, when a smoker quits, all of the 
nicotine is out of their system in two or three 
days, and those changes in the nicotinic receptors 
return to normal in two to three weeks.  
          Dr. Glover told us according to what 
Mr. Ingraham, her ex-husband, said, Ms. Ingraham 
was probably not addicted as of 1969 and 1972.  
          This is the plaintiff's own expert.  
          Can you show that next clip, please?  
          This is Dr. Glover, the plaintiff's 
expert.  These are the questions we asked him. 29 Now if Ms. Ingraham had smoked five, six 
cigarettes a day from 1962 to 1972, that would be 
consistent with somebody commonly referred to as a 
chipper?  
          Answer:  Correct.  
          Question:  And you would agree that a 
chipper, somebody smoking five or less cigarettes 
a day, is probably not addicted?  
          The answer from Dr. Glover:  Probably 
not.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection.  Improper 
characterization of the evidence.  Move to 
strike.  
          THE COURT:  Come to sidebar.  
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
          THE COURT:  Go ahead. 33 MR. ALVAREZ:  Move to strike.  
          THE COURT:  Motion granted.  
          MR. GERAGHTY:  I asked Dr. Glover the 
following question:  If Ms. Ingraham was smoking 
five cigarettes a day, as her husband testified, 
between 1962 and 1972, you agree more likely than 
not she was not addicted to cigarettes, right?  
          His answer is:  Yes, if he's correct, 
that probably might be true.  
          And he was with her for ten years, 
right?  
          Correct.  
          Slept in the same bed together, right?  
          His answer:  I don't know that.  
          That was the testimony of Dr. Glover.  
          Now like Dr. Rosman told you, there is 
some inconsistent testimony on whether 
Ms. Ingraham quit or substantially reduced her 
smoking, but only Ms. Carlow says she doesn't 
recall it that way.  
          But remember what Ms. Carlow said in her 
deposition.  I showed it to her when she testified 
last Friday.  She said that she wasn't close 
friends with Ms. Ingraham when she was pregnant 
with Ms. Junious. 34 She also said she did not remember 
Ms. Ingraham being pregnant with Toni Junious.  
That's the evidence you've heard, ladies and 
gentlemen.  
          Now despite the fact that Ms. Ingraham 
had quit or substantially reduced her smoking and 
with all the knowledge of the health risks she had 
at this point in time, Ms. Ingraham decides to 
resume smoking.  
          She's 30 years old.  She's made the 
decision.  Had she not resumed smoking at that 
time, she would not have developed COPD.  
          So here in this time frame, we know that 
smokers are quitting by the millions, by the 
millions.  Plaintiff's own expert admitted that.  
          You heard from Dr. Proctor.  I asked 
Dr. Proctor the following question.  
          Can you put that up there?  
          You've seen New York Times articles 
between '64 and '66 and 1970 that approximately 13 
million people quit smoking in this country, 
right?  
          That sounds about right, yeah.  
          That's the testimony of Dr. Proctor.  
          So in this period of time, it was a time 35 of unprecedented quitting, between '64 and 1970.  
          But though Ms. Ingraham doesn't quit at 
this time, we know she controls her smoking.  We 
know she controls her smoking.  
          That brings us to 1970.  You heard that 
in 1970, a new warning goes on cigarette packs 
that says:  Warning:  The Surgeon General has 
determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to 
your health.  
          It's not on here, but you know in 1971, 
all cigarette ads come off radio and television 
and in 1972, all print ads have the Surgeon 
General's warning printed on them.  
          Dr. Glover told you around this period 
of time that we're talking about, in the early to 
mid 1970, we're not exactly sure when, Dr. Glover 
told you from his review of the depositions, 
Ms. Ingraham was not allowed to smoke at work.  
          And I want to point this out, underscore 
what I just told you a moment ago:  Ms. Ingraham 
was in control of where and when and how much she 
smoked.  
          You heard that her parents were 
antismoking and that her parents didn't allow 
people to smoke in their home.  So Ms. Ingraham 36 didn't smoke around her parents and you know she 
spent a lot of time with her parents.  
          You know that Ms. Ingraham went to 
church and the church services lasted 
approximately two hours, and you know she didn't 
smoke at church.  
          And you also know that smoking was 
banned in her workplace, and Ms. Ingraham complied 
with that.  She didn't smoke at work.  She smoked 
when she had breaks.  That's the evidence you've 
heard.  
          Two or three breaks during the course of 
the day and, in fact, you heard that Dr. Glover 
said there were times when she would skip breaks 
and skip lunch because she wanted to go home 
early.  That's what you heard from Dr. Glover.  
          Does that sound like a terribly addicted 
smoker?  Does that sound like someone who has lost 
control?  And the answer is:  Of course not, 
ladies and gentlemen.  
          That brings us to the late 1970s, early 
1980s, and you heard that the University of Miami 
and Jackson Memorial Hospital begin offering 
smoking cessation classes to any employee who 
wants to quit smoking and who would like help in 37 quitting smoking.  
          We showed you this particular -- this is 
one of the newsletters called The Record that was 
distributed there to the employees.  
          And it says -- this is January of '85.  
It says:  Monthly quit smoking classes, ongoing 
for the past five years, are open to everyone, and 
many employees have quit either in these classes 
or on their own.  
          So that's of 1979, 1980.  
          These classes were offered on a monthly 
basis, and you know from the testimony you've 
heard that Ms. Ingraham was working, working for 
psychiatrists, for doctors who were well equipped 
to help her if she wanted help quitting smoking.  
          And the evidence you heard was she never 
attended any of these smoking cessation classes.  
If she truly wanted to quit smoking, if she were 
truly motivated to quit smoking, there was no 
better place for her to be working than at the 
University of Miami and Jackson Memorial Hospital.  
          And Ms. Ingraham didn't attend a single 
class.  Now what you did hear is that Ms. Ingraham 
attended yoga.  You heard some people say that 
they believe she took yoga classes in an effort to 38 quit.  
          But, again, I ask you:  Think about that 
for a moment.  In the same newsletter from 1988, 
this is the medical center update, University of 
Miami/Jackson Memorial Medical Center, yoga 
classes are advertised right below the quit 
smoking clinic.  
          If you were reading these newsletters 
and you really wanted to quit, is there any chance 
that you're going to choose the yoga classes over 
the smoking cessation classes?  Does that sound to 
you like a cigarette smoker who is desperately 
trying to quit?  
          We've talked a little bit about 
Valentina Falco.  I want to underscore a new point 
here.  Let me pause for just a second.  
          You heard Mr. Paige and Mr. Alvarez, 
both in their opening and during the course of the 
trial, say that Ms. Ingraham tried to quit many 
times over the years.  He gave you a laundry list 
of ways she tried to quit.  
          And I don't mean to suggest that 
Ms. Ingraham never tried to quit, but you didn't 
hear any reliable evidence to support Mr. Alvarez' 
claim that Ms. Ingraham was desperately trying to 39 quit smoking over the decades.  
          Were these committed attempts to quit?  
We know that none of her quit attempts lasted even 
for one day, so how serious could they have been?  
          You saw the testimony or heard the 
testimony of Ms. Mildred Carlow and Ms. Toni 
Junious.  
          If you could put that up, please, Juan.  
          This is what Ms. Carlow said:  You don't 
have a recollection of Ms. Ingraham quitting for 
one day, right, before she quit for good?  
          Answer:  No.  
          Ms. Junious's testimony was, question:  
And that was even though she, to your knowledge, 
had never quit for more than a day?  
          Answer:  To my knowledge, yes.  
          And you heard from Dr. Neal Benowitz, 
the expert on nicotine addiction, who told you 
that a serious quit attempt should last more than 
24 hours.  
          This is what Dr. Benowitz said:  And in 
your field, you define a serious quit attempt as 
not smoking for at least a 24-hour period, right?  
          His answer is:  Yes.  
          The truth of the matter is, ladies and 40 gentlemen, based on the evidence you've heard in 
this courtroom is that Ms. Ingraham enjoyed 
smoking and was not truly motivated to quit until 
1995.  
          Now that brings us to about 1994, and 
you've heard the evidence.  You know that in 1994 
Ms. Ingraham begins experiencing shortness of 
breath, in October of 1994, and we know that 
because that's what she tells her doctors in this 
health questionnaire which you've now seen several 
times.  
          It's dated October the 18th, 1994.  She 
checked that she was having shortness of breath at 
rest or with minor activity, and that she was 
asked about how much she was smoking, and she 
wrote:  Two packs per week, two packs per week.  
That's five or six cigarettes a day.  
          And, ladies and gentlemen, that makes 
sense because it's consistent with the evidence 
you've heard about the amount Ms. Ingraham smoked.  
          You heard that she smoked different 
amounts of cigarettes during different periods of 
time.  
          Sometimes she didn't smoke much at all, 
and other times when she was with her friends 41 playing cards, socializing, she smoked a lot.  
          But whether it was next to nothing, a 
little, or a lot, Ms. Ingraham controlled where, 
when, and how much she smoked.  
          And she did that until she decided to 
quit for good in 1995.  
          You heard that in April of 1995 her 
father, Melvin Jackie, passes away, and at that 
point in time, you know, according to what 
Ms. Junious said, she began to make more earnest 
efforts to quit smoking.  
          Ms. Junious told you that Ms. Ingraham 
may have attended a session of acupuncture.  You 
saw a record about that.  She may have seen a 
hypnotist.  
          Ms. Junious isn't sure because she 
didn't go with her mother on either of those.  She 
may have used the patch.  Ms. Carlow testified in 
her deposition under oath that she doesn't 
remember seeing Ms. Ingraham wear the patch, but 
to the extent -- but last week on the stand, she 
said:  You know, I think I would have changed that 
answer.  
          But you'll also recall that Ms. Carlow 
wasn't living in Miami for most of the period of 42 time in the early 1990s.  
          And maybe Ms. Ingraham did wear the 
patch, but to the extent it happened, it would 
have been some time between 1992 and 1995 during a 
period of time when we know, based upon her own 
questionnaire, she was smoking roughly five to six 
cigarettes a day.  
          And at the end of the day, no one knows 
how she quit for good in November of 1995.  She 
quit on her own.  She never mentioned it to 
anyone, not even her daughter.  
          You'll remember Ms. Schultz asked 
Ms. Junious the following questions, if you could 
put that up, please.  
          The question was:  And at some point, 
you realized your mother has quit smoking?  
          Answer:  Yes.  
          Question:  And she never mentioned that 
experience to you again, right?  
          Answer:  She did not.  
          That was Ms. Junious's testimony.  
Ms. Ingraham quit on her own just like she made 
all of the other decisions in her life.  
          The important point you heard was from 
Dr. Glover.  He told you that when Ms. Ingraham 43 quit smoking in 1995, there is no evidence that 
she had any withdrawal symptoms, no evidence of 
craving, no evidence of any difficulty.  
          Here is the questions I asked him:  
Question:  Now when Ms. Ingraham quit smoking in 
1995, there's no description of her having any 
difficulty quitting, is there?  
          Answer:  I don't think it's mentioned 
anywhere.  
          Okay.  And when she quit smoking in 
1995, there is no mention of her having any 
craving for cigarettes after she quit, right?  
          Answer:  Correct.  
          Question:  I mean you've read all the 
depositions.  Ms. Junious, none of her friends say 
in December, in January she was suffering from all 
sorts of terrible withdrawal symptoms, right?  
          His answer is:  Correct.  
          And all you heard Dr. Rosman tell us is 
the same thing.  There is no evidence of any 
reference to difficulty with withdrawal, craving, 
or any difficulty quitting in any of the medical 
records.  That's the evidence you've heard in this 
case, ladies and gentlemen.  
          And let me remind you what Dr. Glover 44 said about the absence of withdrawal.  
          Can you put that up, please?  
          This is Dr. Glover.  
          Question:  Now you've testified under 
oath in the past that if it wasn't for withdrawal, 
quitting smoking would probably be easy, right?  
          Answer:  Yes, a lot easier.  I mean 
easier, a lot easier for sure.  
          So Ms. Ingraham experienced no 
withdrawal when she quit smoking for good in 1995.  
And ask yourself, does that sound like someone who 
has a serious addiction?  
          A few months later in February 1996, 
Ms. Ingraham goes to the emergency room at Doctors 
Hospital in Coral Gables.  She has COPD.  She's 
diagnosed with COPD after smoking for more than 35 
years.  
          You heard about that.  We showed you the 
medical records.  We showed you where she told 
those doctors at that point in time that she was 
smoking a half a pack to a pack per day or less 
than a pack per day.  That's what the records show 
she told those doctors when they diagnosed her 
with COPD.  
          And let me remind you of the video of 45 Ms. Ingraham.  She was a strong person.  She 
wasn't the type of person who was going to be told 
to quit smoking.  
          Remember last week when Ms. Junious 
testified that she never asked her mom about 
quitting.  
          Ms. Junious said:  I had my place, and I 
didn't get in the way of what she did.  It was 
Ms. Ingraham's way or no way.  
          So nothing Ms. Junious could have said 
or would have said and certainly nothing that a 
tobacco company might have said would have made 
any difference to her.  
          It wasn't until Ms. Ingraham's own body 
told her that smoking had affected her health that 
she finally made the decision to quit.  
          And then Ms. Ingraham quit with little 
or no difficulty.  
          And, ladies and gentlemen, that's the 
story.  That's the story you've heard for the last 
two to three weeks.  
          Can you put the first question up, 
please, again, Juan?  Can you highlight that, 
please?  
          Now let's talk about the question on the 46 verdict form again.  
          Was Annie Ingraham addicted to 
cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was her 
addiction a legal cause of her death?  
          So was she addicted?  You heard from two 
people.  One of them is Dr. Glover, the 
plaintiff's expert.  He did not review any of the 
medical records.  He had a very simple definition 
of addiction:  If you smoke ten cigarettes a day 
for more than a year, you are addicted.  
          But we have already walked through 
Ms. Ingraham's life.  Dr. Glover told you that 
based upon the amount her husband testified she 
smoked, that for the first 15 years, she was 
probably not addicted.  She didn't even meet his 
simple definition of addiction.  
          We know that she could control where, 
when, and how much she smoked.  We know that she 
quit or substantially reduced the amount she 
smoked during her pregnancies in 1961 and 1968.  
          And we know that when she quit in 1995, 
she had no withdrawal, no craving, no difficulty 
quitting.  
          Does that sound like someone who was 
terribly addicted? 47 And, remember, Dr. Glover is the one 
that told you, in the absence of withdrawal, 
quitting smoking is a lot easier.  
          We brought you Dr. Rosman, who 
specializes in diagnosing and treating people with 
all sorts of addictions.  
          He told you essentially the same thing.  
He said that Ms. Ingraham's smoking pattern was 
not that of someone who was addicted.  She was in 
control.  She could always quit whenever she 
wanted to.  
          But even if you conclude that she's 
addicted, there's a second part to this question, 
and that is -- the second part:  Was such 
addiction a legal cause of her death?  Was such 
addiction a legal cause of her death?  Did her 
addiction overcome a committed effort to quit -- 
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge, that's 
not the legal standard.  
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Move to strike.  
          THE COURT:  Motion granted.  
          MR. GERAGHTY:  I'm simply asking a 
rhetorical question, Your Honor.  
          THE COURT:  I granted the motion. 48 MR. GERAGHTY:  Let's go back to when -- 
to 1969 when Ms. Ingraham resumes smoking on a 
regular basis after her daughter Toni Junious is 
born.  She's 30 years old.  She's already had 
conversations with her friends and family about 
the Surgeon General's report and about the 
warnings.  
          They told each other repeatedly that 
they should quit.  The decision she made to resume 
in 1969 is the only legal cause of her COPD and 
death.  
          She's not addicted.  She knows the 
risks, but she decides to take her chances, not 
because of anything that Philip Morris or RJ 
Reynolds said or didn't say.  And if she doesn't 
decide to resume, she would never have developed 
her COPD.  
          Now you heard that nicotine does not 
prevent someone from understanding the clear 
warning they receive on a pack of cigarettes.  
From news reports from the Surgeon General, from 
repeated warnings from parents, teachers, and 
friends, nothing about nicotine prevented her from 
quitting when she was motivated to do so.  
          The plaintiff has tried to tell you that 49 nicotine is like heroin or cocaine, but you know, 
you heard evidence that that's not true, and you 
know that because of what Dr. Neal Benowitz told 
you.  
          I mentioned Dr. Benowitz a couple of 
times already.  You saw him testify by video.  We 
played his video when the plaintiff opted not to.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.  
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  
          MR. GERAGHTY:  We chose to play -- 
          THE COURT:  The jury is to disregard 
that remark.  
          MR. GERAGHTY:  We chose to play his 
video because he's the senior scientific editor of 
the 1988 Surgeon General's report.  
          I asked Dr. Benowitz a series of 
important questions.  
          If you could put those up, Juan.  
          I asked him:  Haven't you also commented 
that the stimulating effect of nicotine is more 
like that of caffeine than cocaine?  
          His answer:  It's a little more intense 
than caffeine but much less so than cocaine.  
          And then I asked him the following 
question:  And smoking cigarettes does not cause a 50 smoker to lose the ability to be responsible for 
their own actions?  
          His answer is:  Correct.  
          Plaintiff's expert Dr. David Burns said 
the same thing.  
          Can you show Dr. Burns' testimony?  
          These are the questions we asked 
Dr. Burns:  You have said many times that smokers 
are responsible for their own smoking behavior, 
correct?  
          Answer:  That's correct.  
          And even if they're addicted, the 
smokers are still responsible for their own 
smoking behavior, correct?  
          Answer:  That's correct.  The fact that 
someone is addicted is a barrier to behavioral 
change, but it doesn't free them from 
responsibility for their own behavior.  
          And I told you, ladies and gentlemen, 
the issues in this case boil down to control and 
responsibility.  
          And plaintiff's own experts are telling 
you, Dr. Burns is telling you, Dr. Burns is 
telling you:  Even addicted smokers are still 
responsible. 51 That's the same thing Dr. Neal Benowitz 
is telling you.  He is the senior scientific 
editor of the Surgeon General's report.  
          Dr. Glover called him one of the 
preeminent experts on nicotine and nicotine 
addiction.  
          And why do they say these things?  They 
say these things because they know deep down at 
the end of the day, quitting all comes down to 
motivation.  
          You'll remember that I showed this 
pamphlet to Dr. Benowitz.  It's from the American 
Cancer Society.  He said they are an expert on 
quitting smoking.  
          The pamphlet says:  Do you have what it 
takes to stop?  There is no magic cure that can 
help you stop.  Take this short quiz to see if you 
have what it takes.  
          Number 1, do you want to quit smoking?  
          Number 2, are you willing to make 
changes in your daily routine?  
          And Number 3, are you willing to put up 
with some uneasy moments after quitting?  
          The American Cancer Society and Dr. Neal 
Benowitz tell you if you can say yes to these 52 three questions, you can quit smoking.  
          And of course we know Ms. Ingraham could 
have said yes to these questions anytime she 
wanted to because the key to quitting is 
motivation, and what did Dr. Neal Benowitz tell 
you?  Motivation comes from within.  It comes from 
within each individual, not from a nicotine patch, 
not from acupuncture, not from hypnosis.  
          And it's because of that that 
Dr. Benowitz told you about the number of people 
who have quit smoking in this country.  This all 
comes from Dr. Neal Benowitz.  
          Fifty to sixty million Americans have 
quit smoking in this country.  Dr. Benowitz said 
that many of them, if not most, would meet his 
definition of heavily addicted.  
          He admitted that on the 
cross-examination yesterday.  He said:  Most of 
these people are heavy smokers, smoked more than 
Annie Ingraham, more than Annie Ingraham.  
          Ninety percent of them who have quit 
smoking quit cold turkey, without any assistance 
whatsoever.
          THE CLERK:  Mr. Geraghty, you have 20 
minutes. 53 MR. GERAGHTY:  Thank you.  
          And the key to quitting he told you was 
motivation, determination, and will power, 
motivation, determination, and will power.  
          And, again, these all come from within 
the individual, ladies and gentlemen.  
          That's what the experts have told you, 
Dr. Glover, Dr. Rosman, and Dr. Benowitz.  
          Think about it.  Mr. Paige and 
Mr. Alvarez have told you that addiction is the 
key issue in the case, but can you name a single 
witness on behalf of the plaintiff who testified 
for more than five minutes about Ms. Ingraham's 
smoking history?  
          Not Ms. Carlow, not Ms. Junious.  What 
evidence has the plaintiff presented to you to 
rebut the convincing evidence you've heard from 
Dr. Benowitz, Dr. Rosman and through our 
cross-examination of Dr. Glover?  
          Ladies and gentlemen, it really boils 
down to the question I asked at the beginning:  
Who is in control?  
          Ms. Ingraham is no different than the 60 
million Americans who have quit smoking.  She's no 
different than those people who quit, 90 percent 54 of whom did so cold turkey.  She always had the 
ability to quit.  
          She quit smoking or substantially 
reduced in 1961 and again in 1968 without gum, 
without the patch, without hypnosis, and we know 
she quit for good in 1995 with no withdrawal, no 
craving, and no difficulty whatsoever.  
          Even if you ultimately believe that 
Ms. Ingraham was addicted, she demonstrated to 
herself and everyone in this courtroom that she 
could quit whenever she was motivated to do so 
because she did in 1995.  
          Was she so addicted that she lost her 
ability to make rational judgments, or was she 
always in control?  
          I think, ladies and gentlemen, the 
answer is clear based on the evidence you heard, 
Ms. Ingraham was in control, not Philip Morris, 
not the nicotine in cigarettes, and so your answer 
to that first question, if you can put it up 
there, please -- your answer to this first 
question should be no.  
          And if you answer no to this question, 
your job is done and this case is over.  
          But if you disagree with the mountain of 55 evidence that we've presented so far and you move 
on to the other questions on the verdict form, 
let's take a look at those.  
          If you could put Question Numbers 2 
and -- there we go.  Question Numbers 2 and 3:  
Was the negligence of Philip Morris USA, 
Incorporated, a legal cause of Annie Ingraham's 
death?  
          Number 3:  Were the defective and 
unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the 
market by Philip Morris USA a legal cause of Annie 
Ingraham's death?  
          Those are the two questions.  Based on 
everything you've heard so far, ladies and 
gentlemen, there is no direct connection, no 
substantial impact between any conduct by Philip 
Morris other than the manufacture and sale of 
cigarettes that was the legal cause of harm to 
Ms. Ingraham.  
          And that alone cannot be the basis for 
liability in this case.  Judge Donner, when she 
instructs you, is going to read you an instruction 
that says -- do we have that, Juan?  
          Well, you know what, that's okay.  
That's all right, Juan, I'll read it. 56 The instruction you're going to receive 
from Judge Donner says:  The manufacture and sale 
of cigarettes is a lawful activity.  Philip Morris 
USA and RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company cannot be held 
liable merely for manufacturing, advertising, or 
selling cigarettes.  
          And when you look at these two 
questions, look at what they're asking about and 
think about what evidence have they presented 
beyond that.  
          Now Mr. Paige made a comment about 
ammonia being added to cigarettes, and let me 
respond to that very briefly.  You heard 
Dr. Proctor talk about this ammonia issue, and let 
me make one thing clear:  Dr. Proctor is a 
historian.  He's not a scientist.  
          He doesn't design cigarettes.  He's not 
a chemist.  He's not a medical doctor.  And when I 
asked him a question on cross-examination, he 
agreed to a key point.  He told you:  Ammonia 
occurs naturally in cigarettes.  
          Dr. Benowitz, the medical doctor and 
expert in nicotine pharmacology, didn't support 
any of the theories you heard from Dr. Proctor.  
          In fact, I asked Dr. Benowitz about the 57 manufacturing process.  
          And, Juan, if you could put that up, 
please.  
          I asked Dr. Benowitz, who is a leading 
expert on nicotine pharmacology, the following 
questions:  We talked about the fact that in 
tobacco, nicotine is a naturally occurring 
substance, right?  
          His answer was:  Yes.  
          It occurs naturally in tobacco.  You 
wouldn't have a cigarette without nicotine, right?  
          Correct.  
          And in the course of the manufacturing 
process, from the point it comes from the leaf all 
through the process, nicotine actually is taken 
out of the cigarette, right?  
          His answer:  Yes.  
          And I think Dr. Benowitz summed it up 
when he said:  A cigarette made from tobacco, 
grown in your own backyard, rolled in paper would 
have nicotine and would be addictive.  He told you 
Mother Nature puts the nicotine in cigarettes.  
          This is the other question I asked him:  
So a cigarette made of tobacco grown in your 
backyard, rolled in paper is addictive, is it not? 58
          It can be, yes.  
          And it's been addictive since cigarettes 
were first smoked, right?  
          Answer, yes.  
          So, ladies and gentlemen, you know that 
Dr. Benowitz has testified against tobacco 
companies on many occasions.  He wouldn't have 
said these things if they weren't true.  
          Philip Morris doesn't do anything to its 
cigarettes to make them more addictive.  You 
haven't heard any reliable evidence, so your 
answer to Question Numbers 2 and 3, again, should 
be no.  The answer to those questions should be 
no.  
          Next we have two additional questions.  
If you could put up Question Numbers 4 and 6.  
Actually 4 and 6.  Number 5 Mr. Faxon is going to 
address.  
          These questions ask essentially the same 
sort of thing.  One deals with what's called 
concealment and the other deals with an agreement 
to conceal.  But I think it's easier if we just 
deal with them at the same time.  
          The question is whether Ms. Ingraham 
relied upon any statements made by Philip Morris,  www.mydepos.com
www.myreporters.com
Taylor, Jonovic, White, Gendron & Kircher-Echarte
Florida Realtime Reporting
305.358.9047
Fax 305.371.3460
Junious vs. RJR
October 19, 2011
59 RJ Reynolds, or any other tobacco company to her 
detriment, that she relied and that those 
statements were a legal cause of her COPD and 
death.  
          And, ladies and gentlemen, there is no 
credible evidence whatsoever that Ms. Ingraham 
relied on anything that Philip Morris or RJ 
Reynolds said or failed to say about the health 
risks of smoking.  
          What you may not have known before you 
heard from Dr. Proctor, the plaintiff's expert is 
that people in this country have been talking 
about being addicted to tobacco for more than 150 
years.  
          Juan, if you could put that up, please, 
Dr. Proctor's.  
          You know what -- there we go.  Thank 
you, Juan.  
          This is Dr. Proctor's testimony, the 
plaintiff's expert.  I asked him:  And so people 
have used the word "addiction" when talking about 
tobacco products for over 150 years, have they 
not?  
          His answer:  That's correct.  
          He also told you that the Florida 60 Department of Health declared more than a hundred 
years ago, in 1899, that cigarette smoking is the 
worst form of tobacco addiction.  
          You also heard that cigarettes, the sale 
of cigarettes were banned in the State of Florida 
for a 20-year period, more than a hundred years 
ago, because people understood that cigarette 
smoking was addictive and dangerous.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection.  Improper 
characterization.  
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  The jury will 
use its best recollection.  
          MR. GERAGHTY:  We also just walked 
through the personal story of Ms. Ingraham.  We 
know what information she had.  We know when she 
got it.  We know that her parents and teachers 
told her smoking was bad for your health growing 
up.  
          We know she heard and believed the '64 
Surgeon General's warnings, the '64 Surgeon 
General's report, and the warnings on cigarette 
packs.  
          Dr. Proctor was here for four days, and 
during that four days, he talked to you about lots 
of things that he says the tobacco companies did 61 or didn't do.  
          But he made one very clear statement 
that I think, ladies and gentlemen, is important 
to remind you of, if you could put that up there.  
          He was asked:  You didn't know 
Ms. Ingraham personally?  
          His answer:  No.  I don't know anything 
about her.  I don't know anything about her.  
          So if you were waiting for Dr. Proctor 
to tell you that any of these statements -- and we 
put these statements -- we told you about all 
these statements.  You heard about them in the 
evidence.  They repeated many of them.  
          We asked Dr. Proctor -- or Dr. Proctor 
didn't tell you that any of these statements had 
anything to do with Annie Ingraham.  He couldn't 
because he didn't know anything about her.  
          So where is the evidence connecting any 
of this to Ms. Ingraham?  There is absolutely no 
evidence that Ms. Ingraham ever saw or heard the 
first five statements on here, none whatsoever, 
none.  
          So that leaves the 1994 congressional 
testimony which was the last thing Mr. Paige just 
showed you, and you heard Ms. Carlow tell us that 62 she watched that testimony with Ms. Ingraham.  
          And what did Ms. Ingraham say about it?  
Ms. Ingraham didn't believe the testimony.  She 
laughed at it.  Here's what Ms. Carlow said:  In 
any event, she did not believe what they were 
saying, correct?  
          She did not, that's correct.  
          Ladies and gentlemen, that's the exact 
opposite of what we mean by to rely to your 
detriment.  That's the exact opposite of these 
statements being a legal cause of harm to 
Ms. Ingraham.  
          Was some agreement to conceal or omit 
material information a legal cause of 
Ms. Ingraham's COPD?  How could that be?  The only 
witness they brought was Dr. Proctor.  We know he 
doesn't know anything about Ms. Ingraham.  
          We know that he's been paid nearly $1 
million to testify against cigarette companies on 
more than 20 occasions.  
          He told you he's biased.  He wants 
plaintiffs to win these cases irrespective of what 
the facts are.  He doesn't know anything about the 
facts of this case.  
          You know what bucket Ms. Ingraham fell 63 in.  She knew by 1964 and 1966 that cigarette 
smoking caused lung cancer and chronic bronchitis.  
          There is no evidence of a direct 
connection or a substantial impact of any of the 
statements made by Philip Morris, RJ Reynolds, or 
any tobacco company.  
          So your answers to Numbers 4 and 6 
should be no.  
          Giselle, how much more time do I have 
left?  
          THE CLERK:  Six minutes.  
          MR. GERAGHTY:  Thank you.
          And, finally, ladies and gentlemen, if 
you get this far -- and I don't think you get this 
far -- you have to assign a percentage of fault to 
Ms. Ingraham, RJ Reynolds, and Philip Morris.  
          And if you get to this point, the first 
thing you should consider is plaintiff's admission 
that Ms. Ingraham is also a legal cause of her 
death.  You should consider that.  
          But what I really want you to think 
about is, we talked about lifestyle choices.  We 
talked in voir dire with a number of you about 
lifestyle choices.  
          We choose to smoke cigarettes.  We 64 choose to drink alcohol.  We choose to eat foods 
that we know are not healthy to us.  
          And if we go out one night and you have 
too much Grey Goose and tonic and you wake up the 
next day and you have a hangover and you look in 
the mirror, do you say to yourself:  You know 
what, I'm only 75 percent responsible?  
          Nobody says that.  You say:  I'm 
responsible for what I did last night.  That's 
what we do.  
          Now the next issue I want to discuss 
with you briefly is damages and the issue of 
compensatory damages.  
          If you decide that Ms. Junious is 
entitled to recover money for her mother's 
decision to smoke, you have to decide what the 
amount of money should be, and the judge will tell 
you that's within your sound discretion.  
          All I'm simply going to say is:  You saw 
the number Mr. Paige wrote on the board, and if 
there was any question that this case is about 
money, there was no question after the number he 
wrote on there.  
          I'm not going to try to suggest to you 
that Ms. Junious hasn't suffered a loss as a 65 result of her mother, but, ladies and gentlemen, 
let's be reasonable.  
          If you really believe Ms. Junious is 
entitled to any compensation, any compensation for 
the decisions that her mother and only her mother 
made over the course of a 35-year period, I would 
suggest an appropriate number would be $400,000.  
          The final point I want to address, 
ladies and gentlemen, is punitive damages, and 
what I want you to understand is, you're only 
being asked to decide whether punitive damages 
should be awarded, not the amount.  
          If you say yes, there will be another 
phase of this case.  There will be more evidence 
and more witnesses and another round of 
deliberations.  
          The purpose of punitive damages, as you 
heard, is not to compensate.  If you decide that 
Ms. Junious is entitled to any compensation, you 
will compensate her with an award of compensatory 
damages.  
          Punitive damages are something 
completely different.  They are an amount of money 
in addition to and on top of whatever compensatory 
damages you decide to award. 66 The Court is going to instruct you that 
the plaintiff has a much higher burden of proof.  
The burden of proof on the issue of punitive 
damages is clear and convincing evidence, a much 
higher standard than the greater weight of the 
evidence.  
          And, ladies and gentlemen, based on the 
evidence in this case, when you have a smoker who 
quit for good in 1995 with no craving, no 
withdrawal, with no difficulty.  
          And where the plaintiff acknowledges 
that her own decisions, her own decisions to 
continue to smoke are a legal cause of her COPD, 
there is no basis to award punitive damages.  
          So your answer to that question should 
be no.  And if you get to that issue, I ask that 
you look closely at the evidence.  
          What evidence have you heard that any 
wrongful conduct of Philip Morris was the legal 
cause, the legal cause of Ms. Ingraham's death?  
          Is there any evidence that any of the 
statements you heard, any of these statements 
caused Ms. Ingraham to start smoking or caused her 
to not quit smoking when she was motivated to do 
so? 67 You haven't heard any evidence, any 
evidence to support that sort of a conclusion.  
The evidence you've heard is that Ms. Ingraham was 
in control of her own smoking decisions.  
Ms. Ingraham was in control.  
          This is a board I showed you at the very 
beginning, and as you listen to what Mr. Alvarez 
says on redirect and as you prepare to deliberate, 
I would ask that you remember these key points.  
These key points tell you all you need to know to 
decide the issues in the case.  
          You know based on the evidence you've 
heard over the last two weeks that Ms. Ingraham 
knew smoking was dangerous from an early age and 
that she received specific warnings from her 
parents, her teachers, her friends, from the 
government.  
          You know -- you haven't heard any 
evidence that Ms. Ingraham was influenced by 
anything that Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds said.  
          You know that Ms. Ingraham controlled 
when, where, and how much she smoked.  
          And you know that when she quit in 1995 
for good, she did it without any craving, without 
any withdrawal, without any difficulty. 68 You know, we enjoy a tremendous amount 
of freedom in this country.  We have the right to 
make decisions and to make lifestyle choices that 
are not always in our best interest.  
          And with that freedom comes the 
obligation to take personal responsibility for the 
consequences of those actions, and in the end, 
ladies and gentlemen, that's what this case is 
really about.  That's what this case is about.  
          Are we going to hold Philip Morris and 
RJ Reynolds responsible for Ms. Ingraham's 
informed decision, informed decision to continue 
smoking for 30 to 35 years for a person who was in 
control of her own decisions -- 
          THE CLERK:  One minute.  
          MR. GERAGHTY:  -- or is Ms. Ingraham 
responsible and solely responsible for her own 
lifestyle choices?  
          And with that, ladies and gentlemen, I'm 
going to sit down.  Mr. Faxon is going to speak 
with you for a while, and when he's finished, the 
plaintiff will get up and they'll have the last 
word, and that's because the plaintiff bears the 
burden of proof.  
          Now I don't know what Mr. Alvarez is 69
going to say, but whatever he says, I want you to 
ask yourselves:  What does this have to do with 
Annie Ingraham?  What does this have to do with 
this case?  What does it have to do with the 
issues in this case?  What direct and substantial 
impact did any of this have on Ms. Annie Ingraham?  
          Ladies and gentlemen, you've listened to 
all the evidence over the last two weeks, and I 
believe the evidence supports one and only one 
verdict, and that is a verdict in favor of Philip 
Morris.  
          I want to thank you very much.  You've 
been extremely attentive over the course of my 
presentation, and thank you very much again for 
your service. 
