          MR. REILLY:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Well, good morning, everybody.  When I stood
     here in front of you in a different courtroom
     about two weeks and two days ago, I said to you
     guys during voir dire that when you take on the
     mantle of jurors that you gain great power,
     because you're the decision makers of this case,
     and I said you take on great responsibility.  And
     that responsibility was to listen to the evidence 3800 that came in during the course of this case and
     then to receive the instructions of the law that
     Judge Barton gives you.  And you've now received
     that.  You each have a set of the instructions.
          And during the course of this trial, I've --
     I try very hard not to look at jurors in trial
     because you have a job, and I don't want to
     disturb you.  I don't want you to think that I'm
     encroaching on your territory, so I don't look at
     you.  But during the course of this trial, it's
     become abundantly clear that you have been paying
     very close attention to the evidence in this case
     because you've been asking some great questions.
     And that's in spite of the fact that some of the
     evidence has come in in what I know to be a very
     difficult way for you guys to receive it.
          You had depositions in video form that have
     gone on for hours and hours, and you've had some
     depositions that have been read to you with
     counsel as the witness.  And that is very
     difficult, I know, for people to pay attention to.
     But you've done a great job.
          So on behalf of Sandra and myself and Philip
     Morris, and I know Mr. Acosta as well and
     Mr. Denson and Mrs. Kalyvas, we all thank you for 3801 your service, because this is exactly how we hope
     the system works.  Okay.
          Now, you are about to do the most difficult
     part of your job, and that is to actually
     deliberate and make the decisions in this case.
     And now you have to do that following the oath
     that you took, and that is to make the decisions
     without bias and without sympathy.
          Now, without bias.  You've all indicated at
     the outset of this case that you really didn't
     believe that you had a bias that would interfere
     with your ability to be fair and impartial.  And
     we talked a lot about that during the voir dire.
     That doesn't mean, however, that you have to leave
     all of your personal experiences or your common
     sense outside the courtroom, because you don't.
     We hope you do bring your common sense and your
     personal experiences in with you.
          In addition to that, you have to decide this
     case without feelings of sympathy.  I noticed the
     very last pictures that Mr. Acosta showed you at
     the end of his -- the first part of his opening
     statement -- closing arguments, sorry -- you know,
     it would be almost unnatural, I think, for folks
     not to feel sympathy toward Mrs. Kalyvas and her 3802 daughter, Christine, because of the loss of a
     loved one.  And that would be almost unnatural.
     But your job as jurors is to set aside those
     feelings of sympathy and to refocus your attention
     on the evidence that came in during the course of
     the case and the issues with the law that
     Judge Barton has now given to you.  That is truly
     the essence of what you guys do as jurors in this
     case.  Now you're just about to do it.
          So let's go over, then, what are the issues
     that you have to resolve for us.  Rather than
     launching in with a number of documents -- and I
     can't possibly -- and you'll notice how that
     happened.  Mr. Acosta brought up all these
     documents long after the last witness has gone.
     And I don't have Dr. Werley here to address the
     content of those documents.  I don't have the
     ability to -- frankly, to spend my time in my
     closing argument going over each and every one of
     them reading different sections of them to you.
          But I'd invite you to read -- to read all of
     them, because you need to put them in context.
     You need to see what people are really talking
     about if you decide to spend your time looking at
     all the documents. 3803 I will spend a little time looking at a
     couple of them just to refresh your recollection
     as to what it means, to actually put things in
     context, or to try to look at things that are now
     50 years old or 60 years old and try to make sense
     of it.
          So we will look at a few of them, but what I
     really want to do is I want to spend my time
     talking to you about what Mr. Kalyvas' case has
     really been about.  Because as I said when I
     started this case, this is not about some group of
     smokers.  This is not about some vague amorphous
     group.  This is about one person and one person's
     smoking, and that's Mr. Kalyvas.
          Okay.  So let's start.  I told you that I
     thought that the first and foremost issue that you
     were going to have to deal with was going to be
     this question of whether or not was addiction to
     cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris USA,
     Incorporated, a legal cause of the death of
     Spyridon Kalyvas.  And sure enough, there it is,
     first question on the verdict form.  Right?  First
     question.
          And I said, you know, this question isn't
     just one question.  This question is a whole 3804 series of questions -- a whole series of
     questions.  And I used either this board or one
     almost just like it to explain to you what those
     issues were.  And I said, here's the question.
     Here's what it breaks down to.  There's four
     parts -- four parts.
          Can you see?  No, you can't see?  Sorry.
     Move this out of the way.  I know I'm going to use
     this for a lid, and I'm probably going to destroy
     it in the process, but -- okay.
          The first question is, was Mr. Kalyvas
     addicted -- addicted at all?  Now, we had an
     enormous amount of testimony on that very issue.
     We had -- we had one board-certified addiction
     psychiatrist specialist in here who talked to you
     about that just yesterday.
          Was Mr. Kalyvas addicted at all?  And who has
     the burden of proof?  Mr. Acosta spent quite a bit
     of time talking to you about his burden of proof.
     So let's talk about that for just a second,
     because Mr. Acosta does have the burden of proof.
          And he described it as, I've just got to have
     a little bit more, just a little bit more.  But
     the truth is, he has to have such strong evidence
     that it overcomes the evidence that I've put in 3805 and that Sandra's put in in this case.  It has to
     overcome it.  It has to be that strong.  It isn't
     just a little tiny bit.  It's so strong that it
     overcomes the evidence that we've put in.
          So the first issue here is, was Mr. Kalyvas
     addicted?
          The second is, was Mr. Kalyvas addicted to
     cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris USA?
          The third issue is, was Mr. Kalyvas'
     addiction so strong if he was addicted -- if he
     was addicted, was his addiction so strong that it
     was a legal cause of his death?  A legal cause of
     his death.
          And let me stop right there, because you-all
     have in your instructions this definition of legal
     cause.  And it's a lot.  It's a lot.
          An addiction to defendant's cigarettes is the
     legal cause of Spyridon Kalyvas' death if it
     directly and in natural sequence, continuous
     sequence produces -- produces or contributes
     substantially to producing his death so that it
     can reasonably be said that but for his
     addiction -- that's if he was addicted -- to the
     defendant's cigarettes, his death would not have
     occurred -- not have occurred.  That's how 3806 substantial that issue is.
          What does this mean?  I said in my opening
     statement that it means that Mr. Acosta has to
     prove not only that Mr. Kalyvas was addicted, but
     that his addiction was so strong that it was
     essential to why he smoked, that pleasure can't be
     enough for why he smoked.  It has to be his -- his
     addiction has to be so strong that he wouldn't
     have continued to smoke for the pleasure of
     smoking if he was addicted.  It has to be -- his
     addiction has to be so essential that without
     it -- without it, he wouldn't have smoked and he
     would have -- would he be here today?  That's the
     burden of proof.
          But we're not done yet.  We still have to --
     you still have to decide, were Philip Morris'
     manufactured cigarettes the cause of his lung
     cancer -- the cause of his lung cancer?  You can
     put legal cause right there, too -- the cause of
     his lung cancer.
          I'm going to talk about all of that in just a
     second.  We're going to walk through -- just walk
     through what the evidence was.  That's all.
          I said to you, you know, you can distill all
     that down into just three words, really -- just 3807 three words:  Control, causation, and
     responsibility.  That sums up this entire lawsuit,
     sums up for sure that first and all-important
     issue.  Because if that -- if the answer to that
     question is no, this case is over and you go home.
          Who was in control of Mr. Kalyvas' decision
     to begin smoking and continue smoking?  You've sat
     here now through two weeks and two days of trial,
     and you've heard all the evidence about who was in
     control.  What was the cause of his lung cancer,
     if anybody can say?  I'll talk more about what
     Mr. Acosta talked about on that issue of causation
     in just a minute.
          And once you know the answers to those two
     questions, who was in control of Mr. Kalyvas'
     decisions -- frankly, as we walk through this,
     you're going to see decisions about lifestyle in
     general, not just about smoking -- who was in
     control of his decisions about how he lived his
     life?  What was the cause of his lung cancer, if
     anybody could tell?  And then you'll know who has
     responsibility in this case.
          Now, where did the evidence come from?
     Before the case started, I said you're going to
     hear from family members, friends, medical 3808 records.  And I said, you know, you're going to
     hear from Mr. Kalyvas himself.  He's going to
     speak to you right out of the pages of the medical
     records in this case.  And I said you're going to
     see the Hospice record in which he's interviewed.
     And he's basically asked at a point in time when
     he knows he's dying from lung cancer, he's been a
     life-long smoker, he knows whether in his
     estimation he's addicted or not or -- he knows --
     he knows all that.  And what does he say?  What
     does he say about how he lived his life?  What
     does he say about this idea of control?
          Now, Mr. Acosta not only didn't show you this
     record, but you're going to have it.  You're going
     to have it in the hospital records.  But when he
     was asking his experts to evaluate this case, when
     they were making their decisions as to whether or
     not Mr. Kalyvas was addicted or not and whether or
     not addiction was the cause of his injury, he
     didn't even give them this record.
          To make that point, I put in evidence the
     medical records that Mr. Acosta provided to
     Dr. Cummings -- to Dr. Cummings so that you would
     be able to see for yourselves that, frankly, in
     the one instance where Mr. Kalyvas speaks directly 3809 to you, not through some third person, not through
     an interpreter, directly to you, he didn't give
     those records to his own experts when they were
     making their minds up on this issue.  And what
     did -- I said, you're going to see that
     Mr. Kalyvas says -- and this is the Hospice nurse
     saying, "patient stated that he has always lived
     on the edge" -- and that's in quotes.  This is a
     direct quote.  This is not a paraphrase.  "Patient
     has been in three serious accidents and has always
     been a risk taker" -- always been a risk taker.
          I couldn't show you that in opening
     statement, and you had to wait until I put
     Dr. Rossman on the stand to actually see this
     record.  Did Mr. Acosta even speak to
     Dr. Cummings, Dr. Goldman, or Dr. Groff about this
     statement?  Not once.  Not once.  Why not?  Well,
     of course for each of them to decide whether or
     not somebody's addicted, all they needed to know
     is you smoked 100 cigarettes.  They've got a
     one-size-fits-all formula for determining whether
     or not someone is addicted.  So, of course, they
     don't need to know this, do they?  But you do.
     You need to know this, because this is Mr. Kalyvas
     speaking directly to you. 3810 What else does he say?  You're going to
     have -- this is a four-page document.  You can see
     it says "3 of 4."  You'll see all of them.  You're
     going to see things in this document talk about
     lifestyle.  You're going to see that Mr. and
     Mrs. Kalyvas lived on their boat, this 45-foot
     boat, with no hot water.  That's a lifestyle
     decision.  They have a one-year-old baby.  They're
     living on this boat, no hot water.  You've got to
     shower at the marina.  That's all right.  I'm not
     criticizing it, it's just a lifestyle decision you
     make.
          So what does he say about his cancer?  He
     says, "patient feels like God has given him three
     chances to kill himself.  And since he didn't die
     in accidents, God will do it for him"; hence, the
     reason for the cancer.
          Does he say here, you know, I thought -- I
     think I'm a victim?  Does he say I think I've been
     deceived?  Does he say I think I've been addicted
     and forced to smoke against my will, that I tried
     desperately to rid myself of the risks of my
     lifestyle, and here I am, poor me?  Does he say
     that here?  No, he doesn't, obviously.  I
     apologize, it's a rhetorical question.  Right? 3811 It's rhetorical.  Clearly he isn't saying that.
     He knows -- he knows just exactly how he got where
     he is.  He knows that the decisions were his.  He
     knows that, and he's not putting the blame on
     anybody but himself.  And this is the only time
     you're going to hear directly from Mr. Kalyvas.
          Now, Mr. Acosta said that, yes, that they
     have accepted responsibility in this case.  They
     have said that Mr. Kalyvas was a legal cause of
     his lung cancer.  And we talked about that in voir
     dire.  We talked about that when you were going
     through the process of jury selection.  I asked
     you, what -- what -- how did that make you feel?
     What did that -- how did that -- what did that
     make you think about what was going on?  What did
     that mean to you?
          And we talked about the obvious fact that
     Mr. Kalyvas can't have been a legal cause of his
     own lung cancer unless he could have quit smoking
     and quit in time to avoid getting lung cancer.
     Because if you can't quit, if you say, hey, look,
     I am totally out of control here, there's nothing
     I can do about that, then you can't be a legal
     cause, can you?  You can't be.  But they know --
     they know how Mr. Kalyvas lived his life.  And 3812 they've said, you know what?  He is a cause.
          And I told you that in my opening statement.
     I said, you know what?  I could probably just sit
     down right now and not show you the rest of the
     evidence that verifies what Mr. Kalyvas said right
     here, all the awareness he had about the risks of
     smoking, all the awareness he had about how
     difficult it could be to quit.  I could -- I
     could -- I could just rely on those two statements
     and say that's all you really need to know to
     answer the question of who was in control.  But I
     said, no, that's not right.  That's not right.
     What I need to do is to walk you through
     Mr. Kalyvas' life so that you'll know that what he
     said was, in fact, correct -- was, in fact,
     correct.
          And so if you don't mind, that's what I'm
     going to do with you now, is just walk you
     through -- and this is not a criticism.  This is
     not a criticism of Mr. Kalyvas' decisions in his
     life.  This is America.  We get to make those
     decisions.  We get to decide.  Cigarettes are
     legal here, and we get to decide whether or not
     we're going to smoke.  Alcohol is legal here, and
     we get to decide whether we're going to drink it. 3813 We have these choices here.  We have them.  And
     Mr. Kalyvas -- Mr. Kalyvas had them in Greece as
     well.
          All right.  So let's take some of these
     boards down so I have a little room here.
          If you don't mind, let's just walk through
     this timeline.  And let me point out that the
     things I said were going to happen, the evidence
     that I said you would see, you saw.
          I said you were going to learn that in 1953,
     Mr. Kalyvas was born.  And he was born in
     Halkideon, Greece, to his parents, Elefterios and
     Amalia Kalyvas, who were both smokers.  And I told
     you that he was moved to Corfu as a little baby
     and that Corfu was this remote island off the
     coast of Greece in the middle of the Adriatic.
     And you came to learn through the testimony of
     family that Corfu is such a little village that
     there was one TV set in the whole town and that
     all the men would congregate to watch TV.
          Now, during the course of his presentation,
     Mr. Acosta talked about statements made here in
     the United States.  What do they have to do with
     Mr. Kalyvas in Greece who doesn't speak English,
     who is born in 1953, who doesn't watch television, 3814 isn't here in the United States, doesn't get here
     for 22 more years?  That's why I say this is
     Mr. Kalyvas' case, not some -- some other case.
     This is this case.
          And I said that you were going to learn that
     Mr. Kalyvas began smoking, had his first
     cigarette, with the Stravoravdis brothers -- I
     still can't pronounce that -- and that they began
     smoking homegrown tobacco and Karelia cigarettes.
     And that's exactly what you learned.  You learned
     that from Lola.
          Here.  She's talking about the Stravoravdis
     brothers.  And she says, "But the father grow
     tobacco.  He and the Stravoravdis brothers steal
     from his father the tobacco.  And they used to
     make the cigarettes from the paper the father
     have."
          "They steal from father's tobacco?"
          "Yes, they're devils."
          Remember she talked about the two brothers
     being devils?
          And I know that -- this is part of the
     testimony that I know is hard to receive because
     it's coming from page-and-line reading by two
     lawyers.  We don't have her here. 3815 "Karelia, homemade tobacco, and Marlboro.
     And sometimes if I don't -- if I forget the
     Marlboro, I buy from the airplane cigarette."
          What she's talking about -- and this is Lola
     Mullane, the stepsister -- she goes earlier to the
     United States than he does -- than Spyros does.
     And so when she comes back home, she brings
     Marlboro cigarettes because that's what the dad
     and mom and Spyros would like.  So she gets them
     duty-free and brings them on the airplane.
     Sometimes when she's on the airplane, she gets a
     different brand because she's forgotten to go to
     the duty-free store at the airport, and so she
     picks up whatever the airplane is selling.
          You guys have, I'm sure, all flown on
     airplanes and may well have flown on international
     flights where the flight attendants come along and
     they offer you the opportunity to buy duty-free
     stuff.
          And, of course, if they sold Marlboros on
     Corfu when he's ten years old, there wouldn't be
     any need to bring these cigarettes, these
     Marlboros, back to Greece, would they?
          All right.  You remember I said you're going
     to learn that Mr. Kalyvas already had been told by 3816 his parents, don't smoke, before he ever had his
     first cigarette at age ten.  His mother, his
     father, and his sister all told him, don't smoke.
     Smoking is bad for your health and if you ever
     start, you may not be able to ever stop.  And
     that's exactly what the evidence was.  And yet in
     spite of that, Spyros began smoking with the
     Stravoravdis brothers.
          And you remember that Lola testified that he
     got severely punished by his father.  But that did
     not deter -- you learned that he was head-strong,
     strong-willed.  That did not deter him.  He
     couldn't be bullied by his dad or cajoled by his
     mother or his sister into not smoking.  He was
     going to smoke, and he did.
          And you remember the testimony was that every
     time his dad would go off to work that he would go
     up over the hill with the brothers and they would
     go smoke; and they would smoke either homegrown
     tobacco or Karelia cigarettes.  That continues
     until Spyros becomes good friends with the fellow
     Nick Kourtelesis that you heard from again through
     a read page-and-line deposition.
          Now, Lola -- Lola had a little difficulty
     remembering just exactly when it was that Spyros 3817 left Corfu.  But we have the benefit again
     directly from Spyros.  Spyros prepared this -- and
     it's in evidence.  You'll be able to see it.  And
     he prepared it sometime after February of 1990.
     And he was describing himself, as all residents
     do.  And he tells us just exactly where he was
     living and what he was doing each step of the way.
          And where was he?  Well, he was in Corfu
     until he graduated from high school in 1968.  He
     was born in '53.  So that's 15 years or 16 years
     old.  And then what does he do?  Does he move to
     Athens?  No.  He then goes into the Greek Air
     Force.  And he's in the Greek Air Force for three
     years.  And finally in 1971, he ends up in Athens.
     So that's where he lives and how long he lives
     there.
          Now, we're going to talk a little bit about
     how he gets here, but that's from himself.  This
     is -- this is Spyros talking to you about where he
     lives and when he lives there.
          When he befriends Nick, they have a lot in
     common.  You know that they loved to ride
     motorcycles.  They ride.  They ride on dirt
     tracks.  They ride on the street.  They ride
     without helmets.  They crash.  Nick said he 3818 crashed 26 times.  He crashed a bunch of times
     with Spyros.  You know that they loved to party.
     You know that they loved to smoke.  You learned
     all about that through the testimony that came in
     through Nick.  And you also learned that Nick
     tells you the kinds of cigarettes that they smoke
     as well.  He says that while they're living here,
     they smoke --
          Did I screw up your projector?  Sorry.  How's
     that?  I need technical assistance.  Actually, can
     you straighten it up?  We need to see more
     details.  Thank you very much.
          You remember what's the first time you recall
     Spyros smoking cigarettes?  About 17, 18, maybe.
     Do you remember what kind of cigarettes he was
     smoking?  Greek cigarettes.  I don't know exactly.
     The same kind that you had?  On and off, yes,
     sometimes.  So, you know, it just makes common
     sense.  It just makes common sense.  Does he later
     smoke Marlboros?  Yeah, they end up -- they end
     up -- and did he bum cigarettes from tourists in
     Athens?  Sure.  There's no -- there's no question
     about that.  But if you just apply -- don't leave
     your common sense at the door.  If you just apply
     a little common sense, it makes all the sense in 3819 the world that when you're in Greece, you're going
     to be smoking Greek cigarettes, especially if
     you're not -- and we know that these aren't folks
     that are particularly wealthy.  While Corfu is
     lovely, you've already heard that it's not a
     particularly affluent location.
          All right.  Now, what happens in -- and by
     the way, Mr. Acosta put up some quotes from Lola
     about Mr. Kalyvas.  I forgot to put this one up.
          "No, I believe he never tried."
          "He never really tried to stop smoking
     cigarettes?"
          "No."
          You've heard that testimony in this case.
          1971, he goes in the service -- actually, it
     turns out to be 1968 -- 1973, I'm sorry.  1971, he
     goes into the pastry school in Athens.  '73, he
     graduates from the pastry school.  Then in 1974 or
     '75, the great adventure starts.  Right?  As if
     going in the air force and moving to Athens aren't
     pretty adventurous by themselves, Spyros and Nick
     decide to join the merchant marine.  And somehow
     they get themselves to Italy in Genoa, and they
     get jobs as sailors on a boat shipping out of
     Genoa and coming to the new world.  That's us, the 3820 new world.
          And that ship lands in Houston, and
     immediately Spyros and Nick leave the ship and go
     directly to his brother's home in New Jersey.  And
     Nick begins -- I'm sorry -- Spyros begins to work
     at the restaurants that his brother Leo has in New
     Jersey.  That's pretty adventurous.
          Now, let's stop right here, because I would
     like to set the stage for what the world is like
     in terms of smoking here in the United States from
     a regulatory -- from a regulatory standpoint.
          1964, way out here -- way out here, the
     Surgeon General has broadcast to all of America
     that smoking causes lung cancer and other
     diseases.  That's eleven years -- ten or eleven
     years before Spyros and Nick ever touch foot on
     American soil.
          1970, a warning is placed on every pack of
     cigarettes.  The warning says, warning, the
     Surgeon General has determined that cigarette
     smoking is dangerous to your health.  So
     regardless of whether or not in Greece there are
     warnings on cigarettes or not, as soon as Spyros
     and Nick get here, every cigarette they buy -- and
     certainly when they get here, they buy Marlboros 3821 and Benson & Hedges.  Sure.  They're buying lots
     of different kinds of cigarettes, but we're not
     debating that he started smoking Marlboros or
     Benson & Hedges, no way.  But every pack they buy
     and every cigarette they smoke, they have the
     opportunity to see and be reminded of just the
     danger that they're undertaking every time they
     smoke.
          Now, Mr. Acosta said, well -- but Philip
     Morris kept saying that it hadn't been proven that
     smoking causes lung cancer and was addictive.  But
     listen for this -- listen for this when he gets
     back up, because he has a chance -- because he has
     the burden of proof, he gets to get back up and
     talk to you again.  He gets to respond to whatever
     I say right now.  Listen for him to say that
     Spyros ever heard anything Philip Morris ever said
     about whether smoking was addictive or smoking
     caused disease, because you won't.  This is
     Spyros' case, not somebody else's case.
          Warning on every pack.  1971, all cigarette
     advertising banned on TV and radio.  So any --
     any -- and I apologize you can't see this, and you
     probably can't either.  Sorry.  Let me see if I
     can't move it over.  Sorry. 3822 All advertising on television and radio,
     gone.  Every print ad, whether it's a magazine, a
     newspaper or a billboard, every ad has this
     warning on it.  So wherever you look, if you're
     looking at cigarettes at all, wherever you look
     here in the United States, three years before they
     ever set foot on American soil, this nation is
     being warned over and over and over again about
     the health risks of smoking.  Everybody.
          1975, they land here, go to New Jersey.
     Within months -- talk about adventure -- within
     months, what happens to Spyros?  He meets, dates,
     moves in with and marries -- he's 22 -- a 16-year
     old girl, Anastasia Papas, with the approval of
     her family, and he moves into their home.  And
     they take up residence as man and wife in the
     basement of a house, in the basement apartment.
          And everything is glorious with one
     significant exception.  And what is that?  Well,
     Mrs. Papas hates smoking.  She's allergic to it
     and she hates it.  And so once again, Spyros is
     subjected to now his new law family, but a whole
     other family down on him saying, don't smoke, it's
     bad for you.  Don't smoke.  It can be incredibly
     hard for you to quit.  Please don't smoke.  Don't 3823 smoke for me, because it's affecting me.  I have
     these allergies and I don't like your smoke.
          And what is it -- Mr. Acosta didn't show you
     this quote.  This is right out of the evidence
     that you heard.  What does he say?  He says -- and
     this is what Mrs. -- his wife, Anna Papas --
     Anastasia Papas says Spyros said to her.  He said,
     I'm not going to quit.  I've been smoking all my
     life and she needs to get over it.  That's the
     quote out of the testimony that you heard.
          Now, does that sound like a guy who's
     desperately trying to quit smoking and who just
     can't, but he's -- he's just terribly unable to
     quit because he's addicted?  And this is her
     quote.  This is her quote.
          She went on to say that he definitely thought
     he was in control of his smoking, no question
     about it.  No question about it.
          All right.  He continues to smoke.  Although
     he does, she did say that he would make these --
     how did -- how did -- how did he get described?
     This is not my description, but I think it's her
     sister that described him as a loud Greek, a very
     outgoing, very -- I guess the word I would use is
     jubilant kind of guy, just bigger than life. 3824 Right?  And so what does he do?  He makes these
     big gestures of throwing the cigarettes out the
     window.  But he's back smoking the next day.  He
     doesn't want to quit.  That's what he claims.  I'm
     not going to quit.  I've been smoking all my life
     and she needs to get over it.  I didn't make that
     up.  That's testimony you heard.  I knew you were
     going to hear it, but that's testimony you heard.
          1976, what else happens?  Well, that's a
     tragic, tragic time.  Spyros and Anna get in a
     terrible automobile accident.  He's burned badly
     on his body.  He's hospitalized for at least four
     or five months.
          Now, Dr. Rossman, who was here yesterday, is
     a true addiction expert, board certified in
     addiction psychiatry.  He explained to you that
     this is much like the people who he sees in the
     Colorado state penitentiary situation.  They --
     this is not a voluntary quit on his part because
     he can't smoke in the hospital -- can't smoke in
     the hospital.  Just like the prisoners can't smoke
     at the prison.  So he didn't willingly quit, but
     he did quit.
          And what Dr. Rossman said is what?  The
     nicotine is out of your body in very short order. 3825 It's half life is like two hours.  So it's gone
     from your body in a day or two.  He said for sure
     gone, completely gone, not even traceable in two
     weeks.  He said withdrawal symptoms are gone after
     a few days.  That irritability and that sort of
     thing, if you have it, it's gone in two weeks for
     sure.  And he said those neuro receptors --
     remember, I asked Dr. -- I asked Dr. Groff -- I'm
     sorry.  I didn't.  Sandra asked Dr. Groff.  She
     put two studies in front of him and said, have you
     ever seen these?  No.  Have you ever seen these?
     No.
          But Dr. Rossman said, you know what?  There
     are very recent studies that have looked at those
     neuro receptors from both a nuclear medicine
     standpoint and an autopsy standpoint.  And he said
     they both show that after -- within three weeks,
     your neuro receptors are back to their normal
     level.  This stuff about your neuro receptors
     remain upregulated or in increased numbers for the
     rest of your life is -- that's just not right.
          Now, if you don't look at the studies, if you
     don't know about the studies, then, sure, you
     won't know about it.  But here's Dr. Rossman, a
     true board certified expert in this field who 3826 says, look, it's been studied.  It's been studied
     two different ways, with nuclear medicine, with
     autopsy.  And what did they determine?  They
     determined within 21 days -- because that's the
     time frame they looked at.  They looked back and
     said, okay, is there still an up regulation at the
     end of 21 days?  No.  The answer is no.  And he
     told you all that.  And then it became
     uncontested.  Nobody came back.  Mr. Acosta could
     bring in a rebuttal witness if he wants to say,
     no, no, that's wrong, but he didn't do that
     because it's not wrong.
          So he's in the hospital.  He's there for four
     to five months.  During that period of time,
     Dr. Rossman said, look, if he had any withdrawal
     symptoms, they're gone.  If he had any up
     regulation, increased number of neuro receptors,
     they're gone.  He said, besides, you know what
     that is?  That's just proteins on cells --
     proteins on cells.  And he said they're constantly
     working, working, working.  He said, they're
     practically gone.
          He said, now you're down to the behavioral
     aspects and now it's up to you to decide whether
     you're going to go back.  And he said, look, it's 3827 just like the guys that they get out of prison and
     as they're going out the door, I say to them, hey,
     look, are you going to go back to exactly where
     you were before or are you going to change your
     behavior?  Are you going to go back with the same
     crowd, go to the same parties, the same
     circumstances that got you in here in the first
     place, or are you going to change your behavior?
     I mean, anybody who's been involved in the prison
     process, you know exactly how that all works.
     It's behavioral.  You get to decide, am I going to
     go to the parties where they're doing all these
     drugs?  Am I going to go do all that stuff or am I
     not?  And it's a decision that you get to make.
     That's a decision that Mr. Kalyvas got to make.
          Now, we don't know when he resumed smoking,
     we just know that at some point he decided to
     resume smoking.  We don't have anybody who can
     tell us the answer to that.
          We know that in 1978, he and Anastasia had a
     son, Peter.  We know that the whole Papas family,
     along with Spyros, moved to New Mexico in the next
     year, another adventure.  But we know that they're
     not going to stay together very long.  We know
     that very shortly, Anna and Spyros get divorced. 3828 They're divorced in 1980.  And then we're going to
     lose touch with him until 1985 when he's going to
     meet Cathy Kalyvas at the country and western bar
     Belle Star.
          Now, by the time they meet, what's happened
     to the warning on every pack of cigarettes?  Well,
     it's changed.  Now to provide even greater
     emphasis on the risk that you take when you smoke,
     the warnings have changed so that there are four
     different ones, and every pack of cigarettes is
     going to bear one of those warnings.
          It's either going to say -- and I'm -- I
     won't take the time to read them all, but one of
     them says cigarette smoke causes lung cancer and
     other diseases -- lung cancer, heart disease,
     emphysema -- and may cause complications of
     pregnancy.  But they tell you in four different
     ways that if you smoke, you're taking a
     significant risk.
          Now, Mr. Acosta says, gosh, Philip Morris
     shouldn't make cigarettes that can -- this isn't a
     new product.  Everybody on this planet knows that
     if you smoke you take this chance.  It's inherent
     to burning tobacco and inhaling it.  It's inherent
     in that. 3829 Now they meet, they begin to date, they even
     begin to live together.  And then all of a sudden,
     he's gone -- gone back to Greece.  And you now
     have her calendars.  They're in evidence.  You can
     look at them.  You can examine them.  I didn't
     have them until a very short time ago, but you now
     have them to review if you so choose.
          And they will reflect phone calls that she
     had with Spyros.  They reflect dates that she had
     with other people.  They'll reflect -- they'll
     reflect her life in minutia -- in minutia.  I
     mean, whether you water the plants or buy a new
     TV, it's all in there.  It's all in there.
          1980 -- 1980's here, we have a picture.  We
     don't know the exact date of this picture, but
     this picture, I think, sums up the lifestyle --
     lifestyle for Mr. Kalyvas.  There it is.  He's
     sitting on the sofa tieing his shoe.
          Now this picture is in evidence.  This
     picture was given to you guys by the plaintiff.
     This picture was put in evidence.  This picture
     was given by Mrs. Kalyvas to her lawyers, and her
     lawyers put this picture into evidence.  I had
     nothing to do with this.  Nothing.
          In this picture, you see Mr. Kalyvas, sofa. 3830 You see -- looks like Benson & Hedges.  You see
     glasses of wine.  Mrs. Kalyvas said glasses of
     wine.
          Can you take this part right there?
          I asked Mrs. Kalyvas whether she saw a hand
     mirror in this picture, and she said, no, she
     couldn't.  But you can.  You can see a plastic
     bag -- a clear plastic bag.  You can see something
     white.  You can see something white.  You can see
     papers.  You can see -- thanks -- and you'll have
     the picture.
          Is there decision making going on in that
     picture?  You might ask yourself, why the heck did
     they give me that picture?  Why would they give
     you that picture?  Is there decision making going
     on in that picture?  You got it.  Is there
     lifestyle decisions going on in that picture?  You
     got it.  You got it.  Is there risk going on in
     that picture?  You got it.
          1988, Spyros is still in Greece.  He's in a
     motorcycle accident.  He's in a coma.  Of course
     he doesn't smoke when he's in a coma, but even
     after he gets out of the coma and he's still in
     the hospital, he can't smoke.  Is this another
     opportunity for Spyros to -- the nicotine is all 3831 gone.  The withdrawal symptoms, if he had any --
     by the way, when you go back to the story about
     him being in the hospital with the automobile
     accident, there's no history there from the
     family -- from the Papas family of him walking
     around the hospital trying to bum a cigarette or
     something, trying to go outside to smoke a
     cigarette.  There's none of that in that story.
     Likewise, there's none of that in this story.  He
     can't smoke, doesn't smoke.  We don't know when he
     resumed smoking, but clearly at some point, he
     decides he's going to smoke again and he does.  We
     don't know when.
          He returns to the United States on
     December 6th.
          Let's go to 1991.
          Mrs. Kalyvas told you all the things she did
     to quit smoking.  You remember -- you can look at
     her calendars and you can see on her calendars
     where she writes down "quit smoking" on dates.
     And she said, when I was going to quit, my husband
     was going to quit.  And she said, we tried to quit
     three or four times a year every year through the
     '80s, into the '90s.  All you've got to do is look
     at her calendar.  Remember you'll see her crib 3832 sheet, too.  You'll see a little refresher sheet
     that she created, she said, off of her calendars.
     And you'll be able to look at that and say, hey,
     look, does this match up at all?
          Where does Mr. -- the only years in which
     you'll see repeated quit attempts for Mrs. Kalyvas
     are going to be '87 and '88 when he's not here.
     And when I asked her, do you have any idea whether
     he even wanted to quit smoking in '87 or '88 while
     he was in Greece, and she said, no, I have no idea
     whether he even wanted to quit smoking.
          '89, '90, she said she went to a smoking
     cessation program.  It's not on the calendar.  She
     said she went to a smoking aversion program, not
     on the calendar.  I don't know whether she did or
     she didn't.  She told us that her husband didn't
     go because he had to work on Saturday.  But when
     you look at the resume, you'll see he's not near
     work.  So there's no Saturday that he can't go to
     a smoking aversion or a smoking cessation program
     if that's what he wants to do.
          I'm not saying that Mrs. Kalyvas didn't
     decide that she wanted to quit smoking, but
     here's -- here's Mr. Kalyvas.  Has he given any
     indication through action that he wants to quit 3833 smoking?  Did that picture look like a guy who
     wanted to quit smoking really and truly?  That
     picture -- I've nicknamed that picture smoke and
     mirrors.  That picture speaks a thousand words
     about how Mr. Kalyvas lived his life.
          Now, we have some sentences from -- we have
     some sentences from the Hospice folks.  You take
     those sentences and put them together with that
     picture, and what's his nickname?  What's his
     nickname?  Lucky.  And you tell me whether
     Mr. Kalyvas isn't trying to tell you how he lived
     his life.  Not a criticism, just fact.  Just fact.
          Mrs. Kalyvas quits on November 18th.  Quits.
     No more smoking.  She celebrates.  You'll see it
     right in her -- in her calendars.  She celebrates
     the next year, '92, the next year, '93.  So
     clearly Mr. Kalyvas is attempting to quit in '92
     or '93 along with her because she's already quit.
     So that's not happening.
          All right.  1993, they moved to Florida, live
     on the boat.  1994, Mr. Kalyvas is told, you have
     lung cancer.  Dr. Rossman said, I'm applying the
     Diagnostic and Statistical Manual criteria for
     determining whether or not someone truly is
     addicted -- truly addicted, not a recreational 3834 smoker -- not a recreational smoker, somebody who
     really is in the grip of an addiction.  And he
     says, they are not somebody who instantly quits
     smoking for three months and then after that
     changes to dropping -- if Mrs. Kalyvas is right,
     he goes from smoking two and a half packs a day,
     which is 350 cigarettes a week, to two packs a
     week, 40 cigarettes.
          Dr. Rossman said, you want to see control?
     That's real control.  He said, I see patients who
     really are in the grips of an addiction, whether
     it's cigarettes or meth or coke or heroin.  They
     really are in the grips of an addiction.  But they
     don't stop on a dime and then resume at a level
     that's less than 20 percent of what they were
     doing before.  That -- and stay there.  That's
     real control.  And he said, look, go all the way
     to the Hospice records.  Go all the way there and
     see what you see in terms of control.  Because
     there's Mr. Kalyvas being monitored every
     15 minutes.
          And, yeah, Mr. Acosta found -- in all the
     Hospice records, he found a string of an hour and
     a half, I think, in which three cigarettes were
     smoked.  But if you want to take the time to do 3835 it, take a look at the rest of the Hospice records
     and see how often Mr. Kalyvas takes a smoke.
     Because Dr. Rossman went to the trouble to do
     that.  He had all the medical records, not just
     some of them.  He had all of the medical records.
     He had all the depositions.
          Do you remember Dr. Groff told Sandra, well,
     I read Mrs. Kalyvas' deposition.  Well, how about
     everybody else?  I don't need to know that because
     give me 100 cigarettes, and I'm done.  That's all
     I need to know.  Tell me what time you have your
     first cigarette in the morning?  That's all I need
     to know.
          So Dr. Rossman said, you know, I looked at
     the criteria -- you guys asked him some great
     questions -- I looked at the criteria to see
     whether or not there were indications of something
     having to do with an inability on his part -- I
     looked at the criteria to see if he satisfied the
     required number of criteria under the DSM, and he
     simply did not.  He simply did not.  And as a
     result, I concluded he was not addicted.
          So when we get to this first question and
     that first subpart of that question -- where did I
     put that?  Too many boards, Reilly, you've run out 3836 of space.
          When you get to this first question, was
     Mr. Kalyvas addicted, Mr. Acosta, instead of just
     have to put up a little bit of evidence, has to
     put up a mountain big enough to overcome the
     mountain that I just told you about right now.
     His mountain has to be taller than the mountain I
     just gave you.  And my mountain is pretty doggone
     high.
          And I brought you the only really qualified
     addiction expert in the -- that came to this
     courtroom, board certified and recertified in
     2007.  A frequent testifier in tobacco litigation?
     No way.  First case he's ever testified in.  Is he
     a guy that lectures to plaintiffs' lawyers on how
     to -- Sandra, do you know where that one is?
          You'll find it.  You'll see it in the
     exhibits.  I made it an exhibit, the brochure for
     the seminar that Dr. Cummings taught in on
     teaching plaintiffs' lawyers how to get big
     verdicts in tobacco cases.  Remember that right at
     the very beginning?
          Mr. Acosta tried to sort of even that up by
     asking him if he had taught at some seminar by a
     lawyer's organization or by some organization on 3837 proper utilization of forensic pathologists.  Not
     in the same ballpark, ladies and gentlemen.  Not
     in the same ballpark.
          Dr. Cummings, he said, I've testified so
     often in tobacco litigation, it's like my second
     job.
          Can people quit smoking?  Mr. Acosta -- I
     don't know if you listened to it as he was talking
     to you in the first part of his closing argument
     today, but he said three to five percent quit in
     any given year -- in any given year.  It was just
     that little trailer.  It's because he knows we've
     put this in evidence.  What is that?  It's the
     chart, most recent science from guys at the
     Harvard Medical School looking at, over time, what
     percentage of people quit.  Over 25 cigarettes a
     day -- and there's a real debate in this -- in
     this case as to -- I'm sorry if you can't see --
     there's real debate in this case as to just
     exactly what was Mr. Kalyvas' level of smoking.
     But over 25 cigarettes a day, 75 percent of those
     folks quit.  And what percentage of them don't
     want to quit?  This is everybody.  This didn't
     matter whether or not they said, I want to quit or
     I don't want to quit.  This is everybody.  And it 3838 was so echoed in this room -- it was so echoed in
     the courtroom when we did voir dire, I just was --
     I just thought to myself, I don't even need this
     chart.  I don't even need the science.  I just
     need you guys.  Because what happened?  I asked
     everybody, who used to smoke?  How many hands went
     up in this room?  Almost everybody.  Not almost
     everybody, but many, many people.  And I said, how
     many people are still smoking?  And only one of
     you raised her hand.  Can people quit smoking?
     Absolutely.  Do they quit all the time?
     Absolutely.  Absolutely.
          All right.  Let me -- could Mr. Kalyvas have
     quit smoking if he had wanted to?  If he wanted to
     change his lifestyle from what you saw in that
     picture, could he have changed his lifestyle?
     Could he have changed from what he said was the
     way he lived his life if he wanted to?  Sure.  He
     demonstrated it when he quit smoking like that and
     then had his level of smoking curtailed down to a
     level that showed tremendous control.
          All right.  So A, B, and C end up being all
     no.
          Let's talk about D.  Mr. Acosta said, gosh,
     my expert, Dr. Goldman, said smoking was the cause 3839 of his lung cancer and Mr. Reilly's expert,
     Sandra's expert, Dr. Andrews, was uncertain
     because he thought it might be a number of
     possibilities -- might be a number of
     possibilities.  And so and he's uncertain.  So I
     win because -- I win this issue because my
     evidence is I've got a guy who says for sure and
     they've got a guy who says not so sure, can't
     tell.
          But that's not the way you evaluate that.
     How do you evaluate this issue?  Well, you
     evaluate the issue by actually looking at all the
     evidence.  Dr. Godman said, I had most of the
     medical records.  Dr. Andrews said, all the
     medical records, all the depositions -- all the
     medical records, all the depositions.  That's how
     thorough Dr. Andrews is.  I think you've got an
     opportunity to evaluate the level of
     professionalism of Dr. Andrews, and the questions
     you posed to him convinced me you got that same
     impression.  I'm convinced you did.
          What did Dr. Andrews say to you?  Dr. Andrews
     said, look, when I have somebody who -- and by the
     way, he testified in what, one other tobacco
     trial?  Dr. Goldman has been with Mr. Acosta for 3840 how long?  He doesn't even know how many cases
     he's being listed in.  That's a professional
     relationship.
          Dr. Andrews said, you know what?  When I have
     somebody who's this young -- this young and gets
     lung cancer -- that's a disease of sixth and
     seventh decade of life.  So I virtually never see
     somebody who's in their early, early 40s who has
     lung cancer.  So what does that make me do?  That
     makes me think that there is something else going
     on here.  Should I just take the easier -- is he a
     guy that says that smoking doesn't cause lung
     cancer or something like that?  Heck, no.  He
     said, the easy route is I just say, hey, smoking
     did it.  But what did he say to you folks?  He
     said, no, in this instance, I really can't go
     there instantly because he's so young.  I have to
     think about this a little more.
          So what did he do?  He looked -- he looked at
     the records.  Did you ever hear Dr. Goldman say,
     oh, yeah, I evaluated the TB exposure.  I
     evaluated the workplace exposure.  I -- never
     uttered those words.  He didn't say, I've thought
     about his age, I've thought about his exposures,
     I've thought about these other potential 3841 explanations, and I've rejected them all and I
     still conclude that smoking was the cause of his
     lung cancer.  Did Dr. Goldman do that for you?  No
     way.  No way.  But Dr. Andrews, being the thorough
     clinician that he is, being the thorough
     pulmonologist that he is, he said, let me look.
          Now, Mr. Acosta says we're always denying.
     We didn't deny anything.  All we did was we
     listened to Dr. Andrews say what he found.  And
     what did he find?  And it's undisputed what he
     found.  Mr. Acosta could have brought somebody
     else in here and said, no, no, TB is not a --
     don't worry, TB is not a risk factor.  You don't
     need to worry about TB.  Didn't happen.
          He didn't bring anybody in that said, look at
     all those studies that look at bakers, people in
     the baking industry, they're not not at increased
     risk, that's hogwash.  He didn't do that.  He
     didn't do that.  As a matter of fact, what did he
     say to you today?  He basically said, that's all
     legit, because it is legit.  Dr. Andrews isn't
     going to come in here and damage his reputation
     for a tobacco company.  Give me a break.  That's
     ridiculous.
          So what did Dr. Andrews say?  They've worked 3842 together.  They worked together.  So what did
     Dr. Andrews say to you?  He said, look, the man
     tested positive for TB.  And testing positive for
     TB, if you're the clinician, your you're taking
     care of the patient, if you don't think it's real,
     you don't worry about it.  If you think it's
     real -- you take and consider all factors.  If you
     think it's real, then you treat them and you treat
     them now.  And what happened in this case?  They
     treated him.  The people taking care of him
     treated him.  They thought it was real.  And when
     you know, as soon as that, you know you've got a
     risk factor for the explanation for why he got his
     lung cancer, period.
          Occupational exposure, baker, shop, the
     studies show it.  Was I surprised by it?  Very.
     Did I have any idea that that was a real risk for
     people in that profession?  No way.  Was it
     disputed in this room?  No way, because that's
     what the studies show.  So Dr. Andrews throws it
     in the mix.  He said there's scarring in the lung
     -- scarring in the lung.  Is that a real risk
     factor for the development of lung cancer?
     Absolutely.  Absolutely.
          The doctor said, you know what?  You can't 3843 rule out genetics.  But he didn't do any genetic
     testing and didn't tell you that genetics was why
     Mr. Kalyvas got his lung cancer.  He was
     completely candid.  He was completely candid.  And
     he said to you, you know what?  I cannot tell you
     why this man got his lung cancer.  Do I include
     smoking in the mix?  Absolutely.  Absolutely.
          Then he went one step further.  He said, you
     know what?  I looked at the size of his tumor -- I
     looked at the size of his tumor, big as a walnut.
     I look at how long that probably took to have a
     cellular change.  I look at the latency period.
     And what do I tell you?  I tell you -- did he say
     that he must have gotten his lung cancer in
     Greece?  No, he didn't say that.  What he said
     was, you know what?  I can't rule out the
     possibility that his lung cancer began before he
     ever got here.  I cannot rule that out, because it
     is a disease of such latency.  But did he tell you
     that's the answer?  No way.  He's way too candid
     for that.
          Well, does that potentially make some sense
     in light of the fact that as we all learned in
     this courtroom, the Karelia cigarettes versus
     Benson & Hedges or versus Marlboros, the Karelia 3844 cigarettes are twice as heavy in tar and about
     50 percent heavier in nicotine than Philip Morris'
     own cigarettes, Benson & Hedges and Marlboros.
          THE CLERK:  Mr. Reilly, that's your
     one-hour-and-10-minute warning.
          MR. REILLY:  That's my hour warning?
          THE CLERK:  One hour and ten minutes.
          MR. REILLY:  One hour and ten minutes.  Okay.
     Thank you.  I need to hurry along.  All right.
     It's a good time for me to move on.
          So what's the answer to this question?  The
     answer to this question is no.  And if do you
     that, there's nothing more to do and you get to go
     home.
          All right.  How about if you decide that's
     not right -- and, frankly, I think that should end
     your work.  But if for some reason you think
     that's not right, I have to go on.  I have to talk
     to you further.  Right?  So I will.  I will talk
     to you further.  But you can see the way I've
     divided up my time.  That should be the end of
     your effort.  Based on the evidence in this case,
     that should be the end of your effort.
          All right.  The next question is, did
     Spyridon -- Spyros Kalyvas reasonably rely to his 3845 detriment on the concealment or omission by Philip
     Morris of material information not otherwise known
     or available or its failure to disclose material
     facts concerning the health effects or addictive
     nature of nicotine?
          You know, there's absolutely no evidence in
     this case about what Mr. Kalyvas relied on to make
     his decisions about smoking.  Nothing.  This
     question absolutely has to be answered no.  The
     only statement made in this whole trial about
     anybody thinking about influence -- being
     influenced by Philip Morris came from Mrs. Kalyvas
     based on a question that one of you asked.  And
     that was, why did you bring this lawsuit?  And the
     answer that she gave was really -- she said, well,
     I want to -- if I had known, I would have done
     something different.
          This lawsuit is not about Mrs. Kalyvas.  This
     lawsuit is about Mr. Kalyvas.  And there's not one
     shred of evidence in this case.  From the time he
     was ten years old till the time he died,
     Mr. Kalyvas knew that smoking came with a
     significant health risk, that if you ever started
     smoking, you could end up having great difficulty
     quitting, from the time he was ten-year old in 3846 Greece.
          I remember asking you guys during voir dire,
     how many of you have been waiting -- ever waited
     for a cigarette manufacturer to tell you anything
     about the health risks of smoking to decide
     whether you would or wouldn't smoke, and not one
     hand went up.  And that's where Mr. Kalyvas is.
     There's absolutely no evidence in this case that
     Mr. Kalyvas relied to his detriment -- that means
     he would have decided to quit smoking in time to
     avoid his lung cancer -- on the concealment or
     omission of information of any type from Philip
     Morris.  There's just absolutely no evidence of
     that in this case.
          If somehow you get beyond those questions and
     you get to this, I leave it to your sound
     discretion.  You know who was in control of
     Mr. Kalyvas's decisions to smoke and continue
     smoking.
          And as far as money is concerned, again,
     Mr. Acosta asked you for $30 million in this case.
     I leave it to your sound discretion.  If you get
     to this point of this question on this verdict
     form, I leave it to your sound discretion.
          The fifth question is, under the 3847 circumstances of this case, state where punitive
     damages awarded by clear and convincing
     evidence -- clear and convincing evidence against
     the defendant Philip Morris.
          What is it that they said we did wrong in
     this case?  What is it in terms of making the
     cigarettes?  And who agrees -- who agrees?
          Mr. Acosta said Dr. Farone -- the two sources
     here are Dr. Farone -- three sources, actually --
     are Dr. Farone, Dr. Cummings, and Mr. Acosta
     reading old documents.  And the first thing they
     said was -- and I see this print is way too small
     for you guys.  But the first thing they said was,
     well, you shouldn't make cigarettes that are
     inhalable.  Well, here's -- they said there's
     nobody that says that cigarettes have to be
     inhalable.
          Well, for 150 years, cigarettes have been
     inhalable.  What they want you to -- what they
     want you to do is to hold Philip Morris to a
     standard that would mean that Philip Morris had to
     change the entire way cigarettes are made in the
     world and have been for 150 years.  And if you
     have any doubt about that, just take a look at
     what the World Health Organization, which is 3848 the -- in effect, the Surgeon General for the rest
     of the world other than the United States, says
     about cigarettes.  It says, a cigarette is defined
     as any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or other
     nontobacco material.  Cigarettes can be either
     commercially manufactured or individually made.
     Roll-your-own cigarettes are lit and the burning
     process produces smoke that is inhaled -- I wish I
     had a marker -- that is inhaled through the unlit
     end.  That's not -- this isn't Alice in
     Wonderland.  We are not walking through the
     looking glass.  This is the real world in which
     cigarettes are made as they are made and have been
     for 150 years.  They are made to be inhaled.  And
     everybody knows it.
          All right.  They said ingredients -- they
     said toxins -- if you just took out -- Dr. Farone
     said, oh, if you just took out certain susbances,
     you'd have a safe cigarettes or you'd have a safer
     cigarette.  He said, if you just wouldn't use
     ingredients like ammonia, you would have a safe --
     safeer cigarette.
          Well, let's see who agrees with Dr. Farone
     or, to the extent Dr. Cummings weighed in, let's
     see who agrees with Dr. Cummings.  And we'll just 3849 go through it.
          Here's the Institute of Medicine.  I showed
     you their book Clearing the Smoke.  Here's what
     they said.  These are the people that are -- they
     are mandated to evaluate this whole picture.  They
     have access every one of these documents that
     Mr. Acosta showed you.  Every one of them.
     They're on the Internet.  They're on the website
     set up by Philip Morris.  You can go on -- you can
     go on -- not today.  After this is over, you're
     more than welcome to go on their website, look at
     these documents to your heart's content.  The
     Institute of Medicine, go on the -- go on the
     website.  You can read every one of those
     documents -- every one.  The Reynolds documents
     that try to reverse engineer a Marlboro 20 years
     ago to figure out why they're getting their butts
     kicked in the marketplace.  I'm sure Reynolds was
     desperate to figure out, gosh, how come we're
     getting our butts kicked here?  And some guy in
     the engineering department says, well, gosh, maybe
     we -- maybe it's because they use ammonia.  Maybe
     it's because -- I'm sure if we looked hard enough
     at the Reynolds documents, we'd find a guy in the
     marketing department saying, gosh, maybe they're 3850 out marketing this or something like that.  Who
     knows?
          But the bottom line is the Institute of
     Medicine has been tasked with this.  And what do
     they say?  They say, no one knows the
     dose-response relationships -- relations with
     specific toxins, the pathogenic mechanisms or the
     interrelationship between the many components of
     tobacco smoke with enough precision to make
     scientifically reliable quantitative judgments
     about the risk or actual harm reduction -- the
     risk or actual harm reduction associated with the
     use of any tobacco product.  Since we do not know
     which of many toxins may be the cause of specific
     harmful effects, we can only infer but we cannot
     know the health effects of the elimination of any
     one or several tobacco components.
          There's the truth given to you by people who
     are not getting paid as a second job or, in the
     case of Dr. Farone, a disgruntled ex-employee who
     go fired for insubordination 25 years ago still
     testifying against Philip Morris 90 times --
     something like that -- who at the very end of his
     deposition -- I don't know if you heard that last
     question and answer.  The last answer he gave was, 3851 I'm doing this to help Philip Morris.  Right.
          Here's the Institute of Medicine telling you
     nobody knows that.  Although many components in
     tobacco are known to be toxic, little is known of
     the specific dose-response relations of the
     individual toxins as they occur in cigarette smoke
     or of the interactions between the constituents of
     tobacco smoke.  There is little direct evidence
     that removal -- there is little direct evidence
     that the removal of specific substances from
     tobacco smoke or from the tobacco actually reduces
     risk or harm to human health.  There you are.
          Dr. Farone -- let's just run through these
     real quick.  Dr. Farone said, gosh, reduce the
     temperature of the burning end of the cigarette.
     Who agrees?  Here's Dr. Farone.  The Surgeon
     General?  No.  Department of Health and Human
     Services?  No.  Institute of Medicine?  No.
     National Cancer Institute?  No.  American Heart
     Association, American Lung Association, American
     Cancer Society, World Health Organization?  Has
     anybody come out and said, yeah, you're right,
     Bill, that would be great; we would think that
     that was a safer cigarette?  No way.
          And what did Dr. Werley, the guy from Philip 3852 Morris, say about this idea?  Because what Bill
     Farone said was, get the burning coal down to
     450 degrees Farenheit.  Dr. Werley said, you know
     what?  You do that and you'll have a smoldering
     fire and you'll create more toxins than you ever
     dreamed of -- ever dreamed of.
          How about reduce nitrosamines?  This is
     exactly what this is talking about.  There's
     little direct evidence that removal of specific
     substances from tobacco smoke or from tobacco
     actually reduces the risk of harm to human health.
     Right there, that includes nitrosamines.
          Who agrees with Bill Farone, William Farone,
     Dr. William Farone?  Nobody.  Have any one of
     these organizations ever come out and said, you
     know what, if you just got rid of those
     nitrosamines, you'd have a safer cigarette?
     Nobody.  Nobody ever.  They specifically refute it
     right there.
          How about -- we're going to change cigarettes
     completely.  We're going to make cigarettes so you
     can't inhale them.  You talk about -- now we're
     turning the world on its ear.  Now we're going to
     turn the world on its ear.  Cigarettes have always
     been inhalable.  I just showed you that from the 3853 World Health Organization.  But Dr. Farone says,
     you know what?  I think Philip Morris should be
     making cigarettes that are uninhalable.  And
     Mr. Acosta put it out in front of him.  He said,
     yeah, they're making cigarettes too inhalable --
     too inhalable.  Who agrees that cigarettes
     shouldn't be inhalable?  Nobody.  Nobody.
          I asked -- remember, I asked Dr. Werley this
     very series of questions.  I said, does anybody
     agree that cigarettes should be uninhalable?  Does
     anybody agree that these -- that these -- that
     using ammonia makes cigarettes more addicting?
     You know, I asked Dr. -- or Sandra asked
     Dr. Goldman whether or not cigarettes -- we showed
     a whole bunch of cigarettes.  We said, some of
     them -- in fact, I think I may have that chart.  I
     won't take too long to look for it, but it was the
     chart that had all the brands of cigarettes that
     Mr. Kalyvas smoked.  It's somewhere.  I can't find
     it.
          Anyway, it included homegrown tobacco and
     Karelia cigarettes.  And Sandra asked him, are any
     of these cigarettes any more addicting than the
     other?  He said, no way.  Are any of these
     cigarettes any more dangerous than another?  No 3854 way.  It's nicotine in tobacco.  You burn it.  You
     inhale it.  You run the risk that it will be
     addicting because there's nicotine in it, all
     cigarettes.  There's tar.  There's cancer-causing
     agents, toxins in all smoke.
          Remember, I asked Dr. Werley.  I said, are
     there cancer-causing agents if you just burn a
     pile of leaves?  He said, yes, anytime you burn
     organic material, you're going to create
     carcinogens.  You're going to create toxins.  It's
     just the nature of the beast.  No debate.
          Ammonia and urea make cigarettes more
     addicting, who agrees?  Anybody agree?
     Dr. Andrews?  Anybody?  Nobody.  Nobody.
          Remember, I actually asked Dr. Cummings that
     very question.  And this is from the transcript
     April 16th, page and line -- page 1562, lines 23
     to page 1563, line 5.  I said, yeah, but whether
     or not it's more addicting is pure theory and why
     anybody likes it better is pure theory, isn't it?
     Well, more addicting, what it is, is that all
     cigarettes are addictive -- no dispute -- as long
     as they contain nicotine in them.  Potentially so.
     No question about it.  And it's the theory, I
     think -- I think -- the theory I think is over the 3855 speed or delivery to the brain.  That's where the
     science is still -- still up in the air a bit.
     That's it.  That's their guy who testifies as a
     second livelihood against us.
          Do additives make cigarettes more inhalable?
     I asked Dr. Werley that very question.  He said no
     way.  I said, does anybody agree that it's so?  He
     said no way.  There they are.
          Did anybody come here from any one of those
     organizations and say, you know what, I agree with
     William Farone?  You ought to make -- you ought to
     take additives out, see the bromine or cocoa
     shells, anything?  How about the Institute of
     Medicine?  Nobody.
          Do additives make cigarettes more toxic?  You
     know what?  You're going to see this one and
     you're going to laugh.  Who agrees?  Nobody.  Not
     even Bill Farone.  How do I know that?  Because
     here's what he said.  This is his indictment of
     additives making cigarettes more toxic.  Doctor,
     you're not trying to tell the jury that a
     cigarette without additives is safer than a
     cigarette with additives, are you?  It depends on
     what you mean by that.  If you're talking about --
     see, I think a cigarette without additives is 3856 probably less likely to be smoked in the same
     quantity.
          Now, does he know that?  No.  He's just
     guessing.  But he says, it probably won't be
     smoked in the same quantity as a cigarette that is
     more flavorful, easier to inhale, he says.  But
     nobody agrees with that.  So it's not safer in the
     sense of having -- it's not safer in the sense of
     having less toxic chemicals come out of it.  There
     you go.  If that's what you -- well, of course
     that's what we mean.  Isn't that what you meant?
     Isn't that what you meant, Dr. Farone?  But there
     is.  He's saying, no, it's not safer in the sense
     of having less toxic chemicals come out of it if
     that's what you mean.  But it may be safer because
     it's less acceptable to be used over and over
     again with such frequency.  So you might smoke --
     you might smoke less of it.  Let's put it that
     way.  That is just -- that's Dr. Farone.
          What do the people who makes the cigarettes
     with no additives in them say about their own
     products?  They say no additives in our tobacco
     does not -- not mean a safer cigarette.  It's put
     on every pack.  And somebody asked the question,
     does Philip Morris make these American Spirit 3857 cigarettes?  The answer is, no, they're made by
     the Santa Fe National Tobacco Company.  And
     R.J. Reynolds has one that's called Winston No
     Bull.  Same thing.  Has the same thing on it, no
     additives in our tobacco does not mean a safer
     cigarette.  No way.
          THE CLERK:  Mr. Reilly, you have one more
     minute.
          MR. REILLY:  One more minute.  If I could
     just have a few more minutes, Your Honor, I'll --
     just three or four?
          What else did they say?  They said Philip
     Morris should cooperate with the public health
     community.  I showed you that we did.  The Surgeon
     General, the National Cancer Institute to the
     Tobacco (unintelligible) Group, the Institute of
     Medicine, and the Center for Disease Control.  We
     went all through it.  You're going to have the
     exhibits.  You'll be able to look at them
     yourselves.
          What else did they say?  They said, well, we
     ought to go out of business.  We ought to make
     cigarettes that no one will smoke, ought to make
     cigarettes you don't inhale.  We ought to make
     cigarettes without nicotine.  We actually did the 3858 last one.  We showed it to you, Next.  Nobody
     bought it.
          Philip Morris actually went so far as to make
     a cigarette that you have to have a holder for, a
     machine, reduces the level of these toxins, but
     nobody wants that.  Did the public health
     community get behind that?  Not once.  Not once.
          So, ladies and gentlemen, the answer to this
     question on the verdict form should you award --
     is there an entitlement to punitive damages by
     clear and convincing evidence, no.  Obviously I've
     run out of time.
          I apologize for being longer than I thought I
     would be, but we're now at that point where you
     have to make a decision.  And I don't have an
     opportunity after Mr. Acosta -- he gets to get
     back up again.  Why?  Because he has the burden of
     proof.  Remember, he's got to create that
     mountain, that mountain that overcomes everything
     I just showed you.  He's got -- for clear and
     convincing, he's got to have a really tall
     mountain.
          I'm going to sit down.  And I would just ask
     that as you are listening to Mr. Acosta give
     his -- sorry -- final argument, since I won't be 3859 able to come back up again and explain anything to
     you again -- and I won't be able to bring
     Dr. Werley and I won't be able to knock over the
     thing, I would only ask that you think to
     yourselves, have I seen this document?  Is it
     taken in context?  Should I take the time to look
     at it?  Is it 50 or 60 years old?  Is he reading
     me the whole thing?  I would ask you to just do
     one thing, and that is remember this is
     Mr. Kalyvas' case.  Keep your eye on that ball.
          Thank you very much.
          Your Honor, this is going to take me a minute
     to remove all this stuff.
