          MR. ACOSTA:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Of course I'm here on behalf of Cathy and
     Christine Kalyvas.  And, you know, the jury system
     is in a sense -- the court system, the judicial
     system, is a third branch of the government.  And
     we all thank you very much for your attention in
     this case and being here and doing what you're
     doing and being part of it.
          I'm going to tell you about our case.  And
     the first thing I've got to say is that the
     defendant, part of the cigarette industry, that
     industry embedded itself in our society.  It
     embedded itself.  And it was a cancer -- it was
     just like a cancer.  It was a cancer that grew in
     our society.  It was deliberate.  It was 3756 intentional.  It was for profit.  And as a result,
     hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of people
     have died.  They have died because of the choices
     of Philip Morris to do what it did.
          They were wrong.  They should have never done
     it, but they did it.  And they embedded themselves
     in our society to get away with it.  And they got
     away with it by denying, denying, denying, using
     their strength to hire public relations agencies,
     to influence stories, to influence the media, to
     influence the government.  They did all these
     things knowing that people were going to smoke
     cigarettes, they were going to get addicted to
     them, and they -- many of them were going to die.
     They knew.  Their own research determined it.
          You've heard evidence from expert witnesses.
     All right?  Now, they had theirs; we had ours.
     There's another set of evidence, though, that you
     didn't really get to see much of that I'm going to
     show you right now.
          And these are documents that are in evidence
     in addition to this one.  You've seen this one
     quite a bit.  This is the Philip Morris website
     brochure, which is in evidence.
          And you'll get to take these things back into 3757 the jury room with you, and you'll be able to read
     them in the jury room.  You'll be able to see what
     I'm telling you.
          We have, I don't know, maybe 50, 75 records
     here that are in evidence that were not discussed
     during the trial because there's so much.  It
     would take forever, and we can't do that.  So
     we're trying to provide you with enough evidence
     so you can see what really happened.
          And I'm going to start with the first one
     that -- the numbers on these exhibits are roughly
     in chronological order, just roughly, because
     there's some that aren't.  But for the most part,
     they are.
          Oh, excuse me.
          By the way, Your Honor, I would like to
     reserve about 20 minutes for my -- my rebuttal.
          THE COURT:  That's fine.  You may do so.
          MR. ACOSTA:  And may I have a warning at an
     hour?
          THE COURT:  All right.  The clerk will do
     that for you.
          MR. ACOSTA:  The first one is a survey of
     cancer.  This is an R.J. Reynolds document.  It's
     1953.  And within it, it just does a whole series 3758 of research that shows how cigarettes were causing
     cancer and the companies were aware of it.
     Because then in 1953, they got together and they
     formed a conspiracy.  It was a conspiracy.  It was
     a conspiracy to do wrong.  And the doing wrong was
     to deny what they knew to the public.
          We have the Frank Statement which came out as
     a result of what they did, which I have a copy of
     here someplace.  Let me find it.
          In this Frank Statement, they promised to put
     people's health ahead of their profits, ahead of
     everything, but they didn't do it.  They broke
     their promise.  And they told people they believed
     that the products they made were not injurious to
     health, but they knew they were.
          This was all a big public relations issue for
     them.  They hired one of the biggest public
     relations firms in the country, and then they had
     a meeting.  And they got together and they decided
     that they would publish this.  And their names are
     at the bottom of it.  Their names are at the
     bottom of it.  They all signed on to it, and then
     they maintained that over the years.  They -- as a
     group, they maintained this position.  And that
     position was so that they would be able to 3759 continue to sell cigarettes.
          A couple of things that were in evidence are
     from a vice president of Philip Morris.  His name
     is George Weissman.  And Mr. Weissman wrote
     that -- and this is in 1953.  He wrote, Look, if
     it turns out that there is something dangerous
     about our cigarettes, then we'll go out of
     business.  That's what he told the company, and
     that's what he told a group in a speech that he
     gave.  And that is Exhibit No. 22.  His letter is
     Exhibit No. 14.
          And he gave a speech; this is a copy of the
     speech.  And in the speech, he told people, Look,
     we'll go out of business if it turns out that our
     products are dangerous.
          Now, people knew that there were little
     irritating things about cigarette smoke.  I mean,
     it's common sense that if you breathe in smoke, it
     can make you cough.  It can make you sick, you
     know, right when you do it.  So the companies,
     what they did is they advertised -- this is way
     back in 1954 -- you know, have assurance about our
     product because we put this stuff called di-gly in
     it so that you can inhale it without any
     irritation to your throat.  Okay, that's one 3760 thing, but to know that it caused cancer is
     another thing.  And that's what they knew
     before -- before that time.
          We have record 42, which is 1958.  It's a
     Philip Morris confidential document.  And I've
     highlighted this area right down here because it
     says, "Benzpyrene must go."  Benzpyrene is one of
     the carcinogens in cigarette smoke.  If you read
     through the first document, you're going to see
     that there are many, many compounds that are
     carcinogenic, which they knew back before they did
     this.  This is one of them.  And they knew it had
     to go.  And they were telling people, you know,
     Don't worry, our products aren't hazardous.
          Then we get to 1961.  And that's Exhibit 50.
     This is the one where they know where the
     carcinogen is.  They define it in the front of it.
     And then they show all of these carcinogenic
     compounds that they knew were in cigarette smoke.
          Then in Exhibit 51, we have a 1959 Philip
     Morris document where they know that one of the
     reasons people smoke is addiction.
          Then we have another document, 1963.  This is
     Brown & Williamson's vice president, one of the
     people that signed on with Philip Morris to this 3761 document -- or one of the companies that did.  And
     he states, We're in the -- we're in the business
     of selling nicotine, an addictive drug, and we're
     going to challenge the Surgeon General.  This came
     out just before the '64 surgeon general's report.
          Then we have Exhibit 76, which is a technical
     forecast dated -- it's a Philip Morris document
     dated 1963.  And when you read this, you're going
     to see that they knew about nitrosamines.
     Remember, there was a lot of discussion about
     nitrosamines.  Well, they knew about them in 1963.
     They knew that they were extremely dangerous, and
     they didn't care.  They were worried, though,
     about bronchitis and emphysema at the time.  They
     thought that that might be a bigger danger to them
     than the lung cancer issue.
          So that's another one that you can read to
     show you what they knew.  But they denied it.
     They publicly denied these things.  They publicly
     denied them.
          And they hired the -- they created The
     Tobacco Institute.  They didn't hire it, they
     created it.  They created the TIRC, this agency to
     do research.  They created these things to
     manipulate the public, to make the public think 3762 that they were -- that they were doing good
     research, but they weren't.  They had great
     scientists.  They did -- they did some great
     studies, but they didn't do anything to connect
     smoking to cancer.  They never once said that
     cigarette smoking causes lung cancer or any
     cancer.  They never said it causes emphysema.
     They never said it was addictive.  They didn't do
     that.
          Here's 1964.  This is right after the surgeon
     general's report of '64.  This is about the time
     Spyridon Kalyvas is in Greece, and he's smoking.
     And if you'll remember -- and I'll show you a
     little bit -- in a little bit what some of the --
     his sister said about the American cigarettes
     being over there.
          But at that time, the company, Philip Morris,
     through Mr. -- Mr. Weissman -- he's the one that
     said we'll go out of business -- now he's totally
     changed his mind because he says that we need to
     provide people with a psychological crutch so that
     they'll keep smoking our cigarettes.  They
     disagreed with the surgeon general's report and
     they said, Hey, guess what?  We don't think the
     surgeon general's report is having much effect on 3763 people, let's just give them a psychological
     crutch.  And you'll see that there's are other
     things in here like, How we'll go about doing it?
     We'll even get comedians to make jokes about it.
     That's what they did.
          Then we have a document called the 1965 --
     it's a 1965 cigarette, and it's No. 79.  And they
     talk about nicotine delivery, what was needed, and
     investigating purchasing nicotine, adding nicotine
     to cigarettes to -- and defining the contribution
     of nicotine to flavor and how they can transfer it
     from the filter to the smoke.  They were very
     interested in nicotine going way, way back.
          And then here's another document from Philip
     Morris, No. 81.  It's a talk to the Philip Morris
     board of directors.  It demonstrates their
     philosophy about all of this.  "Our philosophy is
     not to start a war, but if a war comes, we need to
     fight and win."  They were fighting the public
     health community so that they could keep selling
     cigarettes so that they could keep doing what they
     knew was wrong.  They knew it was wrong and they
     did it anyway.
          Here's Exhibit 88, nicotine and smoke pH.
     You heard a lot about that.  It's dated 3764 March 31st, 1966.  Ammonia carbonate -- like I
     said, you can read this whole thing -- basically,
     the amount of nicotine people got varied with the
     pH.  That's what this says.  And it says that
     nicotine delivery can be controlled via filter or
     smoke pH.  That's what they were -- that's what
     they were doing back in 1966.
          Exhibit 89 is the market potential for a
     health cigarette.  Now, what did they do in the
     1950s when -- right after this came out?  They
     started promoting and making filtered cigarettes.
     In fact, they took the Marlboro, which used to be
     a lady's cigarette, turned it into a man's
     cigarette and marketed it to men.  And they put
     a -- they put filters on these cigarettes because
     they knew that people would think that, well, if
     there is something wrong with it, this filter is
     going to take care of it.  They were giving them a
     psychological crutch.
          Then later on they did other little gimmicky
     things with their filters to make people think,
     Well, it will be safer.  We'll make -- we'll start
     lowering tar and nicotine.  Yeah, they lowered the
     tar and nicotine, but they -- they changed the
     form of the nicotine.  They changed the form of 3765 it.  And I'll show you another document in a
     minute about that.
          But this -- this particular document talks
     about how the filter was really an illusion and
     how the charcoal filter was just a gimmick.  They
     wanted to keep people smoking.
          Here's No. 91.  This is a Philip Morris
     document, it's dated September 22nd, 1966.  And at
     the end of it, it says -- you know, you can read
     the whole thing, but I'm just trying to point out
     some of the highlights -- do people differ in
     nicotine absorption?  The answer to this is of
     importance as we evaluate that question as we
     influence our cigarettes to alter nicotine
     absorption.  That's what they were doing.  They
     were making it more addictive.
          This is the proof of what Dr. Farone said and
     what Dr. Cummings said.
          Now, Exhibit No. 102 is a letter from
     Mr. Osdene, who was, at that time, manager of
     biological research.  It talks about how the
     cigarette contains a gas.  When you smoke it, a
     lot of it, the burning tobacco turns into gas.
     And that gas is nitros oxide, which slowly
     destroys lung tissue.  Every cigarette you take, 3766 you destroy lung tissue.  And it doesn't grow
     back, because your lung is nonregenerative.  And
     that's what this says.  And they knew that they
     were going to be destroying people's lungs as they
     smoked, and they didn't care how many cigarettes
     you smoked.
          You know, this isn't like the alcohol
     industry.  The alcohol industry never said, Hey,
     alcohol is not addictive; hey, alcohol is safe to
     use.  Never said that.  But these guys did.
     Philip Morris did and the rest of them did.
     That's the difference.
          September 1969, this is a memo to the
     president of the company from the research
     director.  And, basically, it shows that somebody
     had done a test that might hang the industry
     because they hadn't done any research on their own
     products, which they should have done.  They
     hadn't done anything like that.
          Now, here's No. 11 -- Exhibit 11.  And this
     is the disagreement Philip Morris had with the
     position that the New York Times had about the
     warnings.  They didn't think that people should
     have to -- they didn't think that warnings were
     necessary, because you know why?  They didn't 3767 think their cigarette was hazardous.  You may
     remember we had the CEO of the company,
     Mr. Coleman, was on television, Face the Nation.
     And he said -- well, he said something about
     making smaller babies, that women may like that.
     And then he said something about how their
     cigarettes were not hazardous, how we don't have
     any programs to help people quit smoking, we don't
     think there's -- our cigarettes are even
     hazardous, you know, why should we?  That was
     his -- his position on national television.
          Here in 1969, this particular document's from
     the -- Mr. Weikum, who, again, was the director of
     research.  And now they're worried about the
     liability situation.  They're worried that if they
     admit that cigarettes cause cancer that they'll be
     in trouble on a liability basis.  The lawyers
     control a lot of what they do.  This particular
     document indicates that they -- they believe that
     cigarettes may be an accelerator of cancer -- an
     accelerator of cancer.  And they talked about
     how -- that they don't want to admit the cause of
     the disease.  So you can -- you can take a look at
     that.
          Now, somebody asked a question about -- about 3768 inducing lung cancer in animals.  Here's the
     study.  This is Philip Morris' document.  That man
     works for Philip Morris.  He's writing to Mr. --
     Dr. Weikum, who's the head of research and
     development at Philip Morris.  And basically he
     says, you know, Dr. Auerbach showed me photo
     micrographs -- those are pictures of slides,
     microscopic slides.  And he said to my nonexpert
     eye that these were typical invasive carcinoma.
     And then he read him a report that wold
     corroborate the diagnosis.  And then at the end he
     says, I would say the experiment is a crude one
     but effective in that carcinoma in dogs has been
     produced.  You have these dogs breathing smoke.
     And he says, you know, even if that's wrong, the
     obvious emphysema produced cannot be denied.
          Number 123, this is a confidential Philip
     Morris document.  And, again, it talks about how
     they need to make a counterattack to the public
     health community for suggesting that smoking is
     bad for them.
          Then an advertisement.  This is in the
     mid-'70s.  It's 124.  The question about smoking
     and health is still a question.  They're saying
     that nobody's ever been able to determine that 3769 smoking causes any disease in here.  So you can
     read that.
          This is 1970.  And this about -- this is
     another Philip Morris document.  It's about CTR.
     The TIRC, which was that industry research group,
     changed its name to Council for Tobacco Research.
     And then they say that -- that CTR has frequently
     denied what others find to be the truth.  Let's
     face it, we are interested in evidence which we
     believe denies the allegation that cigarette
     smoking causes disease.  That's what they were
     looking for.  Of course it isn't there.  It never
     was there.
          The physiological effect serves as the
     primary incentive.  You get to read this.  This
     was written by the head of the behavioral science
     department -- psychology department at Philip
     Morris.  And they know that there was a
     physiologic effect of nicotine.
          He says, The tobacco product is, in essence,
     a vehicle for delivery of nicotine designed to
     deliver -- oh, this is a different document, by
     the way.  This is 133.  It's called the Nature of
     Tobacco Business and the Crucial Role of Nicotine
     Therein.  This is a Reynolds document we included 3770 so you could see what the other companies thought,
     too -- that the tobacco product is, in essence, a
     vehicle of delivery of nicotine designed to
     deliver nicotine in a generally accepted and
     attractive form.  Our industry, then, is based
     upon design, manufacture, and sale of attractive
     dosage forms of nicotine.  And I think he goes on
     to say, Happily for us, nicotine is habituating.
          This is a letter dated 1972 from a person
     named Udow that works at Philip Morris saying that
     people smoke really for the narcotic effect.
     That's what they smoke for is the narcotic effect.
     It says, Although most people talk about taste, it
     is likely that a greater number smoke for the
     narcotic value that comes from nicotine.
          And here's 136.  That same man that talked
     about the beagle study, Dr. Auerbach's beagle
     study, in 1972 writes Dr. Weikum there at Philip
     Morris.  What it sounds like at the moment is that
     cigarettes are addicting and the reaction of the
     inveterate cigarette smoker is like that of any
     drug addict.
          Now, this is a very interesting document
     right here.  This is an R.J. Reynolds secret
     document.  And it's -- what they did at Reynolds 3771 is they -- they took apart a Marlboro cigarette.
     They were trying to figure out, why is Marlboro
     selling so many cigarettes over Winston?  And what
     they found is that Philip Morris had been
     tinkering with the pH of the smoke and that that
     caused free nicotine.
          And it says, All evidence indicates that the
     relatively high smoke pH shown by Marlboro and
     other Philip Morris brands and Kools is deliberate
     and controlled.  Kools were made by Brown &
     Williamson at the time.
          Then they go on to say, As the -- as the
     smoke pH increases above about 6.0, an increasing
     proportion of the total smoke of nicotine occurs
     in the free form that rapidly is absorb -- it's
     rapidly absorbed by the smoker and gives the
     smoker the nicotine, quote, kick.  And then they
     talk about nicotine kick and free nicotine.
          This document is 138.  It talks all about
     the -- changing the form of nicotine to free base.
     And there's a graph in it, this graph right here,
     which shows you as the smoke pH goes up, there's
     more free nicotine.
          And they also mention ammonia.  In addition
     to the -- in addition to enhancing nicotine kick, 3772 increasing the pH, increasing the alkalinity of
     smoke above about 6.0 causes other changes,
     particularly the increase in smoke pH.  And that
     is achieved by adding ammonia to the blend.
     They're talking about Marlboros in that document.
          Document 140.  This was -- Dr. Farone talked
     about this.  Mr. Osdene handed this out.  So if
     anybody asked any of the people that worked there,
     What do you say if you're confronted by somebody
     that wants to know whether cigarettes cause
     cancer, the answer is:  Exposure to cigarette
     smoke has never been shown to cause any disease.
     That was the position that they took up till the
     year 2000.
          Behavioral Research and Annual Report,
     Smoker's Psychology.  They went along and they --
     they did lots of studies to figure out how they
     can obtain more effective ways to -- that they can
     develop to obtain consumer response to cigarettes.
     Here's one, 142, Manipulation of Nicotine Delivery
     by Addition of Acids to Filler.
          1975.  This is one that shows that when you
     smoke a Marlboro and you smoke a Marlboro Light,
     you get exactly the same thing.  You get the same
     thing.  This is their study -- Philip Morris' 3773 study.
          1977.  This is about that IN BIFO.  This is a
     letter showing that they wanted to create a dummy
     mailbox so that they could hide what they were
     sending over to Europe.  They didn't want anybody
     over here to find out.  Dr. Farone talked about
     that because they didn't want their records
     subpoenaed.
          Then this is 1977, comments about the CTR.
     They're saying, Hey, this program is going the
     wrong direction.  We're going to dig our own grave
     if they're going digging into issues about whether
     or not cigarettes cause cancer.
          1978.  This talks about something that a
     Dr. Abood was doing that might potentially put
     them out of business, and that would be to find a
     nicotine antagonist.  That might be a pill that
     you take so that those receptors don't light up
     when you smoke nicotine.  They were worried that
     it might drive them out of business, so they
     actually -- they -- they wind up hiring Dr. Abood
     to do work for them.
          This is a study that they did in 1978.  It's
     called Roper Study Proposal to Tobacco Institute.
     Let me read this. 3774 "An admission by the industry that excessive
     cigarette smoking is bad for you is tantamount to
     an admission of guilt with regard to the lung
     cancer problem.  This could open the door to legal
     suits in which the industry would have no
     defense."
          "To suggest that" -- and then they talk about
     the smoker, the consumer.  "To suggest that his
     coping techniques are not of his own choosing" --
     that's because of addiction -- "and are
     predetermined certainly does not constitute good
     faith on the part of an industry toward its
     customers."  This is an admission that what they
     were doing was not in good faith.
          Here's one from Dr. Osdene in 1979.  It's
     Exhibit 165.  "Once again, I'm force of the
     opinion that the program seems to be misdirected
     since its main mission seems to be proving that
     smoking causes lung cancer."  That's what they
     didn't want.
          These are the documents that surround that
     one that I showed Mr. -- Dr. Werley, who was the
     second witness for Philip Morris, who basically
     wanted to tell you about the second page of that
     document that had lots of research that they were 3775 doing but didn't want to talk about the third page
     which said, avoid -- avoid doing any research that
     would link human beings to lung cancer.
          Now, here's one.  This is a Lorillard
     document.  This is so you can see other companies
     doing the same thing.  Lorillard says, "Determine
     the minimum level of nicotine that would allow
     continued smoking."
          This is a memo to Dr. Seligman.  And this,
     again, involves that Dr. Abood I mentioned before
     to do receptor studies.  "They are doing central
     nervous system studies on the effects of nicotine
     receptors in that system."
          Then this goes on.  Dr. Dunn, in 1980,
     writes -- and there's a lot of it here, and I
     don't have enough time to go through it, but this
     is Exhibit 175.  And you'll see that essentially
     what was happening is their lawyers were telling
     them what they should research and what they
     shouldn't research and that they had to remain
     officially heedless of the drug properties of
     nicotine.  They didn't want anybody to know what
     they knew about nicotine and what they were doing.
          178 is another Philip Morris document in
     1980, Evaluation of Major R&D Programs -- research 3776 and development programs.  They had a nicotine
     program.  The thing they sell most is nicotine,
     and they wanted to talk about the additives and
     the activities of the additives.
          Then No. 180, this one is Knopik to Kloepfer.
     And in this particular document, this is -- this
     is somebody in the Tobacco Institute writing the
     president of the Tobacco Institute.
          And he says that basically there was a
     conference on -- on -- on drugs that he went to.
     And he says, "I feel badly about my own lack of
     intelligence gathering in this situation, but I
     don't think the questions I now raise are
     academic.  Legal counsel reminds us, I'm told,
     that the entire matter of addiction is the most
     potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a
     lung cancer cigarette case.  We can't defend
     continued smoking as free choice if the person was
     addicted."
          This is an admission of the Tobacco
     Institute.  They're admitting that when you smoke
     and you become addicted to nicotine, that your
     choice, your willpower is constrained by the
     influence of the drug.  It changes the brain.  It
     changes the structure and function of the brain. 3777 In 1981, Document 182, this is another
     surgeon general's report response.  "It is our
     opinion that Philip Morris and the tobacco
     industry take a more aggressive posture to
     counterattack the anti-smoking group."  And that's
     what they continue to do.
          This one talks about the threshold of
     nicotine that's necessary for people to remain
     addicted.  That's 187.
          Here's an industry study called the Nordeen
     Study.  It was done for R.J. Reynolds.  But in
     this one, they found that most people that smoke
     for a significant time would like to stop.  And
     this is dated 1982.  "Many, but not most of those
     who would like to stop smoking are able to."  And
     they were worried that people would somehow figure
     out a way to stop, and they didn't want that to
     happen.
          This is No. 201, and it's The Cigarette
     Controversy, Why More Research is Needed,
     presented to the United States Congressional
     Committee by the Tobacco Institute.  Another
     denial.
          208.  This is -- this is where Philip Morris
     tries to get Dow Chemical, who made Nicorette Gum, 3778 to stop advertising it to people that they didn't
     know whether they wanted to stop or not.  This
     is -- so what they did is they threatened them and
     they discontinued purchasing chemicals for a
     while.  And Dow then changed its advertising to
     only advertise to people that had already said
     they wanted to quit smoking but not to try to get
     anybody else to quit.
          Here's Document 221.  It's November 1990.
     This is the one with project jolt.  In 1990,
     Philip Morris has got a project to jolt up its
     tobacco by changing the form of the nicotine
     because it says that the form of nicotine has
     different physiologic responses.
          So what they're doing is they are
     manipulating the way that nicotine is delivered.
     They don't have to add nicotine.  What they did is
     they changed the way it's delivered.  And they
     changed the way it's delivered by this pronation
     issue.  You know, whether it has an extra proton
     on it or not makes it free-based, goes through
     faster.  And they know that when it gets to your
     brain faster that it produces a stronger sensation
     of the addictive effect.
          They also knew in 1992 that patches didn't 3779 really work very well, that they wouldn't work
     unless you had the behavioral psychology
     assistance to stop smoking, that there was a
     medical -- it's a medical issue for many people,
     not everybody -- not everybody.
          Here's a man from The Tobacco Institute.
     This is a transcript of an interview of Brennan
     Dawson in 1994.  And you remember we showed you a
     little movie clip near the end of our case where
     the CEOs of the companies were under oath and they
     told Congress, We don't believe nicotine is
     addictive -- 1994.  This is after the Surgeon
     General had determined it was in 1988.  They
     denied it.
          And this sheet right here, 231, is in
     evidence.  Philip Morris does not believe
     cigarette smoking is addictive.  It's an
     advertisement.
          So the things that the plaintiff's witnesses
     told you are confirmed by these documents.  If
     you -- if you -- if you read those documents, they
     will confirm the things that Dr. Farone told you
     and the things that Dr. Cummings told you.
          Now, I want to talk about addiction for a
     second.  And, of course, you may remember this 3780 from opening.  This is how you get started.  You
     smoke, the nicotine gets into your lungs, and then
     the heart pumps is right up to the brain.  The
     faster it gets in, the faster the reinforcing
     action of the nicotine.
          You know, the cigarette companies, what they
     did -- what Philip Morris did is they made it as
     easy as they could to start smoking -- as easy as
     they could.  Then they make it as hard as
     possible, by making it more addictive, for people
     to quit.  And then that makes it easy to relapse.
          You know, they are the masters of relapse.
     And many people quit.  They make it a day or two,
     some make it a week or two, for many people
     repeated, repeated, repeated times.  Some people
     just don't make it.
          You saw in some of these -- these -- the
     questions from these books -- the questions from
     these books, even though it's a psychiatric
     manual, it was like 55 percent of people that
     tried to stop were not able to do so.  The
     cigarette companies' own documents in here, most
     people, unable to.
          Now, somebody that stops for a year, two
     years, three years, they pick up a cigarette, they 3781 already have tolerance.  They don't have to go
     through that -- that nausea and the dizziness that
     very novice, naive smoker has to go through.  You
     just pick it up and you're off to the races again.
          And that addiction, it does last for a life
     time.  Those receptors go dormant.  That's what
     happens to them, but they're there.  And when you
     start smoking when you're ten years old, you grow
     a lot more of them than you do if you start when
     you're 25 or 20, because of the development of
     your brain.
          It's a process.  You smoke.  It becomes a
     regular smoking habit.  You get dependent on it.
     That's addiction.  The ease in stopping, as you go
     along in this process, it gets harder to stop.
     The ease of relapse, it gets easier to relapse.
     This is the process.
          There was a cycle that was discussed by
     Dr. Groff.  Let me see if I can find that one.
          This is the cycle.  You smoke, you get
     nicotine absorption, which they wanted to have
     happen as quickly as possible, it changes your
     mood.  And for some people, it's arousal.  But
     it's usually pleasure for most everybody.
          There's tolerance and physical dependence. 3782 Tolerance means you can't -- you can't smoke 20
     cigarettes the first time you try to smoke.  You
     smoke one, it makes you cough, it makes you gag,
     it may make you sick, it may make you nauseous.
     For most people, they can't just pick up
     cigarettes and just start smoking, it doesn't work
     that way.  It's a drug, and your body has to build
     up a tolerance.
          It does it pretty quickly, though, usually in
     about two or three weeks.  And then you're smoking
     20 a day -- or you're able to smoke 20 a day, and
     then that lasts forever.  It lasts forever, and
     you don't get sick.  You don't continually get
     nauseous or dizzy every time you smoke a
     cigarette.  You need the nicotine.  And drug --
     drug abstinence produces withdrawal symptoms.
          Mrs. Kalyvas talked about the symptoms her
     husband had and how he would -- he pace.  He was
     restless.  He had irritability.  He was nervous.
     He couldn't concentrate on things that he did.
          That's -- that's typical of people who try to
     stop smoking.  It's just a symptom.  It is a
     symptom.  Those symptoms aren't as strong for
     nicotine as they are for other things, but the
     cravings and the availability of the drug make it 3783 easy for people to keep relapsing -- they keep
     relapsing.  And nobody knows exactly why, but
     nicotine works the same way in the brain as
     cocaine and other hard drugs.  It's the same
     thing.
          Then what do we get up here?  You get the
     cravings to eliminate the withdrawal symptoms, and
     you're smoking again.  You break the cycle, stop
     smoking; but it's easy to relapse.  And that's why
     only 3 to 5 percent of people that try to quit
     smoking every year are successful that year.
     That's what happens.
          We have another board here that demonstrates
     how this process works, because one of the things
     that we have to show you in this case is how
     addiction leads to lung cancer.  And that's what
     happens.  Addiction leads to continued smoking.
     You keep smoking and you get cancer.  The people
     that get lung cancer, the people that get
     emphysema, those are the addictive -- those are
     addicted smokers.  You see?
          Now, I want to talk to you for a second about
     the plaintiffs' burden of proof in the case.  And
     the instructions were read to you and, you know,
     they talk about greater weight.  But what I'm 3784 going to tell you is -- is an interpretation of
     what that is.  The greater weight is just this
     much.  It's whether we are more right than wrong,
     whether it's more likely that we're right than
     wrong.  That's what -- how you judge this.  All
     right?
          So the first question on the verdict form is
     going to be, was addiction to cigarettes a legal
     cause of Mr. Kalyvas' death?  And it only has to
     be a cause.  It doesn't have to be the only cause
     or the cause; a cause.  And it only has to be a
     significant contributing cause.  That's what our
     burden is.
          Please don't hold us to a higher burden than
     the law requires.  Please follow the law on that.
     It's whether we are probably more right than
     wrong.  That's the way to look at this.
          Now, there was testimony about Mr. Kalyvas'
     lung cancer.  This is the bottom line.  They had
     Dr. Andrews on the stand.  And what was
     Dr. Andrews' bottom line?  I don't know what
     causes cancer, you know.  And he was all over the
     map.  Maybe it was because he was a baker.  Of
     course, if he was a baker, then that ran into the
     latency problem.  If it was TB, it was 3785 tuberculosis, that runs into the latency problem
     because there wasn't enough latency between the
     tuberculosis or the job as a baker.
          But Mr. Kalyvas started smoking at age ten,
     so he had 30 years of cigarette smoking at the
     time he got lung cancer.  30 years is a long time,
     and it's a lot of smoking.
          Dr. Goldman, who's the head of the department
     and still sees patients -- he doesn't just have an
     administrative role, he still sees patients out
     there at USF and the VA.  Dr. Goldman, chairman of
     the department, been there 35 years, runs a
     smoking cessation program.  He says he's looked at
     all this and says this Pancoast tumor -- that's
     the name of this kind of tumor that Mr. Kalyvas
     had -- grows into the scapula and the ribs.
     Dr. Goldman said that the adenocarcinoma was
     caused by Mr. Kalyvas' cigarette smoking.
          It's a dose-response disease.  It's caused by
     carcinogens.  Things that cause cancer are
     carcinogens, and they're chemicals.  They're
     agents.  And they disrupt the way the DNA in your
     cells work, and that's how cancer is caused.  And
     the DNA has, you know, billions of levels, codes.
     And over time what happens is those molecules 3786 attack the DNA chain and then cancer starts.
          Dr. Goldman said it caused his cancer.
     Dr. Andrews says, I don't know.  So if Dr. Andrews
     says, I don't know, and Dr. Goldman says, I know,
     where does that leave us?  That leaves us with the
     greater weight being on Dr. Goldman's side,
     because this -- this fellow doesn't even know.  He
     said, I can't tell you that smoking had anything
     to do with it.  I can't tell you whether it was
     TB, whether it was the fact that he was a baker or
     whatever.  Nobody can know.
          You know, that's the position the cigarette
     industry has taken for 60 years now.  That's what
     they do.  They have denied everything in this
     case.  We came in here and we admitted some
     responsibility.  We think the responsibility
     should be shared.  The cigarette company; nope,
     he's not addicted; nope, we didn't do anything
     wrong; nope, didn't cause the man's cancer.
          You know, if there was ever a person that was
     addicted, who would be addicted if it wasn't
     Mr. Kalyvas?  Who would it be?  You know, with
     his -- his smoking and what he went through and
     what he did -- and these are, you know, what some
     of the witnesses said.  "He smoked all night long 3787 one time."  His son says he's a chain smoker.
          His former wife -- former wife never saw him
     without a cigarette.  "One time he tried to stop
     and he threw them out the window."  She knew he
     struggled with it.  And this is going back in the
     '70s, okay, back in the '70s.  "There was a point
     where he was doing it for himself.  Nobody was
     making him quit, he wanted to quit smoking.  He
     couldn't quit.  But I don't think he realized it
     was something that he couldn't overcome."
          His sister:  "He smoked a lot.  Between my
     dad and Spyro, the ashtray was always full."
          Thomas Papas:  "He had attempted cutting
     back.  I recall him not smoking for a while and
     then, you know, just breaking down.  He would go
     and, you know, just like have half a one, you
     know, the classic what everybody does when they
     try to quit.  He smoked one right after the other.
     He had a cigarette in his hand more often than he
     did not."
          This is a man that cigarettes had a tenacious
     hold on.
          This is Thomas Mullane.  That's Lola's
     husband, and Lola's his half sister.  He's asked
     about addiction.  "Only in a way that -- only in 3788 hearing him say, I can't stop smoking, or
     something of that nature.  I tried, but I can't
     stop.  I don't know where or when that
     conversation took place, but I know he said, I
     just can't stop smoking."  1971 to '79 is when he
     knew him.
          This was his friend:  "Was he addicted to
     smoking?"
          "I know he was."
          "How do you know that?"
          "Because he wanted a cigarette while he was
     dying."
          And this is Lola:  "He tried many times to
     stop, but he couldn't."
          "Did he say he was addicted?"
          "Yes, yes.  He tell me.  He say, I can't
     stop.  I remember he tried to stop, I remember
     that, but he can't.  He couldn't stop.  He said, I
     can't stop, Lola."
          Those are what the witnesses said.  And you
     heard what Cathy said, how they would try -- how
     they would try.  And, you know, it goes back in
     time a long way.  This has been a long struggle.
     13 years since he's died, and now here we are, you
     know.  Hard to remember every single little page. 3789 Impossible.  So we tried to give you the best that
     we could on that, and hopefully you'll realize
     that what we did was met our burden of proof.  We
     are more likely than we are wrong on that issue.
          Now, the brands.  It's always the issue of,
     you know, whose cigarettes were they?  Well,
     here's what Lola says about it:
          "Spyridon started smoking when he was ten."
          "Do you remember how long your brother smoked
     the Karelia cigarettes?"
          "Not too long."
          And the reason for that was American
     cigarettes.
          "You said later he started smoking Marlboro."
          And she says, "After they bring to Corfu
     American cigarettes, yes, everybody smoked
     American cigarettes."
          "Do you remember when they brought the
     American cigarettes?"
          "I was maybe 17, 16 years old then."
          "You were 16 or 17?  So that would be 1961,
     1962."
          "That's when the American cigarettes came.
     He started smoking about a year after that."
          And she says:  In Athens they have Corfu 3790 town.  They have American cigarettes.  Now
     everybody have every kind American cigarettes.
     And I be honest with you.  We say in Corfu,
     everybody like to smoke American cigarettes."
          But here's the one.  Now, he smoked Marlboro
     and Benson & Hedges.  Benson & Hedges is made by
     Philip Morris also -- Benson & Hedges and
     Marlboro.  And he smoked some -- he smoked a lot
     of other brands, too, but on a -- you know, not as
     a primary brand.  The Marlboro and Benson & Hedges
     were primary brands.
          Here's Nicholas:  "He smoked some Greek
     cigarettes like I told you, some American
     cigarettes, Marlboros.  I know he smoked Marlboro
     Lights, regular Marlboros."
          And as I say, most people when they switch --
     they try lights because they think lights are
     safer, but they're not.  Philip Morris today
     admits that.  It's in that website.  And you'll be
     able to see what they say about cigarettes today,
     which they denied until 2000.
          Here's Anastasia Papas.  '74 to '81, what she
     remembers was Benson & Hedges.
          Thomas Papas:  "Do you remember what type
     cigarettes Spyridon smoked?" 3791 "Benson & Hedges in the gold pack."
          That's about the same time as Anastasia.
          Thomas Mullane, '71 to '79.  He only
     remembers Marlboro.  "I remember seeing him with a
     pack.  The Marlboro packs stood out with the white
     and the red and the V on the front.  I remember
     him with a pack."
          Additionally, he and Lola would bring him
     Marlboro from America when they would go to Greece
     to visit.
          Now, the evidence proves that we're more
     right than wrong about addiction, and we're more
     right than wrong about the lung cancer being
     caused by, or at least a cause from cigarettes --
     at least a cause from cigarettes.
          Remember I mentioned that dose response?  I
     think I probably didn't finish that thought, I
     don't think.  But the more you smoke, that
     raises -- keeps raising your risk until something
     happens.  But every -- every layer of cigarettes
     along the way contributes to that.  It's part of
     the dose.
          An analogy was made to aspirin.  You know, a
     person can take a lot of aspirin and nothing
     happens.  You take one more and you die, because 3792 you have that dose response to it.  Well, if you
     took away some of the aspirin down below, you
     wouldn't die when you took that last one, that
     90th one, because it wouldn't be 90 anymore.
          So the way smoking works is that all of these
     cigarettes combine to cause the cancer, and that's
     how dose response works.
          So one of the things you're going to see in
     the verdict form --
          If I could have the ELMO, please?  And,
     actually, I want to go to the jury instructions
     first.
          This is something that the judge just read to
     you.  And it's got circled, if so, whether such
     addiction was a legal cause.
          And then that second paragraph up there, in
     addition to -- in addition to defendant's
     cigarettes as a legal cause of Spyridon Kalyvas'
     death, if it -- if an addiction to -- I'm sorry --
     an addiction to defendant's cigarettes is a legal
     cause of Spyridon Kalyvas' death if it directly
     and in a natural and continuous sequence -- that's
     a sequence -- produces or contributes
     substantially to producing his death so it can be
     said that but for his addiction to defendant's 3793 cigarettes, his death would not have occurred.
          Well, what do we have then?  We have a lot of
     smoking of Philip Morris cigarettes.  A lot of it.
          They are -- Dr. Goldman talked about how they
     were a substantial contributing cause.  That's
     more right than wrong.  That is more right than
     wrong.
          And then I didn't finish this.  Let me read
     further.  "In order to be regarded as a legal
     cause of death, an addiction to cigarettes need
     not be the only cause.  An addiction to
     defendant's cigarettes may be a legal cause of
     Spyridon Kalyvas' death even though it operates in
     combination with the act of another or some
     natural cause or some other cause if such other
     cause occurs at the same time as Spyridon Kalyvas'
     addiction to cigarettes and Spyridon Kalyvas'
     addiction to defendant's cigarettes contributes
     substantially to producing such death."
          So that is what has been proven.  And, of
     course, that's up for you to decide.  All I can do
     is argue the facts to you.  But you heard them and
     you decide whether we're more right about that
     than we were wrong.  If we were more right about
     it, then we should win.  You should -- you should 3794 check yes on the verdict form, which -- there's
     the first question on the verdict form, was
     addiction to cigarettes manufactured by Philip
     Morris, Inc., a legal cause of Spyridon Kalyvas --
     the death of Spyridon Kalyvas, yes or no?  If you
     answer no, then the case is over.  But if you
     answer yes, then these findings from the Florida
     Smokers Group apply to this case.  Smoking causes
     adenocarcinoma, which is the type he had.
          Philip Morris' cigarettes, these are things
     you have to take as true.  Philip Morris agreed
     with the other cigarette companies to conceal
     information regarding the health effects of
     cigarettes and their addictive nature with the
     intention that smokers rely to their detriment.
     That must be accepted as true if you check "yes."
          Now, Dr. Cummings said smokers did, in fact,
     rely on it.  Dr. Farone said, you know, if they
     hadn't concealed some information from me and done
     what I wanted them to do at Philip Morris, we
     could have used technology to make a safer
     cigarette.  Didn't happen.
          Cathy Kalyvas said, you know, had I known
     that they were changing the structure of my brain,
     you know, I would -- we would have done something. 3795 We would have tried harder.  I would have
     encouraged him.
          If people had known that cigarettes were
     truly, in fact, addictive and they were changing
     the structure of their brains when they smoked, it
     would be a lot different.  It would be a different
     world.
          If cigarette companies made admissions way
     back when, it would be a different world, but they
     didn't.  They didn't do that.  They didn't -- they
     didn't tell the truth.  They told falsehoods, half
     truths to make profits.  And they did it at the
     expense of people's health.
          THE CLERK:  Mr. Acosta, that's your warning.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Thank you.
          Okay.  I'm going to quickly try to wrap this
     up.
          There are more findings that you have to
     accept:  That their products are defective and
     they continued to conceal it, that the products
     didn't conform to the representations made for
     them, that they were negligent.
          I was going to tell you a little bit about
     Dr. Farone.  Remember the green slides?  He had
     those six opinions.  He went through six opinions 3796 about the things that Philip Morris did.
          Dr. Cummings, he had very similar opinions.
     Dr. Cummings is the one that came from Roswell in
     Buffalo, New York, who came down here who runs the
     tobacco cessation quit line up there, talked about
     Mr. Kalyvas' addiction and what the cigarette
     companies did.
          One of the things that we put on evidence
     about this adenocarcinoma, you may remember there
     was an issue about propane gas burners in these
     little barns that increased the nitrosamines.
     Dr. Farone talked about the increase of the
     nitrosamines from using that kind of tobacco and
     that then he knew what they were doing back then.
     The witness, Mr. -- Dr. Werley didn't even know
     about it until 1998 and 1999.
          Dr. Farone knew about it.  He knew -- he knew
     that by bathing these tobacco leaves nitric oxide
     that it would increase the carcinogenicity of the
     tobacco that Philip Morris used, could have
     contracted for.  They could have changed it back
     then, but they didn't.  They didn't do that.
          And that particular issue, both the Surgeon
     General and the National Cancer Institute in
     Monograph 13, which I have right here and showed 3797 you, found that that was responsible for the
     increase in adenocarcinoma.
          You know, I -- I don't know how much you can
     say about somebody who's 35 years old and who's
     pregnant -- finds out she's pregnant at the same
     time she finds out her husband's got lung cancer.
     I don't know how much you can say about a little
     girl that's a year old -- let me show you just a
     couple of these blowups.  We haven't really
     published the pictures to you yet.  They're --
     they're going to go back in -- all the pictures
     that we put into evidence will go back in the
     courtroom with you.
          This is when he's in the Air Force.  Imagine
     what he looked like when he was ten.
          This is Cathy and Spyros when she's pregnant
     and he's got cancer.  She's 35.
          And this is Spyro playing with his daughter.
     Now she's about a year old, and he's dying.  And
     when you read those records -- he had to wear
     diapers at the end.  She had to take care of him.
          You know, the only thing we can do is to get
     their attention.  I mean, that's what this is all
     about.  That's why we've gone through all of this.
     It takes a lot of courage to do what they've done. 3798 So I'm going to tell you that, you know, you
     have the ultimate decision about how much money
     you award in restitution.  This is -- we're asking
     for restitution.  And $15 million for Cathy and
     $15 million for her daughter would not be too much
     money.  That would not be too much money.
          We've asked for punitive damages.  I'm not
     going to give you a number for that, that's
     something you just decide based on what you've
     heard.  We do ask that you find that they are
     warranted.  The amount of money that you think
     would punish them for their behavior is totally up
     to you.
          I don't have anything else right now.  I hope
     I have some time left so after Mr. Reilly is done,
     I can come back and talk to you.
          Thank you very much.


          MR. ACOSTA:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Mr. Reilly made a rhetorical question, you
     know, what did we do wrong?  What did Philip
     Morris do wrong?  Well, what they did wrong is
     they didn't tell the truth.  That's what they did
     wrong.
          You know, they -- this case is -- you can
     divided really into two parts.  The first part is
     whether Mr. Kalyvas was addicted to nicotine, 3860 which was a cause of his death.  The second part
     is punitive damages.  If you find that addiction
     to nicotine was the cause of his death, then these
     findings that we talked about before, the fact
     that their cigarettes are unreasonably dangerous,
     the fact they're defective, that they concealed
     things from smokers, concealed material --
     material things that were otherwise unknown from
     people, those will be applied.  And you'll go
     directly to apportioning the damages between
     Philip Morris and the plaintiff.  All this other
     evidence you've heard about additives and ammonia
     and all that stuff, that goes to the punitive
     aspect of the case, you see.  And that may not
     have been made clear by us, and I apologize for
     that if it hasn't.  But when you read through this
     and you see how it works going through the verdict
     form and the instructions, that is how it works.
          What Philip Morris has done and what they
     continue to do is to create doubt on things.  They
     doubt -- they doubt everything that smokers say
     when they've come to court and try to sue them.  I
     mean, that's the name of the game.  They deny
     everything.
          MR. REILLY:  I object, Your Honor.  I don't 3861 think this is a game.
          THE COURT:  Overrule the objection.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Mr. Reilly, he wants you to
     speculate about, you know, all these people that
     didn't agree or did agree.  What's that all about?
     You know, where in the world would they come from
     to agree or disagree with Dr. Farone?  There's --
     there's no proof.  There's no proof.  I mean,
     where does that come from?  It's just something --
     it's just a matter of speculation because -- I
     guess because there isn't some book somewhere or
     some document somewhere that says we agree or we
     disagree.  It just isn't -- it isn't there.
          I took notes trying to follow along with what
     Mr. Reilly was asking, and so it's a little --
     it's not in a perfect order.  But one of the
     things that he talked about was responsibility.
     And the plaintiff in this case has accepted
     responsibility for a share of the fault.  Philip
     Morris hasn't.
          And so there's something I need to tell you
     about responsibility.  Everybody believes in
     personal responsibility.  That's not the point.
     But who do you owe the responsibility to?  You owe
     responsibility to yourself.  You owe 3862 responsibility to maybe your family.  You owe
     responsibility to the rest of the people in the
     country.  But there might be one person that you
     don't owe the same kind of responsibility to, and
     that would be the one that talked you into doing
     what you did.  You know, this is a buyer/seller
     arrangement.  They sell.  And they -- they got
     Mr. Kalyvas, smoking their cigarettes, to do
     exactly what they wanted him to do.  They got him
     to do what they wanted him to do.  Now they take
     the position, well, he shouldn't have done that.
     But back then, they got him to do what they wanted
     him to do.  And he did it.
          So is he as responsible to Philip Morris?
     That's why we have shared fault.  That's -- that's
     why they have responsibility.  They got him to do
     it.
          Now, in terms of the addiction, you know, if
     this man isn't addicted, then nobody's going to
     meet the criteria of addiction.  And that criteria
     varies.  You saw Philip Morris, since 2000, they
     have a much lower bar for what they consider
     addiction to be.  You know, it's somebody that's
     nervous and irritable when they -- and have a
     difficult time smoking -- stopping smoking. 3863 That's at the bottom rung of what addiction is.
     You know, addiction is something that influences
     you.  It's what causes you to keep -- to be a
     repeat buyer.
          Now, this company knew -- this company knew
     that 45, 40 percent -- let's say it was 30 percent
     of the people that see the warning try to quit.
     And they know they're not going to be able to do
     it.  They know they're not going to be able to do
     it.
          You know, Mr. Kalyvas, he tried to stop.  I
     mean, you -- you can pull little bits and pieces
     out of different parts of testimony and find
     different things.  But if you look at it in total,
     you'll see that he did, in fact, try to stop.
     Now, once you try to stop -- once you try to stop,
     that means that the smoking you do from then on
     you wouldn't have done if you had stopped.  If it
     was just a matter of free choice and you decide,
     I'm not going to do it anymore, and you don't do
     it anymore, that's great.  But that isn't the way
     it works with cigarettes.  And they knew that.
     And they didn't tell the truth about it.  That's
     why they should be punished, because they didn't
     tell the truth about it. 3864 Now, I want to say one thing about
     Mr. Kalyvas' lung cancer.  You know, if you look
     in the medical records, you'll see that there's
     one record that says rule out TB.  The treating
     doctors ruled out TB because they found that he
     had an adenocarcinoma.  Otherwise it wouldn't have
     been ruled out.  So you can -- you can see that
     there.
          Aside from that, the latency period that
     Dr. Andrews used was wrong.  It was the wrong
     latency period.  Latency is from the time of
     initial exposure till the time the disease
     manifests itself, not the time when the first cell
     starts dividing, because nobody would ever know
     what that is.  Nobody could ever know that.  And I
     showed that using the 1985 Surgeon General's
     report.
          Lucky.  Well, I don't know exactly what that
     has to do with this case, but whether somebody's
     lucky or not doesn't have anything to do with
     whether they get physiologically and
     psychologically addicted to cigarettes.  But, you
     know, here's a guy who came over from Greece,
     didn't speak English.  And he's a young man.  He
     gets to stay in America.  That's lucky.  He got 3865 pulled from a burning wreck that he was rear-ended
     and his car flips over and he's -- he's underneath
     it and somebody pulled him out.  That's the only
     reason he's still alive.  That's lucky.  So maybe
     that's what explains lucky.
          All I can say is, you know, when you go in
     the back and deliberate this case, that mountain,
     whether it's a mountain or a hill or whatever,
     we've met our burden of proof.  It's -- it's a
     very low burden of proof.  And, you know, I want
     to thank you for your time.  And just go back and
     do what jurors do.  We appreciate it.
          Thank you.
