          MR. PANTAZIS:  -- that monitor?  May I move
     it.
          Good morning.  I'm looking at my watch, and I
     apologize for the rudeness, but as Your Honor has
     said, both sides get an opportunity to speak to you
     this morning, conclusion, summation, of this part
     one, this qualification phase of the case.
          I'm looking at my watch because as I warned
     you in my opening, I talk too much.  And while I
     get to go first, and Mr. Reid will follow me, the
     time that I spend with you cannot be any greater
     than his time.
          So we have equal amounts of time, I just go
     first, him next, and then I get a chance to chat
     with you again, assuming I don't talk too much in
     this first phase, and I have done that before. So first of all let me tell you on behalf of
     both parties, I'm sure Mr. Reid and his client as
     well, thank you for your time today and thank you
     for your service during the first two weeks and for
     the next week as we go to part two.
          I'm -- in looking at this case and -- my first
     communication with you, I said, you know, what is
     your job?  What is the job of the jury?
          I talked to you a little bit about how we
     stand up when you come in.  I know that's maybe a
     little awkward for some folks, but you're the judge
     of the facts, and that's why we're honoring you and
     honoring the positions that you hold.
          But what tools does the Court, the court
     system give you to do your job?  And His Honor
     spoke about this.  All the law comes from His
     Honor.  Judge Rouse instructed you on the law, I'm
     going to comment on the law a little bit, but all
     the law is from him.  While I may comment on it and
     I may think I'm a big dog, I don't make the law,
     there is only one person in this courtroom that
     does that, and that's Judge Rouse.
          But the law in this case comes -- he gave you
     some instructions and I'm going to talk about those
     as we go down. The second tool that you have is evidence.
     Evidence comes from that witness stand, and you've
     heard witnesses, both -- some of the parties, Ms.
     Koballa, you heard her daughter, you heard the
     treating physicians, or as I call them, the
     eyewitnesses to the event.
          You heard professional witnesses, people that
     have been paid to come in and give their opinions.
     There is nothing wrong with that.  As you see, both
     sides use it.  Sometimes people like to throw up
     all the big, "Oh, he got paid money."  Both sides
     do that for professional witnesses.  That's not
     unusual.  We do that so you can know the total
     picture of that witness.  But you are to consider
     that.
          So the witness's talk is evidence, it's sworn
     under oath, it's evidence.  We also have documents,
     documents that are marked as exhibits.  We have put
     in, I don't know, 5, 600 pages of medical records.
     They have put in, I don't know, 800 pages.  I'll
     tell you why there is a difference, but basically,
     the medical records have duplications in them.
          Medical records, when you go from one doctor
     to the other, they sometimes incorporate the other
     doctor's medical records.  We skim those out. These are the medical records that we felt was
     pertinent because it took out the duplications.
     But you will have both, so you can check it out
     yourself.
          Another piece of evidence in the exhibits, and
     these are two very important, and I call them to
     your attention, it's document evidence Number 4 and
     document evidence Number 25.  These are internal
     documents from R.J. Reynolds, and we think they
     bear extremely important on the decision in this
     case, particularly the decisions and the evidence
     you have heard in this trial.  And I'm going to
     talk about them.
          But you don't have to take my word for what
     these documents say.  You will have them back with
     you.  And they are their documents, one from 1962
     from Dr. Rodgman, the other's from 1972, I believe,
     from Dr. Teague, talking to other R.J.R. people.
          Now, you also have in evidence undisputed
     facts.  This is a little bit unusual case.
     Remember, I'm going to show you some boards where
     we had these pieces of evidence that were -- you
     were instructed that you must follow because this
     is a continuation of that two year long trial.
          This is just the qualification of the -- see if Ms. Koballa qualifies as a member of that class.
     So there are some findings that you must apply.  So
     that's in both law and evidence.
          You also have admissions.  I have two boards,
     I have a nicotine fact board I'm going to show you,
     I know you get tired of seeing it, but it has
     certain nicotine facts, you saw me go over it with
     witnesses, I wanted that to show you that those are
     not disputed facts.
          While they may have not said we admit to them,
     they didn't put any evidence to say we disagree
     with them.  And the same thing is true with the
     illness facts I am going to put on.  They agree
     those facts are true.
          So those are two of the tools, but there is
     one more, and I think it's an important one.  I
     think it's so important this qualification part of
     this case, I named it, it's the common sense part.
          The judge instructed you, and I think you
     heard him say very clearly, don't leave your life
     experiences outside.  I'm not talking about
     prejudice.  I'm talking about your common sense.
     Where I grew up, it's what my grandparents and my
     parents taught me, it's a way of life, it's a way
     of viewing things and applying the facts. Use your common sense in determining what's
     the truth in the evidence and how it applies to the
     law.  I believe it's very important and I believe
     it will guide you.
          So what's the law.  Okay.  Well, we first have
     to answer some questions.
          Miss Thomason.
          Can you make those a little bigger?
          Your Honor, may I approach the --
          THE COURT:  You may.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  This is what you will actually
     be answering.  This is what you will take back.
     And it really has two questions, and the second
     question has two parts.
          First question, "Was Stella Koballa addicted
     to cigarettes containing nicotine?"  You answer it
     yes or no.  We believe the answer is yes.  If you
     answer yes, then you go to the second part.
          "Was Ms. Koballa's addiction to cigarettes
     containing nicotine a legal cause of her, 1, her
     C.O.P.D./emphysema, or" -- "and/or, B, lung cancer,
     adenocarcinoma."  If you answer yes to either one
     of those, and yes to that, to number 1, we move on
     to phase two or part two.
          So that's what -- the questions that you must answer.
          Now, the judge talked about, again, in his
     instructions, he said, "Well, how do you -- how do
     you know what level of evidence meets the law?"  He
     used the term greater weight.  The greater weight
     of the evidence means the more persuasive
     convincing force and effect of the entire evidence
     in the case.  It doesn't mean absolutely.  It
     doesn't mean that you've got to have a specific
     number.  It just means more convincing.
          One example that's often used is if you had
     two stacks of 100 papers in each hand, had a
     hundred pieces of paper, same kind in this hand,
     and a hundred pieces of paper, hundred kind {sic}
     in this hand, and the scales on both of those are
     even, but if you put one piece of paper more on
     this side, it tilts the scale.
          That's greater weight of the evidence.  It can
     be that slight.  That's a judgment call for you to
     use, observing the evidence, applying it to the
     law, and applying your common sense in doing it.
          The judge also talked about what's legal
     cause.  This is an important -- very, very
     important in this case, because we know that
     Reynolds Tobacco Company claims all these multiple things caused the injury to Ms. Koballa, and don't
     be confused, you don't have to find that smoking
     was the only cause.  It could be one of many
     causes.
          And this is what the judge instructs you.  It
     need not be the only cause.  It only has to be a
     substantial contributing cause.  It can even
     operate in combination with the acts of another or
     in other causes of the addiction to cigarettes
     containing nicotine.
          So hypothetically, I don't think it's true, I
     don't think any of the things that they put on
     their board through their witnesses contributed at
     all to the C.O.P.D. or the cancer, but if you feel
     like it played a role in smoking -- excuse me, and
     nicotine addiction to cigarettes played a role and
     it was a substantial contributing factor, it's
     okay, you can check yes.
          Why does the Court give us this charge?  The
     Court gives us this charge because this is not the
     first trial in the state of Florida ever.  It --
     State of Florida has created this court system and
     given this charge because it recognizes that
     plaintiffs --
          MR. REID:  Objection, Your Honor, as to what the State of Florida recognizes.
          THE COURT:  I think you need to rephrase it.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Excuse me.
          The reason we have this charge is because
     plaintiffs like Ms. Koballa come in this courtroom,
     they don't live in an incubator, they live in a
     real world, and this charge demonstrates that you
     come into this courtroom living in a real world.
          Ms. Koballa was born in 1933.  She has had a
     long and healthy, productive life, thank for --
     thankfully to Dr. Doig.  But she's had exposures
     like we've all had exposures.  Those are not the
     issues in the case.  The issues in the case is did
     the smoking play a substantial contributing factor,
     along with anything else.
          I personally think it was the only, that's
     my --
          MR. REID:  Objection, the personal opinion of
     an attorney is irrelevant.
          THE COURT:  Again, suggest you rephrase as far
     as --
          MR. PANTAZIS:  I apologize, Your Honor.
          I think the evidence shows it was the only
     cause.  So we're at part two -- excuse me, we're at
     part one.  What are we going to do in part one? We're going to answer those questions.
          You remember what I put up in the opening.  Is
     Stella Koballa addicted to nicotine cigarettes?
     The answer is yes.  Did that addiction to nicotine
     substantially contribute to her lung cancer and her
     C.O.P.D.?  The answer is yes.
          This is the common sense part.  It just makes
     sense if you look at the evidence and look at the
     given facts and the law.  The part two part of this
     case, once you answer affirmatively to part one to
     the two questions, is really the rest of the story,
     who knew what, when did they know it, and what did
     they do with that knowledge.  And as soon as you
     come back with a verdict establishing that Ms.
     Koballa is a member of that class, we will go on to
     part two.
          The first thing you must answer is addiction,
     was Ms. Koballa addicted to nicotine, to
     cigarettes.  I read you a quote at the beginning of
     the case, I said, "It is not the act of smoking
     that causes a person to be addicted, it is the
     nicotine in the cigarettes that R.J. Reynolds
     manufactured that caused the addiction."  That's a
     fact.  It's not the act of smoking.  The defendants
     tried to make it the act, but it's the nicotine. These are the nicotine facts.  Nicotine is a
     drug.  Nicotine is an addictive drug.  Nicotine
     causes a person to crave more regular doses of
     nicotine.  Nicotine addicts crave nicotine.  R.J.
     Reynolds cigarettes contain that nicotine.  R.J.
     Reynolds cigarettes are addictive.
          Even if a person is addicted, addicted like
     Ms. Koballa, they can still stop.  That is not a
     definition of somebody who is not addicted.  It's
     how it affects the human brain, how it affects the
     body.  If a person is addicted and stopped, it
     doesn't mean they're no longer addicted, it just
     means they are in remission.  Remember Dr. Frazier
     testified that's what the DSM-IV calls it.  They
     don't say you quit, they say you're in remission,
     and that's true.
          So the first thing you've got to look at is
     how much smoke, what was the history of her
     smoking, that's one of the key components of
     addiction, how much nicotine did her body get.
          This fact is uncontroverted.  One and a half
     packs per day -- it's really one and a half to two,
     but we took the lower one just because there was
     some time in between.
          One and a half packs per day, that's 30 cigarettes per day for 45 years, that's almost 5
     million -- that's almost 500,000 cigarettes and 5
     million hits or doses of nicotine.  That's a fact.
     You heard no evidence to dispute that, and that's a
     very important fact because it establishes both
     addiction and it also shows something that you may
     remember from the experts, both theirs and ours,
     called dose response.
          In order to determine whether something causes
     something, you've got to know the dose, how much of
     it.  You can't guess.  Remember the judge said,
     don't guess.  You don't have to guess how many
     cigarettes she smoked, you don't have to guess how
     many hits of nicotine she had, that's evidence and
     it's undisputed evidence.
          We also have another fact to establish
     addiction, an eyewitness.  You remember Dr. Sia.  I
     put his picture up here because after a week,
     sometimes all the people get blurred.  Dr. Sia was
     one of the first witnesses that came in here.  In
     1992, Dr. Sia did a full evaluation on her, full
     workup, and what did he find?
          Could I have the next chart?
          He found in 1992 cigarette addiction.  That's
     in these medical records. Now, Dr. Sia is not a paid professional
     witness.  Dr. Sia is a treating physician.  He's
     one of those eyewitnesses.  You know, I consider
     the treating physicians that just come in here that
     have been treating a patient, they're eyewitnesses
     to what happened in her life.  They're not like a
     professional witness that comes here for his or her
     opinion.
          Dr. Sia made that diagnosis in 1992, way
     before any litigation, way before any illness of
     cancer or C.O.P.D. or emphysema.  And that -- it
     was never refuted by anyone.  Did you hear any one
     of their experts say I reviewed Dr. Sia's records
     and I think his opinion was wrong?
          I think they brought a guy named Dr. Thompson
     who basically does gambling addiction.  Nice guy.
     But he said Ms. Koballa wasn't addicted because she
     liked it.  I don't know of an addict that doesn't
     like the substance they're addicted to, but that
     was his basis.
          He said, oh, we looked at the DSM-IV, but he
     didn't show you how he applied the DSM-IV.  Dr.
     Frazier did, and we're going to talk about that.
     No one disputed what Dr. Sia diagnosed her with.
          Stella Koballa was addicted in '92 and she probably was addicted in the mid '50s, based on Dr.
     Frazier's testimony, and she's addicted today.
          Dr. Frazier.  She was the last witness.  I
     thought I would bring her picture up as well.  Dr.
     Frazier established a nicotine -- excuse me, an
     addiction center for the university.  She's a
     medical doctor, she has her -- she's board
     certified in addiction.
          What did she do?  She used the DSM-IV, which
     it is a mental disorder guide, but it's given to
     clinicians, like Dr. Frazier, to apply.  She
     applied it, she reviewed the medical records, she
     did a preliminary opinion, a review, with just the
     three volumes of depositions, then later, she went
     for a review and interviewed Ms. Koballa and looked
     at all the depositions that she testified about.
          So what did she say?  She said she's addicted,
     and she said, and they tried to make fun of her,
     she said it was a no-brainer.  Well, I agree with
     it, I wouldn't have used that term.  I think it's
     just common sense.
          I tell you what else she did.  She brought in
     and showed you how nicotine binds to the brain.
     Showed you in a PET scan, discussed how the
     different receptors are changed.  If nicotine leaves your body, you're still addicted to it.
     Those memories are permanent.
          And I don't know how you can say she's not
     addicted with the three, two or three of the fact
     patterns that you heard.  One of them, she ran out
     of cigarettes, I think she was -- one of the times
     she was trying to stop.  She goes through the trash
     to find butts.  That's how strong that addiction
     was.  She smoked those butts with toothpicks
     because she did not want to put her mouth on the
     butt.
          Does that sound like a nonaddicted person to
     you?  I don't think so.  Common sense.
          Another time, she ran out of cigarettes in the
     middle of the night.  She didn't even bother to
     dress.  She put her jacket over her pajamas and ran
     out and bought cigarettes.  None of these facts are
     disputed.  Ms. Koballa is addicted.  Common sense
     tells you she's addicted.  That first question you
     should mark yes.
          Did the addiction cause her lung cancer and
     C.O.P.D.?  That's the second question.  Do you
     remember, the first question, is she addicted,
     answer that one yes and you go to the second
     question. Well, this question really is asked in a
     different way.  Did cigarette smoking substantially
     cause Ms. Koballa's lung cancer and did it
     substantially cause her emphysema?  So what did we
     do with that.  Well, we first --
          Why don't we go ahead and pull those other up.
          These are facts.  These are not in dispute.
     R.J. Reynolds cigarettes contain cancer causing
     chemicals.  You heard no one dispute that.  R.J.
     Reynolds cigarettes contain chemicals that cause
     emphysema.  No one disputes that.
          The vast majority, some say it's 60, most
     doctors say 80 to 85 percent, of adenocarcinoma
     lung cancer is caused by cigarette smoking.  No one
     disputed that.  The only thing they say, I think
     Dr. Bennett said it was closer to 60, where Dr.
     Rubin and Dr. Burns said it was 80 to 85.
          But no question, vast majority of all
     adenocarcinoma of the lungs are caused by
     cigarettes.  So that means if you have a hundred
     people, eight of those -- 80 of those hundred that
     have that cancer, it's caused by smoking, only 20
     are not.
          90 percent of emphysema is caused by
     C.O.P.D. -- is caused by smoking.  That's not in dispute.
          Next slide.
          What does R.J. Reynolds admit?  They admit
     their cigarettes are addictive.  They admit that
     their cigarettes cause adenocarcinoma of the lung.
     They admit their cigarettes cause emphysema.  They
     don't dispute that.  As a matter of fact, they
     affirmatively admit it.
          Well, in order to understand what -- in order
     to understand what is -- what causes something, you
     first have to do what the experts said, you have to
     do a dose response.  This is the dose response.
     This is how many cigarettes she smoked.  This is
     how much -- how many times she bathed her lungs,
     almost 5 million.  You must also know -- have to
     know what's in this 5 million hits.
          And by the way, there is only one substance
     that you heard any evidence of what chemicals cause
     cancer.  You didn't hear it on any of the other
     testimony, any of those other infections, you never
     heard R.J. Reynolds once put up chemical charts
     that said she breathed -- she inhaled this much of
     this and it contained this.  Didn't.  Said glue
     solvents.  Didn't tell you what was in it.  Didn't
     tell you how much.  Didn't present any evidence that glue solvents cause cancer or glue solvents
     cause emphysema.  But they did not dispute this.
          So when you look at whether something causes
     it, you look at the exposure and what's in the
     exposure.
          MR. REID:  Your Honor, I object, this goes to
     the cigarette design, which is not part of this
     phase.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  70 different chemicals that
     destroy lung tissue are included in cigarettes.
     Each time you puff, 70 different chemicals that
     will either cause cancer or cause tissue to
     disintegrate or become damaged and emphysema.  They
     don't dispute that.
          You know the interesting thing about this?  Do
     you remember when I had Dr. Burns -- excuse me, Dr.
     Bennett, their experts, and Dr. Klein?
          Do you remember, I think Mr. Corr asked, "Have
     you ever seen this?  Have you -- do you know what's
     inside a cigarette?
          "Oh, no.
          "Did you ask R.J. Reynolds what's -- what kind
     of cancer causing chemicals are inside their
     cigarette? "Oh, no."
          How can you come in here and tell you that
     smoking didn't cause this disease if you didn't
     even know what cancer causing and emphysema
     chemicals are in those drugs, are in that
     cigarette?  They not only didn't ask for it, they
     didn't give it to them.
          The next thing is, the third component is
     you've got to know, what did the eyewitnesses say.
     We know that she smoked this much and had this much
     exposure.  We know that cigarettes contain this
     much damaging chemicals.
          Dr. Doig is an eyewitness to this event.  He's
     not a paid professional witness.  He is the man who
     actually had his hands inside Ms. Koballa's chest,
     not to be too graphic, but he saw the tumor, he
     saved her life.
          And when he looked at the tumor, he knew it
     was an adenocarcinoma because of the location, and
     he knew that it was caused by smoking, and that's
     what he told you.  He's done over a hundred
     different chest sections, practiced 40 years, took
     out a third of her lobe.
          He also said something else.  He said that
     he -- the emphysema in that lobe was so bad that when he tried to sew it back, the gaps -- you
     remember emphysema, I think Dr. Rubin talked about
     it as being like a basketball -- I mean a tennis
     net that has holes cut into it bigger?  He didn't
     have enough tissue to sew it, so air escaped and
     caused problems, so he had to spend extra time.
     Direct eyewitness evidence of emphysema.
          Now, we asked Dr. Bennett about Dr. Doig.  And
     you remember what he said?  He said Dr. Doig is the
     least relevant person in the event.  Least
     relevant.  Or least important, I think he used.
     But use your own memory.
          They tried to get Dr. Doig to say all these
     other factors cause -- had or caused Ms. Koballa's
     C.O.P.D., emphysema, or cancer.  What did he call
     it?  He said absolutely not, those exotic factors
     did not cause her cancer, smoking did.
          You know why a treating physician is an
     eyewitness?  If we were trying a auto accident case
     about a red light, the key witness would be the
     person who saw -- who isn't a party, but saw the
     red light, who ran it.
          That's what this guy is, he is an eyewitness.
     He isn't paid by anybody, he doesn't -- he's coming
     in here to tell you the truth, and he saw, he's the only expert that actually saw it.
          Dr. Rubin.  Now, Dr. Rubin is a professional
     witness.  We brought Dr. Rubin here and we paid Dr.
     Rubin to come testify.  Why did we do it?  Dr.
     Rubin's a pathologist.  Could we have found a
     pathologist in Florida?  Absolutely.
          But in coming here on this causation, we
     thought we would bring the pathologist who wrote
     the book, the pathology book that teaches all the
     other pathologists on lung cancer and lung disease.
     He wrote that book for many, many years, and it's
     carried in most of the med schools.
          He's somebody who has reviewed over -- over a
     thousand different lung tissues.  That's what he
     did, his job was to review tissue, determine what
     caused the cancer or noncancer and where it came
     from.  That's what he did.  Over a thousand of them
     he reviewed.  He reviewed over 500 pages of medical
     records.
          Now, you saw Mr. Reid hand him a stack like
     this (indicating), because he pulled out those and
     he said this is what I think is important, but he
     had a C.D. with over 500 pages.
          What did Dr. Rubin say?  There is no doubt
     smoking caused Ms. Koballa's lung cancer and emphysema.
          Dr. Burns.  Mrs. Koballa's lung cancer -- let
     me ask you this.  Or let me state this, I
     apologize.  Why did we bring Dr. Burns?  He's from
     California.  He's a pulmonologist.  We could have
     found one here.  But we brought the gentleman who
     has worked for I think seven different presidents,
     appointments of surgeon generals, both Republican
     and Democrat, 35 years he's authored, contributed
     to the Surgeon General's report from 1975 until
     today, not on a topic about dead people, not on a
     topic about gambling addictions, on smoking and
     lung disease.  We brought this man because he is
     the premier expert on how smoking affects the body.
          What did Dr. Burns say?  It is no doubt in his
     mind Ms. Koballa's cancer and Ms. Koballa's
     emphysema/C.O.P.D. is caused by smoking.
          The defendants brought a gentleman by the name
     of Dr. Bennett and Dr. Klein.  I'm sure they're
     fine people.  But Dr. Bennett primarily does
     autopsies.  If you have a question about who
     murdered somebody, Dr. Bennett might be a good guy
     to do -- to bring it.
          But he doesn't do tissues.  He hasn't done a
     thousand tissues.  He hasn't written medical books on lung disease.  He works for the State as a
     person who discovers and decides how murders are
     solved, how -- why somebody died.  Not causation.
          Can he do it?  Can he -- has he testified
     before for the tobacco companies?  Absolutely.  But
     that doesn't mean he's qualified to do that and it
     doesn't mean that you should -- you weigh the
     experience that Dr. Rubin has, the man who wrote
     the book, the man who's done a thousand, compared
     to Dr. Bennett?  Common sense.
          Ask yourself this.  If you're going to look
     for a pathologist outside the state of Florida to
     come and testify, I gave you the reasons why we did
     it, brought the man who wrote the pathology book,
     brought the man who worked for seven different
     presidents and surgeon generals, over 35 years,
     number one public health official on lung disease,
     they came a long way, but they're the best in their
     fields.
          Why did they go to Montana to pick this
     pathologist, a town -- a state that's smaller than
     Orlando?  You ask that question.  Common sense.
          MR. CORR:  30 minutes.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Dr. Klein.  Dr. Klein, another
     fine gentleman, pulmonologist.  Dr. Klein actually didn't say much, he said Ms. Koballa's emphysema is
     from lung remodeling, but then he admitted smoking
     causes lung remodeling.  Dr. Klein did admit this.
     Smoking contributed to her lung remodeling.
          The only thing Dr. Klein disagrees with us, he
     doesn't think it -- it contributed to the same
     amount.  He disagrees that it was a substantial
     contributing cause, but he admits it's a
     contributing one.
          In order to take a look at how and what caused
     it, you look at the two things:  How much, how much
     exposure, and what were you exposed to?  The only
     substance that you saw any evidence that causes
     cancer, in evidence, that's what we have, evidence,
     not guessing, not speculating like the judge warned
     you against, evidence, smoking that causes cancer
     is these chemicals and this dose response.
          So how does that apply to all of the factors
     and things that --
          Would you put this up?
          Well, that's called dose relationship.  Dose
     relationship means what you've been exposed to, 70
     cancer causing chemicals in each puff, and how many
     times, over -- almost 5 million times.
          And then what's -- what are these -- what are these chemicals, what do we know they do?  80 to 90
     percent of all cancers are caused by those
     chemicals.  80 to 90 percent of all emphysema is
     caused by those chemicals.
          So what did R.J. Reynolds say?  R.J. Reynolds
     says, oh, no, it's all these other things,
     emissions, coal mining, air pollution.  By the way,
     did y'all hear anytime that Ms. Koballa worked in a
     coal mine?  She lived in a house where her
     grandfather worked in a coal mine.
          Air pollution, cleaning solutions, glue
     solvents, chloride fumes, asthma, infections,
     granulomas, pneumonia, bronchitis, and
     histoplasmosis.  They didn't tell you any dose
     response to any of that.  They can speculate and
     guess if you want to violate the judge's order --
     ruling.
          They didn't tell you what, if anything, was
     cancer causing or emphysema causing in any of those
     doses.  They didn't have any and they didn't tell
     you any.  And they didn't show you any statistical
     or medicine evidence that these things cause
     cancer.
          Not one -- did you see one legal or medical
     treatise, did you hear one particular publication? None.  The only thing that you heard was cigarette
     smoking causes cancer.  The only thing that you
     heard that had any kind of credibility is that
     cigarette smoke causes emphysema.  And by cause,
     substantially contributed.
          You could find, hypothetically, again, common
     sense, that one or more of these played into it,
     but you cannot ignore, you cannot ignore from the
     facts, from the law, and your common sense that
     cigarette smoke played a substantial contributing
     factor to the cause of Ms. Koballa's lung cancer
     and her C.O.P.D.
          How much time?
          MR. CORR:  42 minutes.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  So why are we here?  I asked
     that question at the beginning, in the opening, and
     I said because they deny that she is addicted, and
     they deny that her addiction to cigarettes caused
     her disease.  As hard as that is for me to believe,
     that's what they say.
          Now, you've heard the evidence and I think
     it's pretty overwhelming.  But during the trial, we
     got an idea why they say that and why we're here.
          And I point you to Exhibit 4.  You'll have
     this back in your room.  This is a 1962 document from Alan Rodgman, R.J. Reynolds.  In this
     particular document, a lot of it's been X'd out,
     you may see it in phase two, you may not, in this
     particular document, they talk about why we're here
     today.
          This is 1962.  They say, "Obviously, the
     amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette
     smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming."  So what
     are they going to do about it?  It says, "Well, the
     evidence challenging this indictment is scant,"
     meaning we don't have anything to throw at it.  So
     what are they going to do?  Attempt to shift the
     blame to other factors, ergo air pollutants.
          They were planning this defense in 1962, while
     Ms. Koballa was working, trying to raise children,
     working at a grocery store, being a full-time mom.
     They were planning this exact defense.
          If you look at what they say caused this
     cancer, caused this emphysema, isn't it amazing
     what they say in 1962?
          So why are we here?  We're here because they
     planned this defense, and they're going to use it
     to try to keep Ms. Koballa from being qualified as
     a class member.
          This first phase is very simple, a common sense qualification.  Ms. Koballa deserves to be a
     class member based on the evidence involved.  It's
     overwhelming.  We ask you to apply your common
     sense.
          And if you could, verdict form.
          Answer the first question, was Ms. Koballa
     addicted?  Yes.  Was Ms. Koballa's addiction to
     cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her
     emphysema/C.O.P.D.?  Yes.  Was Ms. Koballa's
     addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal
     cause of her adenocarcinoma?  Yes.
          Thank you, ladies and gentlemen, I will try to
     save my time to speak to you after Mr. Reid.


          MR. PANTAZIS:  I heard a lot of things that
     Mr. Reid said, and I'm trying to write them down
     and talk -- so I can talk to you about them.  So I
     don't have a smooth, here is what this story is
     about, but I do want to respond to some of the very
     specific things that he said.
          One thing he said, and I agree with him, but I
     think by agreeing with him I think I'm telling you
     that what he just told you is totally wrong.
          I listened to the evidence, and I hope you
     listened to the evidence.  There was not one piece of evidence that showed that any of those items
     down there, whether it's directly or indirectly,
     cause smoking -- I mean, cause cancer.  Not one
     piece.
          Why do I keep putting up those charts on the
     chemicals?  Because we put on evidence that what's
     in the substance that causes it.  You just can't
     say, well, I looked at that scar and it looks like
     it shouldn't come from there.  What scientific
     evidence did you hear?  What study did you see?
     None.  You can't have a dose response.
          You want to know why some doctors didn't look
     at medical records going back or didn't investigate
     further?  Because meat wrapper's asthma never has
     been known to cause cancer.
          Could I put Dr. Tuthill's slide up?  I'm
     sorry.
          Your Honor, we have -- may I have a technical
     moment?
          THE COURT:  Sure.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  We decided to put Dr. Tuthill's
     testimony.  We don't think it's relevant because
     there was absolutely no evidence, did you hear one
     person take the oath, did you see one document,
     there is no question she had meat wrapper's asthma for a period of I think four to five years.
          And they keep repeating it in the medical
     record, like it's got some importance.  But did you
     hear one person say meat wrapper's asthma causes
     cancer, meat wrapper's asthma causes emphysema?
     No.  But they want you to give it consideration.
          This man testified, and I want you to
     remember, we didn't put his testimony on willingly,
     we didn't think it was --
          MR. REID:  Your Honor, I object to
     counsel's -- counsel put his testimony on and there
     is no --
          MR. PANTAZIS:  I'll withdraw the statement.  I
     don't think it matters.
          We put this doctor on because we wanted to
     give you all the treating physicians, all the
     eyewitnesses.  He's an eyewitness.  And he
     testified that she had meat wrapper's asthma in '73
     and '74.
          Now, did you hear him say "And because she had
     meat wrapper's asthma, she has cancer from it"?
     "Because she has meat wrapper's asthma, she has
     emphysema"?  Their lawyers were the ones asking the
     questions.  Did you hear them ask those questions?
     Did you hear those answers?  The answer is no. It's a little bit concerning when he talks
     about evidence.  There is no evidence that any of
     these things cause cancer.  There is no evidence
     that any of those things cause emphysema.  There is
     evidence, tremendous evidence, that 90 -- 85 to 90
     percent of the people that have C.O.P.D.,
     emphysema, get it from smoking, that 80 to 85
     percent of the people that have adenocarcinoma lung
     tumor, just like Ms. Koballa, get it from smoking.
          That's not guess.  Those are facts.  I didn't
     see any statistical or any studies that show
     anything.
          Now, he says something else that's kind of
     interesting.  He says, well, Dr. Bennett says this
     cancer comes from scarring.  Okay.  I don't think
     so, but okay.  None of the other doctors say it
     came from scarring, but Dr. Bennett said it did.
          Do you remember the follow-up question that we
     asked Dr. Bennett?  "Dr. Bennett, what's the number
     one cause of scarring in the lung?
          "Smoking."
          Smoking.
          Now, smoking is the number one cause of
     scarring -- excuse me, number one cause of
     inflammation that causes scarring.  But smoking, because it causes inflammation, causes the scar, is
     it a substantial contributing factor?  Absolutely.
     But he doesn't want to tell you that.
          Every one of the physicians that we -- the
     ones we brought, as well as theirs, we asked
     them -- except for the addiction experts, we asked
     them does smoking cause inflammation?  Yes.  Number
     one cause for inflammation in the lungs.
          Does smoking cause scarring?  Yes, number one
     for causing scarring.
          Mr. Reid also said something else that was
     kind of interesting.  He said we've got an
     experiment here.  I'm trying to move this so I can
     show -- I agree with him on that, too.  But there
     is a different experiment that that shows.  Do you
     ever wonder why his board stops at 2000?  Why does
     he want you to stop looking past 2000?  You think
     that's coincidental?  Common sense.
          Here is why this -- this experiment is here,
     but it's not the one he's pointing to.  In 1996 --
     let's be honest, 1991, whatever exposure she had
     from environmental, occupational, they all stopped,
     even if you think they contributed to something.
     They had no more exposures after '91.  He agrees
     with that.  The only exposure she had after '91 was smoking.  She smoked from then until '96.  What
     happened in '96?
          From '91 to '96, there is no evidence at all
     of cancer or emphysema before 1996 even with all
     those other stuff.  But in 1996 she gets cancer.
     In 1996 she is diagnosed with emphysema.  That's
     not where the experiment stops, though.
          So in 1996, what else happens?  She stops
     smoking.  And when she stops smoking from 1996
     until 2011, we took smoking out of the equation.
     What happened to her lung?  The emphysema
     stabilized.  What was removed between '91 -- I mean
     '96 and 2011?  Smoking.
          Never had another cancer, even though they
     have granulomas, they're all there.  None of them.
     What was removed since '96?  Smoking.  As a result
     of not smoking since 1996, no more smoking, no more
     development of cancer.
          It's amazing how those scars that supposably
     caused cancer from that other stuff all of a sudden
     stopped for the last 15 years.  Her emphysema has
     stabilized because she is no longer smoking.  That
     is the experiment.
          He said something else that I -- Mr. Corr,
     would you give me a five minute? Your Honor, would you give me a five minute --
          THE COURT:  I'll try.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Or tell me when do I go and
     I'll have Mr. Corr tell me.
          THE COURT:  I would say about five till.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Thank you.  Five till on the
     clock.  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Something else that Mr. Reid said that
     concerned me.  Talked about the best evidence.  I
     disagree with him.  The best evidence is the person
     who saw the lung himself.  He doesn't want to talk
     about Dr. Doig, but Dr. Doig is the only one who
     saw the tissue.  Dr. Doig was not vague.
          Could I have Dr. Doig's slide up?
          He was not vague.  Dr. Doig was insistent.
     And he was -- as a matter of fact, he got a little
     cranky.  Afterwards he asked -- well, I won't say.
          He got a little cranky on the stand.  He was
     insistent that this cancer was caused by smoking,
     and he's the guy who saw it.
          We asked him, because it's up here in this
     corner, does that have any effect on is it caused
     my cancer?  Absolutely not.  It's caused by
     smoking.  We asked him, what did the lung look
     like?  He said it was so -- had so much emphysema, he had trouble stitching it.  He just didn't see
     it, he had to work with it.  That's the best
     evidence.
          Then Mr. Reid pushed him and Mr. Reid started
     pushing him on all those elements, don't those
     things cause cancer.  He said absolutely not.  He
     called them exotic factors.  He said, your exotic
     factors do not cause cancer.  There is absolutely
     no evidence that anything but smoking causes cancer
     of these elements, of these things.
          Mr. Reid did not like Dr. Rubin's testimony.
          Could I have Dr. Rubin?
          Dr. Rubin, if you remember Dr. Rubin, what he
     basically did, and went with you, he went slide by
     slide with what the pathologist did.  You remember,
     he said I agree with the local pathologist.  Must
     have said that four or five, six times.
          Why did we do that?  Because we wanted
     Dr. Rubin, the pathologist, to take a look at the
     local pathologist, eyewitness, and see what he saw
     and was it correct procedurally.  And he absolutely
     said yes, it was.
          And what did Dr. Rubin say after reviewing the
     pathology?  Both the actual tissue itself as well
     as the pathology notes, he said no doubt caused Ms. Koballa's lung cancer and he said no doubt in his
     mind caused her C.O.P.D./emphysema.
          Now, again when I say caused, substantially
     contributed.  That's the standard.  It doesn't have
     to be the only cause.  If you were to believe
     Mr. Reid that some or all or part of those
     contributed as well, you can still find for the
     plaintiff in this -- in this common sense
     qualification phase.  You just must find that
     smoking substantially contributed to the cause of
     the disease.
          Dr. Bennett.  Dr. Bennett was pushed a little
     bit, asked Dr. Bennett, you've got all these things
     on here, and I think you'll remember this, we
     pointed specifically to -- because he was talking
     about polyvinyl chloride fumes.
          We said, "Dr. Bennett, has there been any
     studies or any research that polyvinyl chloride
     fumes cause cancer?
          "No.
          "Does it cause emphysema/C.O.P.D?
          "No.
          "Does it cause you to cough and wheeze
     sometimes?
          "Yes." But that's what they want you to believe.
          The reason that the dose, and I'm not going to
     pull my charts up, I know y'all like them, but I'm
     not going to do it, the reason the dose and what's
     in the dose is so important, because you've got to
     know from the science community does the substance
     that you bring into your lungs cause cancer?  There
     has been no evidence that any of these do.  Does
     the substance you bring into your lungs cause
     emphysema?  They didn't bring you any evidence of
     that.
          All they brought you is a guy who does
     pathology -- excuse me, a guy who does autopsies
     who says to him, it looks like it was caused by
     something else.
          The experiment that Mr. Reid talked about, you
     remove smoking, and what happens?  No cancer, no
     emphysema.  Before smoking, even if you take his
     factors, she had one of the lowest reads of that
     P.F.T.s in 1996.  You remember, he put it on the
     board.  That was her lowest read.
          Well, if she had such a low read in 1996, she
     had been removed from those elements for over five
     years.  His own chart indicts him.  His own chart
     tells you that the only cause, the only cause, in my opinion, but it doesn't have to be, it can be a
     substantially contributing cause, is cigarette
     smoke.  Common sense, folks.
          MR. CORR:  Five minutes.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  I'm going to show you -- would
     you put the smoker/nonsmoker slide up?
          Mr. Reid also says that Ms. Koballa is not
     addicted.  The only evidence that you heard was
     from Mr. Thompson -- Dr. Thompson who says she --
          MR. REID:  Excuse me, Your Honor, may I
     approach about this slide?
          THE COURT:  No.
          MR. REID:  I object, it was excluded
     previously.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  It was not excluded.
          MR. REID:  It was.  It was offered yesterday
     and it wasn't used.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  May we approach?
          THE COURT:  Well, this is a demonstrative aid
     shown to each other this morning, so overruled.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Dr. Thompson, you remember,
     said that the only reason that Ms. Koballa is not
     addicted is because he thought she liked to smoke.
     Well, I think in order to understand, and you heard
     Dr. Frazier say not all smokers are addicted, in order to understand why someone is addicted, you
     have to look at, an addicted smoker, in my opinion
     and what you've heard from the evidence, is always
     smokes daily.  I would suggest to you that someone
     who is not addicted doesn't smoke daily.
          An addicted smoker has constant blood levels
     plus peaks.  In other words, nicotine is in their
     blood level.  Exposures, over hundreds of doses per
     day.  Smokes in all settings.  Often multiple
     failed attempts to stop.  Smokes soon after waking
     up.  You remember the nicotine leaves your brain,
     that cigarette in the morning is the best?
          Somebody who is a nonaddicted smoker gets
     periodic peaks in nicotine, exposed to limited
     doses of nicotine, often smoke only in social
     setting, not difficult to stop, no one needed -- no
     need for morning cigarette.
          Which of that does Ms. Koballa fit?
          Next slide, please.
          MR. REID:  Same objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Often smokes when ill.  You
     heard evidence of that.  Almost always experiences
     withdrawal.  Structural function brain change,
     because those memories are permanently impaired. Spends a great deal of time smoking.  In denial.
     Compulsive use.
          As opposed to does not experience withdrawal,
     doesn't have brain alterations, very little time
     spent, and no compulsive use.
          Ladies and gentlemen, there is a word that
     Mr. Reid said, red herring, and he went through a
     story.  I would submit to you there is a red
     herring in this case, but I point back to the
     document, their internal document, that you will
     have.
          Could I have that document pulled up?
          The red herring is this, they knew in '62,
     just like they know in 2011, that environmental
     factors, the air pollutant factors, there is no
     evidence of it on the scan, so they are going to
     attempt to shift the blame to them.
          And they know today, just like they knew in
     '62, that the evidence of cigarette smoke as a
     health hazard is overwhelming.
          So what was the defense that you heard over
     this last week on whether cigarette smoke causes
     addiction -- excuse me, causes cancer,
     substantially contributes to Ms. Koballa's cancer,
     substantially contributes to her emphysema?  Oh, it's all these other air pollutants, it's all these
     other environmental.  You think that's
     coincidental?  Common sense.
          When you go back and you look, and I didn't
     put this board up for no reason, I know Mr. Reid
     doesn't like it because it points out, there is
     absolute --
          MR. REID:  Your Honor, I move to strike
     counsel's comments about what I like and what I --
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  I know he doesn't like it
     because it points out there is absolutely no
     evidence that any of these substances cause cancer
     or cause emphysema, but he wants you to believe
     that there is because he's brought an expert in
     here from Montana that says so.
          The only thing that substantially contributed
     to Ms. Koballa's lung cancer, the only thing that
     substantially contributed to her emphysema is
     smoking.  And this experiment proves it, if nothing
     else.
          She stops -- she stops smoking in '96, cancer
     disappears after -- no more cancer after surgery.
     Her P.F.T.s improve.  The worst P.F.T. she had is
     in '96. Ladies and gentlemen --
          I need the verdict form.
          THE COURT:  You have just about a minute.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          On behalf of all the parties, again, I would
     like to thank you for your attention.  You've done
     everything that a jury is supposed to do, you've
     been on time, and I know that's -- both parties
     appreciate that.
          The verdict form in this case is very simple.
     Why is it simple?  Because this is a simple phase,
     it's a qualification phase.  It is not the ultimate
     verdict of what happens in the case, it's just to
     allow Ms. Koballa to participate in this case into
     the next phase as a class member.  In order to do
     that, you must answer yes, was Ms. Koballa addicted
     to nicotine -- to cigarettes containing nicotine.
     The answer is obviously yes.
          The next questions you must answer one or both
     of the next questions yes in order for Ms. Koballa
     to qualify as a class member.  "Was Stella
     Koballa's addiction to nicotine contain" --
     "containing nicotine a legal cause of her C.O.P.D.
     and emphysema?"
          There is no other evidence that anything but cigarettes, but certainly, it substantially
     contributed to it.
          Lung cancer, and her particular lung cancer,
     adenocarcinoma, 80 to 85 percent of them caused by
     cigarette smoke.  Absolutely no evidence of any of
     these substances substantially contributed other
     than smoking.
          Now, you may go back and you may say, you
     know, I've heard things this and I believe this.
     The question is not could these things -- you can't
     guess.  You have to have specific evidence.  And
     even if you believe one or more of those things
     played a role, there is no way that you can ignore
     the overwhelming evidence, the overwhelming common
     sense that cigarette smoke is the substantially --
     is a substantial contributing factor, even if it
     acted with those others, both to adenocarcinoma and
     to the emphysema.
          Thank you, ladies and gentlemen.
