          MR. REID:  Thank you.  May it please the Court.
          Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.  If it
     weren't clear before, I think it has become crystal
     clear now, there is a clear distinction in this
     case, a clear dichotomy of positions.
          The plaintiff wants you to decide that smoking
     was a substantial contributing cause to Mrs.
     Koballa's cancer because smoking causes cancer and
     is addictive, based on statistics, based on
     probabilities from witnesses such as Dr. Rubin,
     he's the one that said probability, Dr. Doig who
     says statistics, Dr. Burns who said epidemiology.
          We, on the other hand, are going to ask you to
     make that decision based on Ms. Koballa's medical
     case and her life history, and that's the
     distinction in this case.
          And it couldn't be clearer, because you can
     carry around a stack of documents, and you can put
     them into evidence, and all that, but if you never
     pull one out, you never show one to a doctor or to
     any witness except for one, Dr. Sia's note about
     addiction, if you never do anything, it's clear
     that you don't want the jury to see what's in
     there, and -- or in the complete set over there.
          And I'm going to talk to you as to why the evidence supports the statement I just made -- the
     statements I just made to you.
          First, I want to thank you on behalf of the
     lawyers and folks that have worked with us in this
     trial, on behalf of the men and women who work for
     the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, I want to thank
     you for your attention.  You've been very
     attentive.
          Lawyers aren't typically on juries, but I've
     been told that it's remarkable how, when you go
     back there, the synergy will be amazing, one will
     remember this fact, one will remember that fact,
     and pretty soon, you will remember everything, and
     that's why the system works, and that's why in
     every case where I have had the opportunity to make
     a choice since I have been a lawyer, I have asked
     for a jury trial because this country has decided
     that is the best way to resolve these disputes, and
     that's what we are doing here.
          Now, Mr. Pantazis talked to you a little bit
     about burden of proof and he -- which the
     plaintiffs have in this case.  That's why they get
     to go first throughout, and now they get to go
     last.  I don't get to respond to what they might
     think up to say to you in the very end today. But he suggested this thing about a piece of
     paper, and it sounds like if the paper is the
     evidence, that they only have to produce one piece
     of paper's worth of evidence.
          Well, we don't start with a hundred pieces of
     paper, we start with no paper.  They have to
     produce 101 pieces of paper.  They have to produce
     evidence, not just one little tiny bit of evidence
     that wins this case or shifts the evidence, they
     have to produce all that paper, if you want to
     think about it that way, and I'll submit to you
     they haven't done that in this case.
          Now, I'll talk with you later about the
     question that you have to answer, but if you
     remember at the beginning, I told you there are
     really four questions that were -- involved all the
     evidence that you would be hearing.
          Does Ms. Koballa have C.O.P.D. -- and
     sometimes it's been referred to by emphysema,
     sometimes chronic bronchitis.  Does she have
     C.O.P.D. which was caused by her cigarette smoking?
     Does she have lung -- did she have lung cancer that
     was caused by her cigarette smoking?  Was she
     addicted?  And if the addiction, if she was
     addicted, is that the cause of her smoking, as opposed to some other cause.
          Now, the judge has told you today what the
     definition of cause is.
          If we could have the next slide, please.
          That's the whole charge.  But there are really
     two important parts of that.  And the first part is
     "contributes substantially."  So it doesn't mean
     any cause, it has to be a cause that contributes
     substantially.  And you'll have to decide if
     smoking in this case contributes substantially when
     you compare it to the other potential causes.
          And it goes on.  It tells you what that means.
          No, please leave it up.
          "But for the addiction to cigarettes
     containing nicotine, the injury would not have
     occurred."  What that means is, you could read it
     another way, without the addiction, in other words,
     if you take the addiction off, would there still be
     the same -- if you take the cigarettes away, would
     there still be the same injury.
          And I would submit in this case, and I'm going
     to talk about it, all of these medical records and
     all the medical testimony about these records
     demonstrate that if you take away smoking, you
     would still have the same injury.  And that's the standard that you have to -- that you will have to
     apply in this case.
          Now, let me summarize the evidence that I
     believe you will be -- that you will consider.
          Ms. Koballa's lung cancer and C.O.P.D. were
     caused by a substantial, significant history of
     inflammation, inflammation to her lungs over 50
     some years of a variety of exposures.
          Mrs. Koballa was not addicted, regardless of
     what definition you use, whether you use the DSM-IV
     definition or another definition, whatever the
     definition is, Ms. Koballa was able to control her
     smoking when she wanted to control it, she was able
     to stop when she wanted to stop and when she was
     motivated, and finally, she was able to quit for
     good when she became motivated to quit for good.
          Nicotine, the chemical that they talked about,
     and you've heard testimony about what happens in
     the body, nicotine plays no part in Ms. Koballa's
     decision to start every time after she had quit
     because it was all gone and it wasn't affecting her
     anymore.
          So nicotine could not have been the cause of
     her commencing to smoke again during those periods
     of time when she quit.  And we'll talk about those in more detail.
          This case is not about whether smoking causes
     cancer.  It is not about whether cigarettes are
     addictive.  We talked about that in opening and I
     asked questions -- I mean in voir dire and in
     opening again, and I asked questions, are you going
     to decide this case because of those two findings?
     And everybody said no, that you wanted to hear the
     evidence about Ms. Koballa, not just the general
     evidence.
          But most of what you've heard has been about
     those two questions.  That chart of all of the
     carcinogenic substances that counsel keeps putting
     up, that only proves that smoking causes cancer.
     Or, you know, it can in some people.  That doesn't
     prove that Mrs. Koballa had cancer.  They keep
     showing you that over and over, but that doesn't
     prove in Ms. Koballa.
          Now, Dr. Burns, for instance, and he admitted
     it, spent about two hours, maybe an hour and a
     half, trying to convince you of one fact, smoking
     causes cancer.
          And I said, "Dr. Burns, I notice that you have
     spent a great deal of time."
          And he said, "That's right." And I said, "Why?  It's admitted."
          And he said, "Well, I didn't understand what
     was" -- "nobody told me," or whatever.  But an hour
     and a half trying to prove.
          Dr. Doig told you that smoking causes cancer
     based on statistics.  That's not about Ms. Koballa,
     that's about statistics.
          Dr. Bennett and Dr. Klein were the two experts
     who we presented, were cross-examined about that
     chart.  That chart doesn't tell you whether or not
     Ms. Koballa has cancer, whether her cancer was
     caused by smoking or something else.
          And they read a document to you, not this
     morning but an earlier time, saying that -- oh, no,
     this morning, saying there was substantial evidence
     that smoking causes cancer.
          They didn't need to read that document.  I
     told you that no one would come into this courtroom
     on behalf of my client and dispute those two
     findings.  That was off the table.  And I would say
     70 percent of what you heard this morning and 70
     percent of the plaintiff's case was trying to prove
     those two points.
          That's what the plaintiffs have asked you to
     do.  If those two points were the issues, there would be no reason to ask you to give up your
     valuable time to come in and sit for two weeks and
     decide this case, because it's already been
     decided, if that's the only question.  But I think
     you understand there is a great deal more.  This
     case is about Mrs. Koballa, her medical condition,
     her life experience, her exposures.
          I'll answer counsel's question.  Why are we
     here?  We're here to decide whether or not --
     something about Ms. Koballa's health, Ms. Koballa's
     condition and her life.  That's why we're here.
          Now, there are a number of facts that aren't
     in dispute.  Lung cancer, C.O.P.D. can be caused by
     other things besides smoking.  All the witnesses
     agree to that.
          Mrs. Koballa was exposed to many things in her
     life that would cause inflammation.  Inflammation
     can cause smoke -- can cause lung cancer and
     C.O.P.D.  In fact, I made a little slide up here,
     counsel keeps talking about people being bathed in
     nicotine -- bathed in cigarette smoke and so forth.
          In fact, 80 percent of those smokers who are
     in the same boat that he's talking about, who are
     bathed in the -- in the substances, 80 percent
     don't get C.O.P.D. and 85 percent never get lung cancer.
          That's why it's -- you, in this case, have to
     determine is Ms. Koballa in the dark blue pie
     there, piece of pie, or does she fall within the
     blue and green, the light blue and the green?
          That's what this case is about.  It's not
     about all the smoke -- what happens to all the
     people who smoke.  It's about people who smoke and
     get these diseases, that's what you have to decide
     in this case.
          There are facts that were admitted about
     addiction.  Addicted people can and do quit.  60
     million have quit.  More people quit than do
     currently smoke.  Ms. Koballa quit.  So those facts
     are all admitted.
          So let's move to how did the plaintiff try to
     carry the burden to put the 101 pieces of paper on
     that scale, how did they go about doing that?
     Well, they did it with a couple of witnesses.
     First they did it with Dr. Burns.
          Now, we talked about C.S.I. a couple -- you
     know, last week.  And in this case, I said Dr.
     Burns, he's a scientist, how do you go about
     deciding an issue such as the one in this case?  If
     your job is to determine the cause of Ms. Koballa's conditions, how do you do it?
          Well, he said you would review the medical
     records, you would review the depositions.  He said
     that's important.  He said his preference was to
     review all the medical records.  He said the length
     of exposure to any substances would be important to
     know.
          Now, that's when he's talking about how he
     would do it, if someone said, Dr. Burns, in the
     abstract if somebody comes to him and said, I just
     want you to make -- help me decide, make this
     decision, give me your opinion, that's what he
     would do.
          So your job is to test what he did in this
     case.  Did he do in this case what he said he was
     supposed to do?  Well, this is what he said.  He
     said he only reviewed the medical records that
     these lawyers felt were necessary for him to see.
     That was his actual testimony.
          And when he was the on the stand, he was on
     the stand a few hours, he didn't -- he didn't show
     you a single medical record, he didn't put one on
     the board, he didn't show it to you, he didn't ask
     about it.  Not a single -- not a single thing.
     Because the records the lawyers chose to give him didn't help what he was trying to convince you of
     in this case.
          And that's why you didn't see Dr. Burns talk
     about, show you, and go through any of Ms.
     Koballa -- how can -- how can a witness who --
     whose sole job is to determine the issue in this
     case, which is not does smoking cause cancer, it's
     does -- is Ms. Koballa's cancer substantially
     caused, how can a witness not talk about her
     medical condition?
          It's one thing, as I said, to carry around
     records.  It's another thing to show them to the
     jury.  Now, I can say, folks, everything you need
     to see is in that pile of documents so have at it
     when you get back in the jury room.  Good luck.
     That's kind of what they did in this case.
          So what did Dr. Burns ignore?  Well, he
     didn't -- he didn't have any effect specific
     demographic type knowledge -- information,
     biographical information about Ms. Koballa.  He
     never met -- before he did his opinions, he never
     met her, examined her, spoke to her family.
          He didn't look at the pathology, but he said,
     if I were a treating doctor, I would always look at
     the pathology.  In fact, I do it with the pathologist who did it.  He didn't look at that.
          He didn't look at the x-rays.  He said -- or
     any radiology.  Again, he said if I were treating,
     that's how I would do it.  But in this case, I
     chose not to do it.
          He didn't know anything.  He ignored 31 years
     of her life when she worked in the meat wrapping
     department at Heinen's in Cleveland.
          He didn't know what chemicals were released
     there.  He didn't know the duration.  He said I
     didn't make a note of the duration.  He didn't even
     know she worked there 31 years.  He didn't know how
     many pieces of meat were wrapped every day, that
     means how many times there were -- there were fumes
     emitted that Mrs. Koballa would breathe.
          He didn't know how many packages were labeled.
     That was 15 years.  He didn't know how many
     packages were labeled over the 30 years.  He didn't
     even know about the deposition of Dr. Tuthill, the
     doctor -- now, that's interesting.
          They told you in opening statement that there
     was a Dr. Tuthill, and counsel said, "But we don't
     think he's relevant to this case."  But they
     brought it in and they showed it to you, anyway,
     and lo and behold, there is Dr. Tuthill providing an alternative explanation for her condition.
          They didn't show that to Dr. Burns before he
     gave his opinion.  In fact, he told you the first
     time he even knew what Dr. Tuthill said was when he
     was sitting in the courtroom out here watching the
     tape with you.
          How can an expert not know about that or not
     look at that if he is trying to do an honest job of
     telling you what he believes happened in this case?
          He keeps talking about the eyewitnesses, the
     eyewitnesses.  Well, the fellow who runs down the
     street and is two blocks away is not a very good
     witness as to whether the red light was red or
     green.
          That's what we've got here.  We've got a
     eyewitness, Dr. Burns, who is down the street, but
     he wants to come in and tell you the light was
     green or red, but he was down the street, he didn't
     see it, and he didn't see it on purpose.  There is
     no other explanation.
          Dr. Burns has testified hundreds and hundreds
     of times.  There was no explanation for Dr. Burns
     limiting his review of records to what the lawyers
     thought I needed to see.
          Dr. Burns is biased, there is no doubt about it.  He's smart.  He's worked in tobacco issues his
     life.  He's never testified in a case involving a
     patient that he was really treating as a doctor.
     He's testified hundreds of times.  He kept bragging
     about how well he was paid.
          You know, he said -- when I asked him about
     what he was charging and it came out that he had
     charged in this case, to give you the opinions, he
     said $40,000, and he said, "I am well paid."  He
     said that twice during his testimony.
          And he told you that this same presentation
     for an hour and a half to two hours that he gave to
     you about can smoking cause cancer, he said he had
     done that a lot of times.  Same presentation over
     and over.  They paid $40,000 to bring Dr. Burns
     here and to get him to give you this presentation
     about something that was admitted and not at issue
     in this case.
          He doesn't -- even all the Surgeon General's
     reports, he doesn't disclose his bias, he'd have to
     if he published it in a legitimate journal, but in
     that one, he can put things in there, he can edit
     things, and he can come into court and use it, and
     nobody who reads it would ever know about his
     history. But you now know about his history.  He's
     worked with lawyers helping them learn how to try
     cases, help them find experts, helping them to do
     mock trials.  That's Dr. Burns.
          But the primary problem with Dr. Burns is he
     didn't look at the medical records, he didn't talk
     about them.  And if you don't look at something,
     you need to say I didn't look at this, I closed my
     eyes, I put on blinders so I can say what the
     situation is, but there it is.
          The second one was Dr. Rubin.  Dr. Rubin is
     highly credentialed, there is no doubt about it.
     He wrote the book that they had sitting out here
     the other day.
          So what did he tell you that he ought to do?
     I asked him the same question.  What should you do
     to find out, if this is your assignment, what would
     you do to decide about causation?  He said there
     are really two ways to go about it.  You can
     investigate the occupation, where the person lived,
     where the person worked, and you can get a good
     history, you can find out about the person's life.
          So what did he review?  He reviewed the
     documents the lawyers gave him.  Now, counsel told
     you that -- that -- that I pulled some documents out.  No.  Dr. Burns told you, remember, I showed
     him a small stack and said these were marked at
     your deposition as the documents you produced that
     you relied on in this case.  And he said they were.
          And then he said there was a disc.  It wasn't
     marked, it wasn't here.  I don't know where the
     disc came from.  But he looked at a small stack of
     documents which the lawyers chose.  And again,
     other than showing you two or three slides, he
     didn't go through the medical records, either.  He
     ignored everything about Ms. Koballa's work
     experience.
          I made a slide.  This is what Dr. Rubin
     ignored.  All those things about her work history,
     he didn't know any of that.  All these things about
     her medical history, he didn't know that.  And I
     didn't list all the environmental exposures or the
     risk factors, the chemicals and so forth or the
     other things, because you've seen that, and we'll
     talk about them later.
          That is the evidence that he could have looked
     at if he were really going to come in and tell you
     smoking was a substantial contributing cause as
     opposed to all these alternatives.  He said, I
     would take a history and I would look at all this stuff if I were trying to get the answer, and he
     didn't do it.  He didn't do it.
          What did he conclude?  He said, and he was
     open and honest about it, he said he did nothing,
     he did nothing to evaluate Ms. Koballa's risk
     factors other than smoking.
          So Dr. Rubin said smoking causes cancer, and
     that was his opinion, because of probabilities and
     statistics, he said, and that's all they had him
     do.
          And he ultimately at the end said, you may
     remember, this was the last question, I said,
     "Dr. Rubin, so it sounds to me like what you're
     saying is Ms. Koballa smoked a lot, she developed
     lung cancer, so it must be caused by smoking."
          And he said, "That sounds exactly right."
          That's Dr. Rubin.  That's their case in a
     nutshell.
          Now, on the addiction side, they brought in
     two witnesses.  During their case, where they have
     the burden to prove their case, they brought --
     they had one witness who talked about addiction,
     and it was Dr. Sia.
          And Dr. Sia was a general practitioner.  He
     saw Ms. Koballa several times.  He -- several times she called in and didn't come back.  And there was
     one entry in 1992 where he said addiction,
     cigarette addiction.
          And all he knew about Ms. Koballa was the
     amount and the length of time she smoked, and he
     was the wrong about both.  He had it -- he had a
     different number of cigarettes and he had a
     different period of time.  And that was the only
     evidence.
          He didn't offer to help Ms. Koballa with
     addiction, to treat her, to give her medicine.  He
     had done that when patients had come back before.
     She didn't ask him for any assistance.  And he was
     the only witness that they presented to convince
     you that Ms. Koballa was addicted, the only expert
     who they presented in their case was Dr. Sia.
          Now, they brought Dr. Frazier in after the
     fact, at the end of the case, and it appears that
     she was brought in for two things.  Number one, she
     wanted to say Dr. Thompson didn't apply the DSM-IV
     properly; and secondly, she wanted to say that --
     prove that nicotine has an effect on the brain.
          Well, she didn't even use the DSM-IV
     definition, you know, we had that discussion, and
     she said, oh, there is no definition in there, and I showed her one.  She said, I didn't use any
     definition from the DSM-IV.
          And everybody agrees that nicotine can have an
     effect on the brain.  It has what's called a
     pharmacological effect.  So that wasn't in dispute
     either.  But they brought her back to say Dr.
     Thompson didn't do the DSM-IV.
          She -- Dr. Burns, once again -- I'm sorry,
     Dr. Frazier, like Dr. Burns, is really on a
     planning mission to eliminate the choice to smoke,
     and she admitted that, she would like to see the
     choice to smoke taken away.
          And she has never been involved in any
     litigation before until she became involved in
     smoking, that's part of her campaign, to eliminate
     the choice.  And she said that in the five cases
     she handled, she said they were no-brainers.
          Now, no-brainer to me sounds like you don't
     have to do any research, you don't have to know any
     facts, you tell somebody something, like you smoked
     45 years, so many packs a day, bang, I'm ready to
     give an opinion.  She tried to back away from that
     and said, well, I said that about one case, but
     then I read her testimony to her and she said it
     about all her cases. And then in this case, we discover that -- and
     she said that she would never give her opinions
     until she did this research and so on and so forth.
     And then we see the e-mail that she sent to the
     lawyer, and the e-mail said, "I think there is no
     doubt that she was addicted to nicotine after
     briefly reviewing her deposition."  That's her
     opinion.
          Now, she said, oh, I did other things later to
     make sure I was right, but in her mind, it's a
     no-brainer, this is another case in her mind where
     it is a no-brainer, no need to do anything else.
     That's what Dr. Frazier did.
          Then she brought in her PET scan and said this
     is a really cool thing, but I don't understand it,
     it came out of a book.  And it had to do with
     somebody who took one or two puffs.  And she
     admitted that if you did one with milk, you would
     see some colors change because milk has something
     that reacts that same way, but she said you can't
     do that because it would be too expensive, and I
     just got it out of a book.
          Why was she so reluctant to admit how much she
     had been paid in this case?  Now, counsel is right,
     everybody pays experts.  There is no doubt about it.  And every other expert who came in here told
     you how much they charged.  Dr. Burns was proud of
     the $40,000 he charged.
          Why was she so reluctant?  Do you really
     believe that she is owed close to $50,000 on this
     case and she doesn't know anything about it, how
     much time she spent, how much she was paid?  That
     was remarkable.
          And I think that suggests something that you
     can consider when you are evaluating the
     credibility of witnesses.  Is the witness here to
     give you a fair scientific opinion or the witness
     here as part of another agenda?
          There is a pattern.  Plaintiffs have brought
     in several very expensive experts, and they hope
     that this will relieve you of their burden.  That
     you will relieve them of their burden, rather.
          They rely on statistics instead of the medical
     records.  They say, trust me, trust me, believe me,
     I'm smart, I've looked at all of this material.
     Because they all said they looked at things and
     this is the fact.  But they didn't show you any
     basis for those facts.
          Imagine if a doctor said -- you are sitting in
     a doctor's office -- a person is sitting in a doctor's office and the doctor says, well, based on
     statistics, I think you have this disease, so I
     don't have to examine you, I don't have to get a
     history, I don't have to know where you worked,
     what you were exposed to, how long you've been
     exposed.  Statistically speaking, you would fall
     into the category that had this.  Would a person
     want to go to a doctor who treated him that way?
          That's what these experts in this case have
     done, they have said statistically, probabilities,
     I don't need to look at the medical records, this
     is my opinion.
          Counsel talks about the eyewitnesses.  Well,
     Dr. Sia was barely an eyewitness.  He might have
     been a half a block away.  He saw her six or seven
     times for totally unrelated things.  But Dr. Aneja
     that you've heard about was the treating
     pulmonologist.  The most important medical issue in
     this case deals with pulmonary.  And instead of
     bringing Dr. Aneja in, they brought Dr. Burns.
     They brought Dr. Burns.
          And Dr. Aneja, you'll see his record, you have
     already, down at the bottom there -- in fact, they
     didn't bring any of these doctors.  These are the
     true eyewitnesses, people who treated her and made findings about her condition that relate to the
     issue of this case.
          And Dr. Aneja, I suspect, didn't come because
     on 29 separate office visits, and they're all in
     the files, they're all in those over there, for
     sure, I didn't go through these, between the
     first -- in about this period, 29 different times,
     he wrote no problem, no acute distress.  That may
     explain why you didn't hear from Dr. Aneja in this
     case.
          Now, while an expert can be paid 40 or $50,000
     to ignore evidence in a case, the good news is that
     our system provides that you get to see all of the
     evidence.
          You know, I told you something about C.S.I.
     Well, the plaintiffs have given you the first ten
     minutes.  You have now seen the last 50 minutes.
     And that's how you can decide this case.  You have
     seen all of the evidence in this case.
          So I want to talk about the lung cancer and
     the C.O.P.D. specifically.  I don't know how to
     make this any clearer.  We are not saying in this
     case that all of those exposures that she had
     throughout her life that we'll talk about, we are
     not saying that those exposures cause cancer, that they're -- all of them are carcinogenic.  Some
     might be.  But we are not saying that.
          They keep telling you that's what we're
     saying.  They put a chart up now to go down that
     list to say none of these are carcinogenic.  We're
     not saying that.  We're saying that the most
     important issue in this case is the inflammation.
          You know, counsel was asking the witness about
     red herrings the other day.  Well, you know, that
     came from back in England when they hunted foxes,
     and some people were animal rights people, even
     back in the early days, and they would take a bag
     and fill it up with fish, and they would go down
     the road where the fox had gone, and they would
     drag it along the road so when the dogs came, the
     fish would have -- they would lose the smell of the
     fox and they would go off the other way.  That's
     where we get that expression.
          The issue of whether coal dust causes cancer
     is a red herring.  We are saying that all of these
     exposures cause inflammation.  Inflammation.  Now,
     every -- every witness that we talked to, every
     witness that testified, we talked about
     inflammation.
          Go back to that one, please.  Go back one more.  Yeah.
          Inflammation, you see it, you know what
     happened because you see scars, and it causes --
     inflammation causes lung cancer and C.O.P.D.
     That's what we're saying in this case.
          And their experts do not dispute that.
     Dr. Doig testified, Dr. Rubin testified, Dr. Burns
     testified that inflammation can cause cancer and
     C.O.P.D., and scarring is evidence of inflammation.
     There is no dispute, they all said that under oath.
          And if you look at the -- through all of their
     records, they made a number of findings.  They
     found granulomas and scarring, they found
     emphysema, which they said inflammation increases
     the risk of emphysema.
          Bronchitis can inflame the lungs, chronic
     bronchitis, remodeling, C.O.P.D., and asthma can
     change the architecture of the lungs, the
     environmental exposures, air pollution in urban
     areas can lead to inflammation.  This is not in
     dispute in this case.
          I want to show you this timeline again,
     because it summarizes these things.  Now, if he
     gets back up and repeats again that Ben Reid or
     R.J. Reynolds believes that all of these things at the bottom cause -- cause cancer, you'll remember,
     and I can't stand up and say, wait a minute, as I
     said before, we're not saying that in this case.
     That chart that he put up is a red herring.  That's
     not the point.  We're saying that all of these
     things cause inflammation.  And inflammation causes
     cancer and C.O.P.D.
          And if you look at Ms. Koballa's life, 58
     years of breathing cigarette smoke for sure and
     occupational exposure.  And we'll talk in a minute
     about how do you know that this green is not a
     substantial contributing cause?  Because that's
     really what we have to decide in this case.
          And the evidence, to make the decision you
     have to make, all starts and ends with Ms. Koballa
     and her condition.  And that's why we put in all
     the medical records, that's why we asked every one
     of our experts to look at every single medical
     record, not just the ones we chose to send them.
     That's doctors, test reports, nurse's notes,
     x-rays, C.T.s, depositions of the medical record --
     of medical people, and, of course, the fact people.
          That's why when our experts were on the stand,
     we displayed and discussed all the medical records.
     That's why when I cross-examined all of their experts, I put the medical records on the board and
     asked them to comment on them.  That's why we did
     that.
          If this case is about evidence, why didn't any
     of their experts talk about the best evidence of
     Ms. Koballa's physical condition, her medical
     records?  There is a reason they didn't do that.
     It's because the medical records do not support
     their theory of this case.
          Dr. Burns decided that smoking was the culprit
     here.  Dr. Rubin decided it.  Dr. Doig really
     wasn't in the -- in the business of deciding that
     or not, but they asked him now and he said based on
     statistics, he thought it was related or
     associated.  Medical records are different,
     however.
          Now, if you think about evidence and trying to
     build -- your idea is to build and ultimately build
     a wall, you might say, of the evidence with
     individual blocks, you do that by looking at
     everything, trying to find out what was the cause
     of Ms. Koballa's condition.  So you need to know
     what exposures existed, what effect on the lungs,
     what conditions can cause that effect and so forth.
          So the first block, you might say, would be exposure.  And you've seen evidence of exposure.
     No one can dispute that every one of those
     exposures, there is either a medical record that
     specifically mentions it or there is testimony, and
     nobody disputed that.
          Oh, they have tried to say, well, we don't
     know how much coal dust she inhaled and so forth.
     But there can be no doubt that Ms. Koballa was
     exposed to all of the things that you see on that
     list, and they're included on here as well.
          They keep saying there is -- we don't know
     what the names of the solvents were.  Well --
          Let's see the next slide.
          We know for a fact that as late as this
     period, which is -- now we're into the -- into the
     2000 decade, Ms. Koballa thought, at least, and
     told her doctors, and we assume she was being
     truthful, that all this meat wrapper -- the meat
     wrapping, the P.V.C., the adhesive, that's when you
     stick on the glue, the -- and the fumes from the --
     from the equipment, the Collins they said was the
     equipment, all of that existed in this case.  All
     of that existed.
          Dr. Doig didn't dispute any of this because he
     didn't know.  He did not know either what her prior exposures were because that wasn't his job.  It
     didn't matter to him.  His job was to take care of
     Ms. Koballa's condition when he did the surgery.
     They brought him in to try to turn him into
     something far beyond what he was, which was the
     doctor who did the surgery.  And he didn't know
     about all this.
          You know what Dr. Burns --
          Go back to the slide, please, the one before.
          You know what Dr. Burns called these?  I wrote
     it down.  He said Ms. Koballa had a series of dings
     and nicks.  Dings are like little tiny things you
     get on your car, hood maybe, when something falls
     on it.  And nicks, that's like they say, you were
     nicked, you got a little bump or something.
          He described all of that exposure, all of this
     exposure for all of these years, he said these are
     dings and nicks, but he didn't know what was there
     because he didn't know a thing about her exposure
     in the meat wrapping business or other places.
     Dings and nicks.
          Now, the second -- that's the exposure.  The
     second is, is there evidence of some impact on the
     lungs from these exposures?  There has been
     substantial evidence of substantial impact to her lungs, of substantial evidence of inflammation
     throughout her lifetime.
          Can we see the next slide, please?
          There is the medical record, severe
     infections, history of allergies, asthma,
     bronchitis, pneumonia.  There is another one.
     Chest -- old healed.  In '71, they were talking
     about histoplasmosis.  You see that was mentioned a
     number of times.  They continued to see that.
          Remember what Dr. Doig said -- oh, and then
     the x-ray.  And that -- there -- there -- those are
     the dings and nicks that Dr. Burns wants you to
     believe were insignificant, and as you heard from
     Dr. Doig, you can see them there, you can't see
     them at the top because of the -- because the lung
     is thinner there, but they're all over both lungs.
          And other than Dr. Rubin -- Dr. Burns, who
     refers to these as dings and nicks, everybody else
     says this is substantial scarring.  And then if you
     recall, he talked about the signet, you know, used
     his ring in this area right here that you wouldn't
     see, that's a significant finding when you're
     talking about whether or not lungs have been
     inflamed or not.
          I want you to remember what Dr. Doig said in his testimony.  He said when I -- when I operated
     on Ms. Koballa and I opened her and I looked at her
     lungs, he said you would have to have been a coal
     miner to have lungs that looked like this.  That's
     their eyewitness who was there, who saw it.
          Now, you've seen lots of evidence of it.
     Their experts, they kept that evidence from them,
     and the experts never talked to you about it, but
     Dr. Burns just tried to say, well, these weren't
     important, anyway, because they were just dings and
     nicks.  Now you've seen the actual truth, the
     actual facts.
          So you've got the exposure, you've got the
     impact in the lungs.  The third thing is, what
     happens to the lungs as a result of all this?  And
     in this case, as early as '69, we start having
     chronic bronchitis, chronic productive cough,
     possible asthmatic bronchitis.
          And what's the date of the next one, please?
     I can't see.  Excuse me, I'll walk over.  '70 --
     '70 -- '73.
          And you've seen other references to this.  All
     of these -- every single -- I've said this before,
     every single thing you see on here you can find in
     a medical record.  And we've shown most of these to you during the course of the trial.
          And then you see bronchitis, 10 to 20 times
     during this period, and then you start seeing lots
     of problems once you get into this time frame.  And
     the point of this was, you know, they -- counsel
     was saying to Dr. Rubin, well, did you see in your
     slides any evidence of pneumonia or any evidence of
     bronchitis or any evidence of any of these fumes?
          You don't see evidence of the things, what you
     see is evidence of what they do to the body.  And
     that's something that we -- we have no control
     over.
          We have the doctors who described this, and
     they all said this is what Ms. Koballa's situation
     is.  So to say that -- ask all these later doctors,
     well, did you think that there was this or that,
     the bottom line is, the bottom line is we know what
     the evidence is because we know what the results
     are.
          The most significant insult to her lung,
     however, was clearly this meat wrapper's asthma.
     As you heard from Dr. Tuthill, when -- when this
     paper -- when this plastic is cut --
          And could I see the next slide?
          You release a series of toxic substances, and those are the things that Dr. Tuthill told you are
     released when polyvinyl chloride is heated at 200
     degrees on a hot wire.
          Now, probably some of those are carcinogenic.
     I didn't ask him, well, are these carcinogenic,
     because that's not the point.  We're not submitting
     these, even though I think benzene would probably
     be, I think toluene may be.
          The point is these are all chemicals that
     assault the lungs that cause inflammation.  And we
     know, we know that she was having all these
     problems at the time she was breathing this,
     breathing this.
          She wrapped a thousand packages a day for 15
     years, and with every wrapping, she was breathing
     that material.  The second 15 years, about the
     middle, that went away, and she was left with just
     the labeling.
          And, of course, the solvents and the cleaning
     materials, which everybody agrees, those types of
     things can cause irritation and ultimately
     inflammation to the lungs, and we have evidence
     that all of these things in combination.
          Now, counsel wants to talk about and deal with
     these multiplications and come up with -- nobody knows how many puffs Ms. Koballa took.  If she's
     ironing, she lights a cigarette, puts it down, she
     irons a while, the cigarette keeps burning, whereas
     if she smokes it without interruption or maybe she
     stopped smoking -- for him to make you think that
     this is an objective test, a calculation, a dose,
     it would be like my saying that, you know, an
     average person breathes 16 times a minute.
     Ms. Koballa would have worked 420 minutes every
     day, assuming a seven-hour shift, so she was
     exposed, we know, to a thousand wrappings.
          So I could do the calculations and I could say
     she breathes 16 times a minute when she was
     wrapping, and we know, without any doubt, that
     that -- those chemicals were released, and I could
     multiply that times the number of years, and you
     know what I would come up with?
          I would come up with a lot more than 5
     million, I would come up with about 25 million
     doses of all of those chemicals that you just saw.
     But you can't decide this case that way, just like
     his number -- that would be as ridiculous as his
     number to try to say we know today what the dose
     was.
          And he wants you to believe that the only substance that we know about in this case, the only
     substance that we know the actual dose of is
     cigarettes.  And that's just not true.
          Furthermore, we know the results of these
     other exposures that we see in all these evidence
     about her lungs.
          And then, of course, Dr. Tuthill diagnosed
     Ms. Koballa with meat wrapper's asthma.  And the
     significant thing is --
          If we could see the next slide.
          -- it only happened at work.  Now, remember,
     this is in the late '60s, right here.  She's been
     smoking a long time so far.  And when she goes
     home, when she smokes more, these symptoms all go
     away.
          So she is not having symptoms from smoking in
     this time, she's having symptoms because of meat
     wrapper's asthma.  Meat wrapper's asthma, because
     it goes away.  And we see continuation of
     references to this throughout her lifetime.
          She continued to remind doctors, this was an
     important thing for Ms. Koballa in her life.  It --
     the period of treatment there was about five years
     when she was suffering from this, and she mentioned
     it in '82, in '96, and in 2000.  She remembers. Now, so we know what the exposure, we know the
     impact on the lungs and we know what conditions she
     has.  So how does this relate to C.O.P.D. and lung
     cancer?  Was smoking the substantially contributing
     cause or not?
          Let's talk about lung cancer first.  And for
     that, you heard from Dr. Bennett.  I don't know
     what to say.  He came from Montana.  Montana is a
     small state.  I suppose he would say people that
     are from DeLand may be not as good as people from
     some other bigger city.
          I don't know that the size of the state where
     he works today has anything to do -- if he added up
     all the people in Africa when he worked over there,
     in North Carolina, in Mississippi, and Alabama,
     you'd get a lot more people than the 900,000, I
     think he said half the population of Orlando.  I
     don't know what the point of that was.
          And to say he doesn't look at slides, he has
     done 8,000 -- over 8,000 autopsies.  And when you
     do autopsies -- and he's also done a lot of
     clinical work where he regularly -- he ran the lab.
     He was the quality person who ran the lab at
     hospitals where they would look at slides.  He was
     highly qualified. Now, he doesn't write.  He's a practitioner,
     and you have to evaluate, and he's testified a
     couple three times in tobacco cases and looked at a
     few more cases.  Did you get any cross-examination
     from him about going around trying to generate or
     take positions in litigation about tobacco or not?
     No.
          He was a -- ironically, he is the one witness
     in this case who has actually seen meat wrapper's
     asthma in a real patient when he did an autopsy, in
     a real person when he did an autopsy.  And he went
     through all the slides that, and he showed you what
     the slides looked like and he showed you where the
     tumor was.  Nobody else did that for you.
          Dr. Rubin showed you a couple of slides.  They
     didn't ask him a question -- a single question
     about any of those opinions.  They wanted to know
     why did you go out to -- you know, it's
     interesting, Mr. -- counsel this morning was
     talking about California and all that.  They're the
     ones that brought up this thing about where do you
     live.
          He said aren't there a lot of pathologists in
     North Carolina and at University in -- East
     Carolina and Wake Forest, and why did they go all the way out there?  And I'm thinking, well, you
     went all the way to San Diego.
          The point is that's irrelevant.  That's
     irrelevant.  What's relevant is you watch the
     person, and more importantly, what did the person
     look at and what did he show you when he gave you
     his testimony.
          13-8, please.
          That was the first slide.  And if you
     remember, the most significant thing he said --
     see, doctors can look at evidence, a slide, they
     can look at slides, they can look at how a
     condition's performed and a lot of things to give
     them an idea of whether something is related to
     this or that.
          He told you, if you remember, this section
     right here, that was a big scar or evidence of
     scarring across there.  And he told you that if
     scarring -- and scarring can be caused by tobacco,
     but he told you that if you had tobacco scarring,
     it would not be thick and bold like that, it would
     be thin and wispy looking.
          And nobody contest -- they didn't come in with
     a different slide and say, no, this is what tobacco
     scarring looks like.  They just want you to believe them because they get paid a lot and they've got
     good credentials, they say, oh, it must be caused
     by smoking.
          Well, he actually showed you the evidence of
     what a scar looks like that's not tobacco related.
     And then he looked at a number of things that all
     point to the conclusion that this is not smoking
     related.
          And those are the things -- that's the
     evidence.  That's the later 50 minutes that we
     talked about, where it was found, that it had
     features of B.A.C. which is not tobacco related, it
     had substantial scarring in the tumor itself, it
     preexisted, the scarring, for years.  It shows the
     inflammation.  It hadn't spread.
          There was no -- he said it's rare for a
     smoking related cancer in this -- of this size,
     remember, he said it was a large lesion, not to
     have spread.  And there was no treatment,
     chemotherapy or radiation afterwards, and it hasn't
     returned.  And that's his evidence.
          Now, nobody on the other side ever put up a
     list and said these are all the criteria from the
     medical records and from the reports that I glean
     that suggest or convince me that it is smoking related because they didn't look at the medical
     records and they didn't talk about the medical
     records.  That's -- Dr. Bennett talked about lung
     cancer.
          Now, he also talked about emphysema, and I
     want to show you, if you remember, he did a
     drawing.  He did a drawing.  He's the only one that
     talked to you about the three -- they brought in
     Dr. Doig to say she had emphysema, but Dr. Doig is
     the one that found the blebs.
          And he agreed and Dr. Rubin agreed and maybe
     Dr. Burns, I don't remember if I asked him or not,
     agreed that if you have blebs, that means bullous,
     and everybody agrees no smoking.  Dr. --
          Can you all see this with the thing in the way
     here?
          Dr. Bennett showed you the difference
     between -- this is what it looks like and the
     difference between panacinar, which is not smoking,
     he said that would be a hole through the middle,
     and centrolobular, which would be around the edge,
     and he said this is not smoking, and that's his
     evidence.
          And nobody contested that other than just Dr.
     Burns just to say -- I'm sorry -- Dr. Burns just said, well, that emphysema is caused by smoking.
     Dr. Rubin, emphysema, caused by smoking.
          Again, they want you to believe because they
     have credentials and they've spent a lot of time
     working in tobacco cases, they want you to believe,
     trust me, it's in here.  That's their testimony.
          Dr. Bennett doesn't say trust me it's in here.
     Dr. Bennett says this is what it is, and he showed
     you slides that supported this.  And we had this
     whole discussion, to the extent there is emphysema,
     it is mild, which, again, does not suggest smoking
     related.
          We have another slide.
          Dr. Rubin or Dr. Burns, I forget which one,
     said it was serious or heavy or moderate or
     moderate to severe, whatever.  Well, these are the
     doctors who looked at it over the years.  And as
     time passes, it gets a little better.  At first
     they said it was mild emphysema.  And Dr. Doig said
     it's a matter of degree.
          So when you say emphysematous changes, that
     means it's not as bad as emphysema.  So by '09, it
     had got a little better, and then a month later,
     she has mild emphysematous changes.  So her
     emphysema is actually getting a little better. That wouldn't happen if it were smoking related.
     Nobody has disputed that.  No doctor has disputed
     that in this case.
          Now, Dr. Klein talked to you about C.O.P.D.
     And remember, he talked to you about this normal
     P.F.T. after 22 years of smoking, and he agreed
     that there was evidence, based on Dr. Tuthill's
     records, of meat wrapper's asthma, he described
     what that would be, and he talked about remodeling.
          And that was the hose pipe.  When you get your
     hose pipe, you move it, it's very supple.  If you
     turn the water on quickly, you see it kind of bulge
     a little bit.  But if you leave it in the sun too
     many days, it becomes hardened and it's not supple
     anymore and it doesn't bulge a little bit when
     water goes through.
          That's what happens to your lungs.  And that's
     called remodeling.  And that happens because of all
     of these exposures, all of this inflammation over
     all of these years, it changed Ms. Koballa's lungs
     to some extent.
          Now, Dr. Klein, he practices, he doesn't
     write, he's from California, so he's from far away.
     He doesn't write, he practices.  He has patients.
     Yesterday, he said he saw 24 patients, or the day before he testified.
          And he told you that C.O.P.D. from smoking
     acts different from C.O.P.D. not from smoking.
     Remember now, we're looking at -- we're trying to
     decide if she's in the small 20 percent pool of
     smokers or in the large 80 percent pool.
          And doctors, that's the part of science,
     doctors can tell you, if you have a certain
     disease, it looks a certain way.  And if it looks
     this way, we think it's this, and if it looks that
     way, it's this.
          And their doctors never got to that point
     because they didn't get the medical records out and
     show you any evidence from the actual medical
     records, they didn't have a chart like the one I
     just showed you that Dr. Bennett did.
          Go back to -- don't put that one up yet, I'm
     not quite ready.
          They didn't have a chart that gave all the
     criteria and said this is why it doesn't appear to
     be smoking.  They didn't have a chart that said
     here is all the criteria that -- they didn't have a
     chart like that the other way.
          Nobody put up -- Dr. Burns didn't put up --
     pull out medical records and show you all of the reasons that it's got to be smoking except to say
     smoking causes cancer, which we all agree.  And
     it's not the issue in this case.
          Now, Dr. -- Dr. Klein talked about the P.F.T.,
     pulmonary function tests.  And he showed you this
     chart, and it's kind of busy, but if I could walk
     over here, he said the important thing to look at
     are these.
          In '73, and I marked this one in '73, it was
     normal.  And then by '96, and this is about the
     time of the surgery, and she had -- she had a
     lesion, a cancer, so you would expect it not to be
     as good, it had dropped.
          But immediately after the surgery, and that
     was one of the things all the doctors on our side
     said, the fact that she rebounded with less lung,
     remember, 20 percent is gone, but they told you
     the -- I'm doing the wrong side.  20 percent of the
     lung is gone, but it comes back and it adjusts and
     so forth, so after the surgery, she actually has a
     better result.
          And then from then on, as she ages, it changes
     a little bit year after year.
          The important thing, he showed you the -- I
     don't have the graphs up here.  Remember there is a graph, and if it's normal, it goes up and then it
     kind of goes that way, and if it's bad, if you have
     problems, it goes kind of like that (indicating).
          Dr. Klein told you, and nobody disputed this
     because they didn't bring anybody -- they didn't
     bring the pulmonologist in who actually treated her
     all -- who treated her as recently as last March,
     this March or this month -- last March, I guess, or
     last fall, they didn't bring that person in for you
     to hear from.
          Dr. Klein pointed out to you that smoking
     related C.O.P.D. you would expect this number to
     get 10 percent worse every year.  And you can see
     from here down to here it barely moves.  It should
     have gone from 1.8 to -- what's 10 percent of that,
     .18, and another 10 percent and another 10 percent
     and on down.  Nobody disputed that.  That's what
     happens if you have smoking related problems.  This
     is not smoking related.
          And he then did a summary chart.  Once again,
     she had a normal P.F.T. in '73.  She had, after the
     surgery, they called it mild to moderate
     obstruction.  And that was after -- that was after
     smoking a lot of years.  It was the most -- she had
     at that point, the worst case was mild to moderate. That she had improvement.  Again, she had
     improvements with a smoking history.
          And finally, you don't see the 10 percent.
     They didn't show you a chart that listed all the
     criteria that would cause you to believe the
     opposite is the case.
          And, you know, we sort of have a scientific
     test here.  You know how when -- it's not
     scientific, but when you have little babies and
     you're starting to introduce food, you'll introduce
     one kind of food and see if they break out in a
     rash.
          You know, sometimes you give a child eggs for
     the first time and they wake up with their ears
     bulging and red and all of that.  So you try one,
     if that works, then you try another one, and you do
     that so that you can kind of keep up with what
     works and what doesn't.  And you take one away and
     see what happens now with just this one.
          Well, we have two examples of exactly that
     kind of test in this case.  The first example is
     this right here.  We know that Ms. Koballa had been
     smoking for 22 years when she had that P.F.T.  If
     she were having problems with her lungs associated
     with smoking, and I could pull out Mr. Pantazis's calculations and we could figure out how many puffs
     she had by then, but if -- if she had been smoking,
     you would expect a problem, and you see none.  You
     see none.  At that point.  A normal P.F.T.
          And then the second piece of evidence has to
     do with from the time she moved to Florida.  When
     she moved to Florida, all the environmental
     exposures are gone.  This is like taking the food
     away from the baby.  All of the occupational
     exposures are gone.  And the only thing left is
     cigarette smoking.
          So that ought to tell us what happens to Ms.
     Koballa if she only has a problem with smoking, if
     smoking is the issue.  And we have an answer to
     that from Dr. Sia's records.
          Next one.
          Dr. Sia, remember, saw her a number of times
     between '92 and '96.  And when he saw her, she
     didn't have -- hadn't had a chronic cough in a
     year, since she moved away from everything but
     still smoked.
          She didn't have a frequent cough when she
     would lie down.  She didn't wake with shortness of
     breath.  She did have trouble walking, but up
     stairs she didn't have a problem, and again, laying down.  And there were several records from Dr. Sia
     over those years where he found no acute distress,
     her lungs were clean.
          I'm not sure if I have another slide for Dr.
     Sia or not.
          And then we had six -- he saw her -- there
     were 13 interactions, half she came in, and the
     other half she called in and she said I'm doing
     fine.  In '93 she's doing fine, I don't need an
     appointment.
          Do we have another one?  I can't remember.
          The bottom line is, ladies and gentlemen, that
     when everything goes away except smoking, her
     condition stabilizes and now you have the evidence
     that she actually is doing better.  Smoking is not
     a substantial contributing factor in her condition.
          Now, I don't have a lot of time left, but I
     want to talk --
          THE COURT:  About two minutes.
          MR. REID:  Two minutes?  May I have just a
     little bit more, Your Honor?  You said -- I'm sure
     you'll give him --
          THE COURT:  I won't chop you off mid sentence.
          MR. REID:  Addiction.
          Could I see the slide, please? As to addiction, the nicotine effect, it's out
     of the body in 72 hours.  The withdrawal symptoms
     are gone.  Any effect on the brain, the receptors,
     are gone.  Back to normal.
          If Ms. Koballa stopped smoking for more than a
     couple of months, which she did on a number of
     occasions, you cannot say that nicotine is the
     reason that she started again, because she was --
     nicotine was gone.
          Ms. Koballa knew how to smoke and knew how to
     quit.  She found that she could quit by going to a
     hypnotist, acupuncture.  She uses the patch.  She
     controlled her smoking in places where she wasn't
     allowed to smoke.  But the main thing is, she had a
     number -- and we quibbled, Dr. Frazier wanted to
     quibble about is that a quit smoking or a stop
     smoking.
          The fact is she went away from smoking, she
     learned how to quit, how to get away from smoking,
     and she then made a decision that she would smoke
     again, and it had nothing to do with nicotine.
          They say nicotine is so powerful, even her
     last one when she was nervous and fearful for her
     life, if nicotine has this enormous grasp of the
     brain that totally controls, the fact that no matter what the outward motivations shouldn't
     matter, that's what they told you.  They say it so
     affects the brain that it takes over and controls
     your brain.
          The day that she quit for good without help
     she was fully saturated with nicotine, she had been
     smoking the day before and for the several days
     before.  There was no reason in the world that
     nicotine -- that you could say that there was less
     nicotine.  But the other times she quit, every time
     she stops, the nicotine was gone.
          Ms. Koballa liked -- some people like to smoke
     and they choose not to stop.  Ms. Koballa liked to
     smoke.  And you heard evidence of that about her --
     that she liked all the things about smoking.
          Now, the last thing I would like to show you
     is the verdict form.  And the first question -- the
     verdict form is written in the legal form.  I've
     been talking to you generally about the facts.
          "Was Ms. Koballa addicted to cigarettes
     containing nicotine?"  And you heard the evidence
     that she quit, that she controlled her smoking.
     And I would suggest the answer to that question is
     no.
          The second group of questions deal with the medical case.  "Was her addiction to cigarettes
     containing nicotine a cause of her chronic
     pulmonary or her lung cancer?"  And that's where
     you decide if you think that smoking did not
     substantially contribute to her condition, that the
     other things were the substantial contributors,
     your answer to these questions would be no.  And I
     would suggest that is what's supported by this
     evidence.
          Now, the last thing I want to say to you,
     ladies and gentlemen, is that I don't get to talk
     to you again.  And as you can tell from all the
     lawyers, sometimes we like to talk and we like to
     make points, and it's really tough to sit over
     there and know that I cannot respond.
          I don't know what Mr. Pantazis might say to
     you.  He may be waiting to say something to you
     that he hasn't said yet that I would have a great
     answer to.  So I would only ask you if you listen
     to him, I hope you have listened to me this way.
     And does that make sense what Ben Reid just said to
     me?  Is it supported by the evidence?
          When he says things that you think I might
     have a response to, you might think what would my
     response be, because I can't make it anymore and I can't guess what he might say.
          I want to tell you one final thing.  We have a
     pact, jurors and the litigants.  We agree with you
     that you can go into that room and you -- and you
     can decide this case, and we're not going to
     interfere with that, we're not going to tell you
     how to decide it, you're going to do it.  And you
     can't -- there can't be a wrong answer.
          You know I think in voir dire I told you back
     in the 1700s they used to put jurors in jail if
     they got the wrong result.  That doesn't happen
     anymore.  You are the kings when you go in there.
          However, you have agreed that you will decide
     the case only on the evidence.  You will not decide
     the case because smoking can cause or that it is
     addictive.  You will not decide the evidence
     because it's a big company.
          You will decide the case only on the evidence
     that you've heard in this case.  And that's our
     pact.  And that's why the -- that's why the jury
     system works, because we agree and you agree.
          And so as you retire, I have complete and
     total confidence that you will now go into that
     jury room and you will consider all of this
     evidence and you will do your duty and you will arrive at a proper verdict.
          And with that, I thank you for your just rapt
     attention this morning as I have been speaking.
