          MR. REID:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Afternoon.
          JURORS:  Afternoon.
          MR. REID:  Please let me also add my thanks
     and my appreciation on behalf of the folks who've
     worked with me during this week and on behalf of
     the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, we appreciate
     and we value and we honor your service.
          We are getting close to the end.  I would like
     to spend a little time with you talking about what
     this case is really about.
          Now, as you know, we've divided -- the judge
     has divided this case into several phases.  In
     phase one, you decided that Ms. Koballa was
     addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.  And as
     you recall, every expert who testified agreed that
     if someone is addicted to nicotine, that does not mean that they are not able to make the choice to
     quit smoking, and that's what we'll be talking
     about in this phase of the case.
          We are in no way questioning or saying
     anything about your verdict.  You found that Ms.
     Koballa was addicted.  But now your job, your task
     will be to determine if Ms. Koballa was able to
     choose to continue to smoke or whether she was able
     to stop smoking.
          And this is important because if you remember,
     Dr. Burns, and that was -- seems like years ago,
     Dr. Burns said had Ms. Koballa quit smoking in the
     mid '80s, we wouldn't be here.  The likelihood of
     cancer would be virtually nil.  And that's why it's
     important to talk about whether or not Ms. Koballa
     could have quit at some point in the past.
          Now, as I've said several times before, this
     case is about Ms. Koballa and it's about her
     choices.  And you heard Dr. Proctor when he was on
     the stand agree with a couple of comments of the
     Surgeon General of the United States.
          The Surgeon General for years has said the
     same thing.  "Cigarette smoking represents a
     category of health problems that can be called
     personal choice health behavior."  In '82 he said, "A personal choice behavior, such as smoking, is
     impossible to randomize," that is, to dictate
     smoking behavior.
          And finally, in '86, he said, "Cigarette
     smoking is an addictive behavior, and the
     individual smoker must decide whether or not to
     continue that behavior."  That's been the view of
     the Surgeon General, as you can see, for a number
     of years.
          That's why I've said this case was brought by
     Mrs. Koballa, she has the burden of proof to prove
     that her injuries were caused by something that was
     either done or not done by R.J. Reynolds.  And
     that's what this case is about.
          Now, you may have -- you may not appreciate
     that because this morning you heard about an hour
     with virtually no reference to Ms. Koballa.  You
     know, our system is set up in such a way that a
     party brings a lawsuit and alleges certain things
     and they have the burden to prove what they allege.
     And in this case, the burden is to prove causation.
          You remember I drew a little map, I drew a
     little picture, very inartfully, but I talked about
     it as being a bridge of causation, a bridge from
     the findings, general material, to Ms. Koballa. And this is the bridge that I'm going to be talking
     about today, and we've been talking about for the
     last several weeks.
          Now, you saw the verdict form, and I'm going
     to talk about that a little bit toward the end.
     But there are certain factors that you will have to
     consider, certain questions that you will be able
     to answer, certain ways to think about it.  And I
     want to suggest that these are the things that
     you'll have to decide.
          First of all, did any action of R.J. Reynolds
     cause Ms. Koballa's injuries?
          Did R.J. Reynolds withhold or conceal any
     information from Ms. Koballa that she did not know
     from another source?
          You remember this morning when the judge was
     giving you the instructions and he gave you an
     instruction about concealment, he said not
     otherwise known.  And it's common sense with the
     meaning of the word.  If you say -- you have to
     prove that the concealment caused you injury, it
     must be something that you had no way of knowing.
          And in this case, you have to decide if
     Ms. Koballa -- if anything was concealed from
     Ms. Koballa that she didn't know from other sources.  That's why the judge instructed you this
     morning that it has to be something not otherwise
     known.
          The third is if it was concealed, was it the
     cause?  And that's just what I was talking about.
     Ms. Koballa basically says I didn't know certain
     things, and if I had known these things, I would
     have never smoked.  So that's why your task is in
     the middle there, to decide if she actually knew
     these things or not.
          And then the final question has to do with
     when she realized that she suffered from a
     smoking-related illness.
          So I want to talk a little bit about the
     causation to start with.  As the judge has told
     you, every time you have been instructed, he's
     talked to you about causation.  He talked about the
     but-for test we talked about in the early, now he's
     talking about with regard to concealment not
     otherwise known, but it's the same idea.  There has
     to be connection between what my client did or
     didn't do and what is being claimed in this case.
          Now, this morning, for most of that time, you
     heard only about what counsel believes my client
     did 40 or 50 years ago.  You heard very little about that connection.  And you heard very little
     from the evidence as well.
          You know, if you remember in phase one, I
     think there is a pattern here, if you remember in
     phase one, there was the two doctors that
     testified, both testified in a -- to a limited --
     after a limited review of the medical records just
     what the lawyers sent, they didn't know a lot of
     facts about Ms. Koballa's personal life.
          They talked about this case as if it were a
     generic person, a person -- and many, many times
     today, counsel said something about "the general
     public, including Ms. Koballa."  But he never told
     you why is Ms. Koballa included in the specific
     things he was talking about.
          And now we have the same thing,
     Dr. Goldberg -- let's start with Dr. Proctor.  He
     made it perfectly clear, he was the first witness,
     he said that he didn't know anything about
     Ms. Koballa.  He knew she was a plaintiff in the
     case and that was it.  He didn't know anything
     about her.  And, therefore, he had no way of
     connecting up all of the things he talked about to
     Ms. Koballa's case.
          Dr. Goldberg said several things along that line.  He said he didn't need to know about
     individuals because he knew why people smoked.  So
     he's lumping in.  If you remember, at one point, he
     said, "Well, Ms. Koballa is part of the big group
     that you study, that's why you study groups, to see
     how it would affect individuals within the group."
     Again, that's not Ms. Koballa.
          His answer is simple, everything, everything
     here that happened happened for one reason,
     advertising; advertising, marketing.  Over and
     over, that's what he said.  She started smoking
     because of advertising, she kept smoking because of
     advertising, and she chose not to stop smoking.
     And then when she did stop, she chose to go back,
     always about advertising.
          And then when he tried to talk about
     Ms. Koballa, he did try to make some general
     references, he got it wrong.  He told you certain
     things that you found out later when you actually
     heard from her and heard her testimony and what she
     had said in her deposition that just weren't
     accurate regarding her personal situation.
          Now, the plaintiffs talked a great deal about
     the findings and then again today, and I talked
     about them before, we talked about in voir dire, if the findings answered the questions, we wouldn't be
     here.  There would be no need for you to have spent
     so far two and a half weeks in this case if the
     findings answered that question.
          The first jury that you heard about who made
     those findings had never heard of Mrs. Koballa.
     They didn't know a thing about her, they didn't
     know a thing about her case.  They didn't know
     anything about Ms. Koballa.  That's why -- this is
     where they were (indicating), the first jury.  But
     you have to get over here (indicating) for this
     case.  And you're the jury that gets to do that.
          You're the first jury that has heard Ms.
     Koballa's case and the facts about her case and how
     her smoking choices were affected.  They have to
     cross this bridge.
          Now, today, you heard about 18 documents.  And
     I would have to say a fair summary of what you
     heard is the plaintiff should win the case because
     of those 18 documents.  And we talked about those
     in opening.  And I told you that some of those
     documents are not very good when you read them
     today.  I don't know why some of the people wrote.
     But I ask you to ask a couple questions about them.
          The first thing is what did they have to do with Mrs. Koballa's case?  The fact that somebody
     internally at Hill and Knowlton, a public relation
     firm, was patting themselves on the back for doing
     something doesn't tell you what Ms. Koballa knew or
     didn't know at any point in time.
          I told you that in this case, they would
     cherry pick a handful of documents.  Remember,
     there is 60 million documents out there, and you
     saw 18 today, and I think maybe he put about 30
     into evidence.
          I'll give you some examples.  Some of these
     were press releases that never were -- appeared in
     a newspaper.  You know, there were several press
     releases that you saw, T.I. issued a press release.
     Press releases don't always get in the paper.  They
     didn't bring you the paper where this press release
     was reported.
          There are other documents that don't have a
     caption on it.  You don't know to whom it was sent
     or why it was written.  Other documents, there is
     no evidence that it ever -- it ever became part of
     any policy of the company.
          In fact, one of the things they showed you was
     a Frank Statement, and we know that it was
     published, but in this case, there is no evidence that Mrs. Koballa ever saw the Frank Statement.
     Now, they have spent a lot of time talking about
     the Frank Statement.  It has no connection with
     Ms. Koballa because she never saw it, and on and
     on.
          They just showed you a document this morning,
     I had it here somewhere, let me see if I can find
     it.  They showed you one paragraph.  And one of the
     things you need to do is when you go back, look at
     some of these documents.
          They showed you a paragraph in this document,
     and this is the actual one in evidence.  It's Dr.
     Rodgman.  And they read the paragraph, put it on
     the board.  In 1954 the first report of the
     presence of a carcinogenic polycyclic hydrocarbon,
     et cetera.  And then they said they have been 60
     some more compounds.  That's all they read to you.
          Well, the very next sentence is interesting.
     It says, "Eight of the polycyclic hydrocarbons
     isolated from smoke are known to produce cancer in
     mice.  Another five or six are suspect as cancer
     producing cancer agents in laboratory animals.
     There is no evidence that any of these compounds
     will produce cancer in man."
          So when you go back, if you start looking at these documents, I suggest that you should look at
     the whole document, not just the excerpts.  So we
     have a cherry picked group with cherry picked
     quotes.  You need to look at all of them and
     understand the context of all of these.
          The -- give this back before -- the -- the
     marketing memo that mentioned 14-year-olds, you
     know where those numbers came from?  They came from
     the government.  They weren't R.J. Reynolds'
     numbers.  We didn't go out and do a survey to find
     out what 14-year-old were doing.  But the
     Department of Health, Education, and Welfare did
     that.
          And when you look at that chart, you know,
     they had little squares around a couple of the
     boxes.  What were those?  18.  And if you read,
     they talk about tomorrow's cigarette business.
     There is no evidence that they marketed to
     14-year-olds because in that one document, they got
     some federal government numbers, and it happened to
     mention 14-year-olds.
          I could go on, but I'll just say, look at the
     documents, and, number one, ask yourself, did it
     have anything to do with Ms. Koballa's case, did
     it -- did these documents have anything in them that Ms. Koballa didn't know from another source?
     And secondly, read the context.
          Now I want to talk about a summary of the
     evidence that you've heard, and I would like to
     divide it into two or three areas.  The first thing
     I would like to talk about is that the question of
     whether or not Ms. Koballa smoked or continued to
     smoke or failed to stop because of anything R.J.
     Reynolds Tobacco Company did.
          There was a lot of evidence about that.  The
     basis of the plaintiff's claim in this case is
     essentially based almost entirely on the testimony
     of Dr. Goldberg, because he's the witness who came
     in to try to convince you of the reasons to try to
     tell you -- now, remember, he said I don't know
     need to know about Ms. Koballa, I know why people
     smoke.  So he wanted to try to convince you that
     his belief of why people smoke is why Ms. Koballa
     smoked.
          But now you've heard evidence from Ms. Koballa
     about why Ms. Koballa began to smoke, and she says
     it was peer pressure, and that will be important in
     a few minutes, she thought that kids that smoked
     were cool, she wanted to be part of the in crowd,
     and her parents smoked and a number of her close relatives smoked.
          Now, they keep talking about glamour, and
     there is no doubt that there were glamorous people
     on the movies, around in the world and society, who
     smoked.  But there are glamorous people doing lots
     of things, drinking alcohol, other things.
          That's the only thing they can point to, they
     say because Dr. Goldberg says because glamorous
     people smoked, that's the only reason that Ms.
     Koballa, she started smoking because Reynolds had
     some ads that had glamorous people.
          It sounds like they would only be satisfied,
     the only way to solve this problem would be either
     to stop advertising or to have unattractive people,
     unattractive models.
          And remember, this was a legal product and it
     was being advertised, as Dr. Goldberg finally
     admitted, in the same manner that all other
     products were being advertised at that point in
     history.
          You've heard also evidence in phase one and a
     little bit now as to why Ms. Koballa, what she
     enjoyed about smoking and why she liked to smoke.
          Now, Dr. Goldberg was a witness who wanted to
     say she doesn't smoke for those reasons, it's not really her peers, it's not really her parents, it's
     advertising.
          And I would suggest that Dr. Goldberg is not a
     witness -- you get to judge credibility and you get
     to decide whether people answer questions, whether
     they tell the same story.  You get to decide all
     that.  I suggest he has not earned your belief in
     his credibility.
          Now, what was his basis?  His basis was that
     advertising controls everything.  People cannot
     withstand, that's why he kept talking about the
     millions of dollars in advertising spent by a lot
     of companies, including the tobacco industry and he
     said people can't withstand it.  The advertising is
     there and the only way to satisfy him really would
     be no advertising at all.
          But in his world, it's okay if alcohol
     companies have attractive people and rugged scenes
     or romance in their ads, it's okay if fast food
     industry have attractive people, but it's not okay
     for tobacco.  And I am going to in a minute show
     you how Dr. Goldberg's opinions have changed when
     he's looking at other things on the same subject
     compared to when he's talking about tobacco in this
     case in front of you. Now, first of all, he says that it's clearly
     established that advertising has a direct
     correlation to -- to smoking initiation.  And you
     heard testimony, however --
          Now if I can see the next slide.  I think I
     have a slide on this.  No, not that one, we'll go
     back to that one.  Take that one down.  Before we
     get to that one.
          The Surgeon General, and Dr. Proctor -- no,
     Dr. Goldberg testified, said in one of his reports
     there has been no longitudinal study, remember they
     talked about you study people going forward,
     there's no longitudinal study of the relationship
     of cigarette advertising to smoking initiation.  So
     it just doesn't exist.
          And Dr. Goldberg didn't show you any studies.
     He just said it's his opinion.  But before he was
     paid to be a witness in the cases against tobacco
     companies, he had a different view.
          Now if we could see that slide.
          And this was put up in his article.  He's
     talking about alcohol there.  And he said, "A
     recent review of the experimental, correlation" --
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
          MR. REID:  Ladies and gentlemen, I was talking
     about Dr. Goldberg's opinion that smoking -- that
     advertising is the principal cause for smoking
     initiation.
          And before Dr. Goldberg was hired to testify
     against tobacco companies, he studied the role of
     alcohol, but he also looked into cigarettes, and
     this is what he wrote.  And he was here and he read
     this to you on the stand yesterday or day before.
          "A recent review of experimental,
     correlational, and econometric studies concludes
     the results are mixed and if advertising does play
     a role in stimulating liquor consumption, it is
     decidedly minor."
          Then he said, "Research in assessing a link
     between cigarette advertising and teenage smoking
     has generated equally inconclusive results." Totally opposite from what he told you during the
     time he was here this week.
          He also said pretty much nothing matters
     except advertising, and when I asked him about a
     few other things, he said, well, they may play a
     part, but it's always advertising, advertising,
     even if your parents smoke, it's really
     advertising, even if your peers smoke, it's always
     advertising, and he didn't always agree with this.
          First of all, as you'll see, the Surgeon
     General of the United States disagrees with him.
     "Multiple cross-sectional and longitudinal studies
     worldwide substantiate the relationship between
     smoking onset and peers smoking."  Different from
     what -- and Dr. Goldberg disagrees with somebody
     else about this, what he told you.  He disagrees
     with himself.
          Could we see the next slide please?
          This is what he wrote when he was not
     testifying against tobacco.  "Smoking behavior
     reflects more than the beliefs people have
     regarding smoking.  Of great significance is the
     role of peers, a factor often cited as a key
     variable leading teens to smoke."
          It goes on to talk about it being "Especially important in the adolescent stage when smoking may
     be seen as a way of rebelling."  He didn't say it
     was advertising when before he was not being paid
     to testify against tobacco companies.  He said it
     was peers and that's exactly what we have in this
     case.
          He exaggerated -- if you think about it, he
     exaggerated the evidence about Ms. Koballa in an
     attempt to try to relate the two.  First of all, he
     never met her, never talked to her, he read her
     deposition, but he got information about her and
     about what she remembered from her attorney.  He
     relied on ads she never saw.  He relied on
     products, ads for products that she never smoked,
     and in some cases they put up ads that were even
     run before she was even born.
          More importantly, Dr. Goldberg told you that
     Ms. Koballa remembers certain types, types of
     advertisement.  Remember he said that.  And I
     submit to you that's not credible.  Dr. Goldberg
     was constitutionally unable to give a succinct,
     straight answer to a question when asked.
          Dr. Goldberg, many times in the middle of a
     speech, I had to stop and remind him of what the
     question was because he did not want to answer the questions that were asked.  Other witnesses didn't
     have problems answering all the lawyers' questions
     except Dr. Goldberg.
          Now, why would he be so evasive about certain
     things?  Remember the thing about the seminars?
     It's -- it's not against the law to go to a seminar
     where there are lawyers who are suing the tobacco
     companies.
          But when I asked him about it, he always tried
     to recast it as to some sort of -- at one time, he
     said it was a scientific or an educational thing.
     He finally had to admit that all four were solely
     for the purpose of training lawyers how to sue
     tobacco companies.
          And at one point, he even denied that he
     remembered one out in San Diego, and then I showed
     him where he had previously admitted and testified
     about it not too long ago in another case when he
     was under oath.
          And that's the one he says, "Oh, yes, I was
     proud," he said it three times how proud he was to
     have presented a paper which was sponsored, paid
     for by the National Cancer Institute, N.C.I., and
     he said that over and over as if this were some
     sort of a scientific meeting. Well, when he finally dug the paper out, you
     know it took a while to dig it out, we found out it
     was published four years after that meeting.  Four
     years later.
          All of this is fair game for you to evaluate
     when you look at the witnesses and the credibility
     of the witnesses.
          Now, you heard Ms. Koballa after Dr. Goldberg.
     And Ms. Koballa testified, and I'll -- and I'll say
     that in some instances, her testimony varied
     somewhat from her deposition which she gave several
     years ago, before she sat through the trial, before
     she heard Dr. Goldberg testify.  And you can recall
     the times that we would talk about and I would
     refresh her recollection with her deposition.
          A couple things to keep in mind.  Counsel told
     you that she bought -- that cigarettes were sold to
     Ms. Koballa when she was a child, when he was
     talking about youth marketing.
          Well, now you know that at that time in
     Pennsylvania, 16 years old was the age that people
     could legally buy cigarettes.  16 was the legal age
     that some merchant could sell cigarettes.  That's
     just one factor that you didn't hear until later in
     the case. Now, as to whether advertising had an effect,
     it's one thing to say I just don't remember the
     ads, but they remembered some ads.  She
     remembered -- and now you know why she started
     smoking each of the brands that she smoked.  Let's
     look at the slide.
          You remember that she smoked Cavalier because
     that's what her friends had, not because there was
     an advertising campaign by Cavalier.  She smoked
     Lucky Strikes because that's the one she started
     with.  She switched to Tareytons because there were
     filters.  She switched to Belair because of
     menthol.  And she switched to Basic because of
     price.
          That was her testimony in her deposition --
     or -- she had a 500 page deposition, it didn't all
     happen in one day, it was taken over a -- at
     different times during the case -- of the case,
     during the case.
          In all of those 500 pages, she remembered the
     Tareyton -- a Tareyton ad, the black eye and I'd
     rather fight.  She remembered two cigarette ads
     that she never smoked, the Camel, she remembered I
     would walk a mile and the doctors.  And she
     remembered the Old Gold dancing cigarette boxes, and she didn't smoke those, either.
          If you read every word of her deposition, you
     would find nothing else, you would never find
     sentences where she said, oh, I remember --
     remember they put a whole stack of ads up, Lucky
     Strike ads, I remember those types of ads.  That
     was never in her deposition.
          And the only way Dr. Goldberg knew that was
     that a lawyer told him.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Your Honor, objection.
          THE COURT:  Sustain.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  That's not --
          MR. REID:  Dr. Goldberg understood that Ms.
     Koballa really didn't rely on ads, that there
     really was a connection, as the Surgeon General
     found and as he found in his previous research, and
     so I would submit that he's trying to stretch the
     testimony.
          He knew that she had remembered a few ads.
     And by the time he testified to you, that got to
     the point where he said, oh, she remembers all
     these types of ads, and that proves my point that
     advertising is the only thing that matters.
          He didn't know that her doctors told her to
     quit smoking.  Seems like that's a fact he would have wanted to know since he's giving you opinions
     about why she smoked and what was the --
     influencing her decisions.
          He showed you a couple of charts, and you know
     they always go down to that bottom line and they
     show you the one about cancer, but when you looked
     at the whole thing on the top, what you found out
     was that in 1959, 46 percent of the people knew
     that smoking was addictive and that smoking was
     harmful, and that's that survey.
          And then there has been a lot of talk in this
     case, and we'll talk about it some more, about
     believability and corporate America and the war and
     those things, but Dr. Goldberg in the same --
     remember he said polls are no good, surveys are the
     best.
          I showed him in the survey where it said 3 to
     5 percent would believe or would accept health
     claims from tobacco companies.  He didn't show you
     that.  He just said surveys are great, polls are no
     good.  But then I said, well, what about your
     survey that has this information 3 to 5 percent.
          Now, apply some common sense I would suggest.
     In the '50s, if advertising is as Dr. Goldberg
     tells you, in the late '50s, when smoking was at its height in this country, half the people smoked,
     the other half didn't.
          What was it about that half that allowed them
     to suddenly resist all of this advertising that he
     says is -- permeates society and -- and -- and
     causes people to do this?
          And then as smoking -- as -- even when
     advertising stayed up -- it's changed over the
     years, and in the modern time, it's different, but
     even in the years that it changed, smoking was
     going down.  If advertising was the be all, end
     all, why was smoking constantly going down even
     though the same advertising was out there?
          Dr. Goldberg wants you to believe that Ms.
     Koballa was busy with children and families, and
     she was, her husband, raising a family, living
     life.  So he wants you to believe that she didn't
     notice what was out there about the risks of
     smoking.
          He wants you to believe that she's part of the
     3 percent of the country who said I get -- I would
     take my information about health from the tobacco
     companies.  He wants you to put her in the 3 to 5
     percent, and that's not the evidence.
          He wants you to believe that she's almost robotic.  Advertising, go out, buy the cigarettes;
     advertising, go out, buy the cigarettes.
          That's not the way life is, and the polls tell
     you that, and Ms. Koballa's case tells you that.
     So that's the first point I wanted to talk to you
     about, what did Reynolds do to cause or contribute.
          The second is that she was able to quit.  Now,
     I don't want to rehash what we did last week, the
     whole week.  You found that Ms. Koballa was
     addicted, but everybody agrees that addicted people
     can quit and, as we know, Ms. Koballa is one of
     those addicted people who quit ultimately.  She is
     also one of the addicted people who quit for
     periods of two to three months.
          And you recall the testimony about that, and
     I'll just throw the slide up because, just to
     remind you, because it was a long time ago.
          You remember that nicotine leaves the body,
     you have withdrawal symptoms, and then any effect
     on the brain receptors are gone, and that's why
     people can quit, because if they stop long enough,
     the nicotine goes away, and that was the reason
     that Ms. Koballa was able to quit for a period of
     time.
          And she knew how to quit, she knew going to the hypnosis, going to the acupuncture, she knew
     that would work, but she never went back.
          If Ms. Koballa started smoking again, made
     that choice, after this, then it cannot have been
     the nicotine that drove her to start smoking again.
     It cannot have been the habit.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Objection, this is -- again,
     this is retrying the first case.
          MR. REID:  No, sir.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  And I object to it and move to
     strike.
          THE COURT:  It's closing argument.  I'll
     overrule.
          MR. REID:  Thank you.
          You also remember that Ms. Koballa did
     ultimately quit, and I'll put up this other slide
     about the statistics.  You know now that a lot of
     people have quit, notwithstanding the
     advertisements, notwithstanding the effect of
     nicotine.
          Your job in this case is to determine if the
     evidence supports the view that Ms. Koballa was
     able to quit and that for other reasons, she liked
     to smoke or for other reasons, she chose, she chose
     to continue to smoke. If she chose to continue to smoke, even though
     she had the ability to quit, then she is
     responsible for her smoking decisions and not
     anybody else, and that's kind of what the Surgeon
     General of the United States was saying in that
     first series of quotes that I showed you a little
     while ago.
          So that's really all I want to say about the
     addiction, but I guess I should end by saying, I
     don't want any of you to take this to mean that I'm
     in any way doubting or questioning or complaining
     or whining about your first verdict on the question
     of addiction.  I'm suggesting that was the first
     phase and now we're in the second phase and this is
     the fair question of the second phase.
          Now I'd like to go to the third -- summary of
     the third point of evidence that we have talked
     about.  And this is really the key.  This is the
     most important in this case if you consider that
     this is a case about concealing and keeping
     information from somebody.
          I would submit that there is substantial,
     overwhelming evidence that Ms. Koballa was well
     aware of the health risks associated with smoking
     throughout most of her life, in fact, throughout almost all of her life from the point when she
     could start reading the newspapers in grade school.
          Now, you saw where people get information when
     Dr. Lacy Ford testified, and Ms. Koballa falls into
     almost all of these categories in terms of how she
     would have gotten information.
          What I would like to do as I talk about this
     is to sort of start a little more globally and then
     move it down to Ms. Koballa's personal ability to
     know the information.
          Remember the key to their -- to their case on
     concealment is that Ms. Koballa didn't know that
     smoking was harmful and didn't know that smoking --
     or didn't know that smoking was addictive.  Those
     are the only two questions that matter because
     that's what this case is about.  They're claiming
     she was harmed by cigarette smoking and she was
     addicted.
          So what we would need to explore is did she
     ever know, did she learn, as the judge told you in
     the charge, from other sources that smoking was
     harmful and that smoking was addictive.
          And we start with that's where people get
     information, that's where it comes from.  The risk
     with smoking, and you heard from Dr. Ford, and it was just yesterday, so I'm not going to put up any
     of his slides, I'm not going to play any of the
     movies, I'm not going to go over that because it's
     all fresh, but you heard him say that this
     knowledge of the risk of smoking has been known for
     over a hundred years in this country.  It's in the
     culture of our country.  And he showed you a lot of
     polls, but there were two that really summed the
     situation up.
          First is the Roper poll, and there were five
     of these, if you remember, I went over these with
     Dr. Proctor, I believe.  That tells you -- this was
     the information in that survey, it was also
     reported in the book, the survey that they used.
          That tells you that people don't get health
     information from the tobacco industry.  That's
     not -- you know, in our lives, we get information
     from a lot of people.
          You know, when a judge tells you something,
     that's one information and you give it a certain
     credence.  When a guy wanders in off the street --
     you know, my wife, when she heard that President
     Kennedy was assassinated, she heard it from a guy
     walking along the college campus with a transistor
     radio.  She didn't believe it, she said.  Guy looks like a nut, I don't believe it.
          So we always evaluate where we got information
     from.  The tobacco -- they want you to believe that
     everybody in the country believed everything the
     tobacco industry ever said, and you could put other
     corporations there if you are dealing with -- if
     you had a case about somebody else's product.
     That's the first one.
          And the second point was, and this was the
     Gallup poll, 90 percent, 90 percent had heard
     something to the effect, and this was in, I've
     forgotten the date, '54, 90 percent had heard or
     read recently that smoking may cause cancer of the
     lung.
          And then he talked about some other polls and
     said do you believe it, and substantial numbers of
     people said they believed it also.  That tells you,
     that Mr. Pantazis talked about the country at
     large, that tells you.
          But Dr. Ford did not just tell you about what
     the country at large thought because, you see, it
     doesn't matter in this case what the country at
     large thought.
          As I told you in opening, Ms. Koballa is not a
     generic person, she didn't grow up in a generic household, she didn't learn generic values, and
     that's why generic evidence about her knowledge in
     this case is not the evidence that you need to
     consider.
          Now, Dr. Ford, when he was doing his research,
     we said, okay, Dr. Ford find out -- there is all
     this information out there, find out what would
     have been in the places and where Ms. Koballa would
     have seen it.
          And so that's what he did.  He went to the
     school textbooks that were used in her school in
     her time in Pennsylvania.  Not only textbook, but
     curricular summaries and so forth.  He went to the
     local papers where she lived in all of her
     different places.
          He focused on magazines that she testified
     that she had actually taken as a -- in her family
     growing up and in her family as an adult with her
     children.  He looked at the news shows that she
     said she watched, the personalities you recall,
     Edward R. Murrow, for instance, you saw this
     morning.
          He looked at the T.V. shows that she watched
     and at the public service announcements that she
     testified she had seen.  He took this great big outside world view and brought it down to where Ms.
     Koballa lived, and demonstrated to you that Ms.
     Koballa was exposed to all of these types of
     things, all of these things.
          But now, we don't stop there, because you
     might say, well, maybe she just didn't -- wasn't
     home that day or didn't see that show or maybe
     she -- the day they reported something, she didn't
     pick the paper up.
          So sort of the next step down would be what
     was her actual knowledge, what knowledge did she
     have from reading and watching news?
          Well, she told you that she had read about,
     and this was just yesterday, she told you that in
     the '50s, she read about the dangers of smoking in
     the newspapers.  She told you reading about the
     association between smoking and cancer, and that's
     the word she used, cancer, in the '50s.  She
     remembered the Surgeon General's report.
          She also, there it is, that's where she lived.
     She remembers that.  It would be hard not to if you
     saw those newspapers.  She remembers the -- then
     she talked about Dr. Koop, she remembered who the
     Surgeon General was that issued the one in the
     '80s. And she saw warnings on every pack she picked
     up for 30 years.  Now, she said once I knew them
     and understood what they said, I ignored them.  And
     that's the problem, that's -- that's making choices
     with full knowledge of the risks associated.
          And Dr., I think, Proctor said, well, it
     wasn't a warning to start with, but it certainly
     became a warning by 1985 when it identified
     specific types of injuries that you can get,
     illnesses you can get from cancer.  And finally,
     she remembers watching T.V. reports.
          Now, that brings it down to another level, big
     world, places Ms. Koballa lived, Ms. Koballa's
     reading.  Now we get down to Ms. Koballa's personal
     life experiences.
          Ms. Koballa told you that she believed her
     health problems over the years were caused by
     smoking.  She said -- one time she said she quit in
     part because of health concerns.
          She said every doctor in the '60s, '70s, '80s,
     '90s, every doctor she saw told her, and you can
     look through, and these are some examples, doctors
     don't keep medical records way back, we have them
     back as long ago as that, and you'll have those
     records. Her children, and this is very important, we
     talk about credibility, her eight-year-old -- her
     eight -- I think it was her eighth grade son told
     her addiction, emphysema, cancer.
          Then at the same time, her older sister --
     older daughter in nursing school, and she had been
     to nursing school, so she probably had some idea --
     Ms. Koballa had earlier in her life, she told her
     it will kill you, it causes cancer.  Her husband
     asked her to smoke {sic} many times.
          And she knew specifically that she had
     scarring on her lungs.  And the doctors said you
     should quit smoking to prevent further damage.  And
     in one of the quotes, I didn't put this one up
     here, she actually said he told her to prevent
     further damage from the calcifications.  He even
     told her about what the problem was.
          Ms. Koballa had very direct and personal
     knowledge about the risks associated with cancer.
     So she falls into every category of knowledge, from
     the public at large all the way down to her eighth
     grade son telling her the same story, the same
     thing that she knew throughout her life.
          Now, she says that -- or plaintiffs contend
     that something R.J. Reynolds did wiped all of that out of her mind, allows you to say Ms. Koballa did
     not know any of this.  Because that's what you have
     to decide.
          In order to find that we concealed all this
     information, the risks of smoking, causes of
     disease, addiction, in order to find that, you've
     got to find she did not otherwise know it.  That
     means you have to just ignore -- everything I've
     just gone through, you have to ignore.  And what
     they're telling you is there was so much tobacco
     stuff out there that it wiped all of that out and
     there was no effect on that.
          In fact, this morning you kept seeing that
     chart that Dr. Goldberg made that showed how much
     advertising there was and then just a little bit of
     spending on the public health?
          Well, that was a completely misleading ad --
     chart because it didn't talk about all of the free
     publicity that you have now seen proof of, it
     didn't talk about all of the public service
     announcements that run for free on the T.V. shows,
     it didn't talk about Ms. Koballa having personal
     direct knowledge, and it didn't talk about Ms.
     Koballa's actual health situation.
          That chart doesn't prove -- they want you to think that something Reynolds did was so powerful
     that it wiped all of that out.  And that's not
     common sense.
          He told you that -- Dr. Goldberg said that we
     adulterated the articles.  Well, granted, there was
     a memo that said that Hill and Knowlton had been
     able to stop some articles, but did he bring a
     single article in to show you and say here, this is
     what they did for this article, this is how they
     changed the story, this is how they hid the fact
     that smoking is harmful?  He didn't show you any of
     it.
          In fact -- and we showed you a lot of articles
     the other way.  All of Dr. Ford's -- the articles
     you saw during Dr. Ford's exactly proved the
     opposite, that there were stories which were highly
     critical of tobacco.
          And I want you to look at one from yesterday,
     because this is interesting.  This is the one that
     they crossed Dr. Ford with.  And the only thing
     they pointed to, really, in this --
          If we could see the next slide.
          Was this thing at the bottom.  "John Whitaker,
     chairman of the board, said that you need more
     research, and Dr. Clarence Little" -- and that plays into the argument that they made that that
     was a scheme, that was an idea of ours to say more
     research.
          Well, first of all, remember the tail of the
     kite?  Well, this is a perfect example.  Any
     comment by the tobacco company was put at the end.
     But look at the first of this article.  This is
     very important.
          "Dr. Cameron," who was the American Cancer,
     "said he felt pretty well persuaded."  Okay, so he
     says, "I'm pretty well persuaded that there is a
     relationship."  But in the very next paragraph, he
     said he "was not convinced that the evidence
     justified cause and effect."
          Ladies and gentlemen, that's not the tobacco
     company creating a false debate, that's the
     American Cancer Society saying there is evidence
     but it's not convincing yet.  And all the tobacco
     company said was we need to do further research,
     which makes perfect sense when the American Cancer
     Society can't decide.
          I'm glad they brought that out because that's
     a perfect example, sort of a microcosm of what
     we're talking about here.
          Now, in order to decide on this third point we are talking about now, you have to, as I say,
     ignore everything that Ms. Koballa knew.
          The evidence in this case is that Ms. Koballa
     at this point, this advertising, marketing is not
     the reason she smoked.  She could quit.  The
     nicotine was gone.  She had the ability to quit.
     And for whatever reason, over time, she chose not
     to.  And finally, she was fully aware, fully, fully
     aware of the risks.
          And in -- if all of that's the case, then your
     answer is going to be no to a lot of those
     questions that we'll talk about in a minute.
          If you get to the point, though, of discussing
     whether or not Reynolds should be punished in this
     case, I need to talk about the punitive damage
     claim.  Now, you only get there once you have
     decided that Ms. Koballa is entitled to
     compensatory damages.  If you don't find for
     liability, you don't get to punitive damages.  And
     so these are damages over and above.
          They have asked you to award 8 million
     dollars, 8 million dollars for Ms. Koballa's actual
     damages, and then they're asking you to provide
     additional damages to Ms. Koballa over and above.
          These damages don't to go the government, they don't pay for cancer research, they go directly to
     the individual plaintiff.  And the judge will tell
     you that you cannot punish, you cannot award
     punitive damages to Ms. Koballa except for things
     that caused her injury.
          And we're back to the same bridge of cause
     again.  Whatever behavior they claim warrants
     punitive damages, they have to connect that through
     evidence to Ms. Koballa.  And then to -- if they
     connect it, then you get to the issue of punitive
     damages.
          Now, let me just talk about some of the
     criteria.  First of all, there is a different
     burden of -- burden here as far as the evidence
     goes.  You know, we've been going on the
     preponderance, you remember that, Mr. Pantazis' 101
     pages on this scale and 100 on this scale, remember
     that?
          Well, clear and convincing means you have got
     to have 150 or 170.  In other words, it's a greater
     level of proof to answer the question, yes, that
     Reynolds should be punished in this case.  But most
     importantly, the punishment has to relate to
     something that happened to Ms. Koballa that
     Reynolds did.  There has to be a causal relationship between the actions and Ms. Koballa's
     choices to smoke.
          Now, most of the argument that you heard about
     this from counsel was about these 18 documents that
     he picked.  And I told you in the beginning, these
     documents were from a different era, and the people
     who wrote those documents probably aren't around
     anymore.  It was a different world back then.
          Counsel this morning said he didn't like time
     travel, but -- he didn't like the movie, but he
     suggested that's what we're doing last week, and
     that's exactly what we're doing here.
          I can't explain some of the sentences in those
     documents.  You've been -- they've picked out some
     very awful sounding sentences and I can't explain
     them.  There is no way to explain them.
          But you have to look at the -- you have to
     look at the whole document and you have to think
     about the time it was written and then you have to
     decide did this document really ever become policy
     that affected directly Ms. Koballa.
          In other words, did any of those documents
     take away all of the things that Ms. Koballa knew
     about smoking and health and the risk, did any of
     those documents take away all of that so that she, therefore, would not have smoked if she had known
     that smoking was harmful?  And I think the answer
     is no, they did not.
          And the things in the documents that counsel
     has talked about by in large are things that were
     in the public domain.  The documents, he said,
     well, you admitted that smoking causes disease.
     That's in the public domain.  You admitted that it
     was addictive.  That's in the public domain.
     People knew that.  I can't -- I'm not going to try
     to justify why they decided not to admit it sooner
     or -- or any of those things.
          But the point is we're talking about one case
     here.  They don't want to talk about one case.
     They want to talk about the public at large and
     they want to punish and take up for the public at
     large.  That's not what this case is about and
     that's what the judge will tell you in the
     instructions.
          I want to talk about two or three of the
     things he mentions.  First he talks about the Plaza
     Hotel meeting.  He claims that that was the
     beginning of a conspiracy.  Well, think about it
     and apply common sense.
          Is it -- if you are going to have a secret conspiracy that is going to last for 50 years and
     do all the horrible things, would it be in the
     papers, and the New York Times reported the meeting
     and told exactly what was happening?
          Would you send the bylaws to the Attorney
     General of the United States and say this is the --
     this is the business venture we're going to start
     to -- dealing with smoking?
          Would you send him those, would you invite him
     to come to your meetings, would you offer him
     information about what you are doing?  Is that --
     if it's really as nefarious as counsel suggests,
     would you do all of that?
          And the one thing, they haven't mentioned it
     today, they may mention it later, but the Frank
     Statement.  And you know when Dr. Proctor was
     talking about it, if you read it carefully, in
     light of what evidence you now know about, it's
     different.
          For instance, he agreed, and I wrote down, I
     kind of graded it, true, true, and all that, I'm
     not going to read the whole thing, but when it said
     that medical research indicates there is many
     possible causes of cancer, no agreement among
     authorities, they said there has been studies -- there have been studies that associate smoking with
     cancer, but we think there are other studies, and
     some of these studies aren't accepted, and on and
     on.
          And it goes on to say we're going to create
     this organization.  And the organization they
     created was what you've heard about today, the
     T.I.R.C., which later became known as the C.T.R.
          And counsel told you this morning that that
     was a -- almost a bogus, I think he may have even
     called it a front organization, a public relations
     ploy.  Well, that's what Dr. Goldberg said it was
     or Dr. Proctor, I forget, one or the other.  Well,
     now you know the whole story, he said the rest of
     the story.
          Number one, the New England Medical Journal in
     an editorial that we talked about with Dr. Proctor
     said they thought the tobacco industry should fund
     a foundation or some organization that would fund
     research into smoking and health.
          Dr. Proctor admitted that the board of
     advisors were scientists, in fact, in the words of
     the -- in the words of the Frank Statement, were
     scientists of national repute, of unimpeachable
     integrity, he agreed that they all were. The dean of the medical school at his very
     university was one of those people.  And there were
     others.  The head of this was the president -- was
     the president of the University of Michigan.
          Now, he -- if you remember, he said, well,
     Dr. Clarence Cook Little was a -- he was just a --
     a genetics cancer person, that didn't matter.
     Imagine that.  15 percent of all people that smoke
     get cancer.  There must be some genetics issue
     about why 85 percent who smoke don't.
          Sounds like that's exactly the kind of
     research -- and, in fact, that's the kind of
     research that you would want to know about.  But he
     said, oh, it was a front organization and this guy
     was a genetics cancer, he wasn't a smoking cancer
     expert or something.  That's what he told you.
          He admitted that the research that they did
     was excellent.  He admitted that it was published
     in the top scientific magazine or -- scientific
     books, I'm missing a word, I'm having a senior
     moment.  Scientific journals in the whole world,
     not just in the United States, but in the world.
     He told you that there were 6,000 articles funded.
          But you know what he said?  He said, well, it
     was not the right research.  And that's all he could say about it.  And they're trying to get --
     collect punitive damages because Dr. Proctor said
     they didn't do the right research.
          Well, did he show you a single article and
     point out, "Look at this article, it has nothing to
     do with this"?  Not a single one.  I showed him a
     couple, I showed him one from the University of
     Miami and the University of Florida, both that
     dealt with nicotine.
          But there is another, more telling piece of
     evidence that maybe you haven't thought about yet.
     You remember I asked Dr. Proctor, and he agreed,
     that six, seven, or eight different surgeon
     generals cited a hundred -- maybe not -- scores, I
     would say, some large number, of articles published
     that were funded by C.T.R.  Great -- big -- law
     school -- big university scientists jointly funded.
     Government, the National Institute of Health, they
     jointly funded.
          Now, think about this for a minute.  The
     Surgeon General's report, what does it deal with?
     Smoking and health.  Why would the Surgeon General
     report include all of these articles published or
     paid for or funded by the C.T.R. if they didn't
     deal with, what, smoking and health? That's probably the simplest answer to Dr.
     Proctor.  You say it was the wrong research, but
     obviously, the Surgeon General of the United States
     thought it was the right search about the topic he
     was interested in, and that topic was smoking and
     health.
          They also -- so C.T.R., there is no evidence
     that there was anything nefarious, anything wrong,
     anything punitive, anything that warrants
     punishment about C.T.R., it's just not there, that
     they beat on that, they said it was a front
     organization, they claim it was all a public
     relations stunt.
          6,000 articles in the greatest medical
     journals of the world, that's not a public
     relations front organization, as he would have you
     believe.
          Another thing you've heard a lot about was
     whether or not the tobacco companies should have
     said at various times in history we need more
     research, we are not convinced with the -- of the
     data, or we -- we think there is a dispute about
     whether smoking -- what the relationship between
     smoking and health is.
          You now know, and it all came -- it almost all came from Dr. Proctor.  I think Dr. Ford talked
     about maybe one article.  But Dr. Proctor, this all
     came from him.
          And I went through -- I went through eight or
     nine or ten people over about a ten-year period,
     and he agreed these were the leading scientists in
     the country, and some out of the country.  Here
     they are.
          All of these people, all of these people at
     one time or another during that period from the
     early '50s up through about -- I think the latest
     one is about '62 or '63, just before the Surgeon
     General's report, all of those people at one time
     or another raised questions about whether or not
     there was a true association.  It was a
     scientifically debated topic.
          And the plaintiffs now say we should be
     punished because we agreed with all of those
     scientists.
          And you can see where they came from.  Let me
     give you a couple of examples that you've seen
     previously.  Dr. Burney, remember, Surgeon General,
     he believed that he had informed the public through
     excellent coverage of press, radio, and T.V. about
     general awareness. Dr. Heller, the head of the National Cancer
     Institute, again, newspapers, radio, T.V.,
     excellent job covering, exceedingly valuable way of
     informing the public.  American Medical Association
     in 1964 said the health hazards have been well
     publicized for ten years and are common knowledge.
          They're saying that the tobacco industry hid
     this, that they somehow kept Journal of American
     Medical Association or Heller or Burney, that we
     somehow kept them from telling the truth, telling
     the people the truth.
          Well, you can see what they were telling the
     people.  It is not exactly a tobacco friendly
     message, but it was out there.
          And the last one was the National, Daniel
     Horn.  He said, "You could stand on a rooftop and
     shout smoking is dangerous and you would not be
     telling anyone anything they did not already know."
     Remember, not otherwise known, that's the
     instruction the judge gave you this morning about
     the claim for concealment.  Not otherwise known.
          Now, punitive damages are designed to punish,
     no doubt about it.  So you have to decide in this
     case if R.J. Reynolds should be punished for what
     it did, and you heard the words that the judge told you, it has to be gross indifference to peoples'
     rights and intentional acts and -- it's very --
     it's very tough sounding language, and you have to
     decide.
          Well, you've had some other evidence about the
     other side of the coin about what was going on at
     R.J. Reynolds.  As just a starting point, I keep
     going back to the causation, regardless of the 30
     documents that you saw or the 18 that you saw this
     morning, it's still about Ms. Koballa, did they
     prove the causal connection.
          Now, Dr. -- Dr. Proctor told you that there is
     no safe cigarette, and people have known that for a
     long time.  And they keep putting their board up
     about all the carcinogenic substances.
          Now, imagine this, you heard some testimony or
     you saw some clips, companies saying we've got to
     take them out.  Imagine what a tremendous advantage
     it would be if you could do that scientifically, if
     you could take the smoke and somehow figure out how
     to keep burning tobacco from emitting certain
     harmful chemicals.
          Imagine what a tremendous commercial advantage
     that would be for a company, if they could figure
     out how to do that.  They want you to believe that we were -- we've told you we're going to do it, we
     haven't tried.
          It's hard.  One reason it's hard is because it
     happens in nature.  And you heard that from Dr.
     Proctor.  When you burn tobacco, it emits certain
     chemicals.  When you burn lettuce, it emits many of
     the same chemicals.  When you burn hamburgers, it
     emits many of the same chemicals.
          Now, there are some that are peculiar to
     tobacco.  Obviously, there is -- in tobacco, you
     might have insecticides that were on the crop and
     some of those things.  But -- but the main types of
     chemicals, it happens in nature.  And it's not
     something they put in.  It's -- it burns.  That's
     why it's hard.
          And secondly, and this is probably why you
     don't -- you don't get cancer from -- very often
     from breathing hamburgers, it's because the level
     is so minute in the smoke.
          And Dr. Proctor told you about that.  He told
     you that one microgram would be one crystal of a
     pack of Sweet 'N Low.  And then he said some of
     these are in the level of nanogram, which is
     smaller, and picogram, I had never heard of
     picogram before, but it's one-trillionth of a gram. It's so low that you have one of these big --
     they have these big electron microscopes in labs
     and universities, you couldn't even see it.  That's
     why it's hard.
          But what evidence is there about what R.J.
     Reynolds was doing internally about the problem of
     the dangers associated with smoking?
          They showed you the Claude Teague memo,
     remember?  That's in evidence.  And remember what
     they did, they said Dr. Teague, early, in '52, I
     think, go out and find every piece of literature
     you can find in the public domain about smoking and
     health.  And that's what he did.  78.
          And you remember Dr. Proctor said Roffo was
     someone the people never even knew about, but he
     was important, and he was in Germany.  Dr. Teague
     found nine Roffo papers.  That's the first thing.
          And nothing in this was secret, this was all
     in the public domain.
          And Dr. Rodgman, I showed you that document a
     minute ago where they didn't read the second
     paragraph.  Well, now I want to show you the second
     page, because this tells you what they were doing.
          Can you -- I can't remember, can you make this
     bigger? Well, I'm going to have to tell you.  "Having
     confirmed and extended the early published findings
     on polycyclic hydrocarbons in cigarette smoke, we
     initiated a lengthy research program to develop
     methods to lessen the amount of these potentially
     dangerous compounds."
          And then he goes through and tells you all the
     steps they're taking in 1959 to try to make
     cigarettes safer, extraction process, variations,
     length -- so forth.  And he goes on to say that
     they have done 120 separate experiments involving
     one half a million cigarettes.
          They didn't show you the second page.  They
     want you to think Reynolds said we're going to do
     this and never did anything about it.  Look at
     those documents when you go back there and you'll
     see a lot of things such as this.
          What else did Reynolds do?  You've heard going
     forward, now, right now, does Reynolds need to be
     punished and do they need to be deterred from
     future action, you've heard that they are now
     regulated by the Food and Drug Administration, Dr.
     Proctor told you the restrictions on the smoking,
     more and more restrictions all the time, they have
     rigid rules about advertising, and they're taxed. They are taxed.
          Now, I want to tell you about one more thing.
     For years, they say Reynolds didn't do anything for
     years.  Ten years, Reynolds worked closely with the
     federal government and with the public health
     community and the Tobacco Working Group.  And let
     me just show you what they did.  And Dr. Proctor
     told you about all this.
          They worked on modification.  They were
     looking for a safer cigarette, Reynolds was, with
     the government and with the public health.
     Farmers, expanded tobacco, filters, working on
     filters, on additives.  Some of those things
     Reynolds invented.  Paper porosity, complimented by
     the Surgeon General, that's what Reynolds was
     doing.
          And you know why that stopped?  They would
     have you believe it stopped because Reynolds
     somehow didn't really want to have a safer
     cigarette.  It stopped because the federal
     government said, gee, it's now politically bad --
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Your Honor, objection,
     improper.
          MR. REID:  Dr. Proctor testified to this, Your
     Honor. MR. PANTAZIS:  I don't think he testified --
          THE COURT:  I'm going to allow some latitude.
     It's closing.  The jury will remember the evidence.
          MR. REID:  The government decided it couldn't
     take the heat anymore, it was politically tough to
     be seen working with tobacco companies,
     notwithstanding all of the great things that were
     happening over these ten years, and the government
     pulled the plug on it.
          Ladies and gentlemen, I would submit to you
     that those -- that those -- the things I've just
     been talking about would mitigate against a finding
     that Reynolds was willful and wanton and that
     Reynolds attempted to personally injure, directly
     injure Ms. Koballa.
          That's the other side of the this story that
     you haven't heard until -- well, it's been coming
     out in bits and pieces, you haven't heard it until
     now.
          Now, I think I would like to look at the
     verdict form and just talk a couple of points about
     that, if I might.
          The first question, the first two questions,
     really, deal with something that there has been
     very little talk about in this case.  You're going to be asked if R.J. Reynolds was negligent in
     putting a defective product on the market, and that
     was a cause, and whether they made a defective and
     unreasonably dangerous cigarette.
          The judge has instructed you that there is a
     finding about this generically.  But in this case,
     you have to determine if this cigarette, the design
     or the manufacturing of this cigarette, harmed
     Ms. Koballa.
          And to do that, you need to know what was
     wrong with it, what is the defect, what is the --
     what is the problem?  And you heard no evidence
     about that.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Your Honor, I'm going to
     object, that's an improper argument.  The findings
     clearly --
          MR. REID:  Well, I --
          THE COURT:  Well, again, let's -- you're going
     to have rebuttal, and I allow wide latitude, and I
     have instructed the jury to rely on its memory.
          MR. REID:  So you have to show that something
     about the cigarette caused Ms. Koballa's injury.
     And they didn't bring anybody in, Dr. Proctor was
     not a design or manufacturing expert, Dr. Goldberg
     wasn't, you heard no evidence.  I would suggest to you that the plaintiff has not carried the burden
     on these first two questions.
          Now, as for the third question, that's what
     the judge will tell you is comparative fault.  And
     there you have to balance.  You have to balance.
     What did Reynolds do -- what did Reynolds do --
     remember, it's the legal cause of Ms. Koballa --
     it's not what did Reynolds do to the country at
     large, it's what happened with regard to Ms.
     Koballa's case, and they haven't talked about that
     today.  All they've talked about is the country at
     large.  Occasionally, they'll say "including Ms.
     Koballa."
          We have talked, I have talked, and our
     witnesses from this chair talked about Ms.
     Koballa's case.  And I submit that Ms. Koballa is
     responsible because she made the choices with full
     and complete knowledge, and she knew how to quit,
     and she chose not to quit.  And that's how I
     believe that question should be answered.
          Now, the damage question, I'm going to mention
     this, obviously, my belief, my position in this
     case, is that Reynolds is not responsible for
     causing damage to Ms. Koballa.  But oftentimes if I
     didn't say something about this, somebody might later say, well, I must have agreed that 8 million
     dollars is the right number because I didn't tell
     you a different number.  It has to be your
     judgment.
          But I will suggest to you to consider that Ms.
     Koballa, as counsel told you this morning, is
     cured, as you have heard from all the doctors.
     There is going to be no problem in the future based
     on the evidence that you have heard.
          8 million dollars is a substantially large
     number.  And a large compensatory award would
     suggest that it's okay to disregard warnings, it's
     okay to -- to throw out all the information that
     you have in your entire life and make a decision to
     smoke without taking any of that into account.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Your Honor, I'm going to
     object, that's improper argument on damages.
          THE COURT:  I will sustain that and instruct
     the jury to disregard the message they send.
          MR. REID:  That will be your decision, but
     think about what 8 million dollars amounts to in
     terms of your -- what that would earn every year in
     interest, where that would put somebody on the
     scale of wealth in the country.  You can look at
     all these kinds of things, what is the -- there are no physical problems.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Your Honor, wealth in the
     country --
          MR. REID:  I object to his speaking
     objections.
          THE COURT:  Again, on that one --
          MR. PANTAZIS:  And I think --
          MR. REID:  Closing.
          THE COURT:  -- it's closing argument, I allow
     wide latitude.  Overruled.
          MR. REID:  It's your decision, that's the
     bottom line.  I have told you what I think about
     it.  It's not my decision, it's your decision, and
     I've just raised some issues that I would ask you
     to consider.  Not saying you have to, I'm asking
     you.
          Go on, please, now to the -- the next question
     is about punitive damages.  I'm sorry, concealment.
     And I think the answer to that is completely no.
     Nothing -- they haven't pointed to a single thing
     that was concealed about smoking and health from
     Ms. Koballa.
          The only thing that they're saying would have
     made a difference is whether somebody at
     Reynolds -- they said yesterday did anybody ever write a letter to you and say smoking causes
     cancer.
          You don't have to do that.  It was known.  Not
     otherwise known, that's the key language you'll
     hear from the judge in the charge, not otherwise
     known.
          I would submit the evidence here is
     overwhelming, that there is no -- there is nothing
     concealed that caused, see, that's the key, that
     caused the injury.  Nothing concealed that makes
     this connection across this cause.  And if you
     answer no to that, then you will not even consider
     the question of punitive damages.
          But if you get to the next, if you get to the
     next question, I have suggested to you that
     punitive damages in this case are not warranted
     because when you read -- when you hear the
     instructions, you've got them, you will read them,
     when you look at that kind of behavior, that is not
     the kind of behavior to apply to a company that has
     struggled for years and years to try to invent
     something that nobody has been able to invent:  A
     safer cigarette.
          The government has decided that cigarettes can
     be sold, and that's the only answer really to a lot of what you have heard today, is take it off the
     market.  That's the argument they are making in
     effect.
          Cigarettes are not safe, and Ms. Koballa
     understood they weren't safe from before she
     started smoking.  She told you she read about it
     when she was in high school.  I submit that the
     evidence in this case is that punitive damages are
     not.
          Now, the last question I need to speak about,
     this calls upon you to remember back to the
     evidence from first phase.  Lung cancer was the
     final manifestation in Ms. Koballa's case of a
     lifelong problem with her lungs.  And the evidence
     in this case could not make that any clearer.
          You have to decide when Ms. Koballa was first
     aware that she had a smoking related injury that
     ultimately led to her lung cancer.  And the magic
     date for this question is May 5th, 1990.
          Now, remember the evidence that you heard.
     Ms. Koballa suffered from a number of lung
     diseases, lung problems.  You found that C.O.P.D.
     was not a substantial cause of her damages in phase
     one.
          But she had bronchitis, she had chronic bronchitis, she may have had C.O.P.D. from other
     sources, and the evidence in this case has been
     that all of those lung problems, starting with the
     bronchitis and the pneumonia and the childhood
     asthma, and remember my board, it had all those
     different insults to her lung, that caused her to
     have a number of -- a great deal of scarring and
     calcifications and inflammation, and every witness,
     Dr. Burns, Dr. Doig, Dr. Burns came from San Diego,
     you remember the first witness in the case if you
     can remember back that far, Dr. Doig who did the
     surgery, Dr. Rubin, the gentleman from the
     university that wrote the big, thick book about
     pathology, they all agreed that scarring is
     evidence of inflammation and that inflammation can
     cause cancer and that C.O.P.D. or similar kinds of
     diseases can cause cancer.
          There is no dispute in this case that Mrs.
     Koballa knew she had inflammation, she knew she had
     scarring, she was told it related to smoking by a
     number of doctors, we have gone over that today
     already.
          So that means that in the -- well before May
     5th, Ms. Koballa knew that she had a lung disease
     caused by smoking.  And when counsel says that she had a clean bill of health in 1992 --
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Your Honor, I'm going to --
          MR. REID:  -- I want you to --
          MR. PANTAZIS:  I'm going to object.  It's not
     a lung -- misstatement.
          MR. REID:  Your Honor, I object to speaking
     objections.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  I'll be glad to come up if I
     have to.
          THE COURT:  I'm going to let you cover it on
     rebuttal.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Thanks.
          THE COURT:  And you can go over the verdict.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Thanks.
          MR. REID:  Ms. Koballa, her lung disease,
     counsel was telling you that in 1992 she had a
     clean bill of health.  Well, she did as far as her
     pulmonary function and her breathing.
          But nobody knows, and you heard one of the
     doctors say this, nobody knows when that tumor
     started formulating.  We can't know that.  But what
     we can know is that Ms. Koballa had conditions
     throughout her life that all the experts,
     plaintiffs as well as ours, agree can lead to
     cancer and can lead to lung cancer. So you have to look at Ms. Koballa's situation
     as a whole.  She had this condition.  It finally
     manifests itself in lung cancer in '96, but it
     started way back a long time ago, and there is no
     doubt that she knew about the severity and she knew
     that it was related to smoking.  And that's what
     you have to answer, did she know it, that it was
     caused by her cigarette smoking.
          And I submit to you the question there is that
     she did know before 1990 that she had a condition
     which ultimately manifests itself in the lung
     cancer caused by smoking, but she knew it well
     before its final diagnosis.  Because we frankly
     just can't tell when that cancer first occurred.
          The last thing I want to say, and it's
     something I really overlooked a minute ago, I think
     the best and clearest example of Ms. Koballa's
     awareness that her condition as it relates to this
     and other things, that her condition, the lung
     cancer, related -- that she understood to be
     related was when she said Dr. Doig, when he told me
     I had lung cancer, she said, "I wasn't surprised."
          You heard that read yesterday.  She wasn't
     surprised because she knew that she had been
     smoking and that she had this whole series of conditions over the years all related to smoking,
     and in her own words, she said, "I wasn't surprised
     when I heard that I had lung cancer."  And that
     answers that question as well.
          Now, as you know from -- you're all now
     experts at being -- you were experts at voir dire
     when we talked to you, now you are experts as
     jurors.
          You know I won't get to get up today.  And you
     know there are a lot of things I'd like to say.  I
     can't anticipate everything counsel is going to
     say.  He may show you some more documents, and I
     won't have a chance to talk about them.
          I just ask you to apply the same logic, did it
     relate to Ms. Koballa.  And when you get back into
     the jury room, look through the documents and think
     about what the context of that document was back in
     the '40s or '50s or '60s.
          '40s, '50s, the -- the -- what about the
     schools, I didn't mention that in passing, for
     instance, 1927, it talked about universities,
     colleges and prep schools.  Well, we know that in
     Ms. Koballa's state, a prep school, that was a
     legal smoker, the juniors and seniors in the prep
     school over 16. I'm not saying that's right or that's a good
     idea, but I'm just saying when you look at it in
     the context of 1927, it's a different document than
     if you read it today.
          It's surprising that the Surgeon General of
     the United States would say they haven't proved
     that smoking causes cancer.  You know when Claude
     Teague calls it habituation, and they talk a lot
     about that, well, now you know that in 1964, the
     Surgeon General said smoking is not addictive, it's
     a habit.  That's why you see habituation.
          They suggest to you they're hiding something
     by calling it habituation.  It was habituation in
     the words of the Attorney General until 1988 when
     he changed the definition, and then it became
     addiction.  That's what you heard.
          You may hear other things that haven't been
     raised the first time, and in fairness I just want
     to have a chance to ask you in addition to looking
     at any documents and thinking about them, I would
     ask you to listen to him just like you have
     listened to me.
          And I hope -- and if I have said things, I
     hope you have thought to yourself does that make
     sense, is it common sense, is it really what the record is, is it really what the evidence was, and
     I hope you'll ask him.  And then you don't have to
     say when I'm talking what would he say because he
     gets to come up and say it.
          So I would ask you to consider maybe what Ben
     Reid would say if he had another opportunity to
     respond to things that I cannot have anticipated.
          And with that, I will tell you this is a very
     important case.  We are a corporation, they are an
     individual, but corporations are made up of people,
     and this is a very important case to all the
     parties.
          And I know that you will -- I talked to you
     about the pact that we have and that still applies.
     I know that you will do your duty as you have
     before and your verdict will be the appropriate
     verdict based on all of the evidence, not just 18
     documents.
          Thank you, and I appreciate your attention.
