MR. REID: Thank you. May it please the Court.
It's still morning. Good morning. I certainly want to join counsel in thanking you for your attention. This case is very important to Ms. Koballa, it's very important to my client, R.J. Reynolds, and the people who work there. And I certainly appreciate your diligence and your attention, and some of this is kind of dull stuff,
I realize, but you've been great, and we appreciate it.
And as I told you, I think I said this during the voir dire, that in about probably an hour, maybe, whatever -- however long it takes to finish everything up, the really hard work begins in this case.
And for us, it's not the hard work, it's the hard work for you that you have to do back in the room, and that's as I told you then, you are the judges of the facts, and I told you that's why the
tradition is that the courtroom rises when you come in the same way that we rise when the judge comes in, and that's to sort of make that point, and that's been the point for as long as we've had jury trials.
So I've never been on a jury. Lawyers usually don't get on a jury. Occasionally they do. But I'm told by people that have that you'll be shocked at how you all remember a lot of this, and by the time you get all your memories together, you remember everything, and so -- and that's why it works, that's why you have a juiy of all of you.
Now, the question that you have to answer, the judge told you, is really — it's really just two questions, one relates to C.O.P.D. and one relates to lung cancer, but it's essentially was Stella Koballa addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, which was a legal cause of her, and then C.O.P.D., lung cancer.
But that's really not — there are really several questions that are comprised within that, and I would like to break it down and talk about it.
And if you remember, at the beginning I showed you this. These are really the factors that you'll
be considering as you answer that question. Now, you have to say yes or no.
But the first thing you have to decide is whether or not Ms. Koballa has an illness that's caused by cigarette smoking, because if her illness is not caused by cigarette smoking, it doesn't matter about addiction or any of the other issues.
So you have to decide if the evidence supports the claim that her C.O.P.D. or -- and her lung cancer was caused by smoking.
The second question is, of course, you have to determine whether she was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. And nicotine is the key. Cigarettes containing nicotine.
And then the last part of the question is that if you decide she is addicted, you have to decide if her injury or her illness was caused by her addiction to nicotine or was it caused by something else. And nicotine, there again, as I say, that is the key, as Mr. Pantazis told you.
So those are really the three questions that you'll be answering as we work through this, and I'm going to sort of use those three questions as the guide and as I discuss the evidence today.
Now, as you know, the plaintiff has the
burden, and we talked about that, that's why they get to go first, that's why they get to" go last, because they have the burden.
And the judge told you this morning, and you'll have the charge with you back there to determine what that burden is, but even though they have the burden, I want to start today by telling you what we proved. I want to talk about the evidence that you heard from our witnesses and our documents and so forth in this case.
And really, you're going to hear three types of evidence. The first is the evidence that you'll hear is that Ms. Koballa's lung cancer and C.O.P.D. were caused by years of insults to her lungs which caused inflammation and tissue damage, and it was the inflammation and tissue damage that led to her later illnesses, her C.O.P.D. and her lung cancer.
Now, I'm going to talk about this later, but I want to make something really clear right now. We're not saying that scars cause cancer. We're not saying that breathing coal dust caused cancer. We're saying that all of the things that we' described as insults, those caused inflammation.
Asthma is called an inflammatory disease. The lungs are inflamed, and because of all the
inflammation, that is what causes the later lung cancer and later C.O.P.D.
We'll talk about that later, but I wanted to make that clear, because you saw a lot of slides -today, did coal dust cause the cancer? Did scars cause the cancer? Well, that's not what we've said throughout.
We've said the scars are evidence of the insult to the lung, evidence of the inflammation, and it's the inflammation that causes cancer, and all of their experts agree with that. So I wanted to say that right now, and we'll talk about it later.
The second point is that I'll submit to you or I'll discuss with you some of the evidence that will lead to a conclusion that Ms. Koballa is not addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, because she was able to stop, she stopped, she was in control of her smoking.
And the last question is that did -- the evidence I'm going to be talking about is that nicotine played no part in her decision to begin smoking every time after she stopped, because, as you know, the evidence was that all the nicotine is gone from your system, if you have withdrawal
symptoms, they last a week or two, which is the evidence in this case, and the receptors in the brain, are back to normal, as if you had not smoked.
And so if the question is did the nicotine cause Ms. Koballa to smoke after she quit each of those times, the answer will be, no, that the nicotine was gone and played no part in her decision to begin smoking again after she stopped for those multiple two, three month times.
Now, you've heard the findings I think maybe four times now, and I think I've -- I've said it every time I've had a chance to speak to you. We don't disagree with the findings. Smoking causes lung cancer, smoking is addictive. But that doesn't answer the question.
If that answered the question, as I told you before, there would be no reason to have you here. We wouldn't have to call you in for three weeks to decide something if that answered the question. We agree.
The question that you're here to decide is how those findings relate to Ms. Koballa. This case is about Ms. Koballa and her physical, her — her physical condition and her behavioral condition, we’ll call it, her — how -- her — her smoking and
so forth.
So I want to start with talking about the lung cancer and the C.O.P.D. Now, if you think about it, if you're -- if you say to somebody I want you to figure out whether Ms. Koballa has lung cancer and C.O.P.D. that was caused by smoking, what is the first thing you'd need to know? You'd need to know about her medical condition. You'd need to know something about her history.
That's why we put into evidence, and you — you can't see it now, that entire banker's box of records, her medical records. Now, there is a smaller subset that you'll see that really pulled out the documents that we used a lot on the screen because those are the ones that we talked about, but we put in every single record that we could find, every single medical record.
That’s why, when we asked an expert witness to consider this case, we sent the expert witness every single piece of paper that we could find that related to Ms. Koballa's medical condition, the test results, the reports, the nurse's notes, the doctor's notes, the x-rays, the C.T. reports, the depositions of medical witnesses, the depositions of fact witnesses.
And that's why when the witnesses were on the stand, our witnesses as well as theirs, we showed them medical records, and we asked them to talk about it, and we either examined our witnesses about it or we cross-examined the other witnesses.
We — we want you to see eveiy piece of medical evidence that you can possibly see because that's what it takes to decide about Ms. Koballa's medical condition.
Now, if you sort of think about a lawsuit like building a house, a lawsuit is built with evidence.
And if you think of evidence as blocks, blocks of evidence, I want to talk to you about what the blocks of evidence that we presented to you and how, when you build them up and build them up, they reach - they build a house. And in this case, the house is the conclusion about what caused Ms. Koballa's medical condition.
You need to know what she was exposed to throughout her life. You need to know what affect that exposure would have on her lungs. You need to know what symptoms sheihen had as a result of that. And finally, you need to know what diseases can flow from all of those things.
So the first block is exposure, what was
Ms. Koballa exposed. And, you know, you all probably memorized this slide, it's been up so many times in this case. We've -- everybody's put it up. We've had different views about it, but we've all put it up.
And I will tell you this, if you took the time and you get in the jury room and you wanted to pull out that box, you will find some reference to every single thing that you see on that chart in the medical records, with one exception. A couple of things we learned through depositions, from Ms. Koballa's deposition or otherwise, but every single exposure that you see on that board is supported in the medical records. And those are the same medical records that all — that our experts reviewed.
Now, what did they say about this? Well, first they said — they said, well, she didn't — we don't think she had all these exposures. And they would pick at certain ones and say she didn't have it. They would say, well -- remember, she was on the stand and they kept saying, well, was there a coal mine there? Was there a coal mine there?
Well, there is no doubt, she admitted, she was exposed to coal dust. Some of her relatives came
to the house with clothes covered. She was exposed to coal dust. She had coal heating in her house when she was a child.
Solvents. Dr. Rubin said, and I wrote this down because — I went back, you know, we have the transcript, we know, the lawyers from both sides, we have, as you've seen some, we know exactly everything that was said and we can look it up.
Dr. Rubin said it was ridiculous, that was his word, ridiculous to say that solvents could have caused a problem. But you saw the P.F.T. test where they wrote the hazard, the hazard was solvents. He said it was ridiculous.
Plaintiffs say we don't know the dose, we don't know exactly how many parts per million of whatever. Well, they're right, we don't. We don't know. But the point is we know what the effect was because we know what Ms. Koballa's lungs, what they looked like — what they looked like over time and what they are like today. So we know the result.
The results — and we'll talk about it in a minute.
We know the result, we may not know the exact amount of air pollution, but we know that Ms.
Koballa has a problem with her lungs.
And the interesting thing, Dr. Bums, his
testimony, he admitted, he admitted that there is evidence that Ms. Koballa was exposed to coal dust, that she was exposed to pollution in Cleveland, and that she was exposed to emissions from coke ovens. Now, they say it doesn't matter, but Dr. Bums admitted all of those things.
So the first block is what was she exposed.
Hie second is what affect did it have on the lungs. And there is evidence in this case that Ms. Koballa's lungs have demonstrated a substantial number of insults.
Now, you saw this one x-ray. And if you remember, these are the examples of the various --the granulomas. And he also talked about the signet ring there. You don't see them at the top because of the way that exposure is done.
But you've seen how — it's hard to say that Ms. Koballa didn't have serious lung insults when you look at her actual x-rays, but this is in 1992, a long time after she had moved away from Cleveland and so forth.
I want you to remember something else.
Dr. Doig, he was the surgeon, and he actually looked at Ms. Koballa's lungs, he probably had the best view of anybody, and this is what he said.
"The extent of scarring was unexpected, to put it blankly, put it lightly, because unless you have been working in a mine or exposed to fungi, you do not develop these multiple sites."
Dr. Doig, unpaid, no interest in this case, looked at the lung, and he found the lung was so scarred that she must have worked in a mine.
It came from all the others. I'm not saying that it all came from the coal. But that was Dr. Doig. And that establishes, as I said before, what her lungs -- the condition of her lungs.
That's the next building block.
Now, the next one is, what are the symptoms that she had? And you've heard those, coughing, wheezing, shortness of breath, it's all throughout the medical records. You've seen a number of them, and we've put them up, and you can see them when you go back.
The fourth block, then, is what condition results from this scarring. And Dr. Mallett said, 1969, chronic productive cough, chronic bronchitis, possible asthmatic bronchitis.
Now, Dr. Bums disagreed. Dr. Bums said, oh, a lot of doctors that really don't know what they're doing, maybe out in the field, who don't
teach at the university like I do. He didn't really say that, but that was his implication. He might call it this, but I know it's really -- he didn't really mean that.
So, what, '69, '79, '89, '99, 41 years later,
Dr. Bums tells you that a doctor who treated Ms. Koballa and diagnosed chronic productive cough didn't really mean -- and diagnosed chronic bronchitis didn’t really mean what he said? Well, fortunately, we have a medical record and you've seen it.
Now, Dr. Bums also said that, you know, he knew more about tobacco litigation related illnesses and stuff than Dr. Mallett would have known. You have to balance the experts and the witnesses and the documents and so forth.
But perhaps the most significant insult to her lung was the meat wrapper's asthma. And it was diagnosed by Dr. Tuthill. And you've seen this before.
Dr. Tuthill, she had been to three or four other doctors, you remember, and so forth, but Dr. Tuthill — and he was a board certified pulmonologist, he was a specialist in occupational — occupational exposure type lung
disease, and he said this is a — this was a new phenomenon at this point in time in the late '60s, early '70s, and he diagnosed it as that.
And when you read the records, you'll see that, if you remember, the symptoms were all consistent with meat wrapper’s asthma.
By the way, counsel talked about she doesn't have asthma anymore. The point is she had asthma over the years at various times. She had childhood asthma, she had — the previous one said chronic, and then this is meat wrapper's asthma
The damage is done when you have the asthma. You don't have to say, well, she didn't have asthma in 1996, so that scarring or that -- that inflammation didn't have anything to do with it.
She had these things, and it's synergistic. All of these various insults that aren't disputed by anybody, all of these insults lead to the same conclusion.
Now, what did they say? What was the answer to this? Dr. Bums made fun of the disease. He said, "I don't think it ever really existed." And somebody pointed out, "Well, you have not read anything about it or seen anybody with it.since '75," and he says, "That's because it probably
never existed."
Of course, we now know the reason that it went away is they changed the technology and they don't use the hot wire anymore, but Dr. Bums said it never existed. He said he read some articles, but he didn't print them out, he didn't bring them in. You didn't get a chance to hear him talk about what he found. He just said it probably didn't exist.
And if your job was to come into court and talk about a condition — and meat wrapper's asthma has been in this case for a long time, all the lawyers — we do something called discovery, we go around, take depositions, we get medical records, and everybody appears, and so we all have the same information. Everybody knew this was an issue.
And Dr. Bums was not even told that there was a sworn statement by Dr. Tuthill, that he gave a deposition, a board certified pulmonologist, specialist in occupational medicine, and they didn't tell Dr. Bums what Dr. Tuthill said, but he said it probably didn't exist.
Dr. Rubin did the same thing, he said he looked at two articles a day before his deposition, and he was not even told — they didn't tell him that there had been a diagnosis of meat wrapper's
asthma. They kept it from him. They didn't tell him.
And he said he was totally unaware of any exposures in her job, he was unaware of anything about how her job did. But he came in and raised his hand and said there is no such thing as meat wrapper's asthma, and besides, Ms. Koballa couldn't have had it.
So those are the blocks, you know, the exposures, the symptoms, the condition. So how does this relate to lung cancer and C.O.P.D.?
That's your job. You have to take all of the things that I've been talking about and you have to figure out how does it relate to the ultimate question.
And if you decide they were not caused by smoking, then that's — that means your verdict would be for R. J. Reynolds and you would answer no to those questions.
Now, let's talk about lung cancer first. You heard it a lot today, the claim that we say scar cancer -- the scars cause the cancer. In fact, when Dr. Rubin was on the stand, I've forgotten who was — I think it was Mr. Ogle, but whoever was examining, said, "Dr. Rubin, Ben Reid over there
told the jury in opening statement that scars cause cancer. Do you agree with that?" And, of course, he said, "No, I don't agree with that, that's an obsolete, antiquated position."
Well, I had my notes, now I have the transcript, and I went back and read it. And what I actually said and what the evidence in this case is, is that the scars are evidence of insults to the lungs caused by years of inflammation and tissue damage, that's the evidence, and it's the inflammation and the tissue damage that causes the cancer.
You see, they're trying to -- they're trying to direct you down a different path. You may have heard red herring, that expression, you know, it's an old expression, means that you've kind of raised something that — well, it came from England when people wanted to protect the foxes during a fox hunt, and they would take a bag of fish, maybe herring, I guess, and they would go out to the path and they would drag it across the path so that the foxes would go the other way. That's where we get the phrase "red herring".
Well, to keep saying over and over in opening, today, during the case, that Reynolds or Ben Reid
or anybody on our side said scars cause cancer, that's a red herring, because we're not saying that.
We're saying scars are evidence of inflammation, and inflammation causes cancer, and you'll hear some testimony about that in a minute.
Now, Dr. Bennett testified about the lung cancer based on his pathological review. You know, I think it's interesting that you would put up a resume, and, you know, it showed that no publications. That was actually Dr. Klein. You know, it looked pretty imbalanced. Dr. Bums --1 guess it was Dr. Rubin with Dr. Bennett. He's a very -- he's a scholar. He's been doing this for a long time.
And Dr. Bennett, on the other hand, they didn't put all of the stuff up that he's done, they didn't mention about going to Africa in the genocide trials. There were a lot of tilings they could have put up.
They chose just to put up a few things so you would see this big list of things on this side and a little list on this side, and say, "Ah-ha, we have to believe Dr. Rubin and we can't believe Dr. Bennett."
Well, Dr. Bennett has done 8,000 autopsies.
And it's ironic, and I frankly didn't know this till we got here, that many of these were in Cleveland and that he had actually done an autopsy of somebody with meat wrapper's asthma.
And he's also seen lungs of people in Cleveland who don't smoke who are fairly young, and he talked about how bad the air pollution was in Cleveland.
And they said, "Well, do you live down next to the factory?" No, she didn't live next to the factories. But Dr. Bennett, that's — that's remarkable testimony that relates to the very issue in this case that was kind of a surprise.
But he went through all the slides with you, he talked about the scarring, the inflammation, and so forth. And he came up with the reasons that he believed this tumor was not smoking related.
And we showed you the chart to start with, with the four main points, now that he's testified, we added the ones. It's peripheral, it has features of B.A.C., which is a type of cancer that everybody agrees is not associated with smoking. There are some that aren't associated with smoking, and B.A.C. is one.
There was scarring around the tumor. He said you can't tell if that scarring was from the tumor or there before, but it shows chronic persistent inflammation and tissue injury throughout her lung.
Her cancer hadn't spread, that's a sign. Tobacco-related tumors have a tendency to metastasize to other parts of the body. And the fact that there was no treatment required is another thing. And finally, the fact that it had not returned.
So that was Dr. -- that was Dr. Bennett. And as to this question of — as to this question about whether inflammation relates to cancer, Dr. Bums said it did. There it is.
"So there is a clear relationship between inflammation, this is from his testimony, inflammation and C.O.P.D., for example, and the risk of lung cancer, and that's felt to relate mechanistically to the amount of inflammation that's going on."
Now, even though they keep saying Ben Reid said scar cancer or the witnesses say scar cancer, that's the answer, and Dr. Bums agrees.
Dr. Rubin agreed also at one point.
"Scarring of the lung can be evidence of prior
inflammation?
"Yes.
"Inflammation can cause cancer?
"Can be associated with cancer.
"So you would agree with that, scarring can be evidence of inflammation and inflammation can cause cancer? Okay.
"Okay. I'll go along with that."
"Pulmonary scarring can result from lung disease caused by a variety of occupational exposures, such as asbestos, silica, inflammatory, and infectious lung conditions, such as T.B., pneumonia, unknown reasons, would you agree?"
Answer, "Yeah."
They agree. But because they agree, that's why they have to keep saying the defendant believes that the scars cause the cancer. We don't believe that We don't say that We say this. And there is evidence of inflammation that they cannot avoid. Dr. Doig saw it with his own eyes. All the medical records point to it. You saw it on the x-rays.
There is no dispute about that.
Now, the other doctor that talked about the lung disease was Dr. Klein. And Dr. Klein talked about the C.O.P.D. So Dr. Klein focused on the
treatment post '69. And there you see Dr. Mallett,
Dr. Dougherty, Dr. Collings. And the significance there you heard from Dr. Klein was that this started, this happened at work and not at home.
Now, think about this for a minute. By the early '70s, Ms. Koballa had been smoking for 20 years. And she had not had a single complaint about it You didn't hear her get on the stand and say, "Oh, I had this problem, I had that problem."
She had no problems with the smoking, no symptoms, until she started being around this — the meat wrappers, and it only happened — she is smoking more at home, everyone agrees with that, but yet her symptoms, coughing, wheezing, shortness of breath, are at work.
We know she had childhood asthma, we know she had adult asthma, we know she had meat wrapper's asthma, all of which damage your lungs, cause inflammation.
And Dr. Klein talked to you about this idea of what happens — these are all diseases that don't just — it's not like you get a — you cut your hand or you get a disease quickly. These are longstanding things that come from year after year of exposure. And Dr. Klein talked to you about the
remodeling. He's the only one that talked to you.
Now, he's the one, I made a mistake when they showed his credentials, he didn't write any articles, and you saw these articles on the other side. Well, you know why he doesn't write articles? He told you. He practices, he's clinical. Not everybody — in fact, Dr. Bennett said about 10 percent of practicing doctors write articles.
Why would you criticize somebody who has that kind of practice, thousands of lung patients over the years, because he didn't write an article? Why would you put up a slide that makes it look like — that's why they put that up. They want you to see, "Look at all these over here, look at all these here."
The good news is you got to watch them on the stand, and you got to hear what they looked at, and you got to hear all the things that they based their opinions on. That's good, because if you just looked at their resumes, you'd say, well, this guy over here must be a lot better. That's not the case.
The other point that Dr. Klein made is that if you have C.O.P.D. caused by smoking, it acts a
certain way in the body, you get certain results.
And if you have it from something else, it's different. So~
Slide 17, please.
And this is the P.F.T. And remember, this goes back to the beginning, and then there is the surgery. And counsel even admitted it today, there is -- there is not a lot of change in this over the years, over the ensuing years. Not a lot of change.
And Dr. Klein said that if you develop C.O.P.D. because of smoking, in other words, you smoke for a long period of time and it develops it, you have a completely different -- different result, that — remember that little chart, the graphs that he showed?
You saw one that if you compared somebody nonsmoker — smoker, you would see a different graph. And what we see here is, it's flat. It changes a little bit. He said if it's smoking C.O.P.D., what you would have seen was about a 10 percent drop every year all the way down.
Nobody — we're going to talk about this in a minute, but did they ask a single one of their experts to bring out - pull up a P.F.T. and show
it to you and look at the results and talk to you about it? Throughout the whole trial did they do it? Did anybody on their side pull out the medical record and talk about it? Notone. Not a single one. And we'll talk about that in just a minute.
By the way, Dr. Doig, when they asked him about was her smoke — was her illness caused by smoking, well, smoking is obviously a risk factor and it's one of the — one of the higher causes of lung cancer.
But Dr. Doig didn't know about her histoplasmosis, he didn't know about her pneumonia, he didn't know about her meat wrapper's asthma. And not knowing all that, he, of course, said smoking.
But, you know, he also said something interesting, he said, "It's been well known for years that fumes of any cause will damage the lungs." That's Dr. Doig. And he wasn't getting paid to come in here and testify by anybody. He's the same one that said her lungs looked like she had been around coal mines and so forth.
So that's the evidence that you've heard from Dr. Bennett on the question of whether the C.O.P.D.
Now, I'll speak about emphysema, which is --
it was a component, remember the chart and circles that the different diseases, chronic bronchitis and emphysema and so forth, emphysema
The only witness that really, you heard from who said she had severe emphysema was Dr. Rubin, but he admitted there were three kinds of emphysema, there is centrolobular, which is associated with smoking, there is bullous, which is associated with growing older and not associated with smoking, and there is panacinar, which is not associated with smoking.
And Dr. Doig is the key again here. Remember when he said -- when he did the surgery, he noticed on the surface of the lungs these air bubbles, those are called blebs, and you know what they come from? They come from bullous emphysema, bullous, bullae, the blebs, the air pockets. And everybody agrees that that emphysema has nothing to do with smoking, that's age related. And that's Dr. Doig again, what he saw when he did the surgery.
So to the — and it's not even clear that it's emphysema in this case. You remember — notwithstanding Dr. Rubin who said, oh, it's emphysema, it's caused by smoking, and it's severe, when you saw the actual medical records, one didn't
even call it emphysema. They said it was emphysematous changes. I got better saying that since a couple of days ago. And the other was mild emphysema.
- So there is a question whether there is emphysema or not. But the bottom line is there is no disagreement that the blebs come from the bullous emphysema, and that's not caused by smoking, it's not related to smoking at all.
So both Dr. Bennett and Dr. Klein said that if Ms. Koballa had never smoked, when you consider all the other things that went on in her life with regard to her lungs, her condition would be the same.
Now, counsel showed you part of the jury instruction and said if it's a cause, if it's one of the causes, well, you didn't see the whole thing. The whole thing says that in order to be one of these other causes, it has to be -- it has to contribute substantially.
And you'll see — you'll get the charge when you get back there. But it says "contain" —
"cigarettes containing nicotine contributes substantially."
So smoking may have exacerbated, may have
contributed, but nobody said — their experts all say it's all smoking and nothing else. No one else said that it contributed substantially. They're being honest. They couldn't say it had no affect. But the test for you is contributes substantially. And it didn't.
Now, we'll talk about addiction. And that's really the two questions, was Ms. Koballa addicted and was the addiction the cause. And they carried their -- they attempted to carry their burden with Dr. Frazier.
Now, once again, you know, we saw the chart with all the things picked out on one side and all the things left out on the other side. The chart, for instance, Dr. Thompson didn't point to the thousands of people that he treated at the Air Force hospital when he was doing that, the largest Air Force hospital, I think he said in the world, and -- or all the people since then, but that didn't seem to be important.
But Dr. Frazier wishes — she just doesn't like tobacco, there is no doubt about it. She wishes people didn't have a choice to smoke, and that probably explains why, after all of these years, she suddenly decided to start testifying in
tobacco cases.
And until tobacco, she said she never did any forensic work at all, but she is a medical doctor and she has no experience in behavioral medicine, she said. She is not a trained psychiatrist.
And by the way, this statement that Dr. Thompson had only diagnosed three people purely who were treating — being — seeing him for whether they were addicted or not, well, that's true.
But Dr. Frazier's count is five. And that's because people don't usually come into the mental hospitals to be treated just for nicotine. It's part of the package. So hers is five, and of the five, three were in lawsuits. So if she hadn't started testifying, she would have had two.
Now, that's not -- that makes no difference in this case. That doesn't have anything to do with this case. But there are really two parts to this.
There is the chemical component, and there is the behavioral and the psychological component. And it's a combination.
Now, Dr. -- Dr. Frazier knows about the chemical side. I mean, she's an M.D., and she knows about that. And she knows and she admitted
that nicotine leaves the body in 72 hours, that withdrawal symptoms are gone between 3 and 14 days, and any affect on the brain receptors are gone within two to four weeks.
Now, there was this issue about it changes the brain. She never told you how it changed the brain. Dr. Thompson says, well, it does to the extent you have memories, but a physical change of the brain like the receptors is gone, there is no affect on the receptors anymore.
And that's — and if a former smoker starts to smoke after that period, you can't say that nicotine had anything to do with it because the nicotine is gone, and the question you have to answer is, were they addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and was that the cause of the condition here.
Now, the psychological side, Dr. Thompson was a psychiatrist, and the psychological side is the behavioral question. And in order to quit, you have to be motivated. Plaintiffs contention is that Ms. Koballa was -- that nicotine had seized her brain, and that she could not quit, that she was a strong-willed person in every part of her life except for smoking.
And you remember the -- on the psychological side the types of things that the psychiatrists would consider in looking at all of this, and her methodology — I mean, his methodology as he went through this, you've got to be motivated.
60 million people have quit in this country.
And 90 percent of them did it cold turkey. That comes from the National Institute of Health and I think the C.D.C. Dr. Frazier said both of those were reputable organizations. There are more former smokers out there today than there are smokers.
Dr. Frazier said — remember, there was a question right at the end, the question was something like, "Under your theory of once addicted, always addicted, would you say, Dr. Frazier, that every single one of these 60 million people who quit to this day continue to be addicted?" And she said yes. And you have to decide if that is common sense and if that makes sense.
Her methodology, she used the DSM-IV, which is really not a book for her area, it's a book for the psychiatric community, it's written by the psychiatrists. She admitted on cross she wasn't
even using the definition. She didn't tell you that during her direct, but on cross, she said, no,
I don't think there is a definition in there.
And I don't know if they still have it here, but can you imagine this book that the psychiatrists put together not having a definition of either addiction or dependence? She says she uses one from some other group.
And then she used that six-question test, and she said -- and she admitted that if you smoke three cigarettes a day, you can fail that test. By fail, I mean you can be found to be dependent.
And I kept asking her about it. I said,
"Doctor, can you really say that" — you know, I gave her the hypothetical, I said, "You have your first cigarette when you wake up, that's your favorite one of the day. If you have a cold one day, you stay home, and you smoke and so forth and so on" -- and she wouldn't answer the question.
I kept saying, "Isn't it true that if you added all that up, you would be dependent under that test?"
And you know what she said? "I would never use that test."
And I said, "I know, Doctor, but if you added
it up, would you do it?"
And she said, "I would never use that test."
And we did this about three times, and I finally said, "Okay, you don't want to answer that question?"
She said, "Yeah."
And you remember, I walked over and put that away, because she wouldn't talk about it.
She also said that you could get zero and still be dependent.
The point of all this is, you can't decide whether somebody is addicted or dependent or it's a habit on statistical analysis, on subjective, you know, true/false tests or multiple choice or something.
And you heard about Ms. Koballa's personality. That's what you have to look at. And you heard that Ms. Koballa has a very strong personality.
When she smoked, she never called herself addicted, she called it a habit.
She never went to a doctor and said would you help me stop. She was not a weak person who had no control over her life. She was just as strong and controlled with her smoking as she was with everything else.
You remember the times in her life when she said I can't smoke for whatever reason, and so she didn't, going all the way back to the beginning and all the way up through the $100 bribe where she didn't want her husband to know that she had taken the hundred dollars but she was still smoking. So she would go long periods without smoking when her husband was around.
That's the person who did it. Ms. Koballa enjoyed smoking. She didn't smoke because she was weak and she was helpless and that nicotine had this hold on her, she smoked because she enjoyed it.
And she did quit several times, and we know she went to the hypnosis person, the hypnotist, she went to the acupuncture. And the point of those quits is, in all those quits, or I guess the last ones, she had very small, very light withdrawal.
This is what she said. But at the end of the three months -- "in the first couple of weeks you're antsy and edgy and sharp with people and quick to get upset," and at the end of three months, then she went back to smoking.
Now, Dr. -- you saw that long discussion about the DSM and all the things. You didn't hear a
single word of that in this case. Dr. Frazier, I guess, got it from deposition or got it from somewhere else, but when Ms. Koballa had a chance to sit on that stand and tell you, what withdrawal symptoms did you experience, that's what she said. That's the evidence in the case. It's not cocaine, it's not heroin, it's not alcohol, it's a couple of weeks of being antsy and edgy.
And we know that on each of those quit attempts that lasted two or three months, the nicotine was gone, it was out of her system. She knew how to quit.
Imagine on the 90 -- 90 — 89th day when she had not been smoking for, what, for 89 days, she --she - symptoms were over, withdrawal symptoms were over, nicotine is out, she doesn't have any physiological basis, she had a — she could either have — she decided to smoke again or she could have gone back to the hypnosis person.
Now, counsel said how desperate that makes her sound. She was so desperate, she went to -- she had needles stuck in her body, remember he said that yesterday.
Well, she -- it worked. The hypnosis worked.
She went one time. It worked, the nicotine is
gone, and then she made a decision to smoke because she liked to smoke, that's whatTt really boils down to.
It's sometimes hard, I think, for people who don’t smoke, and especially today, when smoking is not as common as it used to be, but people — some people enjoy smoking. It relaxes them. It was her quiet time at the end of the day. Ms. Koballa does not look like she was just being tortured and smoking.
You know, when they talk about — they picked out this thing about going out in her pajamas or something. Well, that struck me as interesting.
There were cigarettes around the house, why didn't she smoke some of the cigarettes that were already around the house that night?
The point is Ms. Koballa, that's the reason she smoked. And she made a — and she finally made a decision to stop when she was motivated. And when she stopped, remember, she had the nicotine in her system, she had all of the attributes that are pointed out by Dr. Frazier, and yet she stopped cold turkey. And this -- Dr. Frazier told you that she — she had a craving for cigarettes over and over — every day and all that.
Well, this is what she said. This is what she said. "Have there been any instances where you're around someone smoking where you had the urge to take a cigarette?
"A couple of times in the 12 or 13 years since I've been operated, sure, you think, God, I need a cigarette to get through this, but you don't."
Two times. And that's the evidence. That's page -- that page means she said it here in this courtroom.
So — but you can decide if you believe that Ms. Koballa, you won't get a definition from anybody, from the judge or anybody, you have to decide if Ms. Koballa was being controlled, if nicotine had hijacked her brain or not.
And even if you decide that she was addicted, you still have the question was her addiction the cause, was the nicotine and cigarettes the cause, and if the nicotine is gone and it has no effect, then it cannot be said to be the cause. So that would result in an answer to that one question of no, if you get to that point. Now, that's the evidence that we gave you.
I want to spend the last few minutes I have talking about how the plaintiffs in this case
attempted to cany their burden on the medical issues, because they have a burden, as you know. And you know it used to be in trials — they've just become more complex.
It used to be that you didn't need so many experts and it was more factual, but now you do, and it's really not a bad thing.
I mean, probably none of us here in the courtroom have had much experience in looking at slides of tumors or looking at P.F.T.s, pulmonary function tests, or medical records. So we have to bring in people who have spent their lives studying and working in the area.
And in a trial, eveiybody has a responsibility. You know what the judge's responsibilities are, the law, he handles the law, he runs the court, he's kind of like all of our bosses.
And you have a responsibility we talked about, and that's to decide the case based on all the evidence. But the lawyers — or the parties, we have a responsibility.
For the juiy system to work, see, when you walked in here you didn't know a thing about this. You had never hear of Ms. Koballa, you didn't know
anything about her medical, you didn't know anything, and so the lawyers, our responsibility is to bring you evidence that you can use to decide this case. And you should hold us to that.
You should say, "You lawyers, I want to see the evidence that supports what you're asking me to do in this case." So I want to talk about how we have all complied with that obligation to give you the evidence that you need to decide this case.
Now, remember in opening statement, each of us got up and we told you what we thought the evidence was going to be. Now, some of it we know because we've read all the papers, we've been to all the depositions, we just -- all the lawyers here know kind of what the case is about.
But — and both of us said things about the other side, maybe they'll call this witness, maybe they won't. I mentioned one that they didn't call.
But really, during the opening, and a lot of - a lot of people look at that as something akin to a promise that lawyers make to a jury.
We tell you we believe, in good faith, we know this case, and in good faith we can assure you that this is what the evidence is going to be in the case. Because, you see, it's important for you to
start the case not being misled about something.
It wouldn't be right if I told you the evidence was going to be X, but I really knew it was going to be Y, because you start listening to the case thinking X.
Well, you haven't heard --1 went back and read what each of us said. And thus far, you haven't heard any comment that anything I said hasn't been the case. Now, you heard about that one little glitch where they said that I said scars cause cancer, I think we cleared that up. But I want to remind you of some of the things that you heard from the plaintiffs side.
They told you that Dr. Rubin was the only doctor in this case who actually looked at the slides of Ms. Koballa's cancer. That wasn't true.
They had taken Dr. Bennett's deposition. They told you, though, that Dr. Rubin was the only one.
So when you heard him testify, wow, he's the one who has done -- you wouldn't even know about Dr. Bennett until a week later.
They told you that Dr. Rubin had looked at all of the medical records and all of the depositions.
Now you know he looked at — he was given a handful of medical records. He didn't bring them in, so we
don't know exactly how many. I kept asking him how many pages, ten, or five, or whatever. It was a handful.
They told you in opening statement that Dr.
Bums and Dr. Rubin had evaluated every potential cause of Ms. Koballa's injury and decided it was smoking. Every potential cause.
Well, now you know that's not the case. Dr.
Rubin didn't even know about meat wrapper's asthma. Dr. Rubin — Dr. Rubin didn't know about it. You know Dr. Bums didn't look at all the medical records.
They told you that Dr. Bums would talk about cigarettes, what it is, an addiction. He didn't do that.
They told you that Dr. Klein never looked at all of the slides. And I have to say this time they were right. You know why? He's not a pathologist. Dr. Bennett looked at the slides.
Dr. Klein was a pulmonologist. But they wanted you to think that Dr. Klein had not done a thorough investigation, so when he came up to the stand, you would think, "Ah-ha, there is the guy that didn't do a thorough investigation."
They told you that Dr. Klein would say lung
cancer is caused by scars-. See, that's where this red herring started, in the opening statement, knowing that our position was the scars are evidence of inflammation, the inflammation is what caused the cancer. But they told you in opening statement that Dr. Klein would say lung cancer is caused by scars.
They also told you that Dr. Thompson only --or treated people primarily for gambling addiction. Well, you heard his testimony. Do you really believe all those people in the largest Air Force hospital or whatever it was were all there because they were gamblers?
No, of course not. He wrote a couple of articles, but again it - you see, the opening statements, by telling you these things, you begin to develop a view of the case.
This case had been pretty clear, everybody has understood the positions, plaintiffs claimed that it was caused by smoking, we claimed that it was caused by a variety of exposures, caused — which — which caused the inflammation, which led to the conditions.
The entire plaintiffs case is based on Dr. Bums and Dr. Rubin. They didn't call a
Dr. Aneja You've heard him mentioned a few times. Dr. Aneja is the pulmonologist who treated Ms. Koballa for ten years, throughout all of this time.
The most — the doctor with the most specialized knowledge of the area, lung, is a pulmonologist, they didn't call as a witness.
We had his records, and you'll have his records, and when you look at his records, and this may be why they didn't call him, there are 29 entries in his records over about a ten-year period from '0 — from '01 to '10, where he said Ms. Koballa came into his office in no acute distress, in other words, she was doing well, 29 times.
They brought Dr. Bums -- the only pulmonologist you heard was Dr. Bums from California, who didn't look at everything, instead of Dr. Aneja, who is a local treating doctor, because they didn't want you to hear Dr. Aneja.
Now, think about Dr. Bums for a minute. He said I have made my decisions, I — I drew my conclusions based on the medical records. But then he told you he didn't look at all the medical records.
He told you, "I have received all the medical
records sent by the plaintiffs that they felt it was necessary for me to review." So the lawyers decided what medical records Dr. Bums needed to review, and they sent them to him.
They didn't tell him about Dr. Tuthill's deposition or swom statements, for instance.
THE COURT: You asked me to warn you at ten minutes.
MR. REDD: Ten minutes? Thank you.
Dr. Bums testified absolutely, positively Ms. Koballa did not have asthma. He said it was based on some report he saw, but he didn't show it to you. Everybody agrees she had asthma, either meat wrapper's or childhood or later on adult asthma He said she didn't have asthma He said the time of exposure to any substance that might harm your lungs is important to know.
Then I said, "Doctor" -- or I didn't take his deposition, somebody else did, "Doctor" --1 asked him this at trial, "Doctor, how long did she work as a meat wrapper?"
He said, "I didn't write that down."
So he said it's really important to know the time, but he didn't bother to write it down. And he said her only complaint was a cough.
Dr. Rubin likewise was told that she — that — again, I asked him about the records that he saw and "were these the ones selected for you to see by the lawyers as opposed to your telling the lawyers what you needed?"
"Yep, that's about it. They sent it to me.
"And you don't know how or why the lawyers decided to send you the few pages that they sent as opposed to sending you additional material?"
Answer: "It's not the kind of thing that would exercise me."
He was being — if he had just come in and said these are the slides and this is what I observed, I'm a pathologist, okay. But he said her smoking wasn't caused by cancer — I mean, her cancer wasn't caused by smoking, he had all kinds of opinions.
You would think he would want to know a little something about the medical case. He didn't review Dr. Tuthill's records at all, he was totally unaware of any occupational exposure, and then he said, "Oh, well, I don't really need to know that to give the opinions in this case."
It's very easy to come into court, put up your hand, swear to tell the truth if you haven't looked
at the evidence, because if you haven't looked at the evidence, if you say something that's not true, you're okay, because you didn't know.
You're like — it's like this (indicating), the plaintiffs two experts, they said we'll give you a little bit of this stuff, keep your blinders on, just look at what we want you to see, and then we're going to ask you some questions about it, and they didn't show them a single record, except for the slides, they didn't show them any medical record at all during their deposition because they might have shown them something they had never seen before. They didn't see any of it.
Why would a lawyer not send every single medical record?
Now, this morning counsel told you, he apologized and said, you know, I apologize, I'm --I committed a sin, I'm only going to pull out a few selected pieces of evidence for you. And I understand that. I'm only pulling out a few, I mean, of the trial.
But the problem is that's how they ran the whole case. What he admitted doing today, it was telling, that's how they ran — they only pulled out a few pieces of evidence to send to Dr. Bums
and Dr. Rubin so they would come in and give the opinions they needed to hear.
We are the ones that put all of the medical records into evidence, we are the ones that questioned every witness about the medical records. And even when we questioned them about it, they didn't even talk about them after that.
Dr. Bennett, all the cross was about something else, it had nothing to do with his actual materials that he talk — testified to on direct.
That's why the system works, though, because both sides have the opportunity to bring you the medical records that they didn't bring you.
And I think the most amazing example here had to do with Dr. Rubin on this question of whether there is a connection. He -- on this stand, first day of his testimony, maybe it was the second day, he told you that there was no connection between chronic inflammation and C.O.P.D. He told you that there was no connection between chronic inflammation and cancer. And finally, that the level of inflammation is greater, the greater risk of lung cancer, he denied.
So in 2010, he said to you under oath, "So there is no connection in your mind between chronic
inflammation and lung cancer?
"Correct."
But in 2009, in another courtroom in front of another jury, having taken the same oath, he said — he was asked, "Is there a connection between chronic inflammation and cancer?
"Yes, sir."
Okay. I'll get -- see that question? "Yes, sir."
Okay. He admitted that there was a connection between chronic inflammation and cancer.
And the next one, was inflammation. "So there is no question in your mind between chronic inflammation?
"That's correct."
That was in 2010, right here. But in 2009,
"Is there a connection between chronic inflammation and cancer?"
I'm sony, did I get — that's the one I had before. I'm getting the numbers all -- let's go to number 28. Let's start over. Okay. We're back--is that 28?
MS. MOORE: No, that's 29.
MR. REID: Okay, 29. "I want to ask a simple question. Is there a connection between chronic
inflammation and C.O.P.D.?
"No, I don't think there is a chronic inflammation, it's actually acute inflammatoiy cells."
But a year ago he said, "Is there a connection between chronic inflammation and a condition known as C.O.P.D.?
"There is a lot of evidence that chronic inflammation produced by smoking is certainly a contributoiy factor in the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease."
Could we see the next one?
"Is it fair to say the greater the level of inflammation in a person's lungs, the greater the risk of lung cancer?
"It depends on the type of inflammation.
"Oh, you would not accept that as a general concept, what I just said?"
Answer, "Not a general concept."
But in 2009, "In general, is the risk of lung cancer and emphysema for those who do not yet have those diseases related to the extent of chronic inflammation? In other words, the greater the level of inflammation, the greater the risk of developing it?
"I think that is a general concept.
"Is the converse true, the lower the level —
"For most people, probably true."
Okay, is there another one or is that it?
MS. MOORE: That’s it.
MR. REID: Thank you.
So here — although, remember, he also later, or earlier in his deposition, that, yeah, it is connected. Then he said it wasn't connected, then he — but he said last year it was. Is that the kind of evidence that truly supports the claim that's being made in this case?
Now — now, when we talked about the findings, when we talked about the findings, just because smoking causes lung cancer does not mean that Ms. Koballa's lung cancer was caused by smoking because, as you heard, only 10 to 15 percent of all smokers get it and only 20 percent of smokers get C.O.P.D., the same number of nonsmokers with asthma. And you agreed that you would look beyond -- you wouldn't end the case with the statistics only, with the findings only.
Dr. Rubin told you that the only reason he went to those other opinions was that he thought lung cancer and the C.O.P.D. was associated because
of statistics. He told you that by looking at one tumor cell, you can't tell what the causes of the cancer is, you have to look at statistics. But statistics have nothing to do with Ms. Koballa's case.
Dr. Rubin pretty much summarized the plaintiffs case. He and Dr. Bums did the same thing.
"Isn't it true, Dr. Rubin, that in this case, you have expressed a lot of opinions, but the only real opinion that you have in this case is that Ms. Koballa smoked, she had cancer, cancer is, therefore, related to her smoking, and that's it?
"That's the major part of my opinion." That's what he says.
And Dr. Bums said the same thing. Dr. Bums said, "I could not find any evidence of any other substantive cause of her problems in her medical records."
Now we know that's because he didn't look at all of her medical records.
Dr. Rubin said, "I did not investigate any other cause — possible cause for her conditions except for smoking."
They did not do the job that you deserved from
a witness who is going to come in and under oath tell you that smoking caused this cancer.
Now, this is the last time I get to talk to you, it's always hard, I'm sure all the lawyers would agree, that after you've been in a case and you always have a chance to stand back and say "But," whatever follows the but, and I don't get to do that now.
I hope that as you've listened to me, you thought about what I've said, and if I said something wrong, you've thought about it and questioned it and you'll talk about it.
I hope when counsel gets up — I tried to anticipate what he might say in his rebuttal. I might not have thought of everything. He may say something that he hadn't said today before yet and I don't get a chance.
So I hope you'll think about it as he talks, and I hope you'll think maybe, "What would Ben Reid say if he had another chance to respond to this new -- new concept?"
But, you know, the reason this all works is because, you probably don't realize this, but you have a pact with Ms. Koballa and with the defendant R.J. Reynolds, and the whole jury system is based
on this.
You -- we agree - let me tell you what we agree, the parties. The parties agree that when that door closes after you go back, you can decide this case any way that you want to decide it, and that nobody will ever question what you did.
Nobody is going to say that you did it wrong or whatever. You get to decide it. And we've given you that, we've agreed.
But you've promised something back to the parties when you took your oath, and that is because you have this enormous power to go in to that room and do that, you agreed to decide the case on the evidence and the law.
You are not going to decide it because of the findings, you are not going to decide it because you don't like smoking, that you don't think tobacco companies are the same as other companies, they're big companies. You are not going to decide it on any of those grounds.
You agree to decide it on the facts and the evidence and treat — to treat both parties the same. And that's why the system works and that's why probably in every case I've had in my whole life I have asked for a jury trial. No offense to
the judges, but it works, and that's the reason it works, it works because of our pact that you didn't even know that you had entered into.
I thank you again for your time, and I know that you will do your duty in this case. Thank you.
