MR. FURR:  May it please the Court. 
Good morning, everybody.  We're going to 
finish this in time for lunch.  
I want to start sort of where I started this 
morning.  Your verdict yesterday sent a loud, 
clear, and powerful message.  Your verdict was 
$8,795,000, and actually, using the standard 
Mr. Rosen was just suggesting to you of a day's 
profit of 4.4 million, that was two days of profits 
for the entire company for compensatory damages for 
Mr. Konzelman. 
THE COURT:  Excuse me, one second.  3808
Al, could you step outside, ask them to keep 
quiet out there, please?  
I'm sorry, Mr. Furr. 
MR. FURR:  Sometimes it's easier for me 
because I don't hear that well.  
R.J. Reynolds heard your message, they 
listened to your message, they felt your message, 
and like I said, it hurt.  $8.79 million is a 
powerful message that is a punishment in itself.  
We are going to look at your instructions 
later.  The instructions recognize that while that 
money may be compensatory to Mr. Konzelman, it also 
has the property of being punitive to the tobacco 
companies.  That's why your instruction told you 
you can consider that. 
Like I said, though, you know, as bad as it 
hurts, I hope you recognize now we are not here to 
contest or criticize or dispute your verdict.  R.J. 
Reynolds respects your verdict.  And really, we 
only ask one thing from you today, we ask this.  
One of the things you did as jurors was you 
promised to follow the law, and we would ask that 
you continue doing so.
We would ask that the first thing you do 
before you deliberate is reread that one and a half 3809
pages of instructions, and we would ask you to 
consider what those instructions mean and how they 
define the task you now have before you.  Because 
it's a very, very different task, as we discussed.  
Almost like a new trial, really.  
You have just got new legal instructions, you 
have heard there are new issues.  Things you never 
heard about in Phase I are now in front of you, so 
you have a picture now of whether the right thing 
to do is to punish R.J. Reynolds in 2016 for 
conduct that only could have -- that could not 
possibly have injured Mrs. Konzelman after 1995, 
because that's when she developed her disease and 
stopped smoking, so the conduct stops affecting 
her.  
And, you know, you have a new guidance from 
the Court as to things that you can think about as 
you consider whether today, 20 years later, whether 
the right thing is to continue punishing R.J. 
Reynolds even though it's been punished over and 
over and over.  
One of the instructions we talked about 
earlier today -- we did not talk about this.  But 
this is an important place to start.  
On page 3, you will see that "The manufacture, 3810
sale, and advertising of cigarettes is a lawful 
activity protected by federal law.  Therefore, you 
may not impose punitive damages to punish R.J. 
Reynolds for merely manufacturing, selling, or 
advertising cigarettes."
We recognize that not everybody likes the 
cigarette business.  It's a for-profit business, 
selling a product that's known to be dangerous and 
addictive, just rubs some people wrong regardless 
whether it's legal.  
That's why we talked about this in jury 
selection and everybody agreed that they recognized 
that's the nature of the business, and everybody 
said they didn't have any problem with a company 
engaged in that business as long as it's done 
lawfully. 
And so the point is you can't -- R.J. Reynolds 
cannot be punished for staying in business.  They 
have no obligation not -- to go out of business, 
they have no obligation to stop selling cigarettes, 
that can't be a basis for punishing them. 
So much like this morning, I'm going to walk 
through some of your legal instructions and look at 
some of the evidence that you have now seen today, 
not because I've said it, but from the evidence, 3811
from the witnesses, and we'll talk about what that 
might mean for the way you-all think about this 
case. 
You heard this morning "In determining the 
amount of punitive damage, if any," if any, "to 
assess against a Defendant, you may consider the 
extent to which the Defendant's conduct has changed 
from the conduct from which you based your 
determination in Phase I."  
This is that fairness principle we talked 
about.  People change.  Corporations change.  When 
somebody has changed and they've already been 
punished, you know, one of the questions for you is 
should we keep punishing them.  If they have 
rehabilitated and they are different now and they 
are acting themselves, they have paid their debt to 
society, and they have already been punished, do we 
keep punishing, do we keep punishing?  For you-all 
to think about.  For you-all to decide.  And the 
instruction will tell you that you can do that. 
And you do know they have changed.  I mean, 
you were shown the corporate rep depositions just 
now, again, about historical events that happened a 
long, long time ago, but think about who Reynolds 
really is now.  Do they conceal information?  Are 3812
they out of control?  You all know the answer to 
that.  
I mean, this wasn't -- you just heard 
Dr. Garner.  None of his testimony was even 
challenged.  None of his testimony about what 
Reynolds informs the public and about how it's 
regulated, and the scope of that regulation wasn't 
challenged.  
Look, Reynolds is on lockdown now with the 
FDA.  You know that.  You know they don't conceal 
that cigarettes are dangerous.  You know they tell 
people cigarettes are the leading -- a leading 
cause of preventable death in this country.  That's 
a different company now.  
You know they don't conceal that cigarettes 
are addictive, they tell people that cigarettes are 
addictive.  
You know that they inform smokers that smoking 
is dangerous, addictive, a leading cause of 
preventable death and, you know, like I said, that 
the tobacco industry's conduct and their products 
are regulated by the FDA.  
And this all had a significant effect upon our 
society.  If you go back to Phase I, we didn't 
introduce this because, as you have heard, you can 3813
consider the evidence in Phase I, you have learned 
that smoking rates have plummeted.  And we will 
look at what Dr. Cummings told you all about where 
we are today on smoking rates, and that's a fact 
you can consider when you evaluate whether further 
punishment is needed. 
Okay, another instruction that you got this 
morning was this first instruction on page 1 was 
"I'm now going to tell you about the rules of law 
that apply to determining whether punitive damages 
should be assessed and, if so, what amount."  
Mr. Rosen is correct, of course.  You found in 
Phase I that we should come here.  We wouldn't be 
here if you didn't find in Phase I that you believe 
that punitive damages -- Mr. Konzelman was entitled 
to punitive damages, but the law recognizes that 
when you see the new evidence, when you see the new 
legal instructions, you may change your mind and 
the law recognizes expressly that you may feel 
different today than you felt at the end of the day 
yesterday.  
Also, actually when you think about the 
punitive effect that the award you have already 
made will have and has had.  
So we're back to this question.  You know, are 3814
punitive damages needed in 2016 to keep Reynolds 
from repeating its past conduct?  
Respectfully, all the evidence is that it 
would be impossible and there is no chance that 
Reynolds will repeat its past conduct.  
And you were told "whether that misconduct 
occurred in the distant past involved actors who 
are no longer associated with the Defendant need 
not be punished or that it be punished less 
severely.  
Again, fairness.  
If the actors who committed these acts are 
gone, you have got to ask yourself do I really want 
to punish the current company, its shareholders, 
and its employees.  If this happened a long time 
ago and they've changed and rehabilitated and been 
punished and paid their debt to society, you have 
the right to decide, you know what, that they need 
to be punished, but enough's enough.  There has 
been enough punishment.  It's time to move on from 
that. 
So this recognizes that you can do that. 
And you know the past is gone.  You know that 
those entities, we heard about them once again 
today, TI, CTR, TIRC, they're gone.  They were 3815
voluntarily disbanded as part of an agreement with 
the states.  
And nobody, there has been no successor 
organization, the industry doesn't debate or 
dispute or deny the dangers of smoking, they don't 
criticize the Surgeon General or the public health 
figures, they don't go on TV and challenge findings 
about the nature of smoking.  
Instead what do they do?  You've seen that 
R.J. Reynolds informs smokers.  You go -- like I 
said, the actors are gone, we don't need to go 
through this again, as you heard, many of these 
guys are deceased.  They are all gone, they were 
gone by '96 at the latest.  You know, they've been 
gone from the company for 20 years.  You all get to 
decide whether you keep punishing the current 
employees for what these people did that ended over 
20 years ago. 
Well, Dr. Cummings mentioned this to you.  I 
told you we would get to this.  Look, at one time, 
smoking rates in this country were very high.  
Dr. Cummings told you today they've decreased by 70 
percent since the mid 1950s, and we are down to 13 
percent of US adult women who smoke. 
So, yeah, people are still -- people are still 3816
developing smoking-related diseases, but the 
epidemic of smoking is over.  Smoking is on its way 
to becoming extinct in this country, and you have 
to decide whether you want to punish further this 
industry that is on its way to becoming extinct.  
As Dr. Garner explained to you, Reynolds is 
the same name, but different company.  New 
ownership.  New executives.  New scientists in the 
company.  The past is gone.  The past is gone.  And 
it's been punished for it.  And it's been punished 
for it.  And it's been punished for it.  And you 
all have to decide whether further punishment is 
needed. 
Mitigating evidence.  Like I said, the law 
wisely recognizes that you may hear new evidence in 
this phase that demonstrates that there is no need 
to impose punitive damages or that a reduced amount 
of punitive damages should be imposed against the 
Defendant.  Why?  Because you now have other things 
to think about.  You have new considerations, 
things you didn't know in Phase I.  Things have 
changed, and you are entitled to consider that 
evidence in this phase. 
One of the things that was talked about a lot 
in Phase I, you know, every document you heard 3817
about was described as a secret document, a 
confidential document, a concealed document.  Well, 
there are no secrets anymore.  
Every document that you saw can be looked at 
tonight by anybody around the world that has access 
to the internet.  And all the documents that can be 
currently generated, as you heard, are continually 
put on there.  
R.J. Reynolds maintains a website with 
Brown & Williamson, Lorillard, American documents.  
And, of course, Reynolds' documents, they're on the 
website, it's searchable, it includes all those 
documents.  You want to know what Dr. Teague said?  
You want to know what Dr. Rodgman said?  Right 
there they are.  No secret documents anymore.  
But they don't stop with denying -- they don't 
stop with not denying.  To not -- to stop denying 
it was important.  What's probably more important 
is R.J. Reynolds has turned the corner.  They are 
affirmatively making sure that smokers and the 
public know that they agree that smoking is 
dangerous and addictive and can cause premature 
death, and they do it voluntarily.  Nobody forces 
them to maintain this website.  
They do this, as Dr. Garner said, because they 3818
want transparency, because it's the right thing to 
do.  People have a right to know that they 
recognize and agree that smoking has been shown to 
cause disease. 
And you heard about the website.  Dr. Garner 
told you it tells you that nicotine in tobacco 
products is addictive, that cigarette smoking is 
the leading cause of preventable deaths, and more 
important, like we discussed, that quitting 
smoking, quitting smoking significantly decreases 
the risk of developing those diseases. 
There is no reassurance campaign.  There is no 
ambiguity.  There is no creation of confusion 
about.  Whether people should continue smoking or 
quit smoking.  R.J. Reynolds says, hey, smoking 
causes these diseases.  If you don't want to take 
the risks that you're taking by smoking, you need 
to quit.  Not that you need to switch brands to 
this brand or this brand or this brand or smoke 
less or anything.  You need to quit.  Clear, 
unambiguous information for smokers and the public.  
Of course, they go further, they don't -- oh, 
wow.  They don't say it just once, they say it 
again, that the best course of action for tobacco 
consumers concerned about their health is to quit.  3819
To quit.  
You heard in Phase I Dr. Cummings told you 
there is no such thing as a safe cigarette.  It's 
not because R.J. Reynolds hasn't tried.  They spent 
over a billion dollars trying to develop safer 
cigarettes.  They can't do it.  As long as the 
cigarette burns tobacco, which is what a cigarette 
is, that smoke is going to contain carcinogens and 
other toxicants in it.  That's just the nature of 
the product. 
So what other evidence might be considered as 
mitigating evidence?  It's up to you.  You get to 
make that decision.  We've brought that to you.  
And we suggest that you consider whether you think 
these lines of evidence are mitigating.  
One of them are the prior punitive damage 
awards, the way the company is regulated by the 
FDA, the way it has paid for its past conduct under 
the Master Settlement Agreement, the way it's paid 
its debt to society, to all the states, including 
the Florida, and you are entitled to know how many 
other cases there are out there, how many other 
cases there are out there, and to use that as 
context for evaluating whether a punitive award 
should be made in this case and if so, how big it 3820
should be.  And you are allowed to do that in light 
of your knowledge of how many other cases there 
are. 
Well, you have been told that Reynolds has 
already paid $186 million in punitive damage 
awards.  $186 million.  It's a lot of money.  It's 
a lot of money.  They've paid.  They've paid 
punitive damage awards to Engle plaintiffs.  Those 
are payments made in this litigation.  
Well, FDA regulation, kind of hard to 
understate how important the FDA regulation is.  If 
there is any lingering concern, tobacco companies 
just can't be trusted to regulate themselves and do 
the right thing, you don't have to worry about 
that, because they are regulated by the FDA.  
They've been regulated for seven years now.  
And unlike any situation that you've probably 
ever heard of, they pay the policemen to regulate 
them, they pay the FDA to police them.  And as 
you've heard, they pay a lot, they've paid over a 
billion dollars for it.  And the FDA has 
significant authority to really regulate their 
business from A to Z, as Dr. Garner told you.  
First thing they do, no concealment, no 
secrets, they require disclosure of all the 3821
information that R.J. Reynolds has, so that the FDA 
scientists are on equal footing with the tobacco 
company scientists. 
And you heard Dr. Garner tell you, "We give 
them everything we have.  We hold nothing back.  We 
conceal nothing from you."  He was right there.  He 
could have been cross-examined on that if that 
wasn't true.  There was no cross-examination on 
that.  That's what they knew.  
The FDA regulates the way cigarettes are 
designed.  To change the design, you have to get 
FDA approval.  To introduce a new cigarette, you 
have to get -- you have to file a substantial 
equivalence report demonstrating that there is no 
risk in those cigarettes.  
They regulate the manufacture of cigarettes.  
And they come down to the plants to learn how does 
the manufacturing process work, and they walk in 
with open arms, and people like Dr. Garner squire 
them around, show them how it's done, provide them 
the information, provide the explanation, and 
respond to whatever they want to know.  
FDA regulates the sale, they regulate the 
advertising.  If they are curious or skeptical 
about an advertising campaign, what do they do, 3822
they say documents, please, internal documents.  We 
want to look at something in the documents.  What 
does Reynolds do?  They give them to them.  They 
don't hide them.  They don't conceal them.  They 
don't hold them back.  They give them to them.  
What Dr. Garner told you, there was no 
cross-examination on that.  That's what Reynolds 
does.  They have turned the corner, they are 
transparent.  They tell the FDA what they are 
doing.  They conceal nothing.  There aren't any 
secrets anymore. 
We talked about -- and it's not a cheap 
process.  The FDA regulation is expensive.  R.J. 
Reynolds is just one company and they have already 
paid over a billion dollars to the FDA to regulate 
them. 
So we are back to this question.  Are punitive 
damages needed to keep Reynolds from repeating past 
conduct?  You all know that the evidence all points 
the same direction now, that the answer is no, that 
there is no possibility of repeated bad conduct, 
that Reynolds is on lockdown with the FDA, that the 
FDA regulates everything they do, knows everything 
they know, looks at everything they write.  
And actually comes and knocks on the door and 3823
said, hey, guess what, even though you weren't 
expecting us, we are here to walk through and 
evaluate, look at your documents and talk to your 
employees and evaluate your processes and products 
and you ingredients, surprise, we are here, open 
up.  Reynolds opens up, and they send a team of 
people to help them around to make sure they get 
what they want. 
MSA, look, bad conduct in the past.  If there 
is bad conduct in the past, Reynolds has paid its 
debt.  Has paid its debt.  $58 billion already to 
the states.  These obligations continue forever as 
long as Reynolds stays in business, it continues 
paying.  Same for Florida.  3 billion to the state 
of Florida alone.  These are substantial amounts of 
money.  Substantial amounts of money.  
And Reynolds has paid and paid and paid and 
they are going to keep paying.  They are going to 
keep paying.  No question about that.  
Okay, there are 2,900 cases pending.  In each 
of those cases, those plaintiffs can come to court 
and ask a jury for compensatory damages and they 
can ask the jury for punitive damages.  Each of 
them get a chance to prove their cases.  You know, 
we aren't here to punish Reynolds for anything 3824
about those other cases.  
But if you take the request in this case of 
$14 million, and you say what would the liability 
be like if Reynolds had to pay 14 million in every 
one of these cases?  It's over $4 billion.  It's 
over $4 billion in Engle punitive alone if you had 
to pay it in every one of these cases.  
Excuse me, it's over $40 billion.  I did the 
math right, but I wrote it down wrong.  It's over 
$40 billion, over five times their net worth.  Over 
five times their net worth in punitive damages if 
each of these cases result in a $14 dollar verdict. 
And as the judge told you in your 
instructions, you are not supposed to bankrupt the 
company here.  So you are allowed to think about 
what's the impact across all these other cases.  
This is something that I mentioned before, but 
I'm going to direct you specifically to the 
instruction.  On the third page of your 
instructions, you will see that "you should not 
award punitive damages if you conclude that this 
purpose will be satisfied by Defendant's 
compensatory liability.  
In other words, yes, your finding was about 
compensatory liability, but the law recognizes that 3825
that also has the effect on R.J. Reynolds of 
punishing R.J. Reynolds.  And as you've heard, 
based on Mr. Rosen's calculation, that would be two 
days of net profit, two days for one plaintiff of 
net profits.  And there are 2,900 cases pending. 
But you awarded 8,795,000, almost 70 percent 
more than was requested by Mr. Rosen.  Substantial 
award.  Powerful message.  We've heard it.  Yeah, 
I've told you, it hurts.  But it has the effect, 
that already has a significant punishment and 
deterrent effect on Reynolds even though it was 
labeled as compensatory damages in your verdict. 
As we talked about, this is a case in which 
you only award harm for one plaintiff.  The other 
2,900 cases, you know, are a completely different 
matter. 
And I want to suggest to you that, again, this 
decision is all yours.  But $14 million is simply 
not supported by the legal rules you've been given.  
I'm going to suggest to you what could be an award 
that would be consistent with the legal 
instructions you've been given. 
For lack of a better term, I've called this a 
common sense punitive damage award.  I have to go 
back and remind you of a couple things.  3826
In Phase I, the first phase of this trial, 
Mr. Rosen suggested to you that you find 
Mrs. Konzelman to be 10 percent at fault, that 
that's the fault you should assign her.  In your 
verdict, you found her to be 15 percent at fault.  
You found her to be 5 percent more at fault than 
Mr. Rosen suggested to you.  Which he acknowledged 
would be a reasonable finding for you to make. 
If you want to punish Reynolds in a way that 
is reasonably related to your verdict, which makes 
sense in light of all these other instructions, I'm 
going to suggest to you give that 5 percent back.  
Give that 5 percent back.  Even the scales so it 
goes back to 10 percent.  Done the math.  That 5 
percent would be about 400 -- let's see, it would 
being $439,750 to be exact.  
So a punitive award of $439,750 would restore 
that 5 percent of fault that you thought was more 
than what Mr. Rosen thought it should be. 
But you know what, if you say that is just not 
enough, that's not a significant enough punishment, 
I would suggest that the outer limit of what you 
should do, and this is kind of arbitrary, but just 
double that.  Double that 439,000, and make an 
award of 879,000.  879,000.  Kind of easy to get 3827
to.  That's 10 percent of your verdict.  That's a 
reasonable relationship to the verdict that you had 
in Phase I.  
And so if you decide that punitive damages are 
necessary and you want to send a message that hurts 
on top of the over $8 million that you sent, that 
you have already awarded, and one that's consistent 
with your instructions, we'd suggest to you that 
you might consider 10 percent of it or 879,000. 
So here we are, it's 2016.  You know, you are 
being asked to punish Reynolds for things that 
happened a long time ago by people who aren't 
around anymore.  You know they've changed.  You 
know they've already been punished.  You know 
they're regulated.  And you know there is no chance 
that past conduct will be repeated. 
Thank you very much for your time and 
attention this morning.  I appreciate it.  
Thank you, Your Honor. 
