MR. ROSEN:  Thank you, Your Honor.  May it 
please the Court.  
Alan.  Counsel.  
Okay, we are almost finished.  And I want you 
to know that I think we started at 9 a.m. and it's 
about 11:15.  Our short presentation was not 
because this phase is no less important.  Okay?  We 
presented to you the evidence that we believe is 
sufficient that clearly warrants punitive damages 
in this case. 
And by your verdict, what you had said under 
the last question was -- you know, you were asked 
whether you found by clear and convincing evidence 
whether punitive damages are warranted.  And you 
answered yes, and so we start there.  We start with 
that premise, that punitive damages are warranted.  
I told you in opening statement that it's not 
meant to further compensate Alan.  The amount of 
money that you allowed in your verdict is for 
Alan's loss, for the loss of his wife.  
This is separate.  This is separate and 
distinct.  And it's meant to, as an assessment, as 
a penalty, as a punishment for the type of conduct, 
and we're going to talk about it in a moment, that 3797
rises to a level of reprehensibility that is far 
beyond, far beyond anything.  
And we're going to talk about two separate 
aspects.  I'm going to address, one, Reynolds up 
until 2000, because that's most of what you heard 
during the first phase of the trial, and then we'll 
talk about Reynolds of today. 
But the fact that Reynolds is regulated by the 
FDA today or that they pay money to the Master 
Settlement Agreement to the states, does not mean 
that they have ever, ever been punished for 50 
years of their conduct resulting in harm to Elaine.  
Okay?  
Punitive damages, punitive damages must be 
significant.  If they're not significant, then they 
will not be meaningful.  
Counsel mentioned in opening statement that 
R.J. Reynolds heard your verdict.  Right?  And they 
felt your verdict.  In punitive damages, they need 
to listen to your verdict.  All right?  
Placing profit over human life is the most 
egregious conduct that you can imagine.  Profit 
over human life.  That's what we're talking about.  
And the Court -- this is going to be the question, 
and we're going to get to what we believe would be 3798
an appropriate assessment, penalty against R.J. 
Reynolds in this case, in a minute. 
The amount that you decide, that decision is 
based on the greater weight of the evidence.  So 
you've already said clear and convincing evidence 
was presented that warrants the punitive damages, 
but the amount is what's the more persuasive, 
convincing force and effect of the entire evidence 
for the amount.  
The cast of characters and the amount of 
people that were involved was extensive.  And it 
ran to the highest, highest levels of these -- of 
this corporation and these companies.  
And they talk internally about the fact that 
it's -- that it's profit, you know, it's profit.  
And I'm going to talk about the second one, 
the second point here in a minute.  
This is -- this is a document, and I know you 
remember it, it's The Roper Proposal, but when you 
talk about the fact that this was a holding 
strategy, a holding strategy, what that -- what 
that really means is that entire time keeping 
people smoking when time is what people needed, 
okay, because the longer they smoked, the more 
deadly and the more higher the risk became.  3799
And so keeping a holding pattern for people 
like Elaine meant smoking for longer, smoking for 
over a long period of time, extensive amounts of 
cigarettes, being addicted to it, that holding 
pattern is what causes the disease, that holding 
pattern. 
You know, when we talked about, there is this 
lag time, right, when someone picks up a cigarette.  
It doesn't just happen overnight and you get 
disease.  That 20-year or 30-year or 40 or 50-year 
lag time meant something.  And the amount of 
suffering that resulted is -- is -- is 
unimaginable.  Okay? 
When you talk about reprehensibility, you can 
look at the harm to others to determine how 
reprehensible their conduct was, harm to other 
families, to other people.  Okay?  
This type of conduct, the amount of untold 
suffering of the 500,000 people that die each year 
or the 20 million that have died since the 1960s, 
that had a huge, huge impact on not just Alan's 
family, but families around -- across this country.  
I mean, unimaginable, that conduct. 
They did not care who they hurt.  They didn't 
care.  3800
They only understood one thing, and that's 
money.  That's money.  
And so in our state, punitive damages is a 
legal way to assess punishment against a company 
like this who only understands one thing, one 
thing.  
And the second aspect is deterrence, not just 
for R.J. Reynolds, but for other corporations, for 
other CEOs, or any other company that even thinks 
about engaging in this type of conduct, they can 
pick up the newspaper tomorrow morning and they may 
read about this verdict and they will know this 
type of conduct is unquestionably not accepted, 
will not be accepted, will not be tolerated.  
They knew that their position was subject to 
the charge.  They knew it in the finding, yet 
they -- they forged ahead anyways, anyways, to 
promote cigarettes, to promote the sale of 
cigarettes to make more money.  
You are given the instruction, "In making this 
determination, you should consider the following:  
The nature, extent, and degree of misconduct."  And 
that's what we're talking about, the nature, 
extent, and degree. 
And when you talk about those elements that 3801
you are required to look at, all right, and if you 
were to look at it on a scale of either the least 
intentional or the minimal nature of the conduct or 
the length of the conduct, is minimal, or the 
degree is minimal, when you look at a scale of 
where we are on the nature, the extent, the degree, 
this type of conduct is intentional.  It's 
deliberate.  Right?  It's planned.  Preconceived.  
And so when you look at the scale, it is the 
worst, it is the highest level.  It's the highest 
level.  It's not by accident.  It's not being 
negligent.  Right?  It's knowing that you are 
running through a red light when there is cars 
coming and you see them coming and you choose to 
run through the red light.  It's that level.  
The extent, you know, this isn't a one-year or 
two-year course of conduct.  This was 50 years.  50 
years of a course of conduct.  
And, you know, it ended, it ended when -- and 
Dr. Garner just mentioned this.  After all of the 
states in the United States were suing R.J. 
Reynolds and they were forced to get into this 
Master Settlement Agreement, and that's when the TI 
was disbanded, and that's when CTR was disbanded.  
And the degree.  I mean, the degree that we're 3802
talking about is conduct causing death, conduct 
causing the most horrible and horrific diseases 
that our society is aware of and knows of.  
The R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company of today.  
Let's play this.  
(Videotaped deposition of James Figlar, PhD, 
played as follows:) 
BY MR. PAIGE:  
Q.
The last big paragraph there, if you could 
read from "originally" and down one, two, three, four, 
five, six, seven lines, if you could read from 
"originally" seven lines down to the word "product", 
into the record, please.  
A.
Okay.  "Originally, CTR was organized as a 
public relations effort.  The industry told the world 
CTR would look at the diseases which were being 
associated with smoking.  There was even a suggestion by 
our political spokesmen that if a harmful element turned 
up, the industry would try to root it out.  
"The research of CTR also discharged a legal 
responsibility, the manufacturer has a duty to know its 
product." 
Q.
Do you agree, though, Doctor, that the 
manufacturer does have a duty to know its products? 
A.
I do.  3803
Q.
And do you agree that the industry never told 
the world that the CTR was merely a public relations 
effort? 
A.
I don't know what they told them necessarily 
with regard to public relations.  I don't know that it 
was. 
Q.
A.
Q.
You know that it was?  
I said I don't know that it was.  
So as the corporate representative with the 
most knowledge from R.J. Reynolds, as you sit here 
today, you still don't know whether or not the CTR was 
merely a public relations effort? 
A.
I don't believe that it was.  I don't think 
CTR was.  I think The Tobacco Institute, in many 
respects was, it was an advocacy group.  But CTR as a 
grant-in-aid group was not. 
Q.
So again, this is another industry insider 
from back in the '70s who may be mistaken; correct? 
A.
Quite possibly. 
(Videotaped deposition stopped.) 
MR. ROSEN:  And that's 2014, their corporate 
representative with the most knowledge of CTR.  All 
right.  We know what they said internally.  We have 
them.  We have the documents.  It was conceived as 
a public relations gesture, it's functioned as a 3804
public relations operation, set up as a shield, 
cheapest insurance.  And today, today, he doesn't 
believe that it was -- that it was a public 
relations effort, that's what he said.  That's 
today.  
They knew for so long and they concealed for 
so long. 
You heard from Dr. Cummings the type of 
conduct that we're talking about, about filters.  
They knew the filters weren't working.  They knew 
it.  They knew consumers went to filters thinking 
there was a benefit and they exploited that in 
their marketing.  And he talked about the 
conspiracy.  I don't have to go through it again. 
And I'm going to get to that slide in one 
second.  
You know, when we talked about credibility of 
witnesses in that -- you know, in the instruction 
that we heard before, credibility of witnesses, you 
know, Dr. Garner took the stand now, and, you know, 
one thing he said -- he said three things that I 
want to point out.  
One, when I asked him if nicotine is a drug, I 
just want you to ask yourselves whether he asked 
that question, whether he answered that question or 3805
whether you think that there was hesitation, all 
right, in how he reacted, how he responded.  That's 
something I want you to consider, his testimony, 
his demeanor on the stand today, when asked that 
specific question, is nicotine a drug.  
And he told you that R.J. Reynolds does not 
control pH and they don't control the form of 
nicotine.  That was the last two questions I asked 
him.  
You have the documents, you have heard the 
experts, you heard Dr. Cummings and so you make 
your decision on who R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company 
is today.  
I played the video for -- so you understand 
what -- net earnings specifically.  Net earnings is 
the sale of all the cigarettes, all of the 
cigarettes that they sell, they make a certain 
gross revenue, all right, for the sale of 
cigarettes, and then subtract everything from that, 
from the cost of the tobacco, from cost of 
manufacturing, cost of the transporting the goods, 
paying all of the CEOs, all of the bonuses, all the 
employees, pay all of it, pay everybody, 
everything, take care of all the expenses, right, 
and then pay all the taxes, pay the MSA, pay the 3806
FDA, pay it all, all right, and after all that, 
they have a net profit, net earnings in 2013 of 
$1.606 billion.  All right, for that one year.  
And you've heard that it continues the 
increase.  It continues to increase. 
If you take $1.606 billion over 365 days, 
that's 4.4 million in net earnings every day.  Net 
earnings every day.  That's after everybody's 
been -- every CEO, everybody, all the employees, 
all the cost of goods, all their manufacturing 
plants, their rent, their leases, that's excess.  
That's all excess.  4.4 million per day.  
For punitive damages to mean something, it 
can't be a slap on the wrist.  They need to listen 
to it.  My suggestion would be an assessment 
somewhere, and again, my suggestion, and you can go 
higher or you can go lower, it is in your 
discretion, my suggestion would be 3 or so days of 
their net earnings would be right around $14 
million.  All right.  That's my suggestion to you.  
If you were to say that punitive damages 
should be two to one, two to one of the 
compensatory damages, that would be approximately 
16 million.  
We would suggest to you, again, this is just a 3807
suggestion, 14 million.  They will listen to that 
and they will know from this jury this type of 
conduct is the highest level of reprehensibility, 
it will not be tolerated, and R.J. Reynolds, the 
other tobacco companies, and other companies in our 
country know not to ever, ever, ever engage in this 
type of conduct.  
I again thank you for your time and for your 
sacrifice in being here with us.  Thank you.  


MR. ROSEN:  Thank you.  
There was a couple things I want to address, 3828
and then you will deliberate.  And lunch should 
probably be here any minute, so that's perfect 
timing.  
They're not becoming extinct.  Counsel 
mentioned it, that they're becoming extinct.  You 
heard the stipulation.  Their profits continue to 
increase, continue to increase.  And Dr. Garner 
talked about how they are going to continue to pay 
the MSA, they are going to continue to do those 
things.  They're not becoming extinct.  
And 2,900 cases, Dr. Garner knew nothing about 
them when I asked him about questions.  And you've 
sat through one of these.  This is not a walk in 
the park.  Okay?  You've sat through one.  He knew 
nothing about any details about those cases.  
They pay the FDA to regulate themselves 
because they could not regulate themselves.  That 
was a law that was passed in 2009.  They could not 
regulate themselves.  
You know, there is a quote, the true test of 
someone's integrity is what they do when someone's 
not watching.  And what they did for decades, when 
people weren't watching, was despicable and it was 
horrendous.  
Now they're under a microscope and now they 3829
have to pay themselves -- pay to be regulated.  
And they ran unregulated for so long, and you 
have all the documents about adjusting the pH and 
about putting in the different additives and 
putting ammonia in and changing the form of 
nicotine, you have all that, okay.  They did that 
for so long unregulated, right?  That now the FDA 
comes in and it can't be changed unless the FDA 
says so.  
They had a hundred years to perfect the design 
of a nicotine-delivery device, a cigarette, and now 
it's locked in.  That's it.  Nothing changes. 
Punitive damage award.  It must be significant 
so they understand and they listen.  And you folks 
are some of the few in this entire country that has 
more information and more knowledge -- 
MR. FURR:  Objection, this is improper 
argument. 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. ROSEN:  You have significant power in this 
case to make change, to make real change.  And I 
just want to remind you again, just consider when 
Dr. Garner was asked whether nicotine was a drug, 
how he responded.  
Thank you.  
