          MR. FURR:  Just so you-all know the plan, my
     understanding is the lunch has been ordered.  We
     expect it to be here around noon.  And so I will
     talk to you until your lunch arrives, and then
     we'll take a normal break, and we will finish up
     after you get done.
          Well, there is only one place I can possibly
     begin, that is to thank you-all for your heroic
     service.  At least three of you deserve a purple
     heart in this case.  You came back from being sick
     and came back to be here with us.  We really
     appreciate that.
          But all of you have been courteous, you've
     dressed professional, you've come here on time and
     you've paid attention, and we are all very, very
     grateful to you for your service, and it has been
     an honor to serve in front of a jury like this.
     Thank you. Konzelman 19
October 21, 2016

          I have a favorite saying that I like a lot.
     The saying is, keep your eye on the ball.
          Now, I love football, so I like to put a
     football theme when I talk about it.  But it really
     applies to any endeavor in life.  What does it
     mean?
          It means concentrating on the task before you,
     concentrate on the things that matter, and don't be
     distracted by the other things that are competing
     for your attention but won't really help you
     achieve the results and complete the task that you
     have at hand.
          I think that's an important thing to think
     about as you sort through all the evidence in here,
     because this is really a pretty simple case.  This
     is a case about one smoker, Elaine Konzelman.  It's
     not a case about all smokers, it's not a case about
     smokers in general.  The class action is over.
     This case is about one smoker.
          It's a case about one disease, COPD.  It's a
     serious disease.  And we're not going to diminish
     the seriousness in any way of COPD.  But it's not a
     case about lung cancer, it's not a case about heart
     disease, it's not a case about smokers becoming ill
     from other -- with other diseases.  It's about 3496 COPD.
          It is a case about one plaintiff, Alan
     Konzelman.  It's his case.  We now know that this
     is a case in which Mr. Konzelman is going -- has
     asked you to award to him $5.3 million.  $5.3
     million.  So that's what this case is about.
          And you know this case is about that because
     you've seen the verdict form and you now know that
     every single question on your verdict form has
     Elaine's name in it, and sometimes it also has
     Mr. Konzelman's name.  So all this case is about
     the Konzelmans.  It's really a pretty simple,
     narrow case.  And there are only a few facts that
     you really need to know to answer all of these
     verdict form questions.
          And these are the facts.  You've seen the
     evidence.  You know that Elaine Konzelman was
     personally warned over and over about the dangers
     of smoking throughout her life.  You know that she
     knew that smoking could kill her by the 1960s when
     her father told her so.
          You know that she was not confused as to
     whether smoking really did cause disease or didn't
     cause disease because you know, and this is a sad
     fact, but it's just -- the fact of the matter is Konzelman 19
October 21, 2016

     she watched her mother, she watched her mother
     develop emphysema and die from it, and
     subsequently, she watched her sister develop lung
     cancer.
          She wasn't confused.  I mean, the evidence was
     right in front of her face, in an undeniable,
     powerful fashion that nobody could miss, and Elaine
     didn't miss it.
          But despite knowing that smoking is dangerous
     and could cause a deadly disease, she just loved to
     smoke.  She loved to smoke.  And we're going to
     look at that evidence.  I mean, this is not a
     one-time thing.  This was her response.  She loved
     to smoke, and she didn't want to quit.  She didn't
     want to quit.
          We're going to look at what all the family
     members told us about Elaine in the 1980s, and they
     told you that she simply wasn't interested in
     quitting, even when she was watching what her
     mother was going through and what her sister was
     going through.
          Now, you also know that there is a statute of
     limitations defense in this case, and we're going
     to show you that the facts simply are that she
     should have known, whether she did or not is not 3498
     the issue, but she should have known, she should
     have known that she had COPD caused by smoking
     before May 5th, 1990, and as a result, this lawsuit
     is legally barred by the statute of limitations,
     which is not a technicality, it's the law of the
     Florida, it's the law that you are bound by and
     that you all followed to uphold when you took your
     oath to serve as jurors.
          And we also know that just the truth is she
     could quit smoking.  We know that she quit smoking
     the first time that she made what Mr. Konzelman,
     the plaintiff in this case, acknowledged to be a
     wholehearted quit attempt.  Not a half hearted quit
     attempt.  Not quitting for show.  Not quitting to
     placate others.  Not quitting to get others off her
     back.
          But the first time she wanted to quit and made
     a wholehearted quit attempt, she quit, walked away
     from it, and never smoked again without any
     nicotine replacement therapy or any other
     professional help.
          The plaintiffs have the burden of proof.
     That's an important thing to remember.
     Mr. Konzelman has to meet his burden of proof to
     prove his claims about Elaine Konzelman and her 3499
     COPD.  He has to prove to you his claims.  And he
     didn't prove to you his claims.
          It demonstrates -- the evidence demonstrates
     that Mr. Konzelman's case fails in three
     significant areas.  I'm going to give you a brief
     overview before lunch of what that is.  He failed
     because he failed to prove that she was injured by
     concealment or an agreement to conceal.
          He failed to prove that she was injured
     because she was -- addiction to nicotine caused her
     disease.  And his case also fails because it is
     barred by the statute of limitations.  And I'm
     going to look at those three issues at least, I
     hope, before lunch.
          We'll start with the concealment case.  The
     facts demonstrate -- the evidence is demonstrated
     to you that she knew from the 1960s on that smoking
     could kill her because her father told her so.
          But throughout her life, and we'll walk
     through some of this today, she continued to get
     personalized warnings.  Not just the general
     warnings that bombarded all the rest of society,
     not just the warnings on the packs, not just the
     efforts by the Surgeon General and the American
     Cancer Society and the American Lung Association 3500
     and the public health and schools, not just the
     warnings that we all got, but she got personalized
     warnings from her family members, from her own
     body, and from a variety of the sources.  She knew.
          But despite all that, she did not want to quit
     because she loved to smoke.
          And I want to be clear.  I'm not criticizing
     Elaine in any way for wanting to smoke and not
     wanting to quit.  She had the right to make those
     choices.  It was her right to decide whether to
     smoke or not.  It was also her responsibility for
     the choices she makes.
          A fundamental tenet of our society is, in
     America, we have the right to make our choices, but
     we also have to be personally responsible for our
     choices.
          I'm going to demonstrate to you this morning
     that her choice to smoke despite knowing the
     dangers of smoking was the only legal cause of her
     COPD.  The only legal cause.
          Yes, under Florida laws, Florida law
     recognizes that sometimes there can be more than
     one cause of the event, concomitant causes or other
     legal jargon, it doesn't really matter, but the law
     recognizes there can be more than one cause of the 3501
     event, but under the facts of this case, under the
     evidence before you, there was only one cause of
     her COPD and death.
          Let's take a quick look at -- I showed you
     this in opening statement.  I'm going to walk
     through it again now, help short-circuit the rest
     of the day, but let's just look at the abundance,
     the constant drumbeat of information and warning
     that Elaine Konzelman personally received and that
     she received just like all the rest of society.
          You know that her father saw the cigarette --
     saw the warning in 1966, quit smoking, offered all
     the family -- the kids in the family a thousand
     dollars not to smoke before they -- if they didn't
     smoke before they were age 18.  That's what Lori
     Frost told you from the stand yesterday.
          And you know that he told the kids and he told
     Elaine that smoking will kill you.  Smoking will
     kill you.
          Again, sadly we know, I mean, probably the
     most powerful warning a person could get is to
     watch a loved one go through the process.  But she
     watched her mother develop symptoms of COPD in the
     1970s.  She watched her disease progress.  She
     watched her get sick over time.  And then 3502
     ultimately, died from her COPD in 1987.
          We know from John Gilbert, her son who
     testified by deposition, that by the 1970s, all
     four of her children were asking her to quit.  All
     four of them by the 1970s.
          We know that Mr. Konzelman repeatedly asked
     her to stop smoking.  We know that he asked her on
     their very first date to stop smoking.  He asked
     her constantly after that.
          Okay.  We're going to look at all the
     different ways he showed her the warnings in -- on
     the packages.  He showed her the warnings in the
     ads.  He told her about his experience with
     smoking.  And he talked to her constantly about her
     need to quit smoking.  We know that she got
     warnings from her own body.
          We're going to look at this in a couple of
     different ways.  Both because it demonstrates she
     knew what smoking could do, but also it's relevant
     to the statute of limitations.
          We know that she had coughing and shortness of
     breath and wheezing and phlegm, and she began
     developing all that in the '80s, and we're going to
     look at that evidence.  But she got warnings from
     her own body. 3503
          And, of course, Ms. Lori Frost testified
     yesterday, and although she didn't remember what
     she had told us a few months ago in her deposition,
     Ms. Lehman reminded her and refreshed her memory of
     what she had told us in her deposition.  And we
     know that among the many, many warnings that Lori
     gave her aunt was that cigarettes are going to kill
     you.  You have to quit smoking.  You have to quit
     smoking.
          And you heard from her best friend, Sue
     Sweeney, by deposition, and Sue told you that I
     told her it wasn't good for her health.  I told her
     it wasn't good for her health.
          Sue is a real important witness in this case
     because, you know, with family members sometimes we
     all have to maintain a certain decorum and, you
     know, there are expectations in relationships.  But
     who do you talk to in life?  Your best friend.
          Sometimes your best friend just knows you in a
     different way than any family member could, because
     your best friend, you are not judgmental of each
     other, you were best friends through thick and
     thin.  And it's not that they love you any more
     than your family members, but they love you
     differently. 3504
          So the testimony from a best friend is really
     important.
          And of course, the warning labels.  You can't
     overstate the importance of the warning labels.
     This is not a product that caused disease and
     failed to carry a warning.  This is a product,
     among -- one of the first consumer products the
     warning was ever put on.
          This warning has been on cigarettes for 50
     years in one form or another.  For 50 years.  Every
     pack of cigarettes she would have picked up had a
     warning from 1970 on.  Every advertisement that she
     saw for cigarettes had a warning.
          There were warnings everywhere, and people
     brought the warning to her attention, including
     Mr. Konzelman.  He constantly brought the warning
     to her attention.
          But of course, as you know, I cross-examined
     Dr. Cummings on this, and although we had to
     impeach him several times and remind him of how he
     was changing his testimony, you know that
     Dr. Cummings in the end admitted that the public
     health community became active in 1950s and had
     bombarded the public with information about the
     dangers of smoking through the newspapers, on 3505
     radio, on TV, the message was everywhere.
          You know, frankly, from the 1950s on, you
     would have had to be living under a rock.  You
     would have had to be living under a rock not to
     know that public health was saying that smoking was
     dangerous.
          And Sue -- and Elaine Konzelman wasn't living
     under a rock.  She was an aware, intelligent,
     ambitious woman.  She -- she watched the news.  She
     read newspapers.  She was college educated.  Elaine
     Konzelman knew what was going on.
          What was her response to all this?  Well, what
     was her -- what was not her response?
          When people would confront her with all this
     information, she didn't say, there is a
     controversy, there is a controversy, I'm not
     convinced.  She didn't say the cigarette companies
     say it's not proven.  She didn't say cigarettes are
     not dangerous.  She didn't say it's okay, I'm
     smoking a filtered cigarette, they're not
     dangerous, they're not dangerous.
          She didn't say I know it's dangerous, but I'm
     addicted, and I can't quit.
          Now, a couple of family members said that she
     said things like that from time to time, but again, 3506
     looking at all the evidence across the board,
     that's not how she responded.
          She ignored people when they would say
     something about it being dangerous because she
     didn't want to hear it, because she wanted to
     continue smoking, or again, sometimes, when she was
     talking to people like her best friend, who she
     could be candid with, she would say things like, "I
     know it's not good for me.  I know it's not good
     for me, but I like to smoke.  I like to smoke."
          You know what, she had every right to feel
     that way.  She is an adult.  She gets to make her
     own decisions.  In America, we get to take the
     risks that we want to take, and we are responsible
     for the risks we take.  Well, why is that
     important?  Well, let's look at a few examples of
     this.
          I mean, when you -- every time that she was
     provided information about the dangers of smoking,
     one way to look at this is, it was really a
     quitting opportunity.  It was a quitting
     opportunity.
          So whenever people would talk to her about,
     hey, this is bad for you, it's bad for you, that
     was a fork in the road.  That was a moment when she 3507
     had to make a choice.  Did she act on their advice,
     or did she ignore that advice and keep doing it
     even though she was being reminded?
          Here is what Mr. Konzelman told you. testimony From the time you met her, you began
encouraging her to try to quit smoking, didn't you?
     A.   Yes, I did.
     Q.   In fact, you told us that you probably
encouraged her to quit smoking on the very first date
you had with her; right?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   But her response to you was just to keep on
smoking, wasn't it?
     A.   (Nods head affirmatively.)
     Q.   One of the things you encouraged her to do was
to cut down on the number of cigarettes she was smoking
each day; right?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   In fact, you told us you would say things to
her, like, why don't you go an hour or so before you
light another cigarette; right?
     A.   Sure. 3508
     Q.   But she would never do that, would she?
     A.   No.
     Q.   And when you were making these suggestions to
Mrs. Konzelman, your view was that she did what she
wanted to do; right?
     A.   Yes. Again, she didn't say to
     Mr. Konzelman it's not proven, or I'm smoking
     filtered cigarettes, they're okay, or yeah, I know,
     but I'm addicted, and I can't quit.  I mean,
     frankly, she just didn't respond.  And she did what
     she wanted to do.  And she did -- and that's okay.
          But she was a decisive, independent,
     strong-willed woman, as we know from everything
     we've heard, and that's okay.  That's okay.  But
     she made her choices.  She made her choices knowing
     the dangers she was taking.
          Again, let's look at what -- a couple really
     important things you heard during this case.
          Sue Sweeney told you, she told you, from the
     best friend perspective, "She knew it was bad for
     her health."  "She knew it was bad for her health.
     Anyone knows that."  Sue Sweeney lived through 3509
     those years.  She was Elaine's age.  She knows what
     was going on in the '60s.  She saw all of the same
     things you're hearing.
          And Mr. Konzelman -- actually, this is -- this
     is -- frankly, this is an admission by him when he
     admitted this in his cross-examination.  It's just
     completely, just one answer defeats the claim that
     she developed COPD and died because of concealment,
     in other words, the claim that she developed COPD
     and died because she didn't know that smoking was
     dangerous, that's really what that claim boils down
     to.
          Look at what Mr. Konzelman told us.  "And
     during that time in the 1980s, when she was trying
     to quit, she realized that cigarettes weren't good
     for her, didn't she?
          "I believe so.  I believe so."
          And that's from Mr. Konzelman asking you for
     $5.3 million in this case.
          I want to turn -- so that's why the
     concealment case fails, why the agreement to
     conceal fails.  I want to talk with you briefly, if
     I can just steal five more minutes or so from you
     before our lunch hour, I want to talk to you
     briefly about why her addiction causation case 3510
     fails, addiction causation.
          That's kind of a weird term, isn't it,
     "addiction causation"?  Who would have ever thought
     you would spend three weeks of your life thinking
     about addiction causation like you have in this
     case.
          But what is addiction causation?  The simplest
     way to think about it is, you look at the
     instruction, you listen to the argument, the real
     claim is that she died -- developed COPD and died
     because she was unable to quit smoking, because she
     was unable to quit smoking.  That addiction
     prevented her from quitting smoking.
          And here is what the evidence is.  The
     evidence is she wasn't interested in quitting
     smoking in the 1980s.  Her daughter, Sandy Mattson,
     who came here live, admitted that on the stand.
     Mr. Konzelman admitted the same thing.  In fact,
     his language he was -- used was that he conceded
     that he could not say, despite living with her and
     watching her, quote, try to quit for 20 times or
     so, he couldn't say, he couldn't say in his sworn
     testimony that those quit attempts were
     wholehearted before she got intubated and
     diagnosed, and then she quit. 3511
          And as she demonstrated when she got
     diagnosed, she always had the ability to quit.  It
     wasn't that she didn't -- that she couldn't quit.
     It wasn't that she required significant daily
     ongoing counseling with nicotine therapy or support
     or anything like that.
          Once she got diagnosed and said that's it for
     me, she stopped smoking, never smoked another
     cigarette, didn't need nicotine replacement, never
     relapsed, walked away from it.  She made a
     different choice.  She made a different choice.
          So all this put together demonstrates that
     addiction to nicotine was not the cause of her COPD
     and death.  She didn't develop COPD and die because
     she couldn't quit.  She developed COPD and died
     because she chose to take the risks that she knew
     might occur.
          Now, this morning, Mr. Rosen mentioned to you
     that R.J. Reynolds has stipulated that smoking
     cigarettes was the medical cause of her COPD
     leading to death, and we did because we didn't want
     to waste your time on non-issues.  We agree with
     that.  We are not going to waste any time on that
     issue.
          But medical causation does not mean addiction 3512
     causation.  If it did, you wouldn't be here
     answering the addiction causation question.  Those
     are two separate inquiries.  One is medical
     causation.  The addiction causation is really a
     legal causation question.  Just like we talked
     about in jury selection, it's a legal causation
     question.
          And here is where, again, you remember what
     we're doing is taking a quick look at the major
     gaps in the Plaintiff's case.  This is the single
     biggest evidentiary gap in the Plaintiff's case.
     This is a case about addiction causation, a case
     about addiction causation.
          And Plaintiff brought three witnesses, three
     witnesses to discuss addiction.  Dr. Henningfield,
     Dr. Cummings, and Dr. Toll.  And not a single one
     of them, not one of them, search your memories,
     search your notes, talk about it together, you'll
     recall, not one of them, despite being on the stand
     for hours and hours, not one of them said anything
     about a central issue in the case.  Nobody said, in
     this whole trial, no witness has ever said that
     addiction caused Elaine Konzelman's COPD.
          It's incredible, it's a central issue in the
     case, called three addiction witnesses, and nobody 3513
     said it.  Nobody was even asked the question.
     Nobody said it.
          A fair question that you might have had at the
     start of the case is did she know she should quit,
     did she know she should quit.  Well, you know the
     answer now.  You know that everybody in her life
     for a long, long time asked her to quit.  Her best
     friend, Sue Sweeney; her daughter, Sandra; her
     daughter, Karen, that you heard from by deposition,
     she lives in California, didn't make it here, you
     heard from her by deposition.  Her son, John, you
     heard from him by deposition.  Her dad; her niece
     Lori; her son, Ron; her husband, Mr. Konzelman;
     everybody asked her to quit.  Everybody asked her
     to quit.
          She exercised her right, decided not to, chose
     to continue smoking anyway, and, you know, that's
     her right, her responsibility.
          Lori Frost was very clear, although we had to
     remind her of what she told us, we had to remind
     her of what she told us, from what she admitted
     that what she said to Elaine Konzelman was that
     cigarettes are going to kill you, cigarettes are
     going to kill you, you have to quit smoking.  You
     have to quit smoking. 3514
          Again, all this was in the context of watching
     Lori's grandmother, Elaine's mother, going through
     COPD and die, and Lori would watch this and said, I
     don't understand.  She is watching this, she is
     watching this, but she is continuing to smoke
     anyway.  And she would tell her very, you know,
     kind of in her face, hey, it's going to kill you if
     you don't stop.  It's going to kill you.
          Sue Sweeney.  We asked Sue Sweeney the
     question, here is what -- this was the exact quote
     that was read to you from her deposition.  We asked
     Sue Sweeney if she wanted to quit smoking.  Here is
     what Sue Sweeney, best friend, said.
          "She never wanted to quit smoking.  She never
     wanted to quit smoking.  She loved to smoke.  She
     told me she loved to smoke.  She loved it."
          "She loved it."
          It's important, it's really important, because
     as you heard yesterday, in maybe the most boring
     two and a half hours of your life when we read
     Dr. Choy's testimony to you yesterday, my legs got
     tired of standing up here.
          So I know you got tired of listening to it,
     but you heard Dr. Choy say when we asked him, maybe
     even the most important question we asked him was, 3515
     would she have been able to avoid her COPD if she
     had quit smoking as late as 1985?  And he said it's
     a possibility.  She could have avoided her COPD by
     quitting as late as 1985.
          There is no question, it's beyond dispute that
     in 1985 she knew that smoking was dangerous, that
     she knew it caused COPD, but she didn't quit.
          And you know, we know that she had symptoms of
     COPD in the 1980s.  I mean, you know, subsequently,
     some different things were said, but you know, you
     know you heard from this witness stand under oath,
     you heard what Mr. Konzelman told you about whether
     Mrs. Konzelman had symptoms of COPD in the 1980s. testimony When you observed Mrs. Konzelman to have a
cough in the 1980s, you believed it was caused by her
smoking, didn't you?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   And when you would say something to her about
her coughing being caused by her smoking in the 1980s,
she didn't say anything in response, did she?
     A.   No.
     Q.   Now, when you would tell her in the 1980s that 3516
you believed that her smoking was causing her wheezing,
she didn't have anything to say in response, did she?
     A.   No.
     Q.   When you said something to Mrs. Konzelman
about her shortness of breath in the 1980s being caused
by her smoking, she didn't have much to say in response,
did she?
     A.   No.
     Q.   And it's your understanding that
Mrs. Konzelman's COPD was quite severe when she was
diagnosed; right?
     A.   I believe so. Okay.  1980s, he brought it to her
     attention, hey, that cough, hey, that shortness of
     breath, hey, that wheezing that you are having,
     Elaine, those symptoms you are having, that's being
     caused by your smoking.  Being caused by your
     smoking.
          She didn't say you are wrong.  She didn't say
     smoking doesn't cause that.  She didn't say my
     cigarettes are okay with filters.  She didn't say,
     "I know, Alan, but I can't quit."  She didn't say
     anything.  She didn't say anything.  She just kept 3517
     on smoking.
          And you heard Lori Frost yesterday.  I mean,
     Lori went back and forth on things, but you also
     heard her say that in the 1980s, Ms. Konzelman
     coughed like she had phlegm that she was coughing
     up, and that she experienced shortness of breath
     when just walking on level ground at the mall or
     when going up and down steps, or when going up and
     down steps.
          So the Plaintiff's case about the Plaintiff's
     claims for concealment and agreement to conceal and
     the claim about addiction causation, they just
     failed spectacularly in this case.  Neither one of
     them were proven by the facts of this case, by the
     facts of this case.  And you can't backfill and
     prove those claims with the Engle findings or
     generic evidence.
          So let's talk for just a minute about the
     Engle findings and generic evidence and the role
     that does play in this case, because Mr. Konzelman
     can't prove his case about Elaine and COPD with the
     Engle findings and generic evidence.
          Look, the Engle findings say what they say.
     They're serious findings.  We take them seriously.
     We're not here to dispute them in any way. 3518
          And you saw the generic evidence about tobacco
     company conduct.  But over the years, a lot of
     stupid things were said.  A lot of stupid things
     were written.  Especially when you look back at the
     hindsight we all have now, a lot of stupid things
     were said and written.  And I'm not going to defend
     any of that.  Because that's not the issue in the
     case.
          The issue in the case is whether the
     Plaintiffs have been able to use case-specific
     evidence, facts about Elaine Konzelman to connect
     those findings to her COPD and death in a causal
     way.
          In other words, had they been able to
     demonstrate that those Engle findings, that those
     things the tobacco companies said over time, were
     those the legal cause of Elaine's illness?  That's
     the issue before you.
          And you'll see, the jury instruction is very
     clear, again, I'm not diminishing the Engle
     findings, but the jury instruction tells you, I
     encourage you to look at this part of jury
     instruction Number 12, "The findings may not be
     considered in determining whether the Plaintiff has
     proven that Elaine Konzelman was a member of the 3519
     Engle class."
          I know we're asking you to do -- it's hard to
     tell you something and ask you to ignore it, but it
     can't even be thought about when you're deciding
     class membership.  "The findings do not establish
     that the Defendant is liable in this case nor do
     they establish whether Elaine Konzelman was injured
     by Defendant's conduct or the degree, if any, to
     which Defendant's conduct was a legal cause of
     Elaine Konzelman's injuries or death."  They can't
     use the findings to prove those things.  They have
     to use case-specific evidence.
          You know, a lot of evidence they brought to
     you was generic.  You were told this morning that
     Dr. Cummings and Dr. Henningfield's testimony
     demonstrated that Elaine was addicted.  They didn't
     know anything about her.
          Both of them, they didn't know when she
     started, they didn't know what she smoked, what
     brands, they didn't know how much she smoked, they
     didn't know how long she smoked, or why she smoked
     and what she knew, whether she tried to quit or
     whether she was addicted.
          They didn't know anything about Elaine
     Konzelman.  They didn't know anything.  They 3520
     couldn't provide any evidence that would help you
     answer the questions you are here to answer, which
     as we saw from the verdict form, they're all about
     Elaine Konzelman.  They're all about Elaine
     Konzelman.  You can't answer those questions with
     evidence that doesn't have anything to do with
     Mrs. Konzelman.
          There is another aspect I want to address, the
     last topic before we watch two or three slides
     about Dr. Cummings.  Because one of the things you
     have in your instruction package is you have a
     believability of witnesses instruction, Instruction
     Number 3, and I've highlighted a couple things I
     would ask you to consider.
          One is you can -- you can -- you are the
     judges of the facts.  You are the judges of the
     credibility of witnesses.  You get to decide what
     weight, if any, to attach to different witness's
     testimony, and some of the factors you can consider
     are listed for you right here.  One of them is the
     frankness or lack of frankness of the witness.  The
     second is the reasonableness of the testimony of
     the witness.
          And I suggest to you that one of the ways that
     you can evaluate that is the consistency of the 3521
     testimony of the witness.
          Now, another thing you learned during this
     trial that you may hope to forget about and never
     think about again was impeachment.  And that is
     when a witness changes their testimony on the stand
     and they are confronted with their prior sworn
     testimony from a deposition or from another trial
     to demonstrate that they are not testifying
     consistently so that you have that for your
     consideration in evaluating the believability of
     witnesses.
          You actually remember this about Dr. Cummings.
     We counted up 26 different times, 26 different
     times Dr. Cummings said one thing here in court,
     and I demonstrated that it was inconsistent,
     inconsistent with his prior sworn testimony in
     another transcript.
          You know, this is their witness who made $1.2
     million over the course of his career testifying
     about tobacco companies, who doesn't know anything
     about Elaine, and who testified inconsistently 26
     different times and you got to watch the
     spectacularly interesting process of Josh handing
     me transcripts and me confronting Dr. Cummings 26
     different times with how he had changed his 3522
     testimony.
          And this is a great breaking point, Your
     Honor, and I hope you all have a great lunch and
     see you after lunch.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
          MR. FURR:  Thank you, please the Court. 3534
          Welcome back anyway.  Before lunch -- let's
     take that down for one second.
          Before lunch, I walked through a lot of the
     facts with you.  I'm now going to attempt to tie
     those to the verdict form questions and the
     instructions of law that you have which is what
     you're here do.
          And I'm going to start by reminding you that
     really the way you render your verdict, of course,
     is you have a verdict form and that verdict form
     has eight questions that you'll be asked to answer,
     and I'm going to walk through each of those
     questions and review a little bit of the evidence
     that you have already seen and show you how I view
     the questions and suggest to you what it means for
     the purpose of answering those questions.
          And I'm going to address each of the eight
     because it's my obligation to talk to you about
     each question, although I want to be very clear,
     both of the first two questions have a stop/go
     direction you'll see on the verdict form.
          So if you answer the first question no, then
     you don't go any further, the case is over.  Or if
     you answer the second question yes, the case is
     also over there.  So although I believe that both 3535
     of those questions should be answered different
     ways, that result in you rendering verdict and
     completing your service, I'm going to go ahead and
     talk to you about each of them in case you get to
     them.
          I'm going to start with class membership.
     Question number one on your verdict form is, "Was
     Elaine Konzelman, one, addicted to cigarettes
     containing nicotine, and two, if so, was such
     addiction a legal cause of her chronic obstructive
     pulmonary disease?"
          Okay.  So the class membership question really
     has two components to it.  One is addiction, the
     second is addiction causation.  Mr. Konzelman has
     to prove both of those things to you.  If he only
     proves one and not the other, then your verdict
     would be for R.J. Reynolds on this question, your
     answer would be no.
          So you've got to prove both components.
     First, he has to prove that Ms. Konzelman was
     addicted to nicotine, second, he has to prove the
     addiction causation element we've been talking
     about.  And when you look at your instruction,
     you'll see what he's got to prove is that but for
     addiction to nicotine, she would not have developed 3536
     her COPD.
          I'm going to start with the addiction
     question.  And the evidence demonstrates that he
     failed to prove that Elaine Konzelman was addicted
     to nicotine.
          Now, you don't have a definition of addiction
     in your instructions.  But you get to decide what
     addiction should mean for the purpose of this
     lawsuit and what you're being asked to do.
          I'm going to suggest to you one way to think
     about it that would be helpful is, especially in a
     case where you are being asked to render a verdict
     of $5.3 million, one of the ways to think about
     addiction is was she an involuntary smoker.  Was
     she smoking against her will.  Was she only smoking
     because the power of nicotine or was she choosing
     to smoke.
          The evidence has been pretty clear that
     knowing that she's a daily smoker is not enough.
     Dr. Cummings, Dr. Henningfield, Dr. Giakas,
     everybody agreed that not every daily smoker is
     addicted.  You have to drill a lot deeper and look
     a lot closer at their smoking pattern and why they
     smoke.
          Mrs. Konzelman was never diagnosed as addicted 3537
     before this lawsuit.  That's a diagnosis that has
     occurred only here.  You're going to have all the
     medical records, and you can look at them all and
     you'll see, none of them describe her as ever
     having been addicted.
          There is no medical record that shows that she
     ever saw a doctor for treatment for addiction.
     There is no medical record showing that she was
     ever treated with nicotine-replacement therapy to
     prevent relapse.  And, in fact, here is another gap
     in Plaintiff's case, no medical doctor came to you
     in this case and told you Elaine Konzelman was
     addicted.
          The witness that testified that she was
     addicted was Dr. Toll, who is a PhD, not a medical
     doctor.  And we're going to compare his credentials
     to Dr. Giakas' credentials so you can evaluate
     which of them is in a better position to make a
     diagnosis of addiction.
          Dr. Giakas -- excuse me.
          Another thing, there wasn't any disagreement
     about is, look, argument being why else would she
     smoke, why else would she smoke so much?  Well, all
     the witnesses, Dr. Toll, Dr. Cummings,
     Dr. Henningfield, Dr. Giakas, everybody told you 3538
     that some smokers enjoy smoking and they simply
     want to continue smoking, and Mrs. Konzelman was
     one of those.
          You've heard what the evidence is about her
     smoking, from Mr. Konzelman and the experts talked
     about it, both Dr. Giakas and Dr. Toll, you were
     told the following, Mr. Konzelman told you she
     enjoyed the taste, she enjoyed the process of
     smoking, the physical manipulation of the product,
     the hand-to-mouth stuff, and inhaling and
     exhalation of the smoke, she enjoyed it.
          She enjoyed smoking with a cocktail, a lot of
     people do.  She enjoyed smoking with coffee.  And
     Mr. Konzelman told you smoking seemed to keep her
     spirits up.
          And let's remind ourselves what kind of person
     Mrs. Konzelman was.  Mr. Rosen started talking
     about this.  She was not a weak, indecisive,
     addiction-prone individual who was out of control
     and unable to make decisions in her life.  She was
     the opposite.  She was a strong, independent woman
     who chose how she wanted to live life.
          You heard that late in her life, she became a
     small business owner, started up a couple different
     companies.  Everyone who knows her told you she was 3539
     a decisive person, that she was strong-willed.
     And, you know, what you heard was she was so
     strong-willed that when she made up her mind,
     that's it, no one could change her mind from doing
     something that she wanted to, and you were told no
     one could make her do something she didn't want to
     do.  So she had the ability to make her choices and
     follow through with her own independent thought
     process about how she wanted to live her life.
          Again, best friend, Sue Sweeney, was asked,
     Sue Sweeney told us that she could remember one
     time that she asked Elaine Konzelman why she
     smoked.  And here is the testimony that was read to
     you.  "I can remember one time I asked her why she
     smoked so much, and she said, 'Because I love to
     smoke.  I love it.'"
          Sue told you she just loved smoking.  She
     didn't say Sue, I'm addicted.  She didn't say, I
     want to quit, but I can't quit.  She didn't say I'm
     dependent on nicotine or anything like that.  She
     said, "I love to smoke."
          So let's talk about an expert you saw,
     Dr. Giakas, day before yesterday.  MD psychiatrist
     that we brought you.  A clinician who devotes his
     life to helping people with problems, for decades 3540
     he's helped people with serious psychological
     problems, including any addiction problems that
     they have.
          He told you about his geriatric psychiatric
     treatments, his adolescents.  He's treated them
     from A to Z, and he always addresses their
     addiction problems too.  He's a clinician in the
     field, talking to people, working with them,
     helping them change their behaviors and achieve
     their goals, that's who he is.
          His credentials are outstanding.  A medical
     doctor at the Yale University, doesn't get much
     better than that, chief resident at Yale, board
     certified in four areas of psychiatry, 25 years of
     treating patients, 150 patient visits, he's treated
     patients for heroin, cocaine, alcohol, and other
     addictions.  He's treated hundreds for nicotine
     addiction.
          This is a doctor, you heard -- you can decide.
     This is a doctor who knows what he's talking about.
     He knows human behavior.  He understands how people
     make decisions and how they choose to live their
     life and how people can change their lives if they
     want to change their life.
          And you know what, he did charge $95,000 for 3541
     his work in this case.  But why did he do that?  He
     read.  He read every deposition.  He reviewed every
     medical record.  He read the fact witness
     depositions.  He read the expert depositions.  He
     poured over that information.  He empathized, he
     sympathized, he thought about it, he applied the
     addiction criteria to it.  He wanted to be
     prepared.
          And you heard him talk about this case.  If
     there was any witness who came in here and had an
     encyclopedic knowledge of all the facts of this
     case, it was Dr. Giakas.  He communicated clearly,
     hopefully effectively, and that's why it took him
     that much time to prepare, because he did the work
     necessary to come in and talk to you about all the
     discovery in this case and all the records.
          And he told you, I mean, this was, again, a
     little tedious, I'll be the first to admit it, but
     he outlined for you the criteria that he as a
     psychiatrist uses to diagnose whether somebody is
     addicted, and he walked through them one by one.
     And you heard his explanation and his criteria.  He
     knows what he's talking about it.
          He told you what it means.  He told you how to
     apply it in the context of diagnosing if somebody 3542
     is addicted.  And then he took that criterion and
     he applied them to the facts of this case so he
     could evaluate whether or not she was addicted.
          And he sorted through the facts and he came
     out and he told you, his expert medical opinion,
     the only doctor who gave an opinion about
     addiction, that she did not meet the criteria for
     addiction.
          Now, Dr. Toll.  Let's contrast Dr. Giakas, the
     medical doctor clinician, with Dr. Toll.  Dr. Toll
     is a researcher, basically.  You heard he spends a
     lot of time doing clinical trials on whether one
     therapy works or whether one approach works.
          He's not a medical doctor.  He's not board
     certified in anything, including his field.  He's
     certainly not board certified in anything related
     to addiction.  He can't even write -- you know,
     he's not a medical doctor.  It's not a criticism,
     but he just has a different type of expertise, he's
     a researcher.  He can't write prescriptions.  He
     told you he sees about seven patients per week.
          And how did he get here?  How did he get here?
          He was recruited to participate in this
     litigation by his friend, Dr. Cummings, who we've
     already talked about, and you've seen what 3543
     Dr. Cummings' intent is, and that's who Dr. Toll
     is, and, frankly, he just doesn't stack up against
     Dr. Giakas.  His expertise does not match
     Dr. Giakas's expertise.
          Take a step back and look at a full review of
     addiction.  Because Dr. Giakas, as he walked
     through those criteria, he really painted a word
     picture for you, he told you what an addicted
     smoker looks like and the types of behaviors he's
     seen in them and the attributes that they have.
          And here is what he told you.  He said people
     that are addicted are involuntary smokers, they
     frequently hate smoking, they smoke against their
     will, they are not in control of smoking, they
     don't want to smoke, they make multiple serious
     quit attempts with help from doctors and others,
     and they fail, and they just can't beat it.
          They get diagnosed with serious illnesses and
     they keep smoking anyway, even after diagnosis.
     They hit rock bottom, they seek help from family
     and friends.  They try every available therapy they
     can.  And they continue having multiple relapses
     despite exhausting their efforts to try to quit.
          If you have a smoker like that, you have an
     addicted smoker, there's no question about that. 3544
     But that's not what we have here.
          If you compare that to Mrs. Konzelman, you
     know that she didn't want to quit.  She enjoyed
     smoking.  She liked the taste, she liked
     drinking -- having a cigarette with alcohol, all
     the things we just looked at.  She was able to
     control her smoking.  She said she wanted to smoke.
     And then she quit the first time she was really
     motivated.
          When she got diagnosed and it came home to
     her, she's done.  She quit.  Walked away from it
     and never smoked again.
          But you've got to realize, she didn't seek any
     help from family or friends or doctors or anybody.
     She didn't use any of the psychotherapy aids or the
     pharmacotherapy aids or nicotine replacement.  She
     didn't try any of this.
          I mean, in these quit attempts which the
     family described and which Dr. Giakas described to
     you, they were really more quit gestures, they are
     more quit gestures than they are quit attempts
     because she didn't really want to quit.  They were
     being done because you saw -- remember the chart we
     looked at everybody telling her to quit, she wanted
     them off her back. 3545
          She was under a lot of pressure.  Everybody
     telling her to quit, everybody telling her it's
     going to kill you.  You know, she would respond by
     going through the motions of trying to quit.
          We heard she didn't do the types of things
     that somebody really does when they want to quit.
     We'll take a little closer look at that.
          Again, she never smoked after diagnosis.  And
     as you can see, she is a very different experience
     than somebody who is addicted.
          Dr. Giakas was very clear, again, the only
     medical doctor that you heard from, he told you
     that she wasn't an addicted smoker, so I would
     submit to you when you get to verdict form question
     1, the answer should be no.
          The first part of the class membership, she's
     not addicted, and if you find that, your obligation
     as jurors will be to sign and date the verdict
     form, and that will be the end of this trial.
          But she -- like I said, I'm going to talk
     about not only the rest of this question, but all
     the questions because remember we talked about
     there are two parts of addiction causation -- to
     addiction -- excuse me.  The question number one of
     class membership. 3546
          The second part is addiction causation because
     they have to prove but for addiction to nicotine,
     Elaine Konzelman would not have developed COPD.
          Now, again, Plaintiff didn't bring you any
     expert, they called three addiction experts and
     nobody told you, nobody told you that addiction
     caused her disease.  Nobody told you that.
          What does addiction causation really mean?
     Again, you've got lots of legal instructions.  I
     suggest to you the way to think about it, it would
     be helpful for your deliberations, is did the
     Plaintiff prove to you that she was unable to quit
     and avoid her disease?  Did they prove to you that
     she was unable to quit and avoid her disease?
          Talked about this, I won't belabor it again.
     Nobody told you that addiction caused her disease.
     Her treater didn't tell you that, we read Dr. Choy
     yesterday, he never said that.  Dr. Toll didn't say
     that addiction caused her disease.  Dr. Cummings
     didn't, Dr. Henningfield didn't.  You heard from
     Dr. Giakas, he certainly didn't.  Nobody told you
     that addiction caused her disease.
          And, you know, addiction causation is an
     important element of this case that requires -- you
     need expert testimony to help you understand.  I 3547
     mean, this is not a do-it-at-home piece of Ikea
     furniture that you put together by yourself.  You
     need expert guidance on an issue like this, and you
     didn't get it.
          Does addiction prevent quitting?  Does it
     prevent quitting?  You know it doesn't.
     Dr. Henningfield told you that the smoker must
     decide whether to continue smoking or decide to
     quit.
          Dr. Toll told you it's important that smokers
     make the choice to quit smoking.
          And although I had to impeach him with his
     prior sworn testimony on this, as on many other
     issues, Dr. Cummings admitted that his prior sworn
     testimony was that anyone who wants to quit can
     quit.  Anyone who wants to quit can quit.
          And he also told you something else that's
     really important in this case.  Dr. Cummings again,
     after I impeached him, admitted that he had
     previously testified that a smoker is fully
     responsible for making the choice to quit.
          And that only makes sense, doesn't it?  Who
     else could make the choice to quit for a smoker?
     Nobody holds a gun to their head to make them smoke
     a cigarette in the first place and nobody holds a 3548
     gun to their head to make them quit.  It's a
     voluntary human choice behavior.  People make
     choices about whether to smoke or not.
          And Dr. Cummings went further, he told you
     that after all the years he spent researching
     nicotine, again, he's a researcher not a medical
     doctor, but he told you that smokers have a
     responsibility, they have a responsibility to quit
     smoking.
          And Elaine chose to smoke -- excuse me,
     Mrs. Konzelman, sorry, I don't mean to be informal.
     She chose to smoke and that's okay, but it wasn't
     because she couldn't quit, because millions and
     millions of other people were making the choice to
     quit at the same time that she was making the
     choice to smoke.
          As Dr. Cummings explained to you, millions of
     heavily-addicted smokers have quit in the past.
          By 1965, the year after the Surgeon General's
     Report that we looked at, 17.8 million people had
     quit dating back to the mid 1950s, when all of the
     publicity began coming out about the dangers of
     smoking.
          In the four years after the warning label went
     on cigarette packs, 13 million people quit in four 3549
     years.  That's over 5,000 people a day.  5,000
     people a day in this country made the choice to
     quit and choose health.  She was making the choice
     to continue smoking and take the risk.
          In the 15 years, I chose this number -- this
     year because the earliest evidence we have of
     Mrs. Konzelman even making quit gestures are the
     late '70s.  But in the 15 years prior to that, 30
     million Americans had made the choice of health
     where she was making the choice to not even try to
     quit.
          Thousands were quitting every day while she
     was choosing to smoke and not try to quit.
          Did the actions of the tobacco companies
     prevent people from quitting?  You heard a lot of
     evidence about things the tobacco companies did,
     about their advertising, about their reassurance
     message.  And I'm not going to dispute any of that.
     But did it really prevent people from quitting?
     Did it prevent Mrs. Konzelman from quitting?
          Oh, well, all this quitting, while these
     thousands of people were quitting a day, while
     millions of people were quitting a year, the
     campaign of what Dr. Cummings described as the
     campaign of doubt was going on.  That didn't 3550
     prevent quitting.
          He talked to you about the modern American
     cigarette and the control of nicotine delivery.
     But these people were smoking modern American
     cigarettes.  That didn't prevent 30 million people
     from quitting in 1964 to 1979.
          And you heard about the advertising campaign
     from Dr. Cummings.  But people made their choices.
     People still made their choices.  It didn't prevent
     people from quitting.  Those 30 million people who
     quit between '64 and '79 were exposed to the same
     type of advertising campaigns that she was.
          Was she different from the 30 million people
     that quit?  Why was she different?  Why did she
     keep smoking while they quit?  Were the cigarettes
     she smoked more addictive than their cigarettes?
     No evidence of that.  Was her brain affected
     differently than the smokers who quit?  No evidence
     of that.  Was she exposed to advertising different
     than they were?  No evidence of that.  Did she
     smoke for longer or smoke more?  Did she start at
     an earlier age?  Was she genetically prone to
     addiction?
          There is no evidence that she was different in
     any way except for one.  And you know what that is 3551
     already.  They made the choice to choose health,
     she loved to smoke, she loved to smoke and she made
     the choice to not try to quit.  The only way that
     she was different than all the people that quit was
     she made a choice not even to try to quit before
     1979.
          So here is a question for you, was she an
     involuntary smoker who was unable to quit despite
     desperately wanting and trying to do so?  Was that
     who Mrs. Konzelman was or was she a smoker who
     enjoyed smoking and wanted to continue?
          You know, we've talked about this a couple
     times, but the fact is that human nature being what
     it is, when we're doing things that we know that
     are bad for us and people are asking us to quit, we
     will say I want to quit, I'm going to quit, but
     both Dr. Cummings and Dr. Giakas told you that some
     smokers say they want to quit, but when you
     actually talk to them and talk to them a little bit
     more about what's going on with them, you find out
     they have no intention of quitting.
          Dr. Toll told you, he said some smokers say
     they want to quit to placate others.  And this is
     the language he came up with, that's why I've been
     using this language.  He said "Some smokers quit 3552
     for show.  Some smokers quit for show."  And that's
     what Mrs. Konzelman was doing during the years that
     she was making those quit gestures that Dr. Giakas
     explained to you.
          She had many, many, many quitting
     opportunities that she just dismissed when her
     family and friends were warning her.
          Her son told you that he was on her all the
     time about her smoking and how she should quit, and
     she just reacted with indifference and discounted
     his concerns.
          Sue Sweeney told you, her best friend, Sue
     Sweeney, again, that she would shake her shoulders
     like who cares when Sue would tell her she needed
     to quit.
          Mr. Konzelman, I mean, you know, sometimes
     little, small descriptions tell you a lot.  First
     date, he's talked to her about the need to quit.
     She lights up a cigarette in response.
          He told you that he warned her consistently,
     but she kept smoking and did what she wanted to do.
          You know, we asked Dr. Toll, so when someone
     doesn't respond verbally or they respond with
     indifference or they shrug their shoulders, what's
     going on, and he told you that that's a passive way 3553
     of someone saying, no, I am not going to take your
     advice and quit.  I am not going to take your
     advice and quit.
          And you heard, this was a pattern that
     Mrs. Konzelman exhibited when loved ones, family
     and friends, would confront her about her smoking.
          Sue Sweeney again, this is language that was
     read to you from her deposition.  Sue Sweeney told
     you, she said, "I know I have a nice life, but I
     want to smoke.  Alan wants me to stop."  But she
     did not want to stop.
          "I want to smoke.  I want to smoke."  Is what
     she told Sue Sweeney.  She didn't tell her I am
     addicted.  She didn't tell her I want to quit, but
     I can't.  She told Sue "I want to smoke."
          What did Mrs. Konzelman do?  She made quit
     gestures.  One of the ways to look at it is did she
     do the things that you now know people do when
     they're serious about quitting smoking?
          She never did those things.  She never used
     any sort of nicotine replacement.  She never went
     to the doctor.  She never went to a smoking clinic.
     She never asked Mr. Konzelman for help.  She never
     asked family members for help.  She never asked a
     friend for help. 3554
          Think about this.  If you were doing something
     that you know could result in premature disease and
     death, and you wanted to quit doing that, but you
     couldn't quit on your own, what would you do?  You
     would reach out for help.  You would turn to people
     you trust.  You would turn to your friends, your
     family members, your doctors.  That's what you
     would do if, if you wanted to quit.
          If you just wanted to get people off your
     back, you would tell them I'm trying, but I can't.
     Quit for a day or two and go right back to it.
     That's what you would do if you didn't really want
     to quit.
          Her daughter, Karen, told you, you know, you
     were told -- some people came in and said she tried
     to quit a lot, some family members.  Some family
     members and friends saw things differently.  Karen
     told you by deposition, she was asked, "You don't
     recall your mom ever actually trying to quit other
     than the time she quit for good; is that right?"
          Karen said, "That's what I said."
          Best friend Sue Sweeney was asked this
     question:  "Prior to her final quit, had you ever
     known Elaine to go without a cigarette for a day?
          "No."  "No." 3555
          Mr. Konzelman told you that based on all his
     observations and notwithstanding his testimony
     about 20 quit attempts, or gestures, that he could
     not say, he could not say under oath that she ever
     made a wholehearted quit attempt before 1995.
     Well, halfhearted quit attempts, quit gestures
     don't get it.  If you really want to quit, you make
     wholehearted quit attempts.
          The class membership instruction on addiction
     has this language on it, it is number 10, it says
     that "But for an addiction to cigarettes containing
     nicotine, the COPD would not have occurred."
          Did Mrs. Konzelman develop COPD because of her
     addiction to nicotine and because she wanted to
     quit, but couldn't, or did she develop COPD because
     she continued smoking because she wanted to smoke
     and didn't want to quit?  And that's really the
     issue for you on class membership.
          And again, Sue Sweeney, this is what was read
     to you.  It wasn't a one-time thing.  It was over
     and over and over.  Because she loved it.  Elaine
     said she loved smoking, "I love to smoke.  I love
     it."  She said she loved to smoke, she loved to
     smoke, she just wanted to smoke.  She loved it.
     Over and over and over they had discussions where 3556
     Elaine said she loved to smoke.  Not I'm addicted.
     Not I want to quit, I can't, but "I love to smoke."
          And you also heard that you couldn't change
     her mind when she made it up, and no one told her
     what to do.
          Well, who could have altered the outcome of
     this case?  Who could have prevented the
     smoking-related COPD?  Only Mrs. Konzelman.  Only
     she could have made the choice to quit, as
     Dr. Cummings explained to you, the choice is 100
     percent in the control of the smoker, but Elaine
     did -- excuse me, Mrs. Konzelman did what she
     wanted to do.  And then she got intubated, she got
     diagnosed and she quit.  She quit.
          Did she relapse?  Did she need medical help to
     stay quit?  Did she need nicotine replacement?  Did
     she need counseling?  Did she struggle with it?
     No.  She never smoked another cigarette.
          Doctor told you about -- Dr. Giakas told you
     she didn't need medical assistance, she didn't need
     nicotine-replacement therapy, she never needed any
     assistance to stay smoke free, she never relapsed.
          You know, an interesting thing Dr. Giakas
     explained to you, while she was intubated, had she
     been exhibiting withdrawal symptoms from 3557
     cigarettes, they could have put a nicotine patch on
     her.  They could have put a nicotine patch on her
     if she was withdrawing from cigarettes, but we have
     no record -- no medical record demonstrates that
     she ever needed the nicotine patch.
          You know, the facts sort out like this.  When
     you shake it all out, look what comes out the
     bottom.  She smoked because she loved to smoke, and
     she never smoked again once she chose not to.  She
     was in control.  She was able to make decisions and
     follow through.  And the choice and the
     responsibility for her smoking decision was hers.
          Her choices were the only legal cause of her
     COPD.  The only legal cause of her COPD was her
     love of smoking and her choice to continue smoking
     until she was diagnosed, because she always had the
     ability to quit, and she just didn't want to do so.
     Just didn't want to do so.
          So again, for a second independent reason, for
     a second independent reason, you only need one, but
     for a second independent reason, she is not a
     member of the Engle class, because she wasn't
     addicted, and addiction did not cause her COPD and
     death.
          As you will see on your verdict form, if you 3558
     answer this question no, then your foreman will
     sign the verdict form and you will date it and you
     will return it as your verdict.
          The next question I want to go to is the
     question about concealment and agreement to
     conceal.  These -- I'm going to skip over for just
     a moment question 2, which is your statute of
     limitation question on the verdict form.
          Question 3 and 4, your concealment and
     agreement to conceal.  And this is -- on this
     claim, the test is going to be did the --
     Mr. Konzelman prove that but for her reliance on
     Reynolds' concealment or omission of a material
     fact not otherwise known or available, she would
     have acted differently and avoided her COPD and
     death.
          And you have instructions on this.  On both of
     those, concealment and agreement to conceal, they
     are about a page long.  They are about a page long.
     But you can boil them down to something very
     simple.
          The test here is did she continue smoking and
     develop COPD and die because she didn't know
     smoking was dangerous, because she didn't know
     smoking was dangerous. 3559
          Because think about it.  You can't harm
     somebody by concealing information from them if
     they already know it.  If they already know it.  If
     somebody already knows something, you can't harm
     them by concealing it, because they already know
     it.
          And so if you think about, looking at this
     question that way, did she develop COPD and die
     because she didn't know smoking was dangerous, the
     answer to question 3 and 4 are actually pretty
     simple for you.  I'm not going to belabor this.
     But you've seen this.  I'm not going to do it
     again.
          When you get to these questions, all you have
     to do is think about this wheel that we've drawn of
     all the sources of awareness.  The red lines here
     are whatever is going to her, direct personalized
     warnings, personalized -- personal to her.  The
     blue lines are going out to the lines or the
     warnings she got from everybody else.  She got from
     everybody else.
          Fair question, was she the type of person who
     was capable of processing that information?  Could
     she understand that information?  If she
     wouldn't -- you know, if she was incapable of 3560
     understanding that information, that would be a
     different Plaintiff.  That would be something
     different.
          You know that's not who she was.
          Mr. Konzelman, I asked him, "You and
     Mrs. Konzelman were both educated, informed people,
     weren't you?"  "Yes, sir."  And there is no
     question about that.  Sophisticated, educated,
     informed, successful people, that's who they were.
     She was able to process all this information.
          Her best friend told us she was knowledgeable.
     She was very knowledgeable.  She knew it was bad
     for her.  Anybody knows that.  She knew it was bad
     for her.  Anybody knows that.  This is an easy
     question in this case.  The evidence is just
     overwhelming, that notwithstanding whatever the
     tobacco company did or did not do, that
     Mrs. Konzelman, not some other smoker, not smokers
     in general, Mrs. Konzelman knew that smoking was
     bad for her.
          Dr. Cummings.  Again, I had to impeach him to
     get him to admit that this was his prior sworn
     testimony, but he admitted virtually everyone knew
     and heard that smoking caused disease by 1954.  I
     know it's kind of hard to take ourselves back 3561
     there.  I mean, I'm not quite that old, so it's
     kind of hard to imagine what things were like back
     then.  But when those first human studies came out
     and those first animal studies came out, the
     information was everywhere.
          There were huge news stories.  The information
     was everywhere.  Newspapers, TV, the radio, public
     health messages, it was everywhere, and everybody
     knew it, and everybody heard, and Dr. Cummings
     admitted that that was the case.
          But the drumbeat of information never stopped.
     In fact, it just built over time.  You've heard
     about that 1964 Surgeon General's Report.  You
     know, think about this context.  1964,
     Mrs. Konzelman is born in 1930.  She is 34 years
     old in 1964, married, four kids, an adult,
     successful person, a very knowledgeable, aware
     person.  1964, the Surgeon General's Report came
     out.  Is she the type of person who would have
     known about it?
          Well, Dr. Cummings told you that virtually all
     of the American public heard about the release of
     the '64 report and that there was very high public
     awareness about the release of the '64 report.
          And of course you know that awareness went 3562
     straight to the heart of the Konzelman family
     because her father saw this warning label that was
     put on in 1966, and he quit and promised and told
     everybody smoking will kill you, you need to quit.
          He told the grandkids, if you don't smoke
     until you're 18, I will give you a thousand
     dollars.  He was very serious about this matter,
     obviously.  That's a lot of money back then.  He
     was very serious, the message to all the
     grandchildren were unequivocal, and you heard he
     talked to Elaine and told her it would kill her.
          Dr. Horn, again, taking ourselves back in
     time, sometimes a single statement can tell you so
     much about what's going on.  Dr. Horn was in charge
     of the Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health.  That
     was the clearing -- that was the federal government
     organization that was responsible for educating the
     public about the dangers of smoking.
          He was interviewed in 1968.  1968.  And he
     said this.  "You could stand on a rooftop and shout
     'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lung and
     you would not be telling anyone anything they did
     not already know."  You would not be telling
     anybody anything they did not already know.
     Certainly you weren't telling Elaine Konzelman 3563
     anything that she didn't already know.
          Dr. Cummings told you, you know, the warnings
     are an important part of this case that shouldn't
     be overlooked.  The warnings are really important.
     You have got a consumer product that says right on
     the side of the pack that it may be hazardous for
     your health or it's dangerous for your health and
     causes certain diseases, and Dr. Cummings candidly
     admitted that every time she picked up a pack of
     cigarettes from 1970 to 1985 that she learned that
     the health message she got was that smoking was
     dangerous to her.  Smoking was dangerous to her.
          And we know that that warning label and its
     implications were brought home to her over and over
     including from her husband, Mr. Konzelman.  Here is
     his testimony. testimony When you had your conversation with
Mrs. Konzelman about that warning label, you told her
that the warning label says that cigarettes are
dangerous, didn't you?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   She didn't have any response, did she? 3564
     A.   No. She didn't say no, my cigarettes
     are filtered.  She didn't say I know, but I am
     addicted and I can't quit.  She just didn't
     respond.  It was back in that passive-aggressive
     mode of saying I hear you, but I'm not going to
     follow your advice.  And everybody was talking to
     her then.
          I mean, John Gilbert, her son from California
     who testified by deposition told you that by the
     1970s, because of concerns for her health,
     everybody was advising her to quit.  All of her
     kids, imagine that, she watched her -- she heard
     from her father.  She watched her mother.  She sees
     her sister get sick.  And then her kids behind her
     are telling her she needs to quit.  There is no
     question she knew it was dangerous and bad for her
     health and she needed to quit.
          Even their -- their exert, Dr. Toll, admitted
     that her children persistently warned her about the
     dangers of smoking because they were concerned
     about her health.  They were concerned about her
     health. 3565
          And the message was brought home to her in
     another very powerful way, and that was when
     Mr. Konzelman told his wife about the experience he
     had had with cigarettes and what had happened to
     him and how he had quit and why.  And he told you
     about that. testimony And, sir, as you told Mr. Rosen, you are a
former smoker; right?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   Now, you believed that was dangerous to your
health back in the 1960s, didn't you?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   And you quit smoking in July of 1977, didn't
you?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   You decided to quit smoking because you were
having chest pains; right?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   That you thought were due to your smoking;
right?
     A.   Right.
     Q.   You told your wife about when you quit 3566
smoking, didn't you?
     A.   Yes, I did.
     Q.   And you told her about the chest pains that
led you to quit, didn't you?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   And you told her how you quit smoking, didn't
you?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   And when you told Mrs. Konzelman the story of
why you quit smoking and how you quit, she responded by
lighting another cigarette, didn't she?
     A.   Yes. So now not just mom and dad, the
     kids, the friends, the niece, the packages; her
     husband is telling her too, looking across the
     table at his wife, telling her about his experience
     and how he perceived it to be affecting his health
     and how he quit, and she doesn't respond.
          She goes back to that pattern of responding
     with an indifference and passive-aggressiveness and
     not responding.  She doesn't want to hear it.  She
     doesn't want to hear it.
          And, you know, actually, Mr. Konzelman's 3567
     testimony lines up perfectly with the statement we
     just saw from Dr. Horn who said in 1968, you could
     shout from the rooftops that smoking is dangerous
     from the top of your lungs, you wouldn't be telling
     anybody anything they didn't know.  Mr. Konzelman
     just told you that he knew it was dangerous by the
     1960s.
          Again, the warnings.  The warnings.  You just
     can't overestimate the power of the warnings.  I
     mean, we asked Mr. Konzelman about the warnings and
     about what they meant to him, and he told us you
     couldn't pick up a pack of cigarettes without
     seeing the warning.
          Here was his testimony.  You could hardly pick
     up a pack of cigarettes without seeing the warning.
     Remind you, the first warning went on in 1966.  The
     second warning went on in 1970.  A set of four
     rotating warnings, including a warning about
     emphysema per se, emphysema specifically went on in
     1985, at a time when she still could have quit and
     could have avoided her COPD.
          And as Mr. Konzelman told you, you couldn't
     miss it, you couldn't miss the warnings.
          Of course, they also were in advertisements by
     1971 on also. 3568
          But friend Sue Sweeney, the sworn deposition
     testimony, "Did you ever hear Elaine say that she
     was confused about the dangers of smoking?
          "No.
          "Did you ever hear Elaine say that smoking was
     not harmful to her health?
          "No."
          She wasn't confused.  She was bombarded with
     information about the dangers.  She knew that
     information, and she understood that information,
     and she did not rely on anything any tobacco
     company said when making her decisions about
     whether to smoke or not.
          You know, Mr. Konzelman was married to her 30
     years, including 14 years in which she was still
     smoking.  And he told you that he constantly talked
     to her about her smoking.
          And here is what else he told you.  He told
     you that she didn't rely on tobacco companies when
     making decisions.  Here is his testimony that you
     saw right before you. testimony Yes.  You don't recall Mrs. Konzelman ever 3569
talking about anything that the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
Company ever did or said?
     A.   I don't think she knew what I -- what R.J.
Reynolds did with -- through the tobacco.
     Q.   You don't recall her ever talking about what
any other tobacco company had ever done or said, do you?
     A.   Not that I know of.
     Q.   And you don't recall Mrs. Konzelman talking
about anything that The Tobacco Institute had ever done
or said, do you?
     A.   Not that I remember. And imagine the discussions in that
     house, one spouse talking to another, pointing out
     the warnings to her, telling her how he thought it
     was harming his health and why he quit, his own
     words constantly, persistently asking her to quit,
     and never did she say R.J. Reynolds says there is
     controversy.  R.J. Reynolds said it's not
     dangerous.  R.J. Reynolds said it hasn't been
     proven.
          Philip Morris, Brown & Williamson, Lorillard,
     Liggett, American, any other tobacco company you
     want to name, Tobacco Institute, any other related 3570
     tobacco entity, she never defended what she was
     doing by referencing them.
          You know, we talked up front about class
     actions over -- the case about generalized tobacco
     company conduct is over.  But the task here is
     whether Plaintiffs have the evidence to prove that
     the actions of the tobacco company directly caused
     Mrs. Konzelman's disease.
          And, you know, you saw that stuff from Ed
     Horrigan, you saw that stuff from Jim Johnston.  I
     told you I'm not going to try to defend the
     statements that they made at the time they made
     them.  I'm not going to try to defend that, but
     that's not the issue of the case.  Because what you
     didn't hear, what you didn't hear in this case is
     that Elaine Konzelman was ever confused or told
     anybody that I'm going to continue smoking.
          Ed Horrigan says it's not proved.  The CEO of
     Reynolds says it's not proved.  Jim Johnston says
     it's not proved.  Or even generically any tobacco
     industry executive says it not proved.  She never
     said that to Mr. Konzelman.
          Now, a couple of kids, they have a different
     recollection, but he was married to her for 30
     years, 14 years when she was a smoker.  He was on 3571
     her constantly.  You can imagine that she felt
     pressure to quit smoking.  Her spouse is sitting
     across the table saying this to her.  He told me
     she never -- she never referenced any of that
     stuff.
          All right, this whole issue of filters and
     whether or not she kept smoking because she was
     misled into believing that filtered cigarettes were
     safe and okay to smoke.  Well, here are the facts.
     It was the public health community who endorsed
     filtered cigarettes.  It was the public health
     community who reported that cigarettes were safer.
          And it was the public health community that
     encouraged smokers to switch to filtered cigarettes
     in the '50s, '60s, '70s, '80s, and '90s.  But every
     pack of filtered cigarettes carried the same
     warnings as unfiltered cigarettes.  So whether you
     were smoking filtered cigarettes or unfiltered
     cigarettes, people got the same message.  They got
     the same message.
          And certainly the message was the Surgeon
     General's warnings.
          You heard Mr. Konzelman say she tried to quit
     20 times in the 1980s.  This all occurred after he
     married her in 1981.  She was smoking filtered 3572
     cigarettes then.  If she believed that filtered
     cigarettes were okay, if she believed that filtered
     cigarettes were safe, why was she trying to quit
     because she believed cigarettes were dangerous?
     All those quit attempts that he described was when
     she was smoking filtered cigarettes.
          Ladies and gentlemen, Plaintiff just hasn't
     produced the evidence to you on questions 3 and 4
     of your verdict form.  They haven't shown you that
     she was injured by concealment of information about
     the dangers of smoking.  Why?  Because she knew it.
     You can't hurt somebody by concealing information
     that they already know.
          Same for the agreement to conceal.  She
     couldn't have been harmed by any agreement to
     conceal because she knew it already.  She knew it
     already.  You simply can't hurt somebody by
     concealing something from them that they already
     know.
          So when you get to questions 3 and 4 on your
     verdict form, we'd suggest that the answer should
     be no to each of those questions.
          Statute of limitations.  The test you will see
     is the way their claim is time barred because she
     should have known through the exercise of 3573 reasonable care that she had COPD before May 5th,
     1990, and that there was a reasonable possibility
     that it was caused by smoking.  The critical -- as
     the instruction will tell you, it was not when she
     was diagnosed, it was when the COPD manifested.
          Well, let's look at the evidence.  The
     evidence is the COPD that she had manifest in the
     '80s, she had cough, phlegm, shortness of breath,
     wheezing, and although people went back and forth
     on it, Lori Frost, Sue Sweeney, Mr. Konzelman,
     everybody admitted that she had all those symptoms
     in the '80s.
          Now, you heard this morning that the
     centerpiece of Mr. Rosen's argument was that the
     most important evidence is the 1995 medical record
     on her admission that said that she didn't have
     these prior symptoms.  But here is what else you
     heard in the case.  Dr. Toll told you that she
     tended to underreport her symptoms, that she
     underreported her symptoms, and he also told you
     that -- we asked him this question, and we talked
     about the fact that the symptoms she denies having
     "is inconsistent with the other evidence in this
     case?
          "Right." 3574
          This document is the outlier.  All the fact
     witnesses told you about the symptoms she was
     having that she didn't report to the physician.
     These aren't independent findings of this
     physician.  This physician only knew what she told
     him, and she told him she wasn't having those
     symptoms.  So, of course, that's what he wrote
     down.
          Now, you were also told that she wasn't having
     any respiratory symptoms before the day she got
     intubated in 1995.  But you remember
     Mr. Konzelman's testimony, let me go back to that.
     Mr. Konzelman's testimony, he told you that before,
     before she was first intubated, the ambulance
     drivers were called so many times for her breathing
     problems to come and get her and take her to the
     hospital that they had the address memorized.  They
     had the address memorized.
          Of course she was having breathing problems
     from the 1980s on.  She -- the ambulance was
     getting called over and over to come to her house
     and take her to the hospital.
          Dr. Kreitzer yesterday told you that she had
     moderate to severe COPD in 1995, and the important
     thing to remember there is he told you it takes 3575
     about four to five years to go from mild to
     moderate, another four to five years at least to go
     from moderate to severe.
          So if she was having borderline severe
     testimony [sic] in 1995, using those guidelines,
     that COPD would have started in the 1980s.
          Dr. Kreitzer also told you that -- again, this
     was a little technical, but he took the information
     he had about her, and he showed you how the flow
     loop volume showed that she had severe COPD in 1995
     based on her PFT, and that it takes ten or more
     years to develop that.
          So, again, that puts her COPD back to the mid
     1980s.  He told you her diffusion capacity showed
     severe COPD, and it takes ten years for somebody to
     have that attribute of their COPD, also.
          The evidence was overwhelming that she was
     having symptoms in the 1980s.  The medical tests
     prove it.  The witness's personal observations
     demonstrate it.  It manifested before May 5th,
     1990.
          The only real question left is did she have
     reason to know that it was related to her smoking?
     Did she have reason to know?  Well, we know what
     the answer is because everybody told her, everybody 3576
     was telling her it was related to her smoking.
          Sue Sweeney again, "What did you tell her?"
          "I told her it wasn't good for her health.
          "When did you tell her that?
          "Her lungs, when she would cough.  I don't
     know exactly the date.  Several times I told her."
          When she would cough, people would connect the
     dots for her and say, "Elaine, that's your smoking.
     You need to quit."
          Mr. Konzelman, you know, this is what he said,
     he later tried to tie it to remembering someplace
     where he lived, but when I cross-examined him, this
     is what he said in front of you, in the 1980s he
     remembered saying to her, "Your shortness of
     breath, your wheezing, and your coughing is being
     caused by your smoking."
          Of course she knew or should have known that
     the symptoms she was experiencing in the 1980s were
     caused by her smoking, and she should have known
     that they were related to COPD.  Because this is
     the most interesting aspect of why she should have
     known.
          Dr. Cummings told you that one of the most
     powerful messages you can get -- and we talked
     about this a little bit -- is when a family member, 3577
     someone you love is diagnosed with a disease like
     emphysema, when you look in the face of the family
     member and watch what they are going through, it is
     undeniable what cigarette smoking can cause.
          And you know that her mother had COPD, that
     the symptoms started in the '70s.  Beginning with
     the '80s, she was in and out of the hospital.  You
     know, it's a sad fact, it's just awful, but she
     died from her COPD in 1987.  And, you know,
     Mrs. Konzelman was having the same symptoms that
     her mother was having in the '70s, and people were
     telling her, "It's from your smoking, and you need
     to stop.  Look what it's doing to your mother."
          She had every reason to know that she had
     early COPD and that her COPD was related to her
     smoking.  So I suggest to you, again, when you get
     to verdict form question 2, then you look carefully
     at whether she should have known before May 5th,
     1990 that she had COPD and that there was a
     reasonable possibility, a reasonable possibility
     that her COPD was caused by smoking cigarettes, the
     evidence is pretty clear the answer should be yes.
          And, again, this is a second, sort of a hard
     stop.  You'll see the directions between the
     questions in your verdict form.  You'll see when 3578
     you answer this question yes, that's the end of it
     and you return the verdict and the case is
     concluded.
          Comparative fault.  Mr. Rosen talked to you
     about comparative fault.  Again, there is going to
     be a question where if you get to this question you
     have the chance to allocate fault between the
     parties.
          It's important to remember the Plaintiffs have
     the burden of proof.  They have to prove the
     Defendant's fault.  It doesn't start at one.  It
     doesn't start at 50/50.  The Plaintiffs have to
     prove the Defendant's fault.
          But it's not -- the most important thing to
     remember about this question, it is not a
     comparison of who acted worse or whose choices were
     worse or who had more information.  Here is what it
     is.  You will see in your instruction, the
     assignment of fault relates only to actions which
     were a legal cause of Elaine Konzelman's COPD and
     death.  It is a comparison of each party's
     contribution to her death from the perspective of
     fault.  It has to be only the conduct that caused
     her disease.
          You may see a lot of things that you didn't 3579
     like about what the tobacco companies did or said.
     I'm not going to spend any time debating that,
     getting into that, or talking about it because it
     doesn't matter if it wasn't a cause of her COPD and
     death, because that's what this question is about.
          I won't go through this again.  You know she
     knew smoking was dangerous and she knew she should
     quit, but she didn't want to because she loved it
     and -- but she was demonstrating she was able to
     quit.
          Dr. Choy, again, told you that she could have
     avoided COPD and death if she quit smoking in 1985.
     In 1985, she was 55 years old.  She had been warned
     about the dangers since the 1960s.
          But she didn't make a serious quit attempt in
     time to avoid it.  Up until that time, she wasn't
     really making a serious quit attempt, doing the
     things we've talked about that people do when they
     are serious.
          Remember Dr. Cummings' testimony, a smoker is
     fully responsible for making the choice whether to
     try to quit.  The choice to quit smoking is 100
     percent in control of the smoker.
          So I suggest to you when you get to this
     question about comparative fault, the way to think 3580
     about it is who could have changed the outcome?
     Who could have changed the outcome?
          The only person who had the ability to change
     the outcome and make a different choice and prevent
     her COPD disease and related death was
     Mrs. Konzelman, because she was 100 percent in
     control of the decision about whether to choose
     health, quit smoking, or to choose to continue
     smoking cigarettes because she enjoyed it.
          Damages.  Well, I'm going to talk to you about
     damages.
          I, candidly, don't like doing this very much,
     but in this case, I've got to talk to you about
     what the evidence has been.
          The damages being requested here are
     Plaintiff's burden to prove to you.  Again, the
     damages start at zero, and they have the burden to
     prove to you each and every dollar of the damages.
     And we looked at the medical bills.  They say what
     they say.  We agreed they say 295,000.  We're not
     going to waste your time on those issues.
          But it's only -- that's only in order to -- if
     you find the company to be liable for that, but
     we're not wasting your time on that because the
     other claim in here that you are being asked to 3581
     award $5 million for, $5 million, is
     Mr. Konzelman's loss of companionship, mental pain
     and suffering.
          Mr. Rosen told you that he was asking for $5
     million because he told you that Mr. Konzelman was
     there for her.  Mr. Konzelman was there for her.
          So I'm going to review that evidence with you.
     Not the type of thing we usually talk about in
     public.  It's not pleasant to shift through
     people's personal lives, and nobody is making any
     judgments about what anybody did.
          But you have the right, you as jurors, as
     decision-makers, have the right to have all the
     facts.  You have the right to have the facts you
     need to evaluate his claim for $5 million because
     he was there for her.
          So I'm going to walk through with you what
     that evidence is.
          Because you are entitled to know the whole
     story.  I'll be honest, you don't -- it doesn't get
     sanitized for you.  You get to know the good and
     the bad about the relationship, because you are
     being asked to place a value on the relationship
     because he was there for her.  So you are entitled
     to know this whole story. 3582
          You've been told that Mr. Konzelman lived away
     from Elaine 50 percent of their marriage.  You
     know, he spent 50 percent of the time out of the
     house throughout the whole course of the marriage
     away from her due to his job.
          But there is more to it than that, obviously.
     You get to know the whole story.  You know that she
     lived for months at a time in assisted living
     facilities, 2006 to 2010, because he wasn't at
     home.  He wasn't home to take care of her.
          You know from the others that Elaine, her
     doctors, and her family believed that he was gone
     because he was away working on ships.  But you also
     know that the continuous discharge books that
     Mr. Konzelman produced to us at his deposition tell
     another story.
          They are marked as AG-002635A, B, and C.  You
     are going to have them in evidence.  I will talk in
     just a minute with you about the story that they
     tell about whether he was there for her.
          Here is Mr. Konzelman's testimony.  I will set
     the stage for you so you remember what was going in
     the scenario that was occurring before we look at
     the implications of those continuous discharge
     books.  He testified to you that she was living for 3583
     months at a time, between 2007 and '10, in assisted
     care facilities because he wasn't home. testimony And you outlined for us in your direct
examination, near the end of her life, Mrs. Konzelman
was spending time in assisted care facilities, wasn't
she?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   And certainly that would occur in 2007, 2008,
2009, and 2010; right?
     A.   Right.
     Q.   And one of the reasons that she would spend
time in the assisted care facilities is because you were
away working on ships; right?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   And you weren't there to take care of her?
     A.   Right. Okay.  So she is in facilities for
     months at a time because he was away working on
     ships, and he was away for significant periods of
     time.  Here is his testimony. 3584      (Video clip from Courtroom View Network of
testimony And sometimes she would stay up to six months
in assisted care facilities because you were away on a
ship; right?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   And that was happening in 2007, '8, '9, and
'10; right?
     A.   Right. So let's look a little closer to
     what some of the medical records tell us about
     whether he was there for her.  You are going to
     have all these in evidence.  You will be able to
     look at them all.
          This one is in the PMED packet.  Again, PMED
     is something you will be able to look at.  PMED41,
     April 12th, 2008 medical record.  It says, "The
     patient moved from Florida to live with children
     because her husband is on a six-month," "six-month
     work tour on a ship."
          And point out this is 2008 that her -- that
     she is telling her physicians, and they are 3585
     recording that he is away for six months because
     he's working.
          Another medical record I've got to talk about
     with you.  So again, PMED50.  That's in the PMED50
     pack.  It's a May 5th, 2009 record.  We have typed
     it out to make it easier to read what we are
     looking at here.  "Comments:  Patient is anxious
     and depressed.  Upset because husband informed her
     that he may take a job in the South Pacific.
     Patient realizes she has limited lifespan and
     states she may not see him again."
          But there is a little more to it than that
     because she was afraid to raise this with him.
     "Skilled intervention/teaching.  Instructed on
     importance of appropriately verbalizing feelings to
     husband.  Patient's response to teaching:  Patient
     unwilling to discuss issue with husband at this
     time."
          Let's look at another medical record about
     what she was doing and what was going on and
     whether he was there for her.
          This is an August 17th, 2009 psychological
     evaluation of Mrs. Konzelman.  I'm just going to
     highlight some statements you'll see in this
     document.  It's PMED54.  PMED54 in the packet. 3586
     Report of psychological evaluation.  "At the time
     she was receiving hospice care in the home as her
     husband's work required lengthy periods of time
     away.  This is what prompted this assisted living
     facility admission."
          He's gone working is what everybody is under
     the impression of.
          "My husband works out of town; they decided
     for me to come here, which I don't like," "which I
     don't like."
          "Husband's work:  Marine engineer.  He's on --
     asked about her husband's work.  Marine engineer.
     He's on ships, can be away for weeks; but he's 80
     years old, but he's still active."
          "I came here because my husband works, and
     he's gone."  "Because my husband works, and he's
     gone."
          Now, we're going to look at the continuous
     discharge books.  We'll remind you how important
     they are and how reliable they are for the purpose
     that we are going to put them to today.  And we'll
     do it by reminding you what Mr. Konzelman told you
     about these continuous discharge books. testimony of Alan Konzelman played as follows:) 3587
BY MR. FURR:
     Q.   Would you tell the jury what continuous
discharge books are?
     A.   Well, they don't issue them anymore, but they
used to.  In fact, I have three of them.  And it was a
book that if you -- when you sign on, they would put
where you joined the ship and what your rating was, and
there would be the dates.  And then when you signed off
the ship, they would make an entry as to where you
signed off and when you signed off.
     Q.   This is a work history for you, isn't it?
     A.   Yes.  Yes.
     Q.   And you did -- you provided to us at your
deposition your three continuous discharge books; right?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   And those are the only three continuous
discharge books that you used during your career; right?
     A.   Right.
     Q.   And these are essentially a documentary of
your career; right?
     A.   That's right.
     Q.   And you could look at these books and tell
what ship you were on, where you went, the date you went
on, and the date you got off; right?
     A.   True. 3588 Okay.  Work history, a documentary
     about his work life, you could tell where he was,
     the day he got on, the day he got off.  Had to keep
     them.  If he was working on a vessel, it's recorded
     in these continuous discharge books.
          Again, these will be in evidence.  I showed
     you this before.  During this time period,
     everybody is under the impression he's not there
     because he's still working.  Continuous book --
     discharge books tell a different story.
          But here is the last one, book C, that list of
     three that I read to you, that shows that he got
     off the MV Earl on December 3rd, 2007, and the next
     time that he boarded a vessel for work was
     May 29th, 2010.  There are no entries for 2008 and
     2009.  No entries.
          So I asked him on the stand to help us explain
     during this time period when everybody thinks
     you're on vessels and away working and that's why
     she is in assisted living facilities, why aren't
     there any entries in your continuous discharge
     books?  I gave him every opportunity to give you an
     explanation, every opportunity to give you an 3589
     explanation.  But here is what he said. testimony Can you explain to us why there aren't any
entries in your continuous discharge books in 2008 and
2009?
     A.   I might not have been working.
     Q.   Well, those were the years that you were
working away from home and as a result, Mrs. Konzelman
had to go into assisted care facilities; right?
     A.   True.
     Q.   And so where is the record of where you were
working during those years when she was going to
assisted care facilities?
     A.   I might not have been employed. You can't reconcile.  It doesn't
     line up.  Where was he?  Was he there for her?
          One other aspect of this that you are entitled
     to have the evidence before you and so it's my
     obligation to comment on this again, even though I
     don't -- I wish I didn't have to do this.
          MR. ROSEN:  I'm going to object, Your Honor. 3590      THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. ROSEN:  Move to strike.
          THE COURT:  Jurors disregard the last topic.
          MR. FURR:  I will talk to you about Marcela
     Murveit.  Marcela Murveit.  Let's see what
     Mr. Konzelman told you. testimony Now, after you met Ms. Murveit, you stayed
friendly with her; right?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   And you continued to talk to her once in a
while, didn't you?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   And you continued to talk to her by phone
during the course of your marriage to Ms. Konzelman,
didn't you?
     A.   Occasionally.  Very seldom.
     Q.   You would call her; right?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   Mrs. Konzelman never knew about the existence
of Ms. Murveit, did she?
     A.   Not that I know of.
          (Video clip from Courtroom View Network 3591
stopped and the following is in open court.)
          MR. FURR:  I asked Mr. Konzelman when he met
     her.  He told us in his deposition, first thing he
     told us is 1983, two years after he got married to
     Mrs. Konzelman.  But then he changed his mind and
     said no, it must have been 1977.  But he told us he
     met her in Israel when she was over in Israel.
          That's why when we played you Ms. Murveit's
     deposition and we asked her when she went back to
     Israel after she got divorced and when she met
     Mr. Konzelman and she told you 1981.  She told you
     1981.
          What was the nature of the relationship that
     they had.
          (Video clip from Courtroom View Network
stopped and the following is in open court.)
BY MR. FURR:
     Q.   After Mrs. Konzelman passed, you took a couple
of cruises with Ms. Murveit; is that right?
     A.   One or two, yes.
     Q.   Ms. Murveit also came to visit you in Florida
about three times, didn't she?
     A.   I think so, yes.
     Q.   And when she would come to Florida, the two of
you would share a room at your house; right? 3592
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   She would stay for a week or so?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   Besides Ms. Murveit, you've had a few other
relationships since Ms. Konzelman passed away, haven't
you?
     A.   I have a lot of female friends because there
is a lot of widows around. I'm not going to say anything more
     about that.  The question for you is does his claim
     for $5.3 million because he was there for her, is
     that right?  Does it defy common sense?  It's up to
     you.
          Okay.  But there is more to this case, because
     Mr. Konzelman is asking -- he wants the opportunity
     to ask you for more money.  He wants you to come
     back next week so he can ask you to award him more
     money for punitive damages.  So I'm going to have
     to look at that issue with you also.
          Punitive damages are different than the claim
     for compensatory damages.  Your instruction will
     tell you that Plaintiff has a higher burden to
     prove, he actually has the highest burden of proof 3593
     you can have in civil law, he has to prove to you
     by clear and convincing evidence that you can
     conclude without hesitation, without hesitation,
     that he's entitled to punitive damages.
          Your instructions tell you a couple of
     important things about the limits, the way you have
     to think about punitive damages.
          Instruction Number 12 tells you that the
     findings, again, the Engle findings, may not be
     considered when determining whether punitive
     damages are warranted.  And Instruction Number 21
     also tells you that in determining whether punitive
     damages are warranted, you may also take into
     consideration any mitigating evidence.  "Mitigating
     evidence is evidence which may demonstrate there is
     no need to impose punitive damages against the
     Defendant."
          So again, you do need and get to hear the full
     context of what was going on, but the important
     thing to remember is you can only award punitive
     damages for the conduct that harmed Mrs. Konzelman.
     You may not like a lot of things that you saw about
     historical tobacco company conduct.
          Not defending it.  Not the issue.  The only
     issue is conduct that the Plaintiff has been able 3594
     to tie with evidence to Mrs. Konzelman in a causal
     connection to demonstrate that it is that conduct
     that caused her disease and death.
          Let's look at the mitigating evidence because
     you were talk- -- there is a lot about CTR you were
     told, but you might remember CTR did a lot of good
     things too.  There's some mitigating evidence.
     Dr. Cummings told you they funded $500 million of
     excellent research with tobacco company money.
          The research was scholarly, resulted in 6,000
     articles being published.  They funded Nobel prize
     winners.  And, you know, the claim was it didn't --
     it wasn't related to smoking and health.  But then
     Dr. Cummings admitted that over 600 different
     times, 600 times, work funded by CTR had been cited
     by the Surgeon General's Reports, which are
     dedicated to smoking and health.
          There is more to it.  Dr. Cummings told you
     there is no safe cigarette.  If you burn tobacco in
     paper, you generate smoke that contains
     carcinogens.  No dispute there is no safe
     cigarette, but it's not because Reynolds didn't try
     to make safe cigarettes.  It's not because they
     didn't try.
          Because Dr. Cummings told you about the 3595
     Premier cigarette that Reynolds developed
     throughout the 1980s that they spent a billion
     dollars trying to develop.  And they succeeded.
     They made a safer cigarette, safer than the
     conventional tobacco burning cigarette based on
     mutagenicity and chemistry, but that is only part
     of what you have to accomplish.  It has to be
     consumer accepted.
          A safer cigarette that sits on the shelf and
     nobody buys doesn't help anybody.  Plaintiffs told
     you it was rejected by consumers, it smelled bad
     and tasted bad.  It was offensive.  And they had to
     pull it off and try to rework it, because sitting
     on a shelf with nobody buying it is not helping
     anybody.
          After spending a billion dollars, they took it
     off.  What did they do?  They spent several hundred
     million more dollars revising that product and
     trying to make it more consumer acceptable, and
     they succeeded.  They developed a safe -- a product
     called Eclipse that Dr. Cummings told you was safer
     than conventional tobacco-burning cigarettes, and
     it's the safest cigarette manufactured in the
     1990s.
          That's not conduct they should be punished 3596 for.
          So respectfully, on this request by
     Mr. Konzelman to come back and have an opportunity
     next week to convince you to award more money, we
     submit that the answer today should be no on these
     questions and this case should be concluded.
          I'm going to wrap up.  Let's talk about
     fundamentally what's really going on in this case.
     Look, this is a case about personal choice and
     personal responsibility.  That's the way cigarette
     smoking is.  Cigarettes don't light themselves and
     jump in your mouth.  Nobody holds a gun to your
     head and makes you smoke a cigarette.
          It's a voluntary choice you make.  People get
     to make their choices and take responsibility for
     the choices.  And that's the way it's always been.
          There are a couple of videos that were really
     interesting and were played for you from back in
     the day, in the 1950s and 1960s, that demonstrate
     to you that the dangers of smoking had been known,
     but in our society, the principles always are the
     adults get to make their choices.  Adults get to
     make their choices.
          This was Dr. Hammond, one of those famous
     researchers, one of the first people to do those 3597
     groundbreaking studies, that identified the link
     between smoking and disease, and he was also -- he
     was kind of a public figure.  He was interviewed a
     lot.  He was on the news and everything all the
     time talking about this stuff.
          And here is what he told you on that
     investigative journalism show in 1955 called See It
     Now.
          (Video clip played as follows:)
          DR. HAMMOND:  In my opinion, people should be
     warned of the dangers, and they are being warned.
     What they then want to do, whether they wish to
     smoke or not, is their own business.
          (Video clip stopped.)
          MR. FURR:  1955, people were being warned.  In
     fact, I asked Dr. Cummings, "Did you hear what he
     said?"  Dr. Cummings said, "I don't take any issue
     with that.  People were being warned in 1955."
          The same thing throughout the '60s, released
     the Surgeon General's Report, we showed you during
     Dr. Cummings' cross a news clip from that report
     that I'm going to be playing for you.
          (Video clip played as follows:)
          MR. REASONER:  In this kind of a country, it
     comes down to you, whether you like it or not.  No 3598
     one is going to forbid an adult to smoke and it is
     now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it
     is good for him, either.  The decision is his, the
     decision and the health that may depend on it.
          (Video clip stopped.)
          MR. FURR:  Ladies and gentlemen, we ask only
     that you use your common sense.  This is a choice
     about -- this is a case about personal choices and
     personal responsibility.  And we all know the role
     personal responsibility plays in our society.
          It's what our parents taught us, you are
     responsible for your choices.  It's what we teach
     our kids.  It's what we expect, it's what we hope
     for out of our neighbors, coworkers.  We want
     people to take responsibility for their own choices
     in our society.
          Ladies and gentlemen, I ask you to return a
     complete defense verdict for R.J. Reynolds in this
     case.
          And I'll end where I began.  Thank you so much
     for your time the past few weeks, it's been an
     honor to work in front of you the past few weeks,
     and I appreciate it all.  Thank you.
