          MR. ROSEN:  Yeah.  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Good morning.
          THE JURORS:  Good morning.
          MR. ROSEN:  So it's Friday, and we've been in
     trial for quite some time.  And I want to thank you
     from the very beginning, on behalf of my team, on
     behalf of Alan, and I think we speak on behalf of 3422
     the entire -- everyone in the courtroom is that
     your dedication and commitment to this trial is
     unparalleled.
          I mean, we've been through a hurricane passing
     by, we've had holidays, we've had folks getting
     sick, and you've come back, and you've served.  And
     so no matter what the outcome is of this case, we
     thank you for your service.  This is our system of
     justice, and it only works because you are here.
     All right?
          I'm going to -- I'm going to mention one
     thing.  This -- now, and you heard this earlier on.
     This lawsuit was filed by Elaine Konzelman and Alan
     Konzelman.  She was alive --
          MR. FURR:  Objection.
          MR. ROSEN:  -- when this lawsuit was filed.
          MR. FURR:  There is no such evidence.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          Ladies and gentlemen, you rely on your own
     recollection of the evidence.
          MR. FURR:  I would ask that the jury be
     instructed to disregard that.
          MR. ROSEN:  Your Honor, this was a jury --
     juror instruction.
          THE COURT:  Excuse me, I don't want anything 3423
     discussed in front of the jury.
          Objection sustained, jurors disregard it.
          MR. ROSEN:  All right, so the entire time
     we've been talking about do not discuss the case,
     do not discuss the case, do not discuss the case.
     Well, in a little while, you're going to go back
     into the jury room, and you're going to get to
     discuss the case and you are going to get to
     discuss the facts of the case.
          And so I want to get right into it because
     what you are going to be given is a verdict form,
     this is what it looks like.  All right?  And it is
     going to be a series of questions, and you answer
     yes, no, and I'm going to go through -- I'm going
     to go through everything.  Okay?
          And that's going to be the guide -- the guide
     for your discussions.  That's what I suggest you do
     is you look at the verdict form, and there is
     instructions that correlate with each number.  All
     right?
          And so the first question on the verdict form
     deals with class membership, right?  And we talked
     about whether Elaine Konzelman was a member of the
     Engle class.  And you've heard that that is a group
     of people in Florida who suffered from an addiction 3424
     from smoking cigarettes that was a legal cause of
     their disease, of her chronic obstructive pulmonary
     disease.  And it had to manifest prior to 1996.
          And you've seen evidence and we're going to
     talk about it, the medical records that are in
     evidence that you are going to have back in the
     jury room, she was diagnosed prior to 1996.  It was
     1995, and we are going to talk about how addiction
     played a pivotal, pivotal role in her developing
     that disease.  All right?
          And if she is a member of the Engle class, and
     you talk about those findings that the judge read
     to you, you apply those findings to this case.  All
     right?
          We have to prove our case, that's our burden
     of proof, by the greater weight of the evidence,
     the more persuasive and convincing force and effect
     of the entire evidence, the entire evidence.  So
     you have to look at everything, all right, not just
     little snippets of pieces of testimony, everything,
     all the evidence.
          Elaine Konzelman, she was born in 1930.  This
     was a photograph when she was 15 years old.  All
     right?  And I have cross-examined Defendant's
     expert, Dr. Kreitzer and -- excuse me, it was 3425
     Dr. Giakas, he's the addiction expert.
          And after his forensic analysis of this case,
     he determined that Elaine was 15 years old when she
     started smoking cigarettes.  15 years old.  This is
     when she's 15 years old.  Teenager.
          MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. ROSEN:  We brought you some experts to
     talk about addiction, all right, to talk about
     nicotine addiction specifically.  And we brought
     you Dr. Cummings, who is a world-renowned expert,
     we brought you Dr. Toll.  These people have
     dedicated their careers to understanding nicotine
     addiction.  That's what this case is about.  Right?
          This case isn't about, you know, bipolar
     disorder or schizophrenia or other psychiatric
     disorders.  This is about nicotine addiction.  And
     the people that we brought you, Dr. Cummings,
     Dr. Toll, they've dedicated their careers to
     publishing, researching, and understanding this,
     this, this, this powerful, powerful drug.  All
     right?
          And you're going to see, and I think we've
     shown you from their own records, and
     unfortunately and I'm sorry that -- 3426
          MR. FURR:  Objection to counsel's statement of
     opinion.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. ROSEN:  You're going to -- you're going
     to -- what I believe we've shown you, all right,
     and I -- and I apologize, I know I showed a number
     of videos, there are probably too many videos.
          MR. FURR:  Same objection.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          No beliefs, Counsel.
          MR. ROSEN:  You remember and I'm going to go
     through some of the evidence.  I know it was a long
     time ago when we started with Dr. Cummings, but I
     want to go through it, and you're going to see some
     of the -- some of the facts that we have in this
     case.
          Some of the facts that we have is that she
     smoked a pack to two packs a day for over 40 years.
     All right?  Their expert agrees with it.  You are
     going to see medical records that are in evidence.
     Smoked first thing in the morning, and I'm going to
     get to that in a minute.
          She smoked around her kids, her grandchildren,
     while cooking, cruise ships.  She couldn't sit
     through church, through a movie, through a meal 3427
     without having a cigarette.  All right?
          And you are going to see there is a reason
     why.  There is a reason why.  And it's not because
     she just loved the process or she loved the taste
     or the flavor or she loved to blow smoke rings.
          The first cigarette of the day is the most
     important factor, and you heard about this from
     Dr. Toll, it's a marker of how someone is addicted,
     when they have that first cigarette why is it
     important is because when they go to sleep, their
     body is completely -- all the nicotine is going out
     of them.  And so when they wake up in the morning,
     they are in withdrawal and they need it.  All
     right?
          And so you look at time to first cigarette,
     was it within the first five minutes, was it within
     the first 20 minutes, was it within the first 30
     minutes?  That short amount of time is going to
     tell you so much about the smoker.  And you heard
     from both Dr. Toll, that is that their bodies are
     screaming for nicotine in the morning.
          You heard from Dr. Cummings.  He was asked
     about this.  And one of the things he said
     regarding whether or not someone is more addicted
     there are three indicators, are they a persistent 3428
     daily smoker.  Elaine was a persistent daily
     smoker.  When is the first cigarette in the
     morning.  You have to look at that.
          And then how much do they smoke per day.  A
     pack to two packs per day.  That's -- we're going
     to get to how much it is.  But 20 to 40 cigarettes
     a day.  And it's critical in understanding
     addiction.  Those factors.
          And so what was the evidence?  You had the
     son, John Gilbert, we read his deposition to you
     and you heard that it was immediately.  She woke up
     immediately, she had that first cigarette, it was
     right there, next to the bed, lit it up
     immediately.
          Alan Konzelman, almost immediately.  She would
     sit up on the edge of the nightstand, she would
     reach over to the nightstand, she'd sit on the edge
     of the bed, she would have her first cigarette.
          Sandy Mattson testified, how soon would she
     have her first cigarette.  It was right there, it
     was on the nightstand.
          Time to first cigarette is critically
     important.  And -- and you heard that from the
     people who are trying to help folks quit smoking
     and have dedicated their careers to helping people 3429
     stop and they've studied this and tried to figure
     out what is it that -- what is the most predictive
     indicator of whether someone is going to relapse or
     whether someone is going to have a hard time
     quitting?
          Some people are able to quit.  Some people
     it's easy for them.  Other people, it is extremely,
     extremely difficult.  And there is a reason why,
     you heard there is 500,000 deaths every year of
     smoking-related diseases.  All right?  These people
     aren't all just walking off cliffs.  There is a
     driving force, a mechanism behind it.
          This is just some of the -- the medical
     records that you have.  You are going to have these
     in evidence.  80-pack-year history.  Extensive
     history of tobacco use.  Smoking two packs for 35
     years.  70-pack-year history.
          So pack-years.  If it's two packs a day, you
     would divide that by two, 70 divided by two is 35,
     for 35 years, two packs of -- two packs of
     cigarettes a day.  That's how you could look at it.
          One and a half to two packs for 35 plus years.
     35 years of smoking.  It's tremendous.  It's a
     tremendous amount of cigarettes on a daily basis,
     every day. 3430
          We brought you Dr. Toll, a psychologist, who
     explained to you what his opinion was, whether she
     was addicted to nicotine, what the level of her
     dependence and addiction was, high.
          Alan Konzelman talked about how many times she
     tried to quit, right, over the -- over the time --
     over that time period, over 20 times she was trying
     to quit.  You know, maybe it wasn't good enough for
     Dr. Giakas, who says they were just quit gestures,
     but to her family, she tried.  And she tried lots
     of different things.
          Throw away her cigarettes, her lighters, she
     chewed gum, sucked on candy, she would eat more,
     and it would last about a day or two.  She couldn't
     make it past that day or two, and that's what some
     of the experts talk about is that -- that peaking,
     that peaking time, and it continues to go,
     continues to peak.
          And that's part of it is this withdrawal
     syndrome.  The withdrawal syndrome.  She had almost
     every symptom of withdrawal that you can find when
     someone is not smoking, when the nicotine is
     leaving their body.  Irritable, grumpy,
     short-tempered, different person, different
     personality. 3431
          Sue Sweeney talked about how they would go to
     church, right?  And she knew she was going out, she
     would tell me, "I had to leave because I wanted to
     smoke."  She couldn't sit through church.
          Movies, Sue Sweeney says that a couple times a
     month, wouldn't go often, no, she never sat through
     a movie without going out.  She would go out and
     smoke.
          You know where she kept her cigarettes?  In
     her hand.  She had her cigarettes with her all the
     time.  Whichever room she was in she had her
     cigarettes.
          You have to look at the behavior.  You know,
     you have to look at what a person does with their
     time, right?  She just loved it so much that she's
     doing 20 of these a day?  She loved it, the flavor?
     You know, the smoke rings?
          And what happened when she started -- when
     she'd try to quit?  When she tried.  And she did
     try.  She would be depressed.  There is testimony
     that she would cry from two separate people, they
     saw her crying when she's trying to quit smoking.
     When she is trying to not smoke, she is crying.
          Defense expert, they brought you Dr. --
     Dr. Giakas, the $2 million expert who came in and 3432
     said he was paid $95,000 in this case, right,
     $95,000 to look at this case and say that Elaine
     Konzelman was never addicted, never had -- never
     even had a tobacco use disorder, right, a woman who
     smoked herself onto a ventilator, didn't have a
     tobacco use disorder.  Not even a little one.
     Right?
          $95,000, who, at the time he was retained,
     right, for -- for his work in tobacco cases, had
     never done any original research on nicotine
     addiction, never published on nicotine addiction,
     smoking and health, running a smoking-cessation
     clinic, consulting with government on nicotine
     addiction.  That's -- that's the expert.  He's a
     psychiatrist.
          And I think you heard he's a jack of all
     trades, he has lots of different things, he spends
     30 percent, 40 percent of his time in a courtroom
     or doing forensic work.
          What was it he said, I think out of his entire
     career, he's had thousands and thousands of
     patients, only about 25 of them had actually come
     to him specifically for nicotine -- for smoking.
     25 people.
          And that's $95,000 to come in and say that a 3433
     woman who smoked a pack to two packs a day, based
     upon his opinion, from the age of 15, who smoked
     herself onto a ventilator and got a deadly disease,
     she smoked enough to get a -- a disease that killed
     her, but she didn't smoke enough to be addicted?
     Addicted?
          And he took -- I mean, that's extreme.  That's
     extreme.  Look at -- look at the testimony.  When I
     asked him about the Surgeon General of the United
     States who publishes in the area of tobacco and
     addiction and smoking and health, is he
     authoritative?
          Is the Surgeon General Report, is that an
     authoritative source?  No.  Not -- not -- it's not
     one of many sources, it's not authoritative.  The
     person who is charged with the responsibility of
     looking into this and researching and publishing it
     for public health, for people.
          Addiction to cigarettes, you are going to --
     there is a jury instruction on legal cause.  Right?
     Legal cause.
          So we know that smoking, in the stipulation,
     smoking was the medical cause of her COPD and
     death.  That's agreed.  It's not an issue.
          Now we have to look at legal cause.  And so 3434
     there is an instruction on there.  The first part
     of the instruction says but for the addiction,
     right, would she -- would the disease have
     occurred.
          All right, that's one part of it, right?  Did
     it directly and in natural sequence produce or
     contribute substantially.  Did it contribute -- did
     addiction contribute substantially to producing the
     disease.
          But for addiction, would she have smoked one
     to two packs day for 40 years and develop her COPD.
     That's one part of it.  That's one part of it.  And
     there's another part of legal cause.
          And so maybe, maybe you look at this case and
     you say you know what, you know, she tried.  I see
     she tried a whole bunch of times, but some people
     said maybe she wasn't motivated, some people she
     said she maybe wanted to quit later or didn't
     want -- this is another instruction where you can
     take that all into consideration, you could take it
     all into consideration.
          A legal cause can act in combination with
     other things going on in her life.  It can act
     within combination.  And so you'll see it need --
     addiction need not be the only cause.  Addiction to 3435
     cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause
     even though it operates in combination with some
     other cause if the addiction contributes
     substantially to producing the disease.
          And that's the question.  Did it play an
     important role?  Did it contribute substantially to
     her getting COPD?
          Now, I broke this down for you.  You know,
     when you talk about the amount of time she spent
     smoking in her lifetime, in her life, up until
     1995, you break it down, and she spent literally
     12.5 years with a cigarette in her mouth.  12.5
     years of her life.
          And so who -- I mean, who does that?  Who does
     that with anything other than a cigarette?  How
     many people drink 20 cups of coffee a day, 40 cups
     of coffee a day?
          There is testimony she tried to quit cold
     turkey, she switched to the filters.  You remember
     hearing about that, she actually started smoking
     more when she switched to the light cigarettes.
     We're going to get to that in a minute.  She threw
     out ashtrays, lighters.
          She hid stuff.  She hid stuff.  I mean, what
     kind of behavior is that?  Where she'd throw some 3436
     stuff away sometimes and then she'd hide stuff
     other times.
          Chewed gum, hard candy, she gained weight,
     talked about crying.  And this is important, the
     very bottom, at the very bottom here where it says
     "smoked after her mother died in 1987 and smoked
     after her sister died in 1992."
          Smoking decimated this family.  And her mother
     died from smoking and her sister died from smoking
     and she kept smoking.  That's a problem.  That's
     addiction.  Knowing that, knowing -- hearing about
     it.  I mean, maybe she wasn't believing, but
     hearing, just hearing that, that her family members
     died and she's still smoking, that's a problem.
          Talked about all the different withdrawal
     symptoms, you've heard she had all of it and then
     what would happen when she would pick up a
     cigarette, she'd be back to normal, right?  And we
     learned, and I hope -- I hope I did a good job, I
     hope we did a good job presenting to you why that
     is, why it is that when you're going through all
     these symptoms of withdrawal and what's happening
     when a person picks up a cigarette, it's because
     those receptors light back up again and they get
     filled back up and a person feels happy and normal. 3437
          And so every time you hear about someone
     enjoying the process or they like the flavor or
     they like the taste, it's all related to they know
     they're getting nicotine, they know they're getting
     their drug of choice.
          Dr. Giakas says, "Nicotine compared to other
     drugs is really kind of a weak behavioral
     reinforcer."
          And we've put into evidence, into evidence
     internal company documents from R.J. Reynolds and
     from the other companies, nicotine is a potent
     drug.  Our industry is based upon the design and
     manufacture and sale of attractive dosage forms of
     nicotine.  A potent drug, right?  He says it's a --
     it's a mild, it's a mild reinforcer, it's a mild
     reinforcer.
          We provide a product that is an essential
     commodity and a habitual act.  And they talk
     about -- I don't know if you remember this
     document, but putting a rat in a cage, right, and
     they'll go and they'll keep hitting the lever to
     get the food pellet.  Right?  And it's like a
     smoker, they get it and there are going to keep
     getting it and they're going to keep hitting that
     lever 20, 30, 40 times a day. 3438
          We read this to you.  We read this to you that
     -- this was one of the last witnesses, this was
     James Johnston, he was the CEO of R.J. Reynolds in
     1994, under oath testifying and asked about
     cigarettes and cigarette design, and what does he
     say?  He says, "We design our cigarettes to a tar
     specification, not a nicotine specification."
     Right?
          What do we know from R.J. Reynolds' own
     documents?  In designing any cigarette product, the
     dominant specification should be nicotine delivery.
     That's what they sell is nicotine.  And they
     deliberately downplayed the role of nicotine
     because they knew consumers weren't aware of it.
     They didn't understand it.  Consumers didn't
     appreciate what they were doing.
          And they talked for decades internally about
     what they were doing and they hid this information
     from people like Elaine who this information would
     be important for, this information was concealed.
          We're in the business of selling nicotine.  We
     just read the next one, we read the next one.  It's
     an essential commodity.
          R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, there is no
     dispute that the cigarettes caused her disease. 3439
     There is no dispute at all, and that it caused her
     death.  And that it was their cigarettes, it was
     R.J. Reynolds' cigarettes.  The question is whether
     addiction played an important role.  Did addiction
     play a substantial -- was it a substantial
     contributing cause.
          So you've heard the testimony and from
     every -- everybody on the left -- every -- the
     testimony from -- Elaine was addicted to
     cigarettes.  Elaine was addicted to cigarettes.
     The only person that came here was Dr. Giakas who
     says never addicted at all.
          And R.J. Reynolds, all the while, throughout
     their history, this is the business that they're in
     and that they chose to do and not reveal to the
     public is having elaborate research programs
     studying how low they can go with nicotine to
     maintain somebody's addiction.  Precisely
     controlling levels of nicotine.  Do they control
     the nicotine in the cigarettes?  They precisely
     control it.  Right?
          We talked about ammoniation, right, putting
     ammonia and freebasing the nicotine, manipulating
     the nicotine, flue curing, additives, changing the
     pH level so that it could be easily inhaled into 3440
     the lungs which gets it into that huge surface
     area.  Their -- their pulmonologist talked about
     those huge grapes, right, to get it into the lungs
     so it gets to the brain extremely fast.
          And that's why it's different.  That's why
     people don't get addicted to the patch because it's
     slow.  Why they don't get addicted to the nicotine
     gum because it absorbs slowly into the mouth.
     Cigars less -- have less tobacco abuse.  When you
     talk about inhaling into the lungs, freebasing,
     smoking, a drug, it gets to the brain super fast,
     super fast, and it has a huge, huge abuse
     potential.
          And they controlled it to the dose puff by
     puff.  It wasn't by accident.  It's carefully
     controlled.  They make sure that the nicotine level
     doesn't go too low.  Why?  Why?  Because if the
     nicotine level in their product goes too low,
     right, people stop smoking.  People don't smoke.
          Addiction was a substantial contributing cause
     of her COPD.  Her addiction was a primary reason
     she kept smoking.  All right?  That's the evidence.
          Dr. Henningfield, I brought to you a video
     from Dr. Henningfield, another world renowned
     expert in the area of nicotine addiction, smoking 3441
     and health, who has consulted, who has been on the
     front lines of this for decades.  "What role does
     addiction play in continued exposure to cigarette
     smoke?"
          "It drives the daily repeated persistent high
     levels of exposure."  That's what addiction is.
     All right?  You know, you go beyond, you go beyond
     where it talks about -- "going beyond, you know,
     that cigarette that people may like to have after
     dinner, or after sex, whatever.  You know, those
     cigarettes that people often report the best," they
     have gone way beyond that.
          This isn't just a cigarette after dinner or
     something over the weekend or having some with
     cocktails.  This is daily repeated every day for
     decade -- over decades.  And she was one of those
     people.
          What role does addiction play in causing
     disease?  "Addiction is the interface.  It's the
     driver.  It's the interface between the product,
     the cigarette, and the disease."
          That's what happens.  That's what happens.
          And they know, they know what happens if they
     didn't have that in their product, they didn't have
     that chemical, that drug.  Their business would 3442
     collapse.  Right?  They would go out of business.
          And they talk about it, "We would all lose our
     jobs and our consulting fees."  R.J. Reynolds says,
     "It's to say if the exit gate from our market
     should suddenly open, we could be out of business
     overnight."
          So the question is whether addict --
     whether -- was Elaine Konzelman addicted to
     cigarettes containing nicotine and was it a legal
     cause, was it a substantial contributing cause.
     All right, the answer is yes.
          All right, so she's a class member.  She's a
     member of the Engle class.  She fits the criteria.
     She fits that criteria.
          And if she's a member of the Engle class, you
     you've heard the Engle findings.  And I put on a
     lot of evidence during this case, a lot of
     evidence, right, about history and about
     concealment and about conspiracy.
          And I'm not trying to reprove these findings
     to you, all right?  That's not my job.  These
     findings say what they say, they mean what they
     mean.  But you need to see the big picture, the
     context, right?
          There was a jury that determined these things 3443
     in the past for the Engle class.  And they're
     binding, precedent.  Right?  That jury found that
     they concealed and omitted material information not
     otherwise known.  Right?  Concerning the health
     effects or addictive nature of cigarettes.  That
     jury found that against this company and a number
     of other companies, The Tobacco Institute, the CTR.
          The Defendants agreed with other companies to
     conceal regarding the health effects and addictive
     nature with the intention smokers rely on it.  That
     jury found that.  That's binding on you.  And what
     I did was show you what -- you know, a backdrop,
     right, a picture.
          And I told you you guys should get college
     credits for what you've seen because you've been
     here for a long time and you've learned a lot of
     information.  All right?  So now I'm trying -- I'm
     trying to tie it all together so you see everything
     in context, everything.
          The next thing I want to talk about is the
     statute of limitations defense.  And I want to talk
     about best evidence.  The best evidence that we
     have in this case.  All right?
          So this is R.J. Reynolds' burden to prove, all
     right, the statute of limitations defense.  Did she 3444
     file her lawsuit in the time frame required by law?
     All right.  And they need to prove that she either
     knew that she had COPD before May 5th, 1990, right,
     that's one thing they have to prove.  They didn't
     prove that.  Right?  There was no evidence of it.
     Right?
          The other aspect, this is the other part where
     they are going to travel under, is that she should
     have known, by the use of reasonable care should
     have known before May 5th, 1990.
          So their argument is she should have known
     before May 5th, 1990 that she had this deadly
     disease, COPD, and then she should have filed a
     lawsuit back then.  Right?  That's what that --
     that's what that means.
          Now, you heard testimony from a number of
     different people, all right, you know, let me go
     back just for a second.
          And the issue on this is a reasonable care,
     you know, whether she used reasonable care.
     Reasonable care is the care that a reasonably
     careful person would use under like circumstances.
     And so you've got to look at was she negligent in
     any way?  And I'm going to get into that.  Did she
     fall below that? 3445
          And it says right here "Critical event is not
     when Elaine Konzelman's COPD was actually diagnosed
     by a physician, but when Elaine Konzelman knew
     or" -- "whether Elaine Konzelman knew or by the use
     of reasonable care she had COPD and that there was
     a reasonable possibility her COPD was caused by
     smoking."
          They have to prove that she had COPD, all
     right?  That's one part of it, that she had it
     before May 5th, 1990 and that there was a
     reasonable possibility that it was caused by
     cigarette smoking.
          So I want to talk about the best evidence.
     Because you heard a lot of testimony from witnesses
     in court today.  You've heard deposition testimony
     from people that were taken in 2016, 2015, right,
     talking about things from 30 years ago or 40 years
     ago or 50 years ago.
          You've heard from Alan, who is 87 years old,
     all right, and you have to take into consideration
     everybody.  You've heard from Sue Sweeney.  I
     believe she is in her '80s.  You have to take into
     consideration people's ages, all right?  Their
     memories.  And all that -- all that is included in
     the jury instructions about believability of 3446
     witnesses.
          But we have documents that were made at or
     near the time, all right, at or near the time.  We
     don't have to go by memories from people in 2016
     thinking about things from 30 years ago.  We have
     key documents.
          And this is in PMED1.  All right?  So on the
     statute of limitations defense, PMED1 has the
     documents from Dr. Choy.  We know he's the
     pulmonologist that treated her first.  All right?
     And the first admission that we have is February
     28th, 1995.  1995 is the first time, and their
     expert agreed, is the first time she is
     diagnosed -- actually, she wasn't even diagnosed
     that day.  She was admitted to the hospital on
     February 28th, 1995.
          This is the best evidence of the time and what
     was going on in Elaine's mind, all right, whether
     she knew, whether she exercised reasonable care.
     "The patient is very pleasant.  No respiratory
     problems in the past."  This is her reporting to
     her doctors.  They were asking her, what's going
     on.
          She is coming in needing help in an emergency,
     and they are asking, "What's going on?  Have you 3447
     had problems in the past?"  And she says, "No
     respiratory problems in the past."  This is from
     1995, from at or near the time.
          "The patient felt well until Sunday night,
     three nights ago.  She has never had any problems
     with shortness of breath or wheezing in the past."
     That's her belief.  That's what she is reporting to
     her doctors, right?  This isn't memories from 20
     years forward, this is from the time.
          "She saw Dr. Vanek yesterday who put her on
     Medrol antibiotic and inhaler.  Dr. Vanek, you
     heard was her treating doctor that she was seeing
     before this admission.  She had physicians, all
     right?  Talks about her having a penicillin
     allergy, but she has tolerated cephalosporins in
     the past by Dr. Vanek.  She was under the care and
     treatment of a physician, of a physician, who was
     watching over her, who was responsible for her.
          And so the question is did she exercise
     reasonable care.  You heard testimony that she
     would routinely get checkups.  She would routinely
     go to see doctors.
          The defense wants to say she should have known
     at some point before 1995 that she had COPD when
     her doctors didn't know, when her doctors were 3448
     prescribing things like -- diagnosing her with
     hypertension.  Right, a doctor had to examine her,
     meet with her, take a history, prescribe a
     medication.  He didn't find COPD.
          MR. FURR:  Objection.  There is no such
     evidence, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. FURR:  Move to strike the last comment.
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, you are to
     rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
     This is counsel's closing argument.  So the
     objection is sustained.  Disregard the last
     comment.
          MR. ROSEN:  "Patient complains of shortness of
     breath for approximately three days prior to
     arrival.  Past medical history, history of
     hypertension."
          You know what's not listed there?  History of
     bronchitis, breathing problems, chronic bronchitis.
     And she's taking Verapamil.  And you heard
     Verapamil is a drug, it's prescription medication
     prescribed by physicians.
          You heard in the redirect yesterday of
     Dr. Kreitzer, counsel got up there and said, was
     the standard of care this in the 1980s, and was the 3449
     standard of this care in the 1980s, and was the
     standard of care this in the 1980s.
          That's what the doctor's job is.  Right?  The
     doctor's job is standard of care.  And so their
     argument is every single time she went to the
     doctor, every one of those doctors committed
     malpractice.  They all missed it.
          MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. ROSEN:  And she should have known.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. FURR:  Move to strike that comment.
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, you are to
     rely on your own recollection of the evidence.  The
     comment is stricken.
          MR. ROSEN:  This is in 1997, she again went to
     the doctor in 1997.  So she is two years after her
     diagnosis of COPD.  The doctor meets with her and
     says, "The past medical history is positive for
     hypertension for the past approximately five
     years."
          All right, so that goes back to 1992, she had
     hypertension.  Hypertension.
          She didn't just make a decision -- I mean,
     you're going to decide what that means.  Okay?  You
     decide whether she had seen a doctor, she got 3450
     treatment, she was prescribed medication by that
     doctor.
          Trauma to her left ankle in 1991, there is
     another time where she -- you make a decision
     whether -- where it talks about a past medical
     history, whether she saw a doctor, whether that
     doctor examined her, saw her.
          All right.  It's not -- you can't hold her
     responsible if a doctor missed it.  You can't hold
     her responsible if a doctor missed it.  She was
     exercising reasonable care.  She went to doctors
     routinely.
          Edgewater Drive, all right, this is important.
     Because I drew this on the board for Alan.  Okay?
     Edgewater Drive, you know, when you talk with
     certain people, giving them anchor dates is
     important and it's helpful.  All right?  An anchor
     location or an anchor date, a place that someone
     can say all right, I was living here, I can
     remember before that point in time X, but before
     that -- after that point in time Y.
          And so Alan was asked about Edgewater Drive
     before that time, how was her health, before 1992,
     when you moved to Edgewater Drive; right?  And
     there is testimony, I think you heard him get 3451
     cross-examined in the 1980s, the 1980s, the 1980s.
          Their own expert wouldn't admit that in his
     own notes, right, and it's stipulated now, we're
     going to get into that, but that this is what Alan
     said at his deposition, right?
          At one point he says the 1980s, but then
     someone else -- then later, he says, "I was living
     at Edgewater Drive."  Her health was excellent.
     She never had any problems.  No coughing, no
     shortness of breath, no wheezing, no phlegm.  I
     mean, that's Alan.  That's one witness that talks
     about her symptoms, what symptoms they remember
     observing.
          Alan continued to say the same thing.  She was
     active.  She would get checkups routinely.
     Routinely by doctors.  And she did that in the '80s
     and '90s.
          "Where were you living when you first started
     to observe Elaine having shortness of breath?
          "Edgewater Drive."  That's 1992 going forward.
     Right?  And is that -- that's consistent, right?
     This was in Dr. -- this is in Dr. Giakas' notes.
     Remember I tried to refresh his recollection, he
     says I don't know, I don't remember.
          And this was read to you.  And it's in his 3452
     notes.  "Is it accurate the first time" -- this is
     from Alan Konzelman's deposition in Dr. Kreitzer's
     notes -- Dr. Giakas' notes.
          "Is it accurate that the first time you recall
     Elaine having shortness of breath, wheezing, or
     coughing was while you were living in Edgewater
     Drive?"  That was recorded in Alan Konzelman's
     deposition, "Yes.
          "And my notes indicate you moved to Edgewater
     Drive in 1992?"
          So we're talking about symptoms.  All right?
     When was her symp- -- when did she first begin to
     show signs or symptoms, and that's consistent with
     the 1995 note.  The 1995 note from the time.
          John Gilbert, the son, "She was healthy all
     through the 1980s, late 1980s, early '90s, she was,
     you know, a healthy, vibrant person."
          Mom in the Bahamas, you remember this
     testimony, right?  This is 1989, he talks about his
     mom going on the cruise in 1989, she was in perfect
     health.  There is a picture there, one on a boat in
     a conga line, right?  You saw that picture in 1989,
     right?
          They are arguing that she should have known
     she had been suffering from a deadly smoking 3453
     disease in 1989, but look at her.  You have
     photographs of her.  Right?  You have her life and
     you can see it and judge for yourself.
          "You mentioned earlier your mother was" -- and
     this is Karen Gilbert, this is another daughter
     that you read her deposition, "you mentioned
     earlier that your mother experienced shortness of
     breath prior to the time that she was hospitalized
     in 1992 or 1993?"
          "First time my mother was short of breath and
     had problems breathing was when she went into the
     hospital, to my knowledge."
          That's what her other daughter said.
          Lori Frost, this was their witness, they
     called this witness.  Right?  Their own witness,
     Lori Frost comes in, and what does she say?  In
     1985, when she saw her -- she didn't see her much
     in the 1980s, but she said 1985, no chronic cough,
     no chronic wheezing, no phlegm, no shortness of
     breath in '87.
          I mean, I can go down the list.  1993, no
     shortness of breath.  She saw Elaine at her
     mother's funeral, at her mom's funeral, and Elaine
     was in good health.
          "From 1979," I asked Lori Frost this, "From 3454
     1979, from your observations, it never crossed your
     mind once that she had any type of smoking-related
     disease?"  This is an observer.  "True.
          "And she was in good health from '66 to '93?
          "True."  When she saw her at the funeral.
          The wedding, Sandy talked about the wedding.
     You know, we have photographs.  She's right there.
     They had a great time.  And she was -- growing up,
     she was healthy.  She was healthy up until I think
     she talked about when she came out to Utah in 1992,
     end of '92, end of '93 is when she started to see
     her slow down, having some shortness of breath.
     That's the first time she made an observation of
     it.
          And again, the same questions with Sandy
     Mattson, what was her health like?  Was she
     coughing up phlegm, was she chronically coughing,
     was she chronically short of breath?  No to -- no
     to everything.  I mean, come on.
          1991, we have her scuba diving, we have photos
     of her scuba diving, having a great time in Hawaii,
     in Maui, in 1991 this was taken.  Same thing,
     perfect health, no problems.
          This is -- this was something that Dr. Giakas
     said.  And I want to -- I want to -- I need to 3455
     point it out to you, because he was saying that she
     didn't meet a certain criteria -- one of the
     certain criteria for his -- for addiction.  And he
     said that, "I can't say whether she smoked despite
     being aware of the harmful consequences," I can't
     say that, I'm not sure.
          And this is what he said.  "So if there was
     any evidence in the chart, in the entire record
     where a witness were identifying and saying
     Mrs. Konzelman said, yeah, I know this is causing
     the shortness of breath or wheezing or cough, if
     they said that she said, then I would say she
     satisfied criteria number 9.
          "In this case, I couldn't find that
     verbalization that Mrs. Konzelman actually had that
     knowledge and accepted it, you know."
          No information tying that that she accepted or
     had knowledge that smoking was causing her harm.
     There is some testimony from some witnesses that
     said maybe she had a cough, there was some
     testimony maybe she had some shortness of breath.
          Those are observations.  Nothing, nothing that
     she believed it or that she was aware of.  And
     that's their burden of proof that she knew or she
     should have known she was suffering from a disease. 3456
     She knew or should have known.
          And what did Dr. Kreitzer say?  Dr. Kreitzer
     admitted that COPD is one of -- it is -- there is a
     huge percentage of the population -- it's a major
     concern in the field of medicine that there is a
     huge percentage of COPD people that are
     underdiagnosed.  And the reason is because it's so
     slowly progressing.  It's so slow.
          And he said that people even -- they start --
     they just naturally adjust their activity to deal
     with shortness of breath and things like that.  All
     right?  And so they're not getting diagnosed.
          Did she fail to use reasonable care, that's
     the question.
          20 percent come to him had no idea they had
     COPD.
          In the 1990s, right, we talked about different
     levels of COPD, most people in the 1990s, back
     then, they weren't getting diagnosed until stage
     III or stage IV.  And they're trying to say she
     should have known back in 1989, when her first
     diagnosis was in 1995, moderate to severe, which is
     consistent with all -- with what his testimony is,
     is that people get diagnosed with COPD late in the
     game.  It is what it is, that's what happens, 3457
     because people are doing all right, and then they
     drop off a cliff.
          She had a major viral infection.  You'll read
     it.  They didn't even know -- on that first
     admission, they didn't even know that it was
     chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.  They didn't
     know that.
          And you'll see, there is differential
     diagnosis, I don't have a copy of it right now, but
     the very bottom of the ER chart, differential
     diagnosis does not list COPD.  The first admission
     chart doesn't list COPD.  All right?  It wasn't
     until she was discharged, when they first started
     thinking, okay, this could be COPD.
          And he admitted, out of the 4,000 medical
     records that he looked at, no report that said she
     had been told by a physician that she had COPD
     prior to, and we were talking about 1995.  Right?
     Nothing in 4,000 pages of medical records.
          You heard testimony, and the Defendants just
     read this to you yesterday.  And we're talking
     about whether or not you can look at her numbers
     now and tell whether she had COPD back in the '80s.
     We're guessing; right?  We can't be sure.
     Guessing. 3458
          "The only way that I can tell you is if you
     have a previous pulmonary function test, but we
     don't have it.  So we are probably guessing that
     she had it for several years or not.  Is it
     possible?  Yes, it is possible, but I cannot really
     be sure."
          This is Dr. Choy, the doctor who is
     responsible for taking care of her.  He says, "I
     can't tell you if she had it in 1989 or before May
     5th, 1990.  I can't tell you that."
          And you know what else he also said?  I mean,
     that -- the greater weight of the evidence is their
     burden of proof.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
          MR. ROSEN:  May it please the Court.
          And I apologize, I didn't see that someone
     needed a break.  So I'm sorry.  I'm up here.  I'm 3460
     in a different world.  So I'm sorry.
          It's THE Defendant's burden; right?  The
     Defendant has to prove that she knew or should have
     known.  And so you heard testimony from Karen
     Gilbert, John Gilbert, Alan Konzelman, Sandy
     Mattson, even Dr. Giakas, Lori Frost, Dr. Choy.
     They all talk about symptoms that she was doing
     great up until early 1990, and that's their
     testimony.
          And you had Sue Sweeney, and I want -- I'm
     going to talk to -- talk to you about that in a
     little bit.  Okay?
          Edward Horrigan, got a video.  So their
     argument is she knew or she should have known that
     smoking cigarettes caused COPD before May 5th,
     1990.  And so I want to just play this video for a
     minute.
          (Video clip played as follows:)
          MR. KOPPEL:  Cigarette smoking does not cause
     cancer, yes or no?
          MR. HORRIGAN:  It is not known whether
     cigarettes cause cancer.
          MR. KOPPEL:  All right, sir.
          MR. HORRIGAN:  It has not been causally
     established. 3461
          MR. KOPPEL:  Cigarette smoking, no causal
     relationship between cigarette smoking and
     emphysema?
          MR. HORRIGAN:  Despite all of the research to
     date, there has been no causal link established.
          MR. KOPPEL:  No causal relationship between
     cigarette smoking and heart disease?
          MR. HORRIGAN:  No.  As a matter of fact, there
     are studies that while we are accused of being
     associated with heart disease, there have been
     studies conducted over ten years that would say,
     again, that science is still puzzled over these
     forces.
          (Video clip stopped.)
          MR. ROSEN:  And that's the CEO of R.J.
     Reynolds in 1984, right, saying his product doesn't
     cause disease, doesn't cause -- doesn't cause
     emphysema.  They are arguing she should have known
     back then when our own CEO is saying it didn't
     cause COPD.
          She can't be held to a higher standard.  I
     mean, again, they talk about the standard of care,
     standard of care.  All right?  You know what, they
     breached the standard of care.  R.J. Reynolds
     breached the standard of care. 3462
          The CEO from R.J. Reynolds, this is 1994,
     okay, 1994.  "Does cigarette smoking cause cancer?
          "Not in my opinion."
          This is the former CEO of R.J. Reynolds under
     oath.
          "What is that opinion, the fact there
     continues to be statistics, does cigarette smoking
     cause any disease?
          "Not in my opinion."
          This is the CEO of R.J. Reynolds in 1994,
     under oath.  During the entire time that Elaine
     Konzelman was smoking, R.J. Reynolds denied that
     their product caused disease.  It wasn't until
     2000, you've heard the evidence, that they came and
     they -- and they came forward and they admitted
     that it caused disease and it's addictive; right?
          In 1994, "Is it your position that it has
     never been proven that cigarette smoking caused a
     single person to die?
          "That is my position."
          And that's the CEO, the head, head person of
     this company.
          Did Elaine Konzelman know or by the use of
     reasonable care should she have known before
     May 5th, 1990 that she had COPD and that there was 3463
     a possibility that it was caused by cigarette
     smoking?  They hadn't proved that she had it.  All
     right.  By all accounts, by the testimony, she was
     doing well.  She was doing great up until 1993,
     '94.
          And I want to make clear, if you answer yes to
     this question, the case is over.  The Defendant --
     R.J. Reynolds wins.  All right.  If you answer yes
     to this question, Defendant wins.
          The answer is no.  The answer is no.  She
     filed her claim timely.  She filed her claim
     timely.  She was diagnosed in 1995.  And according
     to the record, at or near the time, all right, the
     document that was recorded that we have, no history
     of breathing problems, no prior problems.  That's
     what it says.  And she was under the care of other
     physicians who took care of her.  No history of
     COPD or breathing problems.
          The next questions are going to be concerning
     reasonable fraud, fraud.  Once she is an Engle
     class member, I told you, the findings apply.  All
     right.  They did this.  The Defendant concealed it.
     They omitted material information not otherwise
     known or available.  That's a fact that they did
     it, right, about the health effects or addictive 3464
     nature.
          So you take that rule of law, right, you take
     that rule of law, and then you apply it to the
     case, did it impact Elaine?  Okay?  And the next
     question is very similar.  It's the conspiracy
     question; right?  They did it.  If she is an Engle
     class member, they did it.  It's the fact.  It's
     the rule of law and that you apply it.  How did it
     impact Elaine?  How -- how was it important to her;
     right?  What would have been important to her;
     right?
          You heard she was an intelligent person.  She
     was smart.  She was decisive.  You heard all of
     these things.  What would have been important for
     Elaine?
          In 1984, "Can We Have an Open Debate?"  I
     mean, this is -- this was their campaign to create
     doubt and controversy.  And you heard that.  I just
     showed you the video of their CEO on Ted Koppel.
     And you heard from the son, John Gilbert, she would
     watch Ted Koppel and Nightline.  He remembered
     that.
          And they talked -- again, the whole idea was
     to create doubt so that people continued to smoke,
     right, so that people would have that psychological 3465
     crutch.  Well, maybe it is, maybe it isn't, but,
     you know, it could -- any risk is so far off, it's
     so remote, it's not going to happen to me.
          And this was John Gilbert.  You heard his
     testimony.  "How do you tie that general knowledge
     to the media specifically?
          "Well, it was a very debatable topic.  There
     was a lot of debate in that period of whether it
     was harmful or not."
          All right.  He remembered the controversy.
          "Okay.  And the debate, as you understood it,
     was entities, were they expressing views about
     cigarette smoking?
          "Yeah.  The debate -- the debate was whether
     it was harmful or not, and she thought they weren't
     harmful based on what she heard."
          It impacted people, their debate, their
     controversy.  And we have proof that it impacted
     Elaine and her decisions.
          R.J. Reynolds is responsible for those other
     companies.  You know, when you see a statement or a
     video from The Tobacco Institute or the Council for
     Tobacco Research or you hear a statement from
     Philip Morris, if it's done in the course and scope
     of that conspiracy, they're responsible for it; 3466
     right?  They're responsible.  They were in it
     together.  And we know they were in it together.
          And I showed you that meeting at the Plaza
     Hotel and how they got together, they were
     competitors at first, but they got together and
     they got this public relations campaign.  And we
     have all their internal documents of what they did
     when they formed the conspiracy and they hired big
     scientists.  They misled the Surgeon General.  They
     were studying nicotine; right?  They knew about
     when kids -- how old the kids were going to start
     smoking.
          50 percent of smokers are going to die.  I
     mean, what they concealed, right, R.J. Reynolds
     concealing, the manipulation of nicotine, filtered
     cigarettes, people believed filtered cigarettes
     were safer, were helping, were removing nicotine,
     right, when, in fact, people were actually smoking
     more, right, because people -- Dr. Kreitzer --
     Dr. Giakas didn't -- doesn't believe this, but
     people smoke for nicotine, and they adjust their
     behavior to get the perfect dose.
          That's what Dr. Toll told you is that smokers
     are very, very good at it because that's what their
     body needs; right?  And they adjust it, and they 3467
     get the perfect blood level of nicotine throughout
     the day.  And that's why you have people having
     different levels of nicotine.  It affects different
     people, and different people need that certain
     amount.  And so then they increase.
          If you -- if you take someone who is smoking a
     regular cigarette and give them a light cigarette,
     they are not getting the same amount of nicotine,
     so they start puffing harder and they start taking
     deeper breaths and getting more of the nicotine
     that they need.
          So when they formed that conspiracy, this was
     her.  She had been smoking.  She's 21, 22 years
     old, 23.  What were they doing?  R.J. Reynolds was
     studying; right?  What was Elaine doing?  You think
     she was studying the clinical data that confirmed
     the relationship between smoking and cancer?  Okay.
          R.J. Reynolds was doing that.  That's what
     they were doing.  They were tracking it closely
     because they knew it would affect their business
     and their profits tremendously.
          And so that's when they met, and that's when
     they -- when all that information started to come
     out, most important thing was "to free millions of
     Americans from the guilty fear that would arise 3468
     deep in their biological soul every time they
     smoked a cigarette."
          They needed to figure out a way, right,
     because people naturally have this inclination if
     they hear that it's bad, they needed to free people
     of that.
          And so they started out with their campaign.
     You saw the Frank Statement.  They promised the
     public that they would be responsible, they would
     cooperate with public health.  They said their
     product wasn't harmful.
          But internally, what did we know, internally
     that the individuals we met with, smoking caused
     lung cancer.  Carcinogen -- this is internally what
     they are saying to themselves.  It's in every class
     of compound smoke.  "The amount of evidence
     accumulated to indict cigarettes is overwhelming.
     Cigarettes cause unattractive side effects.  They
     cause lung cancer."
          And so they formed this, The Tobacco Institute
     and the CTR, to create doubt and distraction
     science; right?  Millions and millions of dollars
     on research, and we haven't found anything.  Okay.
     Of course you didn't find anything.  You haven't
     been studying what you told the public you are 3469
     going to be studying.
          And they knew internally that they would be in
     a deplorable position.  Look, I mean, it says right
     here, the TIRC; right?  That was what they said was
     going to be this honest, honest organization for
     the public that it was a successful defensive
     operation; right?
          And they talked about how they have to give a
     psychological crutch and self-rationale for people
     to keep smoking.  "Obviously the key word is
     confusion.  Doubt is Our Product.  The most
     important story casts doubt."
          We have the evidence that they actually did
     this knowingly, intentionally, deliberately.
          Show a short clip.
          (Video clip played as follows:)
          MR. HUGH CULLMAN:  We want to be the detective
     just as much as the Surgeon General and as the AMA.
     We'll cooperate in every way.  Well, obviously, a
     filter takes out certain tar and nicotine.  I don't
     think the industry admits there are any bad
     elements.
          If there are bad elements, through our
     laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through
     the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope we 3470
     may find them.  And if they are found, they will be
     removed.
          MR. JOSEPH CULLMAN:  We do talk to the
     question of whether or not cigarettes are
     hazardous.  We do not believe that cigarettes are
     hazardous.  We don't accept that.  Because when,
     as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is
     identified as being injurious to human health, we
     are confident that we can eliminate that
     ingredient.
          (Video clip stopped.)
          MR. ROSEN:  Those are lies; right?  Those are
     lies.  I'm going to talk about a holding pattern, a
     holding strategy in a minute.  Those are lies.
     Those are lies they wanted the public to believe,
     people like Elaine to believe so that they
     continued to smoke, right, so they continued to
     make money.
          (Videotaped deposition of James Figlar, PhD
played as follows:)
BY MR. PAIGE:
     Q.   And they wanted people to believe that and
rely upon them, did they not?
     A.   I believe in general, yes.
     Q.   And as early as '88 or '89 or '90, The Tobacco 3471
Institute was saying they still didn't know whether
smoking causes cancer; correct?  That's what they were
telling the public; correct?
     A.   They did not know.  They could not make that
determination is what they said in the video.
     Q.   And they wanted the people to believe them;
correct?
     A.   I would say they would, yes.
          (Videotaped deposition concluded.)
          MR. ROSEN:  They wanted -- this is the C --
     this is a corporate representative from R.J.
     Reynolds, and this was taken I think in 2014, right
     there, 2014.  They wanted the people to believe
     them that there was no proof that these -- that
     their product caused disease.  It was deliberate.
          And it was a -- and they boasted about it
     internally.  They boasted internally how it was
     working.  Right?  You saw that consumption chart
     where every time there would be a dip, it still
     just skyrocketed, right?
          20 years, a single strategy on major fronts,
     it was brilliantly conceived and executed.  It was
     a holding strategy.
          You know what a holding strategy is?  Whatever
     we can do just to keep people smoking.  All right? 3472
     Maybe we don't win, maybe, you know -- it's not a
     vehicle to win, we just need to keep people
     smoking, we just need to keep the status quo, while
     millions of people are dying from horrific
     diseases.  And you're going to hear about Elaine's
     horrific disease, and I think you heard from the
     testimony how it affects people, how it affects
     families.
          It was set up as an industry shield, we know
     that now.  We have these internal documents where
     they talk about how their whole -- everything was
     fake.  It was a front.  It was a front.  It was the
     cheapest insurance the tobacco industry could buy.
     That's what they were doing.  That's what R.J.
     Reynolds and The Tobacco Institute and their fake
     CTR in the '70s, in the '80s, that's what they were
     doing.
          You know what Elaine was doing?  She was with
     her family, smoking in her house with her kids.
     Okay?  Don't you think that would have been
     important to her?
          Awareness versus belief.  I may hear
     something.  Do I believe it?  And they did a great
     job shaping public perception, a tremendous job.
          What was she doing?  She was smoking around 3473
     her grandkids.  Do you think for a second, knowing
     Elaine and learning about who she was, do you think
     for a second she thought she was doing something
     harmful around her grandkids?  These things are
     important to people.
          "Who ain't for more money?"  Right?  And they
     talk about they have Congress, "Through a
     symptomatic program on the Hill, we can count
     nearly 300 representatives on our grade A
     contacts."
          "Carcinogens are found in practically every
     class of compound."  Present technology.  This is
     1961, internally they are talking about how they
     can't -- there is carcinogens in every class of
     compound.  We can't remove it.  And then what do
     they say to the Surgeon General in 1963?  They send
     a letter to the Surgeon General, they say none of
     the chemicals listed are harmful to humans, and
     it's possible, of course, to modify it by filters.
          Lies.
          The fraud.  Right?  We know, you heard from
     Sandy Mattson, she remembers her mom smoking Camel
     unfiltered, unfiltered cigarettes and she switched
     to a Pall Mall.  And she showed her mom the Pall
     Mall cigarette, showed the filter.  Her mom showed 3474
     the filter to her, how it was darker and it was --
     and she believed it was safe, she believed it was
     better, she believed it was working.
          All the people that switched.  I mean, the
     amount of people that switched from unfiltered to
     filters right around -- right at the exact time,
     '64.  The Surgeon General Report's coming out, here
     is your psychological crutch to keep smoking.  All
     right?  Don't believe them, here is a filter, we'll
     take it all out.
          The bottom line here, all right, "In the
     meantime, we say here is our triple or quadruple or
     quintuple, capable of taking whatever constituent
     smoke -- out of smoke."
          And then what do they say up here?  "The
     smoker of a filter cigarette was getting as much or
     more nicotine and tar that she would have gotten
     from a regular cigarette."  Right?  "She had
     abandoned the regular cigarette for reduced risk of
     health."
          That was her.  This would have been important
     for her.  Right?  Knowing that she's getting as
     much or more.
          The illusion of filtration, I mean, that's
     what they talked about.  We need to make an 3475
     illusion of filtration.
          And then another one, down here, it talks
     about "Someone who switches to a hi-if cigarette
     winds up smoking more units in order to provide
     himself with the same delivery which he had
     before."  Do you know what that is?  Same delivery,
     the same delivery of nicotine as they had before.
          And here is the evidence that you've heard
     testimony, and there was some other testimony about
     it, but what did she tell you the reason she was
     smoking, "She smoked filters, she felt they were
     safer."  Right?  And she showed you the filter and
     she talked about the filter, and we just talked
     about that.
          And then what happened when she switched to
     lights?  Do you remember, she tried to convince her
     mom here is the step-down method, try the Virginia
     Slims.  Her mom tried it, and what happened, she is
     smoking more.  Which is exactly what they knew and
     they hid and concealed.
          This is the former CEO, Robert Heimann, of
     American Tobacco Company.
          (Videotaped deposition of Robert Heimann
played as follows:)
     Q.   Throughout your tenure with American, it was 3476
1 25
not only American's position, but your position that
cigarettes weren't injurious to health; is that
accurate?
     A.   Through my tenure?
     Q.   Yes.
     A.   Yes, that is so.
     Q.   That's something American Tobacco wanted the
public to believe; is that correct?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   It's a statement that American Tobacco placed
great reliance on?
     A.   We -- we issued that statement, yes.
Certainly.
     Q.   As far as --
     A.   Certainly we wanted them to believe it.
     Q.   As far as you are concerned, a person is
justified in relying on that statement?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   Okay.
          (Videotaped deposition concluded.)
          MR. ROSEN:  From their own mouth, Elaine was
     justifiably -- she could justifiably rely on their
     statements, from the CEO of American Tobacco
     Company.
          And she did. Konzelman 19
October 21, 2016

          And so the answer to these questions are both
     yes.  All right?  Did their fraud impact her?  The
     answer is overwhelmingly -- overwhelmingly yes.
          All right, all of those things would have been
     important for her to know.
          Percentage of fault.  So you, under our law,
     it's not an all or nothing proposition.  Right?
     You can make a decision what the respective levels
     of fault are of parties.  You can weigh it, when
     you look at it, and there is an instruction on it.
     All right?
          So when you get to this question, you are
     going to decide what is the responsibility.  And
     then what I want to suggest is when two people come
     to a table, all right, you look at who had what
     information, who had superior knowledge, who knew
     what about what, and then you make your decision.
     All right.  And you decide the percentage of fault
     between Elaine that you charge to R.J. Reynolds or
     Elaine.
          They were spending -- you know, we talk about,
     you know, you heard about the public service
     announcements, right, and you saw a couple, I think
     there was a Yul Brynner, I forget which one it was,
     but there were some public service announcements 3478
     saying smoking causes lung cancer, smoking causes
     disease, you've got to stop, it's really harmful.
          And you know what else you learned, actually
     Dr. Toll came in and talked about this, he's an
     expert in message framing, it's the psychological
     message that we give to smokers.  And he's saying
     -- he's on the cutting edge of this right, he's on
     the cutting edge, saying, you know, it's not good
     to tell people smoking is going to cause lung -- is
     going to give you lung cancer.  All right?  Those
     are loss frame messages.
          And he's trying to change public policy
     because he studies this.  And the psychology is you
     don't want to say that to someone, you want to say,
     listen, quitting now, you are not going to get lung
     cancer, not if you continue to smoke, you are going
     to get it.  And so it's important to look at that.
          I mean, these were the messages that public
     health were giving, but then what was the industry
     doing?  I mean, this is the evidence.  The industry
     was spending more in one day in marketing, in their
     campaigning, than the government could spend in a
     day.  In a day.  It was overwhelmingly drowning out
     what public health was trying to say, the message.
     The industry was spending more in one day than the 3479
     government would spend in an entire year.  One day
     compared to a year that the government had.
          From 1953 to 2000, "What was the amount spent
     by The Tobacco Institute and CTR to create the
     controversy?"  They spent a billion dollars, a
     billion dollars to keep that train going.  Why?  So
     that they could keep selling cigarettes.  People
     keep buying, people keep dying, they keep making
     money.
          And this was it, again, you saw this, the
     holding pattern, okay, it was a holding pattern.
     20 million deaths.
          This is it, the doubt, confusion, the campaign
     that they went on.
          Listen.
          (Video clip played as follows:)
          MR. CULLMAN:  We do talk to the question of
     whether or not cigarettes are hazardous.  We do not
     believe that cigarettes are hazardous.  We don't
     accept that.
          MS. BROWDER:  The case is still open.  The
     jury has not come in.
          MR. STOSSEL:  It may not be harmful?  You are
     not convinced?
          MS. BROWDER:  It may be, or it may not be.  We 3480
     don't know.
          MR. DWYER:  So insofar as the correlation
     between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are
     concerned, no one knows.  It may, it may not.  In
     fact, no one knows what causes lung cancer.
          MR. HORRIGAN:  It is not known whether
     cigarettes cause cancer.  It has not been causally
     established.
          SPEAKER:  So do cigarettes cause cancer?
          MR. MERRYMAN:  I don't know if they do or not.
          MS. BANKS:  I am not in a position to give you
     a does or does not answer.
          REPRESENTATIVE WAXMAN:  They agree that
     smoking causes lung cancer.  Do you agree?
          MR. JAMES JOHNSTON:  It may.
          MR. WAXMAN:  Do you know whether it does?
          MR. JAMES JOHNSTON:  I do not.
          (Video clip stopped.)
          MR. ROSEN:  I mean, decade after decade this
     industry denied and concealed it so that people
     keep smoking.
          And you have it, I mean, you have the chart
     that goes right up into the 1980s.  I mean, really
     1964 is when you have the Surgeon General coming
     out, but they keep -- it keeps going.  You know, 3481
     '53, you have the mouse painting study, '64.  But
     it keeps going.
          And they were looking to get people, the
     pre-smoker, the nonsmoker to become habituated
     smokers.  That's what they said internally.  And
     look at this, they have to -- "He does not start to
     smoke to satisfy a nonexistent craving for
     nicotine.  Rather, he appears to start to smoke for
     purely psychological reasons.  Younger adult
     smokers have been the critical factor in the growth
     and decline of every major brand and company over
     the last 50 years.  They will continue to be
     important in the future.  Renewal of our market
     stems almost entirely from the 18-year-old market.
     No one starts smoking after 25 -- 24.  5 percent."
          They need replacement smokers.  A replacement
     smoker, you know what that is?  That's when either
     someone quits or they die, they need someone to
     replace that person.  And so they've got to get it
     from that 18-year-old group or by 18 years old.
          Nicotine.  They deliberately downplayed the
     role.  This is an R.J. Reynolds document, right?
     Not everyone knew that nicotine was addictive.  Not
     everyone knew that.  And not everyone knew what
     they were doing to the nicotine, freebasing it and 3482
     putting other chemicals in to change the form and
     the pH.  All right?  No one knew that.
          "We have deliberately downplayed the role of
     nicotine, hence the nonsmoker has little or no
     knowledge of the satisfaction."
          And then look what they say, "instead we
     somehow must convince him with wholly irrational
     reasons that he should start smoking."  Right?  All
     those advertisements that you saw making it fun,
     you know, sexy, glamorous, cool.
          "We have to convince him of irrational reasons
     so that he starts smoking our product and gets
     addicted in the hopes that he will for himself then
     discover the real satisfaction."  Quote,
     satisfaction.  You know what that is?  That's
     addiction.  That's the pharmacological effect of
     nicotine that people get.
          And they studied consumers and they knew, this
     is in '78, they knew that consumers are -- "very
     few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine,
     the addictive nature, and that it's a poison."
     Right?
          And then you have testimony from Sue Sweeney
     on this issue.  You know, "Did Elaine ever talk
     about nicotine? 3483
          "No.
          "Did Elaine ever talk about addiction to
     nicotine?
          "No.
          "Did Elaine ever talk to you about nicotine
     being a drug?"
          And this is her testimony from 2015 or '16.
     She says sitting her -- I said, Question:  "Sitting
     here today do you believe that nicotine is a drug?
          "That I do not know."
          This was a woman who smoked and had quit in
     1995 or '96, right around the time Elaine quit.
     And to this day, she doesn't know that nicotine's a
     drug.  Very few consumers are aware of how
     powerfully addictive it is.  Right?
          And you have got -- you have learned a
     tremendous amount of information, tremendous, that
     the average consumer does not know.
          Those things would have been important.  You
     know, their own forensic guy says that she started
     when she was 15 years old.  You know, when two
     people come to a table, what information do they
     have?  You are going to make a decision.
          What I would suggest as far as percentage of
     fault, percentage of fault, R.J. Reynolds 90 3484
     percent, Elaine Konzelman 10 percent, if you find
     her to be at fault at all.  Okay?
          Damages.  "Please state the total" -- so next
     question on the verdict form is damages.  All
     right?  There is two types of damages, there is the
     medical expenses and then there is the compensatory
     damages for Alan for his loss of his wife and for
     what he went through from the time they got -- she
     got sick up until the time that she passed.  All
     right, that's how -- that's the different types of
     damages.
          You've heard the stipulation, $295,000 is the
     medical expenses for Elaine Konzelman that goes to
     her estate.  All right?  That was stipulated to,
     that's agreed to by the parties.
          So I want to talk about the next -- the next
     point about damages.
          We've shown you evidence, we've shown you
     proof, Alan's testified, Sandy has testified, every
     witness that came into this courtroom talked about
     this relationship.  Alan, all right, he's a
     mariner, he's a sailor, he was away for a few
     months at a time and he would come back home.  When
     they were together, they were together all the
     time.  All the time. 3485
          You know, some folks, they may have a 9 to 5
     job or an 8 to 7:00, whatever it is.  I mean, they
     may see their spouse or loved one at night for a
     little bit or maybe see them for a little bit in
     the morning.  People have different relationships.
          You know, soldiers who have to go away across
     the -- you know, they get deployed, they don't see
     their family for however long and come back, they
     still love each other.  They still care about each
     other deeply.
          All right?  And the fact that this was his
     career and what he did to support his wife
     shouldn't diminish that at all.  Doesn't diminish
     that at all.
          Because when they were together, they were
     together and they traveled and they had a
     wonderful, great, great life.  They had a -- an
     amazing, adventurous life that some people don't
     get to experience because of the type of work he
     did when he was able to come home.  And they sailed
     and they enjoyed each other.
          You heard Alan had been married a couple times
     and it don't didn't work, so you know who it worked
     with?  It worked with Elaine.  She was the right
     person.  And it lasted 29 years.  29 years.  And 3486
     they sailed and they got married and they traveled
     together and they had fun together.  And they grew
     old together.  And they had a right to grow older
     together, to have each other.
          Alan lives with Cliff now, a roommate.  He had
     a right to be with his wife, Elaine.
          And he was there when she declined, and
     declined worse, and declined worse.  And he
     continued to work and continued to support her.
     And there were times where he was away and there
     was times when he came back.
          And anyone can make an accusation.  Anyone.
     But I want you to look at the proof.  And I want
     you to look at Alan and everything that you heard
     from everybody in this case and this testimony and
     trial, and at the end of this day, I want you to
     make a decision what that relationship was and what
     the loss of this woman, Elaine, was to him.
          He was there for her and he took care of her.
     And he was there on the last day of her life.  And
     he will never have her back.
          And he watched her deteriorate.
          The number that I'm going to suggest is a
     significant number.  It's a substantial number,
     because it's a substantial loss.  If this was a 3487
     case about broken bones or a case about surgery,
     you have to look at the nature and the extent of
     the damages.  And you're going to see that there is
     no exact standard for measurement.  You are going
     to decide.  Whatever you decide we accept, okay.
          This is a suggestion, you can go higher, you
     can go lower, it's just a suggestion.  All right?
     This is the type of case where I am required to ask
     you for a substantial verdict, and so I would
     suggest $5 million for his loss, for Alan's loss,
     the loss of a woman like Elaine.
          And the punitive damages follow.  And I
     mentioned this -- I didn't mention this, I was
     thinking about this, I didn't think I was going to
     say it out loud.  You've come this far.  And you
     have fought through illnesses and been here and
     been committed.
          And so if you answer yes to this question, if
     you find by clear and convincing evidence that
     punishment is warranted for the type of conduct
     that this company has engaged in.  All right.
          If you find that it's warranted and you answer
     yes to this question, our case will go on to a
     second phase.  We would come back Monday, and it
     would be very short, I would probably put on about 3488
     a 15-minute witness and then rest.  The defense may
     have a witness.  It would being very, very short,
     probably a day, maybe a day and a half extra of
     your time.
          And so if you've come this far for us and you
     answer yes, I'm asking you to come just a little
     bit farther, just a little bit farther, because I'm
     going to show you that punishment is warranted.
          There is instructions, it talks about whether
     it's clear and convincing, whether they are guilty
     of intentional misconduct.  You can consider harm
     suffered by others to determine how reprehensible
     their conduct was.
          And they knew it.  It's not -- it's not that
     they made a mistake and they accidentally did
     something.  Instead they knew what they were doing.
     And despite knowing that at some point in time
     they'd get caught, they continued to do it.
          "Our basic position in the cigarette
     controversy is subject to the charge," they knew
     they could be charged, "and may be subject to the
     finding that they are making false and misleading
     statements to sell cigarettes."  Lies for profit.
     Death for profit.  That's punitive.
          And you can use a punitive damages verdict to 3489 punish the company and to let other companies know
     that this type of conduct will not be tolerated.
     It can be used as a deterrence to others.
          They knew.  "Happily," they boasted, "happily
     for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both
     habituating and unique."
          "If we move towards eliminating nicotine, we
     will liquidate our business."  Right?
          The nicotine levels are not obtained by
     accident, they regulate them.  And we can fairly
     precisely, the nicotine levels desired by the
     levels that management want.  And smoke pH, how
     they talk about using free form, free form,
     freebasing nicotine so that people keep smoking.
     People can't stop, people get sick and they die.
          They talk about this again.  It's like they
     know that if there's a nicotine antagonist, if
     there's something that could block that nicotine
     receptor, give a pill to somebody you're going to
     block the receptor, right, and then people won't
     smoke, they won't get the nicotine in there,
     they're out of business.
          They avoided having research done.  They were
     terrified of that type of research.  And they came
     and they swore before Congress, before the United Konzelman 19
October 21, 2016
3490 States people, right, for decades.  For decades.
          (Video clip played as follows:)
          REPRESENTATIVE WYDEN:  Let me begin my
     questioning on the matter of whether or not
     nicotine is addictive.  Let me ask you first, and
     I'd like to just go down the row, whether each of
     you believes that nicotine is not addictive.  I
     heard virtually all of you touch on it.  And just
     yes or no.  Do you believe nicotine is not
     addictive?
          MR. CAMPBELL:  I believe nicotine is not
     addictive, yes.
          REPRESENTATIVE WYDEN:  Mr. Johnston?
          MR. JAMES JOHNSTON:  Congressman, cigarettes
     and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic
     definitions of addiction.  There is no
     intoxication.
          REPRESENTATIVE WYDEN:  We'll take that as a
     no.  And again, time is short.  If you can just --
     I think each of you believe nicotine is not
     addictive, we just would like to have this for the
     record.
          MR. TADDEO:  I don't believe that nicotine or
     our products are addictive.
          MR. HORRIGAN:  I believe nicotine is not Konzelman 19
October 21, 2016

     addictive.
          MR. TISCH:  I believe that nicotine is not
     addictive.
          MR. SANDEFUR:  I believe that nicotine is not
     addictive.
          MR. DONALD JOHNSTON:  And I too believe that
     nicotine is not addictive.
          (Video clip stopped.)
          MR. ROSEN:  Those are the heads, the senior,
     senior, senior people right up to the top before
     Congress.  And you've seen every internal document
     that -- I've shown you the internal documents about
     what they knew about their product and how they are
     manipulating it, how they are keeping people
     smoking.
          And so it will be up to you to decide whether
     there is clear and convincing evidence that
     punishment is warranted.  The answer we believe is
     yes.  The answer screams yes.  And so we would ask
     you to -- to give us a little bit more of your
     time.
          And so I've had -- again, I truly appreciate.
     I can't -- I can't say it enough that we appreciate
     everything that you've done.  On behalf of my team,
     everybody, Baron Phillipson and Ms. Wald and 3492
     Elaine -- Alan Konzelman and Elaine, and Elaine.
     On behalf of our whole team and everybody, thank
     you so much.


          MR. ROSEN:  May it please the Court. 3601      I'm going to try not to hurt myself here.  I
     think I'm going to fail.
          MR. FURR:  Your Honor, may I move someplace
     where I can see the --
          THE COURT:  Yes, sir.  Of course.
          MR. ROSEN:  This is going to be the last
     opportunity that I get to speak with you, so this
     is just my final rebuttal.  And I want to talk
     about some of the things that Mr. Furr brought up
     with you just now.
          Really, this case is two completely different
     sides of the spectrum.  All right?  So you have a
     choice.  They're going to look at the evidence and
     what each side is saying.  And all we have is
     credibility.  All we have is truth.  And the jury
     is the factfinders.  You decide what the truth is.
     All right?
          You've seen Mr. Konzelman, you heard him on
     the stand, you've heard him testify.  He spoke to
     you right there.  There is an instruction that
     talks about credibility of the witnesses.  You get
     to look at him and judge him and decide how he
     reacted, how he responded, everything.  Every
     witness.  Okay?
          And so what it comes down to is on our side, 3602
     Elaine was addicted, she tried to quit.  Elaine did
     not know what R.J. Reynolds concealed.  Elaine was
     diagnosed for the first time with COPD in 1995.
     And I wrote that down improperly, sorry.
          R.J. Reynolds committed fraud engaged in the
     conspiracy to conceal health effects and addictive
     nature of their product for profit, and addiction
     was the legal cause of Elaine's COPD.  That's our
     case.  Okay, what's the truth?  What is the truth?
     All right?
          And we look at their side.  She was never
     addicted, never, not once in her life.  No tobacco
     use disorder.  She never tried to quit.  Those were
     just little gestures.  They were just gestures.
     Never tried to quit.  Right?
          R.J. Reynolds said some stupid things in the
     past.  Those weren't stupid things.  Those were --
     those were decades-long, documented evidence from
     the highest level of their corporation, of their
     business.  They weren't just stupid things.  They
     were deliberate.  They were deliberate.  They were
     intentional, and they were misleading the public.
          It was as the most reprehensible of behavior
     you could ever imagine, putting profit over human
     life.  The most reprehensible.  That's what they 3603
     said.  It was just -- they were just stupid things.
          Alan lied to his wife and doctors while she
     was dying from COPD.
          Make no mistake.  Make no mistake, what was
     just presented to you is that Alan was lying to his
     wife.  Those two years in his continuous discharge
     book that aren't there, right, that don't show that
     he was working, he was lying to his wife, he was
     lying to his doctors, and he was off somewhere else
     doing something else; right?  And I think the
     implication is he is having an affair with someone.
          MR. FURR:  Objection as to what counsel
     thinks, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Thank you, sustained.
          MR. FURR:  Move to strike.
          THE COURT:  Jurors disregard the last comment.
          MR. ROSEN:  And so you are the factfinder and
     you will decide whether that's truth or whether
     that's not truth.
          And Elaine had diagnosed -- had COPD six years
     before she was actually diagnosed with it, and she
     should have known that she had COPD six years
     before she was actually diagnosed with it.  That's
     their case.  All right, we're on two separate sides
     of the spectrum, you decide what the truth is. 3604
          All right, and I'm going to talk about Alan
     right now and the discharge books.  I want to jump
     into it.  Because, you know, he said right -- one
     of the first things you saw the question when he
     was asked on that stand, right, that first question
     he was asked was about what about these discharge
     books.
          And what was his first response?  He said they
     don't issue them anymore.  That's what he said.
     And there was a -- and I find it interesting that
     there was another clip, when he was actually
     confronted direct again about the issue.
          And let's play the clip that wasn't played. testimony So if you were working away from home for a
lengthy period of time in 2009, where is the
documentation in your continuous discharge book?
     A.   I may have gotten certificates of discharge at
that time.
     Q.   Okay.  I thought you told me that didn't
happen until after 2010?
     A.   I don't remember.  Some of the ships I went
on, they didn't know what a continuous discharge book 3605
was.
          (Video clip from Courtroom View Network
stopped and the following is in open court.)
          MR. ROSEN:  You are going to decide what the
     truth is, whether Alan was lying to his doctors and
     lying to his wife and not actually working and was
     somewhere else, all right?
          Or the truth, which was that this man was
     working, that there were times where he got
     certificates of discharge, that there were boats
     that didn't even use the discharge book anymore.  I
     mean, he's 87 years old.  He comes from a different
     school, the old school.
          This is a man who --
          Can I get the overhead?
           -- this man, who is lying to the doctors and
     lying to his wife, right?  You were shown a
     document about him -- his wife being upset that he
     had to take a another job, right?  Well, what about
     the other document where he's with his wife,
     "patient and husband instructed on use of" -- can't
     -- "monitoring blood pressure."
          Because he's with his wife just a couple of
     days before the document that they showed you.
          And then what about the fact -- you know what, 3606
     this is a man who is lying to his wife and he's
     going off somewhere else, and he's not telling the
     truth, but he's finding time, and this is in the
     evidence, he's finding time to write a letter to
     the facility because he doesn't feel they're giving
     his wife proper care, and he's upset that they're
     not giving her proper care.  Right?
          This is a man who is lying and running off
     somewhere, but yet he's sending -- he's sending
     letters saying I don't like the way this -- I don't
     like -- and that's in PMED57.  I don't like the way
     that the doctors are treating his wife.  All right?
          So you -- you're going to make that decision.
     You're going to make the decision.  And the
     decision keeps going.  We're going to come back to
     this in a minute.
          In 2008 with his wife, and I want to talk
     about the trust that they have, that she lists him
     on the advanced living will directive, she appoints
     him.  This is in 2008.
          The trust and the love that this couple had,
     in hospice, she's telling the folks at hospice,
     this is in the -- in the records as well, she is
     talking and reporting about their life.  In her
     retirement years, she enjoyed traveling with her 3607
     husband and also doing volunteer work at the local
     hospital.  And this is what she's telling them in
     the last few months of her life.
          And he's lying.  And he's running away.  But
     he's also at home with her when she had two
     emergency room visits, each time she's at home with
     her husband, she became short of breath and she or
     he had to call 9-1-1 because she suffocated.  And
     was he there?  Was she home with him?
          What's the truth?  What's the truth?  Why put
     that in front of you?
          MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor.  He's
     attacking my argument.
          THE COURT:  Anything else?
          MR. FURR:  Comment on counsel.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. FURR:  Move to strike.
          THE COURT:  Jurors will disregard the last
     comment.
          MR. ROSEN:  You know, the whole story, that's
     what counsel mentioned, the whole story.
          I want to jump back just for a second.  You
     know, you heard about John Gilbert statements,
     people telling her to quit, what was her response.
     This is 143. 3608
          You know, John Gilbert talks about
     indifference.  You know, what else did he say?  And
     he talks about a later conversation that he had and
     what would she say in response.  She was addicted,
     she couldn't quit.  And is that something that she
     specifically would say that she was addicted, yeah.
     She said, "You know I can't.  It's an addiction."
          We talked about Sue Sweeney, right?  Sue
     Sweeney talked about, you know, she had this cough
     in the 1960s.  Right, a cough in the 1960s.  127.
     "How would you describe Elaine's health otherwise
     during the time you lived at Thoman Place?
          "She was in perfect health.  She was never
     ill."
          131.  "Before she moved to Washington
     Township, you observed a deep, chesty cough?
          "I did."
          That's in the '60s.  All right?  That's the
     '60s.  It says, "Was it productive?  Was it
     productive?  Do you know?
          "No, not that I know of."  All right?
          She loved to smoke.  That's the testimony you
     heard, right?  That's the testimony you heard.
     Let's put it into context.  Let's take a look at
     what Sue Sweeney said.  This is 130.  "Did Elaine 3609
     ever tell you she loved smoking?
          "Yes.
          "Tell me about that conversation.
          "I would -- I can remember one time I asked
     her why she smoked so much, and she said, 'Because
     I love to smoke.  I love it.'
          "When did Elaine tell you that?
          "When she still lived on Thoman.  Other than
     that, I never asked her anything about it."
          Okay?  That's in the '60s.  That's in the
     1960s.
          And then why do you think she said that she --
     that -- why would Sue Sweeney say that her friend
     loved to smoke?  You know what her definition was?
     And this was the testimony.  This is the testimony.
          128.
          "Why do you say that?
          "Because she loved to smoke.
          "How do you know that?
          "Anyone who smokes every day all day long
     loves to smoke."
          Anyone who smokes all day every day, all day
     long, that's addiction.  That's addiction.  That
     Sue Sweeney couldn't appreciate, didn't understand.
     Why?  Because she didn't understand nicotine 3610 addiction.  She didn't know what they knew.
          You know, they brought up the ambulances.  I
     mean, you have the medical record.  You have a
     medical record from 1995.  Okay?
          And you're going to decide whether, when Alan
     Konzelman gave that testimony, whether he was
     accurate in his deposition, whether he was
     accurate, whether there was all these ambulances
     coming to her house before 1995.
          You have the medical record from 1995, you
     take a look at it.  Okay?  And there is testimony,
     139.
          "Alan, at your age, does it help you when we
     give an anchor date in time to talk about things?
          "Yes.
          "And so before 1995, when she was diagnosed
     with COPD, did ambulances come to your home?
          "No."
          And Sandy gave that same testimony.  There
     were no ambulances coming to the home.  You're
     going to take a look in this -- in the medical
     records, you'll have it, there were a lot of
     ambulances, okay?  And they were all after 1995.
     There were a lot.  Okay?  Alan at 87 years old.
          I want to talk a little bit about the statute 3611
     of limitations defense.  This is 140.
          "Do you know how long it takes a patient on
     average to move from mild to moderate in terms of,
     for lung obstruction, as shown in a pulmonary
     function test?
          "I don't think nobody can tell you that.  I
     don't think there is a specific time in which one's
     severity moves to the next one in any specific
     time.  Too many factors involved."
          All right, there is too many variables.  But
     their expert comes in and says, oh, it had to be
     there for ten years.  Right?  Well, her treating
     doctor, the person who is charged with the
     responsibility of taking care of her, says nobody
     can tell you that, there's too many variables.
          141.  And the same answer for moving from
     severe to very severe.  "That's correct.  I have
     patients who are in the same degree for years and
     years and years, so there are patients who from one
     year to the next, all of a sudden, they're so bad,
     you wonder why."
          Okay, it could be dramatic declines, it could
     be slow.
          142.  Again, this is Dr. Choy, this is her
     treating doctor.  "Now, you're asking me did she 3612 have any previous COPD?  I really can't tell you.
     Could it be possible?  It's always possible.  In
     medicine, anything is possible.  But did she have
     it, I really cannot tell you based on this."
          And at the very end, "Nobody can tell you
     based on this.  If it's possible, yes, but can I
     tell you, really cannot tell you."
          That's her doctor who's saying, I can't tell
     you based on 1995, her having moderate COPD, I
     can't tell you whether she had it in '89 or '88 or
     '85.
          And that's their burden of proof.  Their
     burden of proof is to prove that she had it, and
     not only that she had it, that she should have
     known she had it.
          And the number on this one is covered.
          And Verapamil.  Now, you understand this is
     talking to Dr. Choy.  You understand past medical
     history notes, the patient has had a history of
     hypertension and is taking Verapamil.  What is it,
     he explains it.
          And prescription medications, do they have to
     be prescribed by a doctor, yes.  For a doctor to
     prescribe Verapamil would they have to meet with
     the patient and perform a physical exam, take a 3613
     history and do the normal examination that a doctor
     does before they prescribe medication.  Usually
     that's the way they do it.
          Okay, she had medication prescribed to her
     before her first admission.  We know she had been
     seen by a doctor, who examined her, who looked at
     her.  And she -- and there's no evidence, we have
     no evidence she was ever told she had COPD or was
     diagnosed with COPD before she actually was.
          The encyclopedia of facts.  This was
     Dr. Giakas.  I think counsel described him as the
     encyclopedic knowledge of all the facts.
          Let's go ahead and bring it up.  I'm sorry
     150.  You're not a mind reader.
          "Encyclopedic knowledge of all facts."  Right?
     This was when I was asking him, "Doctor, isn't it
     true that Alan Konzelman was living on Edgewater
     Drive when he first noticed Elaine Konzelman having
     shortness of breath, wheezing, and coughing?
          "I don't recall where he was living."  All
     right.  And you read -- you heard the stipulation
     we read into evidence.  That's in his notes, that
     was in his notes that she was living at Edgewater
     Drive and that's after 1992.  But he was choosing
     which facts he was going to talk about and what he 3614
     was going to remember.
          MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. FURR:  Move to strike.
          THE COURT:  Jury can disregard the last
     comment.
          MR. ROSEN:  Let's talk about Marcela.  144.
          With respect -- "Were you surprised to hear
     from Mr. Konzelman in 2011 when he called?
          "Yes, I was very surprised.
          "Why is that?
          "I was not interested, you know, I was single
     for so long, I never wanted to get married."
          You know, she was surprised when she heard
     from him.  And you know what, Alan called her up a
     year and a half after his wife passed.  All right,
     that's the evidence is that it was autumn of 2011.
     And then they went on a cruise in March.  It didn't
     last very long.  They weren't compatible.  All
     right?
          A man watched his wife suffer for a very, very
     long time.  And he was alone.  There is nothing
     wrong with a person reaching out to somebody that
     he knew from the past to speak with them and spend
     some time and have some companionship.  And it 3615 didn't work.  And you want to know why?  Because
     she wasn't Elaine.
          MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. ROSEN:  145.
          "Did you speak with Mr. Konzelman at all
     between '81 and 2011?
          "No."
          She didn't remember even talking to him.  She
     didn't remember talking to him.
          I'm going to just briefly touch on one more
     subject, filters, 153.  You know, I think counsel
     mentioned that public health, it was public health
     that was encouraging everyone to smoke, public
     health, right?  I mean, it sounds like they're
     blaming public health.
          Who had superior knowledge about that product
     and about whether filters were working?  This is
     153, this was Dr. Cummings.
          R.J. Reynolds had superior knowledge and they
     knew it wasn't working and they concealed it and
     they were happy to have public health encouraging
     people to smoke filters.  It's more money in their
     pocket.
          I want to end with this. 3616
          Just wait one second.
          I wanted to make sure that the stipulation
     about when Elaine passed away was correct.  March
     22nd, 2010.  Okay, she was in hospice in
     California.  All right?
          126.  You have these records and you're going
     to get to see who was there and who was with Elaine
     on the day she died and in the weeks leading up to
     her death.  This is March 22nd.  "Lunch arrived
     while nurse in attendance and husband fed patient
     bites of meat and potato.  She refused anything to
     drink."
          This is a man, this is a man who is being
     accused of lying to doctors, lying to his wife, put
     her in an assisted living facility and not working
     so that he can be out somewhere?  You're going to
     make that decision.  You're going to make that
     choice.
          Is this the truth?  You make the decision.
     Alan and Elaine loved each other.  Alan worked to
     support his wife.  He cared for Elaine.  He wanted
     her to get the best treatment.  They loved each
     other, they loved each other's company.  And they
     had each other.  And that was taken away.
          You'll see this, this is in evidence.  This is 3617
     Elaine.  "My final wishes.  I ask that my ashes be
     returned to Alan and scattered out to sea with
     Alan's."
          All we have is credibility and truth in this
     courtroom.  And you make the decision.  What is the
     truth?  Whatever verdict you render, we accept.
     Thank you.
