MR. ISASI: Thank you, Your Honor.
May it please the Court, Counsel, Mr. Larkin,
Mrs. Newborn, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good morning. I hope you had a good weekend.
We heard a lot of argument this morning. And just that. Arguments from Mr. Gerson and Mr. Paige about punishment and deterrence.
But there are two things you didn't hear much about. The first is really what's the purpose of
the punishment that they want you to hand down.
A punishment of almost $20 million.
What purpose of that that hasn't already been accomplished in the last 15 years.
And you also didn't hear a lot about evidence to support their punishment and their deterrence ideas; that this is necessary and that this would deter conduct.
And that's important. Remember, a lot of the rules are different. You saw the judge gave you instructions. A lot of the rules are different for this phase but one rule remains the same, which is, that the plaintiffs have the burden of proof. They are required to bring you the evidence to support their claim for punitive damages.
So that's what we're going to do right now.
We're going to discuss the evidence and the law, and we submit that when you look at both, you're going to conclude that what the plaintiffs are seeking in this case is punishment without a purpose.
Now, the plaintiffs recall by your verdict have already received full, fair, and just compensation for the damages to Mrs. Larkin.
The plaintiffs' argument today just ignored that completely. I heard Mr. Gerson say that -- or
Mr. Paige say that, you know, what the message would be for Reynolds if you paid compensation, then we can just get out of it. That -- you awarded just shy of $5 million in this case. How is that just getting out of it?
Awarding punitive damages, ladies and gentlemen, for the Reynolds of 2015, today's Reynolds, would serve no purpose. And that's what I'm going to talk with you about this morning.
We start, however, with what you've heard from the judge. And that is that Reynolds can only be punished for concealing information and agreeing to conceal information that was the cause of Mrs. Larkin's oral cancer.
So the punishment that they're asking you to hand out has to be related to the concealment or the agreement to conceal. That's the evidence that the plaintiffs needed to focus on. And when you think about it, we heard a lot Friday during the question -- questioning of Dr. Borgerding by Mr. Paige about cigarettes and -- and -- and harm by cigarettes. But this isn't a vote, ladies and gentlemen. This punitive damages award is not a vote on whether or not cigarettes should be legal.
And it's not a vote on whether or not we approve of
the business of Reynolds.
Society has made those determinations that cigarettes are legal and that Reynolds and other companies can be in business; and that, ladies and gentlemen, shouldn't factor into your determination at all.
So let's talk about what the evidence shows, what the evidence shows concerning Reynolds and what it discloses. Because this is, after all, a punitive damages claim about concealment.
And what you heard, you heard about the disclosures required by the federal law of Reynolds and you heard from Dr. Borgerding that those disclosures go above and beyond what is required.
Why are we talking about this, by the way? You heard this concept of mitigating evidence. And this is -- this is from one of the instructions that you'll have. And what it tells you is that mitigating evidence -- that's evidence which shows there is less of a need or no need to punish -- is something that you should consider. It is something that you should talk about when you are in the jury room deliberating.
Now, Mr. Paige asked -- he ran through a few things, payments under the MSA and FDA regulations
and he said, well, how is that mitigating evidence?
How is that evidence which shows there's less of a need to punish or no need to punish? I'm going to answer those questions for you.
Let's start with the master settlement agreement. Cigarette manufacturers are -- after reaching agreement with 46 states and then separately with the other states, including Florida, have paid significant amounts of money. Just Reynolds alone has paid $42 billion. To Florida alone, Reynolds paid -- has paid an additional $2 billion.
And the important thing is those payments (indicating), members of the jury, those are continuing. They talk about how much has been paid. Those payments continue on and on and on with no end in sight.
The other -- another piece of mitigating evidence is the question of the amount of litigation that Reynolds is facing.
You heard about the thousands of cases that are -- that are still pending against Reynolds.
Um, you heard about the punitive damages awards that have already been entered against Reynolds in these types of cases. $106 million in punitive
damages.
Now, think about that. Dr. Proctor, he came and took the stand. He goes to juries, as you heard, and he goes and he describes the same historical conduct to juries. You heard what he said.
He's not the biographer of the smoker. He comes in and he describes the conduct. He's looked at the documents and he describes the conduct, the concealment. The agreements to conceal. That's what he does.
And he testified -- he -- he's already testified, the evidence was, 18 times when he came in to this courtroom. 18 times. That's just him testifying in just 18 cases. So -- I think -- he alone had testified in over 50 cases just in the past three years.
So when they put up some number up there about 20 trials a year or something like that, there's no evidence of that. There's no evidence that there's 20 trials a year. There -- we know -- we know that Dr. Proctor is on a pace to far exceed that and he's just one person.
He comes in and he describes the same conduct each time; and juries that have found punitive
damage awards in those cases have punished Reynolds for that conduct.
Now, under Judge Walsh's instructions, this mitigating evidence is something that you should consider when determining the question of punitive damages.
Here's another issue that came up, Mr. Paige raised. Why is this mitigating evidence? I'll explain it.
This is a very unusual situation. You heard from Dr. Borgerding. The tobacco industry has to pay for the cost of its own regulation and the enforcement of those regulations. The police powers of the -- the FDA.
In just the last six years Reynolds has paid almost half -- excuse me -- more than half a billion dollars to the federal government to fund the very organization that then controls it. Clear -- going into the future these payments are going to continue on. Clearly this is billions and billions of dollars.
And this, ladies and gentlemen, how is this mitigating evidence? This is part of the price that Reynolds of 2015, the Reynolds of today, has to pay for past conduct.
I mean, you know from the evidence and from your own experience that circumstances have changed in terms of tobacco in this country. The ads are gone. They can't sponsor sporting events, things like that; but it's not just the environment.
It's not just people's views. The federal government has come in and taken total control.
This is the price that they've paid for their past conduct. That's why this is mitigating evidence, because this is something that you should consider in determining whether or not you need to punish Reynolds again.
So what is it that the FDA does? What evidence did you hear about that?
Well, again, in a case involving conspiracy to conceal, fraudulent concealment, probably the two most important things are right there on the top.
The FDA now requires that if Reynolds, or any other tobacco company for that matter, conducts any research on smoking and health, they have to turn it over. If they do any research on smoking and addiction, smoking and nicotine, anything like that, they have to turn it over.
There are no more internal studies, confidential documents of their research in this.
That has to be turned over to the federal government. Part of the FDA's powers in this regard, they get complete disclosure of all the ingredients. All the ingredients in a product. We have to disclose everything about the constituents of the cigarette, the smoke. If we know it, we have to tell them. There is no -- there is no ambiguity here. There is no wiggle room. This is a requirement.
The FDA controls the marketing and product development of Reynolds. So think about that. All those ads and things like that that they spent all that time showing you, the FDA now has control over that. That is not something that Reynolds can -they can't put an ad out in the paper, in the newspaper, on the radio, anything; they can't do any marketing efforts without getting it cleared through the FDA.
FDA has access to all the information on Reynolds' products now. All of it -- Reynolds' research. Now, the -- the point -- Mr. Gerson said, well, I mean, think about all this, the fees they pay, the regulation. That -- that doesn't excuse the prior conduct.
That's not the point. With respect, he knows
that's not the point. The point is that this is a consequence of the prior conduct. This doesn't excuse -- we're not arguing to you, ladies and gentlemen, that because this happens, well, you know, you shouldn't consider anything that Reynolds did in the past. We're presenting this to you as mitigating evidence to show that Reynolds is paying the price for its conduct already.
You-all are going to be asked to consider the circumstances and whether or not they've changed. Whether or not the conduct of Reynolds has changed. And this is evidence of that.
This is the consequence. This is a punishment that Reynolds is already dealing with and will deal with for on and on and on.
I want to mention the -- this question of conspiracy as well, because you heard from Dr. Proctor, during his testimony, that, um, the conspiracy ended in 2000. It was 15 years ago. And that's significant because, of course, that's one of the things that you-all found in your verdict. You found there was conspiracy.
But there's no dispute; even the plaintiffs' own expert agreed that conspiracy ended a long time ago.
And, again, I'm going to show you the jury instruction in a few moments that says that you can consider changed circumstances and changed conduct.
Now, in a case involving concealment of information, this is something that you can consider. That is the fact that the Reynolds Web site -- Reynolds maintains a Web site that has all the documents from the litigation.
So think about that. When this case is over, not before, not allowed to do any research yet; but when this case is over, if you wanted to you could go to this Web site (indicating) and look at all the same types of documents that the -- that the plaintiffs' lawyers have been putting up for you.
You and anyone can go and examine this.
It's available to anyone. It's the largest business archive in the world. It's searchable online. You heard the testimony, millions and millions of documents -- I think Dr. Proctor said 85 million pages. And this is a site that Reynolds pays for.
Now, again, in a case involving concealment you heard from -- from Reynolds witnesses about the fact that the ingredients in cigarettes are now publicly disclosed. We -- we've disclosed them before to the
federal government, but now they're also available to the public.
And -- and that's voluntary. We -- that's not part of any settlement with anyone. That is a voluntary step that Reynolds makes. To make it clear that the Reynolds of 2015 is transparent, is clear about things like what are in the cigarettes that are manufactured.
So smokers or anyone can go to the Web site.
They can check out the list of ingredients. They can look -- pull down their brand and see what's in there.
You've seen this part of the -- the Web site.
Again, in a case involving conspiracy -- I think it's important since you can look at changed conduct and changed circumstances -- consider this: This is part of the Reynolds Web site. These -- the guiding principles of Reynolds. The Reynolds of 2015. What Reynolds now tells smokers and the public.
And it's clear: Cigarette smoking is a leading cause of preventable deaths in the United States.
And it lists lung cancer, heart disease, and other serious smoking-related illnesses.
No confusion. No doubt. This is clear.
And this is changed conduct. These are changed
circumstances. And this is voluntary.
Ladies and gentlemen, again, Reynolds is not required to do this. The Reynolds of 2015 does this because it believes it should, not because it has to. And you saw other parts of the Web site -- I will remind you of them very briefly again -- that touch on this.
THE CLERK: Counsel, you have 20 minutes.
MR. ISASI: 20 minutes to go?
THE CLERK: Yeah.
MR. ISASI: Thank you.
THE CLERK: You're welcome.
MR. ISASI: So Reynolds says here that no tobacco product has been shown to be safe and without risks. There's no -- there's no confusion there. There's no doubt. It's not -- nothing is being concealed and this is voluntary.
The Reynolds of 2015 is acting as a responsible company in what is, admittedly, a controversial industry, but they are being responsible. These are -- this is different conduct. These are changed circumstances from the Reynolds that you heard so much about during this trial.
Nothing's being concealed. Nothing's being omitted. And that's why, ladies and gentlemen, the
punishment that the plaintiffs are proposing to you is punishment without a purpose.
We go -- again, couldn't be plainer. Reynolds tells its customers quitting smoking significantly reduces the risks of serious disease. No doubt about this. No confusion about this. A statement voluntarily made by Reynolds.
Here's another statement made by Reynolds. The best course of action for tobacco consumers concerned about their health is to quit. Again, that's a voluntary statement that Reynolds is not required to make and this is what the Reynolds of 2015 is telling its own customers. If you have health concerns about smoking, you should stop. Period. That's it.
So -- can you think of another industry -- does the liquor industry go to its customers and say, if you have concerns about drinking just don't drink anymore? But that's what the Reynolds of 2015 is doing.
So when you look at this all together -- as we respectfully request you should -- when you look at this together, what we've shown you is that Reynolds has and is already being punished for the conduct that you found it liable for in this case.
We have payments in the billions and continuing. Punitive damages awards have already been rendered over $100 million. We are paying for the -- for regulation of ourselves and the industry almost half a billion dollars, $565 million and going on, these payments, into perpetuity.
MR. SEIDEN: (Handing.)
MR. ISASI: (Perusing document.)
The FDA -- the FDA regulation, all the things that FDA can do, controlling manufacture and design. It has the power to close plants and seize products and has. It has exercised that authority. It's gone in and because a tobacco company -- not Reynolds as you heard -- but other -- other -another tobacco company wasn't complying with the regulations in force and effect, they went in and they used their enforcement powers.
They use enforcement powers to seize product. That's the -- that's the world that Reynolds lives in.
And then Reynolds has the voluntary disclosures. This is -- this is what Reynolds does that is above and beyond the call.
There we go.
In addition to all -- I haven't talked about
this one: Points smokers to the Surgeon General and government authorities. On the Web site we point people to the very authorities that you've heard so much about. Reports from the Centers For Disease Control, the Surgeon General's Reports and we tell smokers if you want information on smoking and health, that's where you should go (indicating).
No one is up trying to distract anyone from any of the messages that are coming from the public health community.
So remember all those questions that Mr. Paige was asking Dr. Borgerding on Friday about the -some congressional findings associated with the Family Tobacco Control Act [sic]? He was asking Dr. Borgerding about -- they were very serious findings. Congress had found, you know, that, among other things, the tobacco companies had concealed information about smoking. They were -- they were serious allegations, right? We agreed those were serious allegations and this is the result. This (indicating) is the result of what was found. It's an ongoing restrictive punishing environment that Reynolds operates in.
It's not just Reynolds, of course. Other cigarette manufacturers have to operate in this
environment as well.
And it's not -- and -- and -- and an important point on this, ladies and gentlemen, is that this isn't just punishment. The other cigarette companies and other companies are deterred by all this.
If you think about this, the kinds of fees, the -- the -- the payments, the settlements that have been entered into; that's deterrence. That's deterrence, convincing others not to do the same thing that you found Reynolds responsible for.
That's what any other company is looking at.
If they try to engage in the same type of conduct that you found Reynolds responsible for, this is what's waiting for them at the end.
What company wants to be facing this (indicating)? What company wants to have to deal with huge billion-dollar payments, total domination by federal agency, thousands and thousands of lawsuits? That's -- that's the deterrence (indicating).
And what -- what Mr. Paige and Mr. Gerson never explained to you, never provided you any evidence of is how, in the face of this (indicating), a punitive damages award in this case operates to deter
companies further.
This is what they're already facing: Companies both inside and outside of Florida look at this and they will -- and they see what the consequences of concealment are. That's a staggering, staggering picture for them. That's deterrence.
What's already happened is deterrence. And the plaintiffs -- it was their burden to show you how some other company, which is already looking at this (indicating), would then look at something else and -- and -- and that was -- that was necessary.
That was needed to deter. This (indicating) is deterrence. It's already been accomplished.
Now, I want to come back to the instructions -is what we started the discussion off with. This is one of the -- the instructions in the packet you'll see. You should consider the following: Whether there is any mitigating evidence that demonstrates there is no need for punitive damages or that a reduced amount of punitive damages should be imposed.
The evidence is, ladies and gentlemen, that Reynolds is being punished.
Everything we've discussed thus far demonstrates there's no need to punish Reynolds
further for concealment. No concealment is going on and they're already paying the price for the prior concealment.
The government requires disclosures. Reynolds is going above and beyond that.
And the evidence is -- there's two purposes for punitive damages: Punishment and deterrence. The evidence is that the punishments Reynolds has faced and other tobacco companies has faced would deter any company from engaging in that kind of conduct.
Now, there is one instruction that you weren't given in Phase I of this case that I -- that is in your -- that will be in your packet now and I just want to spend a moment talking to you about that.
And that's on Page 8 of your packet.
You've heard me refer to this a couple of times already. It says -- and this is important -- again, this is one of the new rules that's in effect for this phase.
In considering whether punitive damages are necessary, and, if so, how much to award against Reynolds, you should consider the extent to which Reynolds' conduct has changed from the conduct which you determined -- I'm sorry, the conduct on which you based your determination that punitive damages
were warranted. That's the fraud, the concealment, the conspiracy.
And you should consider the extent to which the circumstances have changed.
So what Judge Walsh is instructing you here is that you have to consider the Reynolds of 2015 and how it operates today in making your determination on punitive damages.
You have to consider the conduct that brought us to this phase, the fraudulent concealment and then you compare that conduct, the fraudulent concealment, from the past to the Reynolds of today. You compare the two and factor that into your decision.
You also have to consider, as you saw, the circumstance, whether circumstances have changed. And that's -- that's things like the regulations that are in effect. The executives that are now gone. We'll talk about that in a moment.
Even things as simple as the Internet. You know, you heard from -- you know, from the plaintiffs about how, you know, back in the '40s and '50 and '60s it wasn't as easy to get information. Today it's much easier to get information and Reynolds is getting that information about its
products out. Circumstances have changed.
And, again, even if you do conclude that punitive damages are warranted, what the judge is telling you here is that you should consider changed conduct and changed circumstances on the question of the amount.
So I mentioned the executives. This is -- this is one of the changed circumstances.
You saw this board (indicating). And we walked Dr. Borgerding through this. This is what the plaintiffs call the conspiracy.
And he took you through this and I asked him, look at the board. The folks from -- from the Tobacco Institute, the Center for Tobacco Research, TIRC, all of them. Do they work for Reynolds now? Have they worked for Reynolds? He said no. We took them off the board.
And I asked him about folks at other tobacco companies like Philip Morris, which you heard so much about in this case. Is Philip Morris a competitor of Reynolds today? Yes. Do the folks on this board work for Reynolds today? No. Did they work for Reynolds? No.
We talked about folks at the companies that over time have become part of Reynolds that are on
this board. Do any of them work for the Reynolds of 2015? He said no.
And then lastly, we looked at the folks who -who did work for Reynolds at some point in time and I asked him, do any of these people work for Reynolds today? And he said no.
And that's what's gone. Those are changed circumstances.
That's something that you can consider. The folks -- the folks that were at Reynolds when the conspiracy that you found existed was taking place, when the concealment was going on, they are gone.
Now...
The -- the restrictions that have been put in place have been put in place on a group of new people. New people at Reynolds.
They're already paying the price for the Reynolds. Twenty -- the Reynolds of 2015 is paying the price for the Reynolds conduct back then.
And the punishment today, punishment today has to have a purpose to be meaningful. It has to have a purpose because punishment without purpose, punishment for the sake of punishment, that's revenge. That isn't punishment that is sanctioned by the court. It has to be to deter. It has to be
to punish. And the question is, Reynolds is being punished now.
The people who are operating Reynolds today, the Reynolds of 2015, are developing different products, the ownership today is different. You heard about this from Dr. Borgerding, as well as from Dr. Figlar describing how Reynolds is working on ways to reduce the risks, the health risks associated with its products. Dr. Figlar told you about ZMapp, which is part of Reynolds's efforts to transform tobacco. That's a drug that was developed that was used to treat Ebola, which as you all may recall in the last year became a big issue.
That's the Reynolds of 2015.
They want you to punish Reynolds today for conduct going back almost 30 years or more. Now, Mrs. Larkin last smoked in 1988.
But the problem is that the people who are going to be writing that check are not those people. That's the Reynolds of 2015.
And that's something that you can consider when you make your determination.
So here's the verdict form.
This is -- the first question that you're going to be asked to -- to respond to. And it asks
what -- what the total amount of punitive damages, if any, you choose to award.
And this is important because there's no question -- let there be no dispute or debate about this -- you can decline to enter a punitive damage award. The fact that we are here doesn't mean that punitive damages must be awarded.
If you find, based on the evidence that you've heard, that punitive damages are not necessary to punish and deter, you can put a zero in there.
And that's because you've heard a lot of new things about Reynolds in this phase, we're operating under new rules, and you have a new question that you have to answer.
You've already sent a powerful message by entering a $5 million award.
Just because we're here today does not mean that you need to award or must award more. Because any amount that you award would be in addition to the compensatory damages that you've already awarded.
With your verdict, you unanimously, unanimously determined that $4,955,000 was the proper amount of money to fully, justly and fairly compensate for Mrs. Larkin's pain and suffering, disability and
physical impairment, disfigurement, mental anguish, and loss of capacity for enjoyment of life and her medical bills. All of those things: Fully, fairly, justly compensated in your award. That's a very significant amount of money. Takes people years to accumulate even a part of that.
And the plaintiffs are now asking you to award additional damages on top of that.
Now, if you enter such an award, let's be clear where the money goes. It's not going to any public agencies, antismoking efforts, smoking cessation clinics, other smokers. It doesn't go to anyone but Mrs. Larkin's estate. They can only be awarded to the plaintiff in this case.
Now, I'm not being critical of that, understand. That's -- here in Florida, that's how the law is; that's how we operate. It's not a criticism, but it is something that you should be aware of as you consider this question, where the money is going to go.
Now, when considering the question, punitive damages must be based solely, solely on Reynolds's conduct that you found to have caused Mrs. Larkin's oral cancer -- that's the fraudulent concealment and the conspiracy -- that's the -- what the -- that's
the law that Judge Walsh has given you. Other smokers, for example -- because you've heard they have their own suits, thousands of people out there with their own suits, those -- those suits shouldn't factor into this. You can only consider the harm to Mrs. Larkin.
Those people will have their own day in court, their own damages claims.
This case, this case is only about Carole Larkin and not any other smoker.
Now, the other -- and this is an important point, and you heard a little bit about this this morning, again, from the judge -- is that punitive damages cannot be awarded for design defects. And the judge read you an instruction this morning concerning the questioning that had occurred on Friday.
And she said, "You heard evidence on Friday about R.J. Reynolds's design of cigarettes. I further instruct you that the design of R.J. Reynolds cigarettes is not for your consideration during this phase of the case, and that you may not impose punitive damages to punish R.J. Reynolds for manufacturing cigarettes, including cigarettes that contain nicotine and are
inhalable."
"You cannot punish R.J. Reynolds for manufacturing cigarettes that contain nicotine and are inhalable."
And there's a -- there's an instruction that you'll see in your packet, it's on Page 9, that makes this clear.
The manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a lawful activity. You -- when you consider the question of whether or not to punish Reynolds, one thing that you cannot consider is the fact that Reynolds sells cigarettes and advertises cigarettes, even -- even the judge has told you -- even if Reynolds knew and believed cigarettes to be dangerous or to present health risks.
Even knowing that, that cannot factor into your determination on punitive damages. What you -- what you have found and what is part of the deliberations is the question of fraud and concealment but not the product itself.
There's a reason for that. The Reynolds of 2015 is trying to act as a responsible company in a controversial industry. That's evidence you can consider, but the judge has told you this is not evidence; you can't consider.
Now, if you -- if you go back here (indicating) and you enter zero on this form, you're not going to have to go any further. There's another question on the verdict form, but you won't have to reach it.
However, I'd like to talk to you about that for just a moment because it may come up in your deliberations. And this is the question -- Question No. 2, and it talks about, "Was the wrongful conduct of the managing agent, director, officer, or other person responsible for making policy decisions on behalf of Reynolds," and it gives you a whole list of things that you need to look at to -- to click "yes" on this. There's a whole list here. Things like that the... um...
Starting right here (indicating). "Was it" -"Was the person motivated solely by unreasonable financial gain?
"Was actual" -- "Was the high likelihood of injury resulting from the conduct actually known by the managing agent, director, officer, or other person responsible?"
There are -- if you look at that question, there are six different things that all have to be met for you to check "yes" on this box.
And you didn't hear about any of them. You --
what you did get was an instruction that said that the conduct that you have to consider for the question of punitive damages has to be conduct that harmed Mrs. Larkin and that there needed to be specific intent to harm Mrs. Larkin. That's in your instructions.
MR. GERSON: Objection, Your Honor. There's no need for there to be specific intent to harm Mrs. Larkin.
MR. ISASI: I'm happy to -THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, again, I'm going to ask you to take a look at the instruction and follow the instruction as it is written. This is the law that I am giving you that -- that you must follow in this case.
And what the attorney is presenting right now is argument and is not the legal instruction on the law.
MR. ISASI: Right. And I -- I -- you should absolutely look at the instruction. And when you do, you'll see on Page 4 it says that "One of the things you should consider is whether at the time of loss, injury, or damage, the managing agent, director, officer or other person responsible for making policy decisions on behalf of R.J. Reynolds
had a specific intent to harm Carole Larkin. And that that conduct did, in fact, harm Carole Larkin."
"Specific intent." That means that this -this managing agent, director, officer that they didn't bother to name for you had specific intent to harm Carole Larkin. Not some unknown smoker, not smokers in general, but Mrs. Larkin. That's the instruction. Don't take my word for it and look at it yourself.
THE CLERK: Ten minutes.
MR. ISASI: Ten minutes to go?
THE CLERK: Yes.
MR. ISASI: Thank you, Juan.
THE CLERK: You're welcome.
MR. ISASI: So respectfully, ladies and gentlemen, I think I've accurately recited the law to you and respectfully we suggest that under the law and instruction that you'll have, the answer to this question should be no; they did not meet that proof, they didn't show that to you at all.
So let's go back to Question 1. I'm going to try to pull this all together for you.
Over the past 15 years, Reynolds has turned the corner. It's a changed company. It's now taken the position that smoking is dangerous, it's addictive
and it tells everyone so right on its Web site.
You heard Dr. Borgerding was asked that question: What's the position? Smoking is dangerous, can be addictive.
Reynolds broke its connection with companies like CTR and TI and TIRC and they've been disbanded. Reynolds publishes all the documents that involve this litigation on our Web site for anyone to look at. It publishes all the ingredients of its cigarettes. It informs smokers of the risk of smoking. It says that smoking can be addictive and dangerous and that the best course of action is to quit smoking if you have any concerns.
There has been zero evidence presented to you, ladies and gentlemen, zero that Reynolds today conceals information or enters into agreements to conceal. No other -- the -- the furthest back that anyone can go on that is to 2000. There's no evidence of concealments or agreements to conceal past 2000. That's 15 years.
And the folks -- you saw on that board the folks who were engaging in the conduct, they're gone; they're not here to punish.
And, as you've heard, Reynolds is a company that is significantly and thoroughly regulated by
the federal government.
Its future actions are controlled by the FDA.
So we submit, ladies and gentlemen, that based on the evidence, and plaintiffs failure to meet the burden of proof, which they still bear in this case, you should vote to award zero dollars for punitive damages.
I submit to you, members of the jury, that there really is no valid purpose for a punitive damages award because they're not needed to punish the Reynolds of 2015. It's punishment without purpose. It's not the type of deterrence that is needed or effective.
So I'd encourage you to exercise your discretion on the verdict form and choose to award no damages.
Now, I want to conclude by talking about what the award you have already entered and your discussion of damages in this phase.
We submit to you that your award the nearly $5 million you've already awarded is a message heard loud and clear. And the plaintiffs are now asking for almost another 20 million. They want a total judgment coming out of this case of almost $25 million.
Now, we submit that it's -- that's just not a proper punitive damages award in this case based on the evidence that you've heard. It's punishment without a purpose. It is revenge.
Now, you-all may choose to discuss, though, punitive damages amounts. You may, when you get back there, before you render your judgment, you may want to talk about it; maybe it's going to be more than zero. Maybe you have heard the evidence on Reynolds, its changed conduct, its changed circumstances, and you conclude, well, I'll take that into account, but only on the amount. I'm not going to find zero. And that's something that you could do. It's -- it's within your province and we respect that.
So because of that, I just want to talk about common sense for a moment.
If that discussion is going to take place, we ask you to use your common sense and keep in mind the purpose of punitive damages. If you're going to have that discussion and you're going to talk about a range of numbers that you could potentially fill in, we believe common sense and the evidence would dictate that conversation take place in a range -it certainly could be zero, as we've suggested, but
it could be more than zero, it could be hundreds, it could be thousands, it could be tens of thousands, it could be hundreds of thousands of dollars. It could even be one million dollars. That could be a reasonable, commonsense determination that you all reach on the question of additional damages to award.
Because, remember, under Judge Walsh's instructions we've heard mitigating evidence, all the things we've gone through, you can consider that not just on the question of whether to award punitive damages, but also on whether or not to lower the amount of punitive damages that you might otherwise award.
So we simply request that you use common sense when you get -- and when you consider the purpose of punitive damages that that discussion take place in -- in that range.
Because when you consider all the evidence, all of the punishment and all the deterrence, nothing more is needed in this case or with respect to others.
Finally, you have to think about the message that punitive damages awards send.
There's no -- they haven't disputed that
Reynolds -- the Reynolds of 2015 has changed the way that it does business. It doesn't do business the same way. What is -- a significant punitive damages award, both to other companies as well as at Reynolds says, change your conduct, be -- be punished, with the whole regulatory scheme, all those billions of dollars of payments that you have to make, all of that, doesn't matter. The message will be, even if you change everything and you become a better company, you're going to be punished over and over and over again. You're going to continue to be punished.
THE CLERK: Counsel, you have three minutes.
MR. ISASI: Thank you.
THE CLERK: You're welcome.
MR. ISASI: Um, so I have three minutes.
I thank you for your patience today and through this whole trial. It's -- it's a remarkable thing to be called in for jury service. I mentioned to you before, we're all volunteers here, and you got drafted.
And -- this has been -- this trial has been a remarkable journey. And even though you didn't volunteer for it, it's certainly our hope that you have -- you've obtained a benefit from participating
in this process. Some of you may never have a chance to serve on a jury again. I suspect you will remember this as long as you do.
I'm going to sit down now. I have to sit down, and this will be the last time I get to say anything to you-all. And that's because the plaintiffs -remember, the reason they go last is because they have the burden of proof. So I can't respond when Mr. Paige gets up and says what he's going to say, I can't respond to the things that he's going to say, but you've heard our points. By now you've probably heard them too many times. But you've heard our points, you know what the responses would be.
So as you listen to Mr. Paige, I would ask you as he's talking to you, think about, what would Jose say in response to that? What would he say?
On behalf of our client, R.J. Reynolds, on behalf of our team, I want to thank you. We have confidence in you and in your deliberations, and we will respect your decision. Thank you.
