MR. FASI: Thank you, Your Honor.
Good afternoon.
JURORS: Good afternoon.
MR. FASI: I said to you all during jury selection that what you do is similar to what used to be a long time ago when we had a draft and people actually went in and did service in the military, public service, service to their country.
What you've done is exactly that here, and I think that all sides thank you for your service, thank you for your attention, which is really the -really a remarkable thing.
When you see a lot of juries, you realize that what you all did, showing up on time and paying attention throughout everything, is remarkable.
And so we thank you for that, because that's what we asked you for when we were picking a jury.
It was about two weeks ago when I presented my opening statement to all of you. And I mentioned that we would bring you the rest of the story. We would bring you facts so that after you listened to the plaintiff's case, you would see that there was
another side to the story and that it was not as simple as it was made out to be.
And what's remarkable is throughout the over one-hour closing argument, what you heard was as simple as it could possibly be. And I want to spend my time explaining that to you, at least the way we've seen the evidence as it's come forward, why we brought some of the evidence to you, why we questioned some of the people the way we did, and why we called some of the people that we did, because you deserve to have all of the facts and you deserve to have the full picture.
Now, I believe that what we told you on opening, all the things we laid out to you, all came into this case, all of it, and I will explain that to you as we go through.
The key point that I made in opening statement, if you can think back to then, was this is not a class action. And what you heard during the plaintiff's opening was a class action argument. It was about all the things that have been done globally.
But I want you to think about a statement that I made to you, and I'm going to get to it in one second, remember when I said this case is about one
smoker, one, it's about Barbara Lourie. Think and look at your notes and think about how many times did they tie things to Barbara Lourie in a direct and substantial and convincing way? And I don't think it's an exaggeration to say they did not.
And there is a reason they did not. And that's what we're going to explore together.
I previewed for you what they would do in opening statement, and if you remember, I said always ask yourself this question.
It's okay for me to have this here, Judge?
THE COURT: Yeah.
MR. FASI: I said every time they show you something from one of the companies or whatever, ask yourselves what does that have to do with.
I don't know if you remember me saying that because it was early in the opening, just like it's early in my closing. Everything they put up, ask what did that have to do with Mrs. Lourie? Whether it was ads, internal documents, articles, all those kinds of things. Because what you have in this case, that many times we don't have, is a vivid, clear, in-focused picture of this smoker, of what she was like, of how she saw things, and what happened in her life.
We had people come to talk to you who have known her since she was a little girl, and they remained friends up until she unfortunately passed away. That's amazing and that's unique, but it also helps to bring information to you.
Think about how many times we had to bring you what her friends said, what other family members said about her that paints the picture of this one smoker.
What they have done in this case is what I call generic versus Mrs. Lourie. And the generic brand isn't the complete brand that comes in.
We said to you, and they admitted today again, they have the burden of proof. They have to prove this case to you before you give them anything.
And that's their burden. And they have run from that burden.
Think about what I said to you in opening statement. They have to do more than prove cigarettes cause disease, cigarettes are addictive, and the company said some dumb things. We told you that in opening.
And what have you heard for the last two weeks? Cigarettes cause disease, cigarettes are addictive, and the company said some dumb things.
And that's all they have done. They have cherry-picked little things they want you to see to get you riled up so that you give them what they want without talking about the smoker.
We're trying to make you believe this is some kind of a class action, and look at what's happened to the whole country or whatever, this -- I don't know what the word was, this period in our history.
What matters, and you'll see it when you get the instructions and the verdict form, what matters is Mrs. Lourie, and that is all that matters in this case.
But just think to yourselves, as I go through this, I will illustrate, but you all know how they stayed away from Mrs. Lourie in the case, and they stayed away from her in their closing argument to you.
The interesting thing that I heard Mr. Bigger say is that he put up a thing about the evidence, and he said you need to look at the -- you need to look at the entire evidence in this case. In this case you need to look at the entire evidence. And he said I can't touch on it all. Well, yes, you can, if you focus on Ms. Lourie, you could touch on it all.
When you think about, and I will point out to you later, the experts' testimony that they brought you, Dr. Burns and Dr. Proctor, think for just a second, and I will get into it in more detail later, I promise, but just think, Dr. Proctor, what was the first thing Dr. Proctor said when he sat in that witness stand? "I am not here to talk about Barbara Lourie." Well, then, what's the point?
Dr. Burns comes in, starts putting up statistics about the generic smoker. What does that have to do with Mrs. Lourie?
I'll give you a quick example. He put up some stuff about, well, there is a certain percentage of people that thought that light cigarettes were okay for them. That's great. Some percentage of people. But what about Mrs. Lourie? What did her husband say about that? And we'll explore that in a minute.
That's really a key question, came out very early in my opening, and it remains the key question for you in deciding this case. You can be upset about dumb things that were said, you heard Jeanne Bonhomme say there was no shortage of dumb ideas. Yeah, I'll say.
But what did it have to do with Mrs. Lourie?
How can they take anything that they showed you and make a direct, substantial, impactful connection to Mrs. Lourie and come here and ask you to present them with money and award them punitives and all those other things and yet they don't want to talk about Mrs. Lourie.
Not a single witness of theirs was able to tell you, this is important, not a single witness of theirs was able to tell you something that a tobacco company said or did that had a substantial and direct impact on Barbara Lourie's decision to start smoking, keep smoking, not quit smoking.
Think. Think about that.
What witness came in and said my close friend, my best friend said, "If they had just told me this, I would have quit years ago"? What person came in here and said, "Because of what they did, that's why I started smoking"? And that's critical in this case. That's critical.
Because as the judge will tell you, you don't leave your common sense behind. You're going to find out everything is going to be about the legal cause to Mrs. Lourie. And how do you get there when they won't talk about it?
Think of -- think of her friends who
testified. Each one of them, and this is important, was a smoker. Each one of them quit smoking. And none of them ever said that they started, continued, or delayed quitting because of anything the tobacco companies said or did. Think about that. Not one. Nobody.
They want to say it's pervasive, it's everywhere. It's everywhere. And yet here are her friends from when she is six years old, and they tell you they started smoking. Did any of them say I started smoking because of ads or because I read something in a -- in a TIRC brochure? Did any of them say I didn't quit smoking because the tobacco companies said I don't have to?
And then to come in and say, well, once you're addicted, you can't quit. Isn't that amazing that everybody who testified, including Elaine Berman today, she quit smoking in 1975.
We showed you, we showed you what Mrs. Lourie actually saw and read. Do you remember the PSAs, the public service announcements? Mr. Lourie said they both saw Yul Brenner, Larry Hagman, and the guy from Perry Mason, Bill Talman. He said, "We saw those."
You didn't hear that coming from here. No,
what you heard from here was there was this wallpaper in the air and somehow or other that affected her. Well, you heard from Mr. Lourie that they saw that.
The Surgeon General Report, unequivocally, and I will be talking about this a little bit more, the Surgeon General Report, why do you think that after you heard about it on a Friday, on a Monday, they come back and say, oh, no, I misspoke, she never read that. Why do you think that is? Think about it. Because it is critical to this case.
Warnings on the cigarette packs. Is there any question in your mind that she saw the warnings on the cigarette packs? Did not Mr. Lourie say of course she saw them, they were right there in front of her. He said that from that witness chair.
The Great American Smokeout, when we said, did you know about the Great American Smokeout, it was not, no, we never heard of that. It was, yeah, we knew about it and she chose not to participate.
There was testimony that she read about smoking and health and addiction, and yet they want you to believe that because there was this campaign of doubt, that doesn't connect. There is no connection to her.
You heard, from the testimony early on, that she was well-read on this subject. We're not just coming in here and saying, oh, you know what, she read a lot of newspapers. Well, big deal if she read a lot of newspapers. But you heard from her husband who said she was well read. She knew the issues. She read about tobacco and health. She read about addiction.
This wasn't some person who had no idea what was going on in the world around her. That's why it was so important to talk about Barbara Lourie. Because if you want to talk about the generic brand, sure, then you can take all that stuff and put it up there and you can say, well, yeah, I guess. But we don't have to say I guess in this case, because we're not talking generic. We're talking Barbara Lourie.
So I want to go through some of the main elements that the plaintiffs must prove to all of you, not to some of you, each and every one of you they have to prove this. And I want to show you how they have fallen far short of meeting their burden.
First of all, the number one thing that I think the evidence supports completely is
Mrs. Lourie is not a class member of the Engle class.
This is the same verdict form you were shown earlier. The very first question you have to ask is, was she a member of the Engle class, and that's the question that does it. Now, I want to explore that with you a little bit.
First of all, "Was Barbara Lourie addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?" There is an important word, "and," and, meaning it's connected, it's not and/or, it's and, it's connected. "And if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?"
"And." It's not enough, was she addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and was it a legal cause.
So this question can actually be broken down into three other questions. There is three questions here. And the first question, and we're going to take these piece by piece. "Did Mrs. Lourie's cancer originate in her lungs?"
That's the first thing that they must prove to you, to your satisfaction. Not to ours, all the lawyers sitting here, to your satisfaction.
"Was Mrs. Lourie addicted to cigarettes
containing nicotine and, and if she was addicted, was it the legal cause of her cancer and death?"
That's the class membership.
So what I'm going to do, you're probably going to be grateful for this, is I've been working, as you know, with the other attorneys, but with Pam Yates, who has handled much of the medical. And so since the first question is did the cancer originate in her lungs, I'm going to have Pamela Yates address you for a little bit. Okay?
MS. YATES: Good afternoon.
JUROR: Good afternoon.
MS. YATES: Did Mrs. Lourie's cancer originate in her lungs? As Mr. Fasi told you this morning and in his opening -- or this afternoon and in his opening statement, plaintiff has the burden of proof, and that is just as true in the medical side of the case as the rest of the case. So let me address medical.
I think we can agree on one thing. There is a lot of missing information from the medical side of the case. Records are gone. We have no original films, no x-rays, no scans, no MRIs, none. No records from multiple physicians, the initial presentation, her chemotherapy treatment, various
doctors that she saw throughout her life. No tissue to look at under the microscope.
We have a few doctors' notes and very few actual reports. I showed you that slide with Dr. Peterson. But the vast majority of the limited medical information we have is from notes of other doctors reporting on somebody's findings.
Primarily, Dr. Calkins' notes, who was either reviewing the now missing records or relying on some other report of what was in those records. We actually don't know.
And even though there are many things missing on the medical side of the case, what we tried to do was bring you as complete a picture as we could. And we don't have all the answers, that's obvious.
Plaintiff has the burden of proof.
If we look at the records, we essentially have two snapshots of time for Mrs. Lourie's medical care and treatment. We have a 1992 hospitalization for a hysterectomy. She had severe abdominal pain. We have that snapshot.
We have another snapshot. Approximately November 1996 until September 1997, and that covers some of her care and treatment relating to the multiple cancers Mrs. Lourie ended up with.
That's all we know. Why is that important? Because in medicine, you need, and you talk in medical probabilities. And in a court of law, you have to have proof. And that burden is on the plaintiff.
Is it enough to say that we have a smoker here and cancer ended up in the lungs? Is that the end of the inquiry?
Not in medicine, not in a court of law.
I read with interest when Mr. Bigger put up some of his slides with some of the experts. No doubt, no possibility from his witnesses. When so much is missing, I throw it to you as to whether there can be no doubt, no possibility.
Let me be clear about something. I think you've noticed, but there have been some comments throughout trial, and, in fact, Mr. Bigger made some comments in his closing. And I think the comment in closing was, "You heard the defense in this case question whether Mrs. Lourie had lung cancer."
Let me be very, very clear. We have never and are not claiming, not a single witness said that Mrs. Lourie did not have a cancer in her lungs. We saw some of the evidence from the pathology report.
We do claim that with the limited evidence we have available to us, that that cancer did not begin in her lungs.
We never claimed, not a single witness testified that we knew where the cancer began. We don't have enough information. It could be the breast, the colon, multiple other locations based on the type of cancer Mrs. Lourie had.
Remember, the type of cancer was adenocarcinoma. Adenocarcinomas can begin in any place of the body that has glandular tissue. There is a long list. I think Dr. Peterson went from about here to here (indicating).
What we tried to do was bring you the rest of the story as best we could in light of the limited records, just as Mr. Fasi said we would.
Let's take a look at the medical evidence. Probably the most important admission in this case on the medical side came from Dr. Villa. And it dealt with Mrs. Lourie's lung tumors.
Dr. Villa admitted most of the time, we find tumors, plural, in the lung, they came from somewhere else.
Why is that admission so important? Because Mrs. Lourie had tumors, plural, in her lungs.
When you put that admission next to the evidence that was presented by plaintiff on the number of tumors in the lungs, some questions start to come up.
Plaintiff's case began with a one single tumor theory. It moved to a two-tumor theory under cross-examination and it ended with a maybe one or two tumor. Their witnesses, three different theories, their burden of proof.
Let's go through the evidence in order and see where that single-tumor story began.
It began with Dr. Calkins. Dr. Calkins came in here and told you under oath there was one tumor in the right lung. She was adamant there was one tumor.
Under cross-examination, I actually showed her the pathology report, and Dr. Calkins stood firm on one tumor. She said it grew through the fissure, the separation of the lobes. And it was actually one tumor that had grown.
And remember that? Dr. Calkins challenged the findings of the pathologist, the person who actually had the tissue in front of him, looked at it grossly, looked at it under a microscope, he measured it, he examined it, and he reported on it.
But Dr. Calkins said he got it wrong.
You are the sole judges of credibility. The judge read you that instruction. You can look at the means and opportunities to know the facts and the reasonableness of the testimony, those are just two of the factors in assessing credibility.
The next medical witness, Dr. Villa, you were shown a diagram by the plaintiffs. I don't know if you remember this. It was up on the big board.
They had the one lung being removed, and we cleaned that up that it was two, and they had a picture of one mass, plaintiff's evidence.
And then I cross-examined Dr. Villa. And Dr. Villa admitted that there were two tumors in the right lung, one in the upper lobe, one in the middle lobe. And remember, I took the tumor diagram and I added, I drew on there the second tumor. We now have two tumors. That was Dr. Villa.
And Dr. Villa was specifically questioned, well, couldn't it be one that had grown through this fissure? He said no, Dr. Calkins was wrong.
He disagreed with Dr. Calkins.
How else do we know there were two tumors? Well, we know from the actual pathology report, one
of the few reports we have in this case, we don't have the tissue, but we do have the report, is the pathology report of December 3rd, 1996 and that report specifically measures the size of the two tumors and that there are clear margins around those two tumors. There is an actual clear description of the tumor. That means no merging of the tumors.
Who is the next witness called that addressed the tumors? Dr. Burns. What did Dr. Burns say, I don't know, one or two. He had access to all records. He had access to everything. He couldn't conclude.
One of the few actual reports that we have in this case, the pathology report, and yet even with that evidence, plaintiff's witnesses give three versions of the story, one tumor, two tumors, one or two tumors. Burden of proof.
But ask yourselves why did plaintiff's witnesses start out by showing you their picture with one, by having Dr. Calkins testify as to one, and it all comes back to Dr. Villa's admission.
Most of the time we find tumors, plural, in the lung, they came from somewhere else.
Dr. Peterson agreed. Dr. Peterson said there
are two tumors, right upper lobe, right middle lobe, and then Dr. Peterson developed the story a little further; right? He showed you all -- we did our drawing. And Dr. Peterson, again, we don't have the actual scan, we have a report of a report, and he showed you the other nodular findings in Mrs. Lourie's lungs. Why? Because that's medically accurate.
As Mr. Fasi promised in opening, we tried to bring you the full story, so we didn't stop at the two tumors, we tried to bring you as close to the full picture as we know based on what's available.
So where does this leave us? Well,
Dr. Peterson agreed with Dr. Villa, most of the time we find tumors in the lung, they came from somewhere else.
What other medical evidence did we bring you? Could we solve the entire puzzle? No. This is not like an episode of House where we have a differential diagnosis and he solves the problem.
We got you to the list of differential diagnosis, but he can't tell you where the cancer began.
There are multiple cancers on that list.
And in Dr. Peterson's opinion, the presentation of Mrs. Lourie's cancer, there was not
enough information available in order to conclude where it started, but there was enough to conclude, that admission from Dr. Villa and the agreement from Dr. Peterson, it did not start in the lung.
Remember the testimony about cancer of unknown primary? How can that be? How can you have a cancer and not know where the primary is?
Dr. Villa and Dr. Peterson agreed, the primary could have disappeared. The body has some type of immunologic response, and the primary is no longer there. The primary could be too small. Even though you've got wide metastatic disease, you have a tiny primary and you don't find it. And number three, the doctors treat the patient assuming the location where they first found the cancer is the primary source, and that's not unreasonable.
That's when you need to look at the circumstances of the patient care, what are the symptoms, where are the symptoms. Clinically silent in the world of cancer does not mean it's not there, but the doctor will treat where they know it is. And that's what happened here.
There is no criticism of what Mrs. Lourie's doctors did.
Let's take a quick minute to look at some of
the other evidence. These are admissions from Dr. Villa and Dr. Peterson, they agreed, most cancers are genetic. Mrs. Lourie was young when she was diagnosed with cancer in her lungs, much more common in your 60s and 70s. Just because the first diagnosed cancer is in the lung doesn't mean it started there, Dr. Villa and Dr. Peterson agreed. Adenocarcinomas from other locations metastasize to the lungs. In fact, the evidence in this case is that the morphology and metastatic pattern of Mrs. Lourie's cancer are consistent with adenocarcinomas that are not lung primaries.
Dr. Villa and Dr. Peterson agreed. Plaintiffs have the burden of proof.
So even though we have very limited records, consider the tests that were done and the circumstances under which those tests were done. There is no debate, there was no colonoscopy.
There is no debate, there was no mammogram for at least four years.
That's not a criticism of her physicians.
Mrs. Lourie's physicians were treating a lady with where she had her symptoms.
If it were as simple as the two facts that plaintiffs rely on, smoking and cancer in the
lungs, we would need to do no further investigation, and that's not how medicine works.
We wouldn't need the specialty testing. We wouldn't need the tumor boards.
Did Mrs. Lourie describe -- did Mrs. Lourie's treating doctors describe her carcinoma as adenocarcinoma of the lungs? Yes, that's in the records. But look at the circumstances under which they were treating Mrs. Lourie. Those conclusions are not unreasonable.
Mrs. Lourie was in pain. She had been in pain for several months, she had the shoulder pain, taking Advil thinking it was a sports injury.
She had an x-ray. She had a diagnosis. They found the mass in the lungs. They found the masses in the brain. She had a seizure. All within a matter of a few weeks, a very compressed time frame. And then she underwent her treatment after her surgeries, and the records described her as doing okay under horrible circumstances, and then there is another span of a few weeks where Mrs. Lourie's two episodes admit her to the emergency, a short time frame again. In total, ten months. Dr. Peterson got it wrong. We had two compressed time frames of a few weeks. The entire
time frame was ten months.
This is still a very short time. And what we know is unfortunately, Mrs. Lourie had cancer -oops.
At the end in many locations. Many locations.
Plaintiff showed a slide in closing. Barbara Lourie had lung cancer caused by smoking. And he had a list of witnesses on one side and just Dr. Peterson on the other. Dr. Peterson conceded if this is a primary lung cancer, it's most likely smoking is the cause.
There were two doctors on that list, Dr.
Taylor and Dr. DeWeese that I expect there is nothing in the record that either one of those doctors said her lung cancer was caused by smoking. The only time that examination came in was a cross-examination of Dr. Peterson and it was "they said it was a lung cancer." That's it. But that's not the debate whether Barbara Lourie's lung cancer was caused by smoking. The debate is whether the cancer began in her lungs.
Finally on the death certificate, Mr. Bigger said there is no dispute. I think the witnesses agreed, Dr. Villa, Dr. Peterson, agreed to a perforated colon. There was debate over what had
caused that perforated colon. There was debate as to whether a metastatic process could cause, rarely, maybe, so there was some debate over the due to, not the immediate cause of a perforated colon.
We brought you the most complete picture of Mrs. Lourie's lung tumors. Plaintiffs brought you a one tumor, two tumor, one or two tumors version. Three different versions. They have the burden of proof. I don't think that tumor evidence meets that burden of proof because of Dr. Villa's admission. And maybe that explains -- ask yourselves why did they try to convince you early on there was only one tumor in the lung?
With that, I'm going to turn it back to Mr. Fasi. Thank you.
MR. FASI: The second element that you have to take a look at is was she addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.
The plaintiff's position in 2009, do you remember there was something called a verified worksheet that was signed under oath, and I'm sorry to have to do that, I've got to go back.
MS. YATES: Sorry.
MR. FASI: That's all right.
I don't know if you-all remember this, but this is the sworn verified worksheet filled out by Mr. Lourie. I think it's important for you to take a look at this language. Mr. Lourie is asked was she addicted. And Mr. Lourie says, "Addiction is a medical diagnosis. I am not qualified to say whether the smoker was addicted or not." Check this out. "I'm not sure what the smoker's medical records say about this." Presumably in those records, someone had to have written this woman is hopelessly addicted, as you heard throughout this trial, somewhere over the course of 50-some years.
"I'm not sure what those records have to say. Defendants have been given medical record releases to obtain those records, and doctors will have to say whether the smoker was addicted. Since I can't say whether the smoker was addicted or not, I can't say how long the smoker was addicted. The witnesses who may be able to testify about the smoker's addiction are her doctors and/or expert witnesses who have not yet been identified," in 2009. That's sworn under oath. So we know according to the plaintiff in this case who is asking you for money damages here that addiction is a medical diagnosis. So why then did he get up on
the witness stand and tell you that he knew that his wife was addicted if he just got done under oath saying I don't know, I'm not qualified? Why, then, did they put a bunch of lay witnesses up this there to say, oh, yeah, she was addicted, and then create a slide for you with all these names when under oath, the person seeking money damages from you says "I'm not qualified, it's a medical diagnosis"?
Think about that. Use your everyday experience and common sense as to why someone would do that.
Dr. Herkov and Dr. Rosman agreed that the DSM-IV was the gold standard for diagnosis of addiction. One of them, Dr. Rosman, is a medical doctor. The other is a psychologist. One of them,
Dr. Rosman, actually treats nicotine addiction.
Dr. Herkov does not. Let's think about that for a minute as you look at the credibility of the witnesses and as Mr. Bigger wanted you to keep in mind, qualifications, why would you bring someone to testify about nicotine addiction who doesn't treat nicotine addiction? And that was the first witness they put before you.
And they disagreed on the definition of
addiction. And, in fact, you won't get a definition of addiction in this case. You go through those jury instructions, there will not be a definition of addiction. You're going to have to rely upon what you heard and what you believe and what seems more reasonable. The only doctor you heard from, who is a boarded psychiatrist that treats nicotine addiction is Dr. Rosman, and he explained to you why using the DSM-IV, he did not believe she was addicted.
Now, if two physicians can come in here, use the same criteria, and they can't agree, how could you possibly be able to agree? Two doctors, both qualifications, a little bit different, but both with qualifications. And when you read the jury instruction about burden of proof, it says if you have to guess, they have not met their burden. You cannot guess at what an answer is on this verdict form. They have the burden to prove it to you so that you don't have to guess.
Dr. Burns and Dr. Herkov testified not all smokers are addicted. But even Dr. Burns and Dr. Herkov, the plaintiff's experts, cannot agree on what the criteria is that should be used to define addiction.
This is almost like what Ms. Yates just talked about, smoker, tumor in the lung (snaps fingers), lung cancer from cigarettes. Well, what they want you to believe is she smoked a lot of cigarettes, so she is addicted.
Well, it's interesting that Dr. Herkov, their expert, said "The amount of smoking alone is not enough to diagnose someone as addicted." What does Dr. Burns say? If you smoke X number of cigarettes, you are addicted. Their own experts can't agree.
So I want you to think on this issue carefully and see if you can make a decision on it. And if you can't, if you have to guess, they haven't met the burden of proof on this question. And then addiction is not the legal cause of her disease.
An addiction is not the legal cause of her disease.
Whatever definition you choose to apply, even if you were to find she was addicted, the next question is whether Mrs. Lourie's addiction, if any, was a legal cause of her lung cancer and death. And the key is the why. Do you remember when I did the opening statement, I gave you an example about if I am walking across the street, if I go out the door, across Twiggs, and (snaps
fingers) I got hit by a car or a truck, what was the cause, in fact? The truck hit me and hurt me. Okay? But what's the legal cause? I don't know if you remember that. What's the legal cause? The legal cause is the why did it happen.
And I told you then that I would tell you at closing why the accident happened in the hypothetical I gave you. Well, in the hypothetical I gave you, the accident happened because the truck ignored a stop sign and blew right through it and hit me.
Mrs. Lourie ignored the biggest stop sign in the history of public health, the Surgeon General Report of 1964 that you have heard about over and over again in this case. Despite knowing and believing the health risks of smoking, what did Mrs. Lourie do? She kept smoking. That's the why. That's legal cause.
She was a fully-informed adult who was not addicted. How can you say that? How can you say that?
Let's take a look at this. Because according to Dr. Burns, I hope you remember this, and I know a lot of you took notes, according to Dr. Burns, if she had quit in 1964, when she was 19 years old, an
adult, after the Surgeon General Report, or in
1966,	when she was 21 years old, after the warning labels went on every packet of cigarettes, she would not have gotten cancer. And I know you remember testimony.
The same is true in 1976, when she was 31 years old. From that point forward, '64 and '66 especially, the sole legal cause is her choice to keep smoking. Geez, how could she not keep smoking, according to the plaintiffs?
Think back to the testimony in this case as to when people who knew her and when their experts said she became addicted. And it wasn't in 1964, and it wasn't in 1966. So if the key to their case is she was so addicted she couldn't quit, well, geez, how do you explain 1964 and 1966, when she is an adult, and your own expert said she wasn't addicted yet?
This is the legal cause description that you were given. "In order for legal cause" -- "in order to be regarded as a legal cause of a disease or a medical condition" -- you will have these, by the way -- "an dictation to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause."
So what does that mean? Mrs. Lourie knew, I
think we can agree, Mrs. Lourie knew that smoking was a health risk from a very early point in time in her life. Mrs. Lourie had the ability to quit very early in her life. And here is the key phrase. She could have quit in time to avoid her injury.
Because if that's not true, then how is it that she could have any fault? And the plaintiff is saying she could have quit. If she had tried hard enough, she could have quit. All of their experts, their experts, told you it's up to the smoker to quit smoking.
If you get to this question, based upon the evidence in the case, you should attribute 100 percent to Mrs. Lourie if you get there. She is the only person from the evidence in this case that could have made the decision to quit smoking. She is the only person that could have decided to make a serious effort to quit smoking, and her smoking decisions were hers and hers alone.
Now, we talked about awareness. And you heard about the Gallup poll in 1954, where 90 percent of people had heard that smoking -- that there had been a connection between smoking and lung cancer. That's in 1954. 60 years ago.
You heard about the Newton study, which remarkably, the plaintiffs put up before you today.
In that study, of which we believe, and you heard from the experts, they believe that Mrs. Lourie was a part of that study in 1959, 90 percent of the students polled in 1959 knew that smoking was hazardous to your health, knew smoking caused cancer. But here is the key. Think about this.
This is why I find it remarkable they put this up for you. What was the percentage of ninth grade girls who were smoking at her school in 1959? What was the percentage? 10 percent.
I say this, it's simple math, but advertising was everywhere, and it made people smoke even if they didn't want to. Made everybody smoke. That's what you heard. It was the culture. It was everywhere, and that's the excuse for starting to smoke. Blame the advertisers.
But if that's true, then why did 90 percent of those students not smoke in 1959? You have to agree, she was in the distinct minority in 1959.
5 percent -- there was a graph from Dr. Burns.
5 percent of the people in Dr. Burns's graph that he showed you in 1960, 5 percent of women smoked at her age in 1960. 5 percent. What happened to the
other 95? Why weren't they sucked into the culture? Why didn't they start smoking at an early age because they were being targeted?
It's an interesting question that I will be waiting to hear the answer to. 95 percent were not smoking. So, so much for the power of advertising.
Dr. Burns said in 1975, if you remember that I went through this with you, this goes to what we call awareness. This is 11 years after the Surgeon General's Report came out, and what they want you to believe is that the only voice being heard in the wilderness was that of the tobacco companies. That nobody else was out there getting the facts out.
There were no secrets out there. They can say it all they want to try to get you upset, to try to get you to award them large sums of money, but the fact of the matter is that their own expert in 1975 said more Americans knew about the dangers of cigarette smoking than knew the President of the United States.
What does that have to do with Mrs. Lourie? You know from sitting here for two weeks listening the testimony, she knew.
1981, 95 percent of people, Dr. Burns said,
are thoroughly aware of the health risks of smoking and here is an -- here is the really key phrase here. And 90 percent of those people realized those risks apply to them.
You listened to the testimony in this case.
Does Mrs. Lourie fit under this? Absolutely. Is Mrs. Lourie one of the 90 percent who realized the risks applied to her? Absolutely.
Don't know if you remember this testimony, but Mr. Lourie testified that they spoke to their sons when they were little in graphic terms. I don't know if you remember that line of testimony. We talked to them in graphic terms. What do you mean by graphic terms? We told them when they were little that smoking causes lung cancer, emphysema, loss of the ability to enjoy your life.
And then what did -- what did Mr. Lourie tell Dr. Herkov about the 1964 Surgeon General Report and Mrs. Lourie? That she knew from the mid '60s that cigarettes were bad for her. She read the Surgeon General Report.
That's what he told you, and then he came in here and told you the following Monday, I misspoke. I didn't correct it in my deposition, even though I read my deposition, and I just put no changes, but
the weekend after this came out in testimony before the eight of you, I misspoke. You decide what to do with that.
And then he said after that, after the Surgeon General, it was written in stone. She knew it inside and out. Knew what? The Surgeon General Report. Knew it inside and out. She researched.
She was an expert. And then comes the phrase of all phrases in this case in my opinion. That was a watershed day for her because she could not hide anymore.
Legal cause. There is no doubt, no doubt, in Mr. Lourie's own words that Mrs. Lourie knew all she needed to know in 1964 to make an informed choice. She knew that cigarettes could kill her.
Her informed choice to continue smoking and not to quit in '64, in '66, and even in 1976, is the sole legal cause. That's the why.
Again, there is legal cause as it is described. If it directly and in -- and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such lung cancer so that it can reasonably be said that, but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the lung cancer would not have been suffered. Focus on
the word "but for".
In this case, that means the plaintiff has to prove to you that her lung cancer was so strong -I went backwards, and I'm sorry. Her -- her addiction was so strong that, but for the addiction -- in other words, without an addiction, she could have quit and avoided lung cancer.
Not only have they failed to prove that, but their own witnesses contradict the plaintiff's claims on this critical issue, and let me review that with you quickly.
Addiction can never be the legal cause of disease when during the critical time the plaintiff's own experts said Mrs. Lourie was not addicted. Let's examine this because I think it's really a critical point to help you here.
Barbara Lourie was born in 1945. In '64, she is 19 years old. She is legally an adult. She is in a nursing program, and she could have quit without any addiction interfering. And even though the plaintiff claims Barbara Lourie eventually became addicted -- stick with me on this. I know you listened to all this stuff, but this is important. Their own expert, Dr. Herkov, admitted she was not addicted before 1967.
That is really an astounding piece of testimony in this case. When you put it together with the knowledge of the Surgeon General Report, with the statement that was a watershed day for her, they cannot come to you and say she couldn't quit because she was hopelessly addicted. According to their expert, she was not.
Dr. Herkov believes she wasn't addicted until she was in her early 20s. He thinks it could have been '66, 67, '68 before she was addicted. But she was not addicted before the '64 Surgeon General Report according to their expert that they brought you.
The plaintiff himself told you -- despite what he put in that sheet, the plaintiff himself told you when we were married in '67, I didn't think she -- I didn't consider her addicted at that time. That's in 1967.
So she was fully informed and she believed the messages about the health risks of smoking. She continued to smoke. She continued to smoke. Addiction did not cause what happened in this case. Those are the facts that were brought to you in this case. And those are also the facts that were not discussed during the plaintiff's closing
argument with you, and for good reason.
She did not smoke because of an addiction when she read the Surgeon General's Report and continued smoking. She made an informed choice to smoke with complete knowledge when she was an adult, when she was not addicted. That's the legal cause.
And this goes directly to the class membership question, that first question I showed you. The key is -- the key is she was not addicted and could have quit and avoided her illness.
She could have quit in time to avoid any injury. Undisputed in this case.
So let's look at some facts about her. Where is the evidence -- think about this. Look through your notes. Where is the evidence that she was desperate to quit, that she always wanted to quit, that she made serious attempts to quit? The only person who told you that is Mr. Lourie who is here asking you to give him money damages today.
Not one of his sons, not one of them said she was desperate to quit, always wanted to quit, made serious attempts to quit. Not one of her friends testified live or by deposition or by video, not one of her friends said she was desperate to quit, always wanted to quit, made a serious attempt to
quit.
An addiction does not mean it's impossible to quit. Let's think about this. And this I'm going to kind of go into a general sense because it helps explain something.
Dr. Rosman said many addicted smokers quit. Dr. David Burns said any -- any addiction can be broken with sufficient internal and external support. Dr. Michael Herkov, plaintiff's expert, said even highly-addicted smokers can and do quit.
You heard in this case that millions and millions of people -- those are not my words.
Those are from their experts, Dr. Proctor and Dr. Burns. Millions of people, even those who are addicted, have quit.
Nicotine leaves a smoker's body within 24 to 48 hours of stopping smoking. Think about the evidence. Did Mrs. Lourie ever stop smoking for 24 to 48 hours according to the testimony in this case? She didn't give herself the chance, because she didn't want to go that long. She didn't want to deal with it and put up with it. And I'm talking about the later years. She wouldn't have had to deal with this in '64 and '66.
You heard from the witness stand from the
plaintiff's own experts over half the people who have ever been smokers have quit smoking. Now, looking at the generic case, only 3 to 6 percent quit, according to the plaintiff's experts in the generic sense, but let's talk about this case.
Let's talk about what does this have to do with Mrs. Lourie.
Do you remember that her peer group, kids from high school that she grew up with and stayed in contact with, that she said, I think Mrs. Coven said, half of their high school friends smoked. I think you remember that. Half of her high school friends smoked. In her peer group, 100 percent of the smokers in that group quit. All of them quit smoking. Dr. Herkov said that was remarkable.
Well, that's not a surprise, because we're not talking about a generic group. They may have said that 3 to 6 percent of smokers quit successfully.
Well, in this case, in this case, 100 percent of the smokers you heard about quit, except for Mrs. Lourie.
Her friends, Linda Coven, Lynda Snider, and today you heard from Elaine Berman, all quit. Her father, her mother, her older brother all quit.
And I ask you to think about that for a minute.
Who came in here to say, yeah, I heard -- you heard that her dad was a heavy smoker. You heard her mom was a smoker, and you heard her brother was a smoker.
Did anybody come in here and tell you that when her mom and brother quit in 1996, they agonized? They had a difficult time? They couldn't do it. They failed multiple times? No.
All you heard from the witness stand is, yeah, they quit smoking. They quit. And that's her family.
I'm not faulting Barbara Lourie, as I told you in opening, for the decisions she decided to make. Those are her decisions. She's free to make them, but the key is that she could have quit.
MR. BIGGER: Sorry, Judge. May we approach just for a second?
THE COURT: Okay.
(The following proceedings were had before the Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
MR. BIGGER: I never like objecting during closing argument, but I'm looking at the screen and I'm quite sure that Mr. Fasi just said to the jury, did anybody come in here and tell you that when her mom and brother quit, they agonized, they couldn't do it, they failed multiple times, you know, all
you heard from the stand is they quit.
Unless I'm crazy, I'm pretty sure he just blurted out things that are not in evidence to the jury by his own admission that no one came in and said those things, and I don't recall that being put into evidence during this trial. Maybe I am wrong.
MR. FASI: You are.
MR. BIGGER: I would be happy to be corrected,
then.
THE COURT: If it was an objection, it's overruled. Move on.
(The following proceedings were had in open court before the Court and jury.)
MR. FASI: I want to talk about some things about quitting, and I'm going to try to touch on them, but I think it's important to do this for you all, especially after you've been sitting here for two weeks. And I'm going to try to get moving so that you -- you won't get -- I want to give you this information. It's important for you to have the whole picture.
Genetics. Dr. Herkov said the main difference between those who do and do not quit is genetics. The evidence that you heard in this case is that
Mrs. Lourie's mother quit smoking and her brother quit smoking as I just told you. You've heard that from Michael Lourie. Mrs. Lourie is a person who could have quit if we're going to go under the heading genetics. Her genetics defined her as the type of person who could quit.
Second, motivation. You heard that plenty of times. Motivation is the key to quitting. You've heard from their experts on their end. If you are not motivated to quit, you are never going to quit. They will never get out of the starting block, one witness put it.
Three, it has to be a serious quit attempt. A smoker is never going to quit smoking, said Dr. Herkov, if they don't make a serious effort to quit, and a serious effort to quit is defined as more than 24 hours. Not 20 minutes of hide my cigarettes or can I have them back. Not going to the Mad Russian for an hour or two and then leaving and lighting up. Those are not serious quit attempts by the definitions of addiction specialists.
And yet you've been told over and over again she made multiple serious attempts to quit. Rely on your own memories on that. Rely on what you
heard from the witness stand, from the evidence, and from this court. Rely on what you heard, and then ask if I'm correct.
The evidence on Mrs. Lourie's quit attempts.
If you remember, this comes from Dr. Herkov's notes when he interviewed Mr. Lourie before he ever gave a deposition. How many times did she attempt to quit in her life? Five or six times. That's one quit attempt every five or six years.
Here is some more testimony. From 1979 to 1994, she made a couple of quit attempts. And you'll have to rely on your memory as to what were those quit attempts and whether they fall under the definition of a serious quit attempt.
And how many quit attempts from when they moved to Florida? Zero. Does that sound like someone who was desperate to quit to you?
I want you to think about this. Let's say you know someone who has been unemployed for 30 years. And you say to them, hey, what are you doing to get a job? And they say, well, every five or six years, I send out a resume.
Use your common sense. What would you think of that? Is that a serious attempt to find a job?
And so the same analogy can be made here, but
even more so, because here you're talking about somebody's life. And yet from her own husband, you have the information about the quit attempts.
Because something like this could have an impact on your life, if you are serious about quitting, then you will make a serious attempt to quit.
If she used cessation devices, and I say if she did, and you heard about patches and gum and cold turkey, well, guess what? She didn't follow the directions. Because if she was using the gum, the testimony without any -- without any contradiction is she smoked while she was using that, and you know you're not supposed to, otherwise, what's the point?
She smoked while she allegedly was on the patches in Massachusetts. And when she went cold turkey, Mr. Lourie told you she had cigarettes available to her right there. That's not a quit attempt.
Further testimony from Mr. Lourie. She never stopped smoking for a day. She maybe quit smoking for an hour or two. She might have gone two days, but that would be a stretch.
Rely on your collective recollections of the
testimony in this case.
The hiding cigarettes, I just want to address that. Mr. Lourie characterized the hiding cigarettes that supposedly took place in 1969 or 1970 as her first important quit attempt. Dissect that. How long did she last without cigarettes?
30 minutes to two hours, depending on the testimony. Let's just say it was two hours.
You remember when Michael, her son, testified he remembers hiding her cigarettes? And how long did he say she lasted without him giving them back? 20 minutes.
Mr. Lourie told you that when he hid Mrs. Lourie's cigarettes, she was -- and these are important words. She was panicked and terrified in that hiding the cigarette thing from 1970, '69,
'70, panicked and terrified. How many times did you hear that she was panicked and terrified when she didn't have her cigarettes? Once from him. Once.
Well, she played tennis with Linda Coven once a week for two hours and never smoked a cigarette. Was she panicked and terrified while she was on the tennis court? And she kept playing week after week. If you recall, Mr. Lourie said she sat in a
Mad Russian appointment for about two hours, he said. Did she sit there completely terrified and panicked for the full two hours, or did she sit there giggling with her friend, Lynda Snider, as the testimony was?
Did Lynda Snider ever tell you she was panicked and terrified during that event?
Mr. Lourie said his wife might have quit smoking for maybe two days, but he can't remember when it was. And during that two days, did he tell you, boy, I remember those two days because she was panicked and terrified?
And when they went to the Mad Russian, they took their cigarettes with them. Is that a serious quit attempt? Do you really mean that you're going to go all in?
You know, that's a phrase that's become very popular in the last few years. I'm going all in.
I'm going all in. Okay, so let's go all in. Let's get rid of the cigarettes. Let's get rid of the lighters. Let's get you guys to help me, encourage me to get through this. Let's do this together.
There is no evidence of "all in" in this case when it comes to quitting smoking.
Mad Russian. You remember what the deal was?
You paid. And what was the deal? You could go back for free.
Did this desperate to quit smoker ever go back? No.
Did she ever go to a doctor for help? No.
And I think, if you recall the testimony,
Mr. Lourie's reaction after the Mad Russian says a heck of a lot. If you remember when I questioned Mr. Lourie, I said, do you remember telling us that you said -- when she lit up a cigarette, you said something like, "Really? Really?" Why is that important? I think it's important because what it means is you're not trying. That's what "really" means. Really? Paid your money, we came here, and you are going to light up the minute you walk out the door? You're not trying.
I think it's important to compare the recollection of the friends and sons against what you heard from Mr. Lourie, the plaintiff in this case. What you heard from Michael Lourie was quitting wasn't even on the radar until the '80s.
Michael Lourie said he had no knowledge of her trying to quit before he left for college in 1987.
And even though she read the Surgeon General Report in 1964, he doesn't remember her trying to quit
smoking in the 26 years that followed that.
David Lourie. First time his mother tried to quit was in the '80s, and he remembered that his father hid the cigarettes, although Mr. Lourie said he never did it again after 1970. And Steven Lourie, her son, the youngest, who you heard from about a week or two ago, said he's not aware of her ever trying to quit smoking. Ever. In a home where somebody is portrayed as being desperate to quit.
Dr. Calkins' medical note says she is going to stop now in 1996. And Michael, her oldest son, says in 1996, he never saw cigarettes in the house again. Not in the pantry, not in the ashtrays. Nowhere else in the house. That was his testimony to you.
Linda Coven's testimony I touched on in opening statement, and I think it tells you what you're going to need to know on this topic. Linda Coven is her friend from when she was little.
Linda Coven said I quit smoking, and we said to her, did you share that with your friend, Barbara Lourie? No, I didn't. Why? Because I didn't think she would be interested in knowing how I went about quitting. I just didn't think that was an
interest of hers.
You heard that. That was a deposition that was played to you the other day.
Dr. Herkov showed you some things about changes in the brain, neurotransmitters and all that sort of thing. But he had to admit that even smokers who have those same brain changes quit every single day. That doesn't prevent someone from quitting.
And there is no evidence that Mrs. Lourie had any of those issues in 1964 or 1965 or 1966, when, by their own experts' testimony, she was not addicted. Not one witness other than Jim Lourie testified that Barbara Lourie ever said I can't quit. And that is the key focus of their case, so addicted she couldn't quit.
No doctor said she couldn't quit. Not one of her sons said my mom said I can't quit. Not one of her friends ever said she told me I can't quit.
So in order for you to make the determination in this case, regardless of what she needed to do, Mrs. Lourie could have quit. She could have decided not to smoke. She could deal with the episodes of quitting that eventually will get easier if you could get through those first couple
days.
Even if you are addicted, you can quit. If you make up your mind and say I'm not going to smoke, it can be done, and people know that.
Dr. Burns says willpower and motivation with family support and friends, you can quit. Burns says family assistance increases the likelihood that someone will be successful. Dr. Burns said addiction does not relieve a person of responsibility for their own behavior. Dr. Burns said it's up to the individual to decide to make a change, and that you can only quit where the person has a sincere motivation to make a change.
And only the smoker can implement the decision to quit. Ask yourselves where in this record from this trial is there evidence that she ever set a date to say this day, I'm going to quit. And you heard Dr. Burns say that's what he counsels doctors to tell patients if they want them to quit, set a date, make a mark, and make it soon, not down the line.
Mrs. Lourie, it appears from the evidence, was looking for what some people would call a magic bullet. She wanted to go to the Mad Russian and be done. That's what she wanted to do. She didn't
want to gut it out, she wanted it (snaps fingers) done. She wanted somebody else to take responsibility, to take her cigarettes for her.
Put it on someone else. As I said, that was her right, her choice to decide not to quit. She knew what she was doing. And the record is without any contradiction that she made informed choices.
Now, in 1996, she showed significant substantial control over her smoking. She cut down her smoking. I mentioned before that her son Michael never saw her smoke again. Do you remember, it was either a picture or a video where they showed a couch, and they said that was her favorite place to sit and smoke, in the house? Did Michael -- after 1996, did Michael ever see her again sitting in that couch smoking? You answer that for yourselves, and when you think about the evidence.
The evidence is she wasn't laid up all the time in 1996. There is a medical record that you can look at that says she is up and moving, going for walks, seems to be doing okay.
Now, I want to talk about why did Barbara Lourie smoke. And I'm going to hit one of them quickly, and the other one I want to take some time
with, and by that I mean five minutes.
She liked it. She enjoyed it. It relaxed her. Well, how do you know that? Well, Dr. Herkov remembers Mr. Lourie telling him that Mrs. Lourie enjoyed smoking, or testimony of Mr. Lourie.
Mr. Lourie said she enjoyed cigarettes and that's why she smoked. Linda Coven said Mrs. Lourie enjoyed smoking because it relaxed her. So that I think is in the record, that's pretty clear.
But the weight gain is interesting because ever since I raised that in opening statement, there has been a constant ridicule of that suggestion. And at no time have we ever said that was the only reason she didn't want to quit even though that's what was being portrayed to you.
They said it was absolutely ridiculous that a suggestion would be made that one of the reasons she didn't want to quit was because of a fear of gaining weight. Yet almost every witness who we cross-examined had had a separate conversation with Mrs. Lourie about how she was afraid to quit because she might gain weight.
You remember this testimony. Mr. Lourie gave that up without me even having to ask about it.
Why was this question asked of Mr. Lourie in his
deposition? We didn't ask him did she get puffy, he told us that. Why? Because he said that she was afraid she would gain weight.
And if you remember the testimony, only one or two days at most did she quit smoking. So if you quit smoking for 24 hours, 48 hours at the most, his testimony was, "She already started putting on weight. I could see it. She got puffy. Puffy in her face."
In a day. Is that credible? And even if you find it credible, it says a lot about how important that was.
This is from Dr. -- this is from his verified worksheet in 2010. Remember, this is under oath. And what does Mr. Lourie say after she stops smoking? Well, he claims she was irritable, easily angered, and here is the key phrase for you, "Experienced an increase in her desire to eat and had weight gain." That's what made us question him. I thought you said she only quit for a day.
How could she possibly have weight gain? She got puffy.
Mrs. Lourie's friends. What did Linda Coven say in her video deposition? She was afraid to quit smoking and gain weight because that's what
had happened to Linda Coven.
Lynda Snider said Mrs. Lourie discussed with her that quitting smoking could cause weight gain.
You decide what to make with those statements. You decide. You're the only ones that get to decide what to do with those statements. All we can do is bring them to you.
Son Michael. Michael Lourie said Mrs. Lourie commented about -- do you remember, it says local store clerk, but let me bring it more back to your memory. There was a video store clerk, and he remembers the conversation that he had with his mom that she noticed the video store clerk had quit smoking and put on weight that he called was noticeable to -- Mrs. Lourie said it was noticeable. Why would she make a statement like that if gaining weight when you quit wasn't in her mind, if it wasn't a reason why she might hesitate to quit?
And then came this. Do you remember when we moved to that smaller courtroom one day, I think it was a Tuesday, we went down to that smaller courtroom. And Steven Lourie, who is here today, was testifying.
Steven Lourie, who needed a deposition to
remember if he had told us that his mother was smart, intelligent, et cetera, incredibly had a memory. And he told you that there was only one time in his life that he talked to his mother about quitting smoking, and it was more she talking to him. And despite the fact that he had such trouble in trial that day remembering some of the most basic questions that were asked of him, he had no trouble remembering a statement his mother made over 25 years ago.
And I told you this in opening statement and I said I would come back and talk about it in closing because I think it gives you what you need to know about this case. This is a crystal clear memory that he has of his mother asking him if he would still love her if she quit smoking and got fat.
Those are her words, not ours. Those are her words from him. Either she had it in her mind that that was for sure going to happen or it was made very clear to her that it had better not happen. I don't know, I wasn't there.
But I give that to you to think about because despite the ridicule of what a preposterous thing to say that she didn't want to quit because she might put on weight, don't listen to a lawyer,
listen to her friends and her sons.
So addiction was not a legal cause. The why in this case instead is her informed choice to continue smoking for reasons completely unrelated to addiction. That was the sole legal cause in this case.
And remember, after she was diagnosed with lung cancer and brain tumors, use your everyday experience and common sense about what that must be like to be in that position. And as time moves on, and your sons are there, and I asked her son David, who he acknowledged he was the closest to her of the three boys. Remember that Mrs. Lourie never said I regret smoking. Remember that Mrs. Lourie never said to anybody I regret that I didn't quit.
And Mrs. Lourie never said I regret not trying harder to quit.
If ever there was a time when statements like that would be made, that would be the time. And that was also the time that her mother and brother quit in 1996, according to her son Michael.
So if I can have it switched, please.
MR. TELOFSKI: Sure.
MR. FASI: Based on the facts of this case, when you look at was Barbara Lourie addicted to
cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death, under the facts of this case, the answer can only be no.
It would have -- if you look at it all and use your collective wisdom and judgment and analyze the facts and the credibility of the witnesses on what you heard and weigh it all, you will come out with no.
On this question, you must be unanimous. All of you who deliberate must be 6-0, no. And by that I'm not saying you have to say no. Whatever your verdict is, all of you must agree. But I think that the argument that we're making to you today based upon the evidence that came out, that actually came out in this case, no is the answer.
Question number 2 also requires -- and you don't get to question number 2 if you answer no to question number 1. You are finished if you check off no on number 1.
But question number 2 has the same legal cause requirement, and for the same reason, you check off no. And you will be hearing from the other companies, but for all three companies, based on the evidence as we've laid it out to you today,
actually, as the evidence that came in from them in this case, the answer is no in question number 2.
And, again, all six must agree whatever you decide to put.
Now, I want to talk to you about question number 3, which is comparative fault. I don't think you'll get to this question. You won't get here, but I have to talk about it in case you do.
But I want to highlight two things. If you are under the impression that you have to find -- if you are under the impression that you cannot put 100 percent on the plaintiff, you would be wrong.
And I think Mr. Bigger misspoke when he did his closing argument. You do not have to spread it around. And you can find an individual 100 percent responsible.
Now, think about this, the logic. Mr. Bigger said put 12 percent because she was 12 years old when she started smoking, and put 88 percent for the rest of the defendants.
Well, she was 21 years old in 1966, after she had read the Surgeon General's Report and the warnings came on the packages that year. Under his logic, then you should put 21 percent for her.
Does that make any sense? You know when you are
looking at the evidence and you are evaluating all of the evidence, is that the way you are going to fill this thing out?
I mean, the common sense when you come in this courtroom, it doesn't get left out on the street.
You bring it with you. And the judge has told you that and will tell you that.
Ask yourself should a person who admits that her own choice to smoke was a legal cause of her cancer be anything less than 100 percent? They have admitted fault in this case. Should a person who chose to smoke after reading and knowing, inside and out, the '64 Surgeon General's Report, and knowing and believing that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, can that person be anything other than 100 percent at fault?
Should a person who, by their admission, chose to smoke be anything less than 100 percent at fault? It had to be her decision. Michael Lourie testified if it was going to happen, quitting, it had to come from her. Dr. Herkov said at the end of the day, the person has to do it with a variety of help. And the question that I asked Mr. Lourie today, he said it was her choice and her decision, nobody else.
In looking in the mirror, and you see Mrs. Lourie there, there is nobody else in that mirror with her. That's why they admitted fault.
Can I have this back, please? Thank you.
This is an important law, and this isn't lawyer talk, this is the law that you will have when you go back in the jury room. "The manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a lawful activity." We can't be held liable, none of these companies can be held liable merely because we manufacture, sell, or advertise cigarettes. That's the law. That's it.
So if anybody believes, well, you must be somewhat responsible because you sold these cigarettes, that law says we cannot be held liable for that.
And keep in mind that Mr. Lourie acknowledged that in his conversation with Mrs. Lourie, there was no safe cigarette. So -I'm sorry, can I have this back?
MR. TELOFSKI: Sure.
MR. FASI: If I knew how to do it, I would.
On this, the evidence is it should be 100 percent.
All right. Concealment and conspiracy. And I
want to talk to you about questions 4 and 5 together. "Was each defendant's concealment or omission of material information about the health risks and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes", key phrase, "a legal cause of Barbara Lourie's lung cancer and death?"
If you check yes on number 5, then whatever you put on percentage here, let's say you put 99 percent here, it's as if you put zero. And the jury -- the jury instruction will explain that to you as you go through it. If you checked yes, it doesn't matter what percentage of comparative fault you put, it will have no effect at all.
There is no evidence, keep this phrase in mind, there is no evidence in this case that any conspiracy had a direct or immediate impact on Mrs. Lourie.
Actually, I need to go back again, please. Thank you.
This is what I was talking about earlier about the reduction. We heard witness after witness in this case talk about there is no evidence that statements or actions of the TIRC, the CTR, the Tobacco Institute, or anything had any impact on Mrs. Lourie. I talked about that, so I'm not going
to go into that any more.
But the plaintiff lawyers spent a lot of time talking to you about things the defendants did in the 1950s, '60, '70s, '80s, but like I said to you in opening statement and earlier today, they have to prove a lot more than defendants said some dumb things. There is no doubt they did. They've got to prove way more than that. They have to bring it home here.
Unless the plaintiff proves that something the tobacco companies did had a direct and substantial impact on Mrs. Lourie or, this word will ring with you, I think, if you remember the testimony, or that she was fooled by any of those statements or that they affected her in some way when they had absolutely nothing to do with this case, is there any evidence that she was ever fooled by anything anybody said?
So for this claim, they have to show you that Mrs. Lourie was waiting to hear something from a tobacco company, that if she -- and, and if she had gotten that information, that would have made her quit in time to avoid her injury. Ask yourselves where have you heard any evidence like that in this case.
All the witnesses who came in prove there is no connection. At any time. All the witnesses who -- sorry. No witnesses came in and said she was fooled.
Now I want to show you this here, which I've talked about, but if you remember when I asked Dr. Burns about the Frank Statement, he kind of laughed and said why are you asking me about the Frank Statement, she was eight years old. I think we can reasonably assume she did not read it. I don't know if you remember that exchange, it was pretty early on in my cross-examination of Dr. Burns. And I thought, okay, good. Then on closing argument of the plaintiff, I see the same Frank Statement that I asked Dr. Burns about, which he laughed at me for even raising it.
The point that I'm raising is what does the Frank Statement have to do with Mrs. Lourie? What does advertising have to do with Mrs. Lourie? What do any of those things have to do with Mrs. Lourie?
Now, here is something that you saw again today, and I really wanted to go over this with you because this is what you were shown on opening statement and today. And what they're showing you here is total cigarette consumption in the United
States. Total. And when I asked Dr. Proctor about this, Dr. Proctor said we look at per capita.
Why is the per capita so important? Because per capita shows what's really going on with smokers in the United States. This is a way to get you to go wow, look at that. This is the truth of what's happening in the United States. That despite the fact that this number goes up in the way they showed you up until 1980, this shows what Dr. Proctor said, that the Surgeon General Report that comes out here shows an immediate decline of people quitting, a slight uptick here, and then continuing going down, down, down until we are now where smoking was in the 1930s, before it took off. This is where we are now. And it will more likely continue to go down based on trends.
Why weren't you shown that on opening statement? Why weren't you shown that during closing argument?
What this shows, and Dr. Proctor, if you remember, said the Surgeon General's Report was the beginning of the end for the American cigarette.
And this is what he uses to prove it.
It also goes to show, you remember all the stuff you heard about, about between here and here
all the stuff they were trying to do to create doubt to make people think I don't have to quit and all that stuff, how did that work? You answer that question. How did that work, if we're back down into the per capita from the 1930s?
So they may have been patting themselves on the back, oh, we did a great job, but this tells a different story. This says it was a total failure.
What they thought they were going to accomplish, they didn't accomplish, and it keeps on going down.
Why did Mrs. Lourie start smoking? Let me hit this one quickly, because I bet you could answer this question. The Newton study that you were shown said peer pressure is the number one reason why her age group and her schoolmates started smoking, but like I said, only 10 percent of the people smoked at that time. Or was it friends?
Was it parents who smoked? Was it an older brother who smoked?
Remember, Dr. Burns said the principal determinant of whether someone smokes is whether their parents and an older sibling smokes.
But to listen to what comes from here (indicating), it was all the advertising, that's why Barbara Lourie started smoking. So ask
yourself that question as you look at all of their evidence.
Not one witness testified that Mrs. Lourie began smoking or continued to smoke because of ads. Not Lynda Snider, not Mr. Lourie.
And you know what's interesting is Mr. Lourie went to the same school as Mrs. Lourie. He was subjected to all these ads floating all over the universe, the culture, and everything else.
Mr. Lourie told you he chose not to smoke in junior high because he knew it was bad for you. So not everybody got sucked in. Some people made decisions.
And Mr. and Mrs. Lourie joked about cigarette advertising, if you remember that exchange. They were in the sales and advertising business. When they looked at these ads, they would laugh at them.
All right. I want to hit a couple of things here on credibility of the experts. Dr. Proctor and Dr. Burns. Plaintiffs know -- plaintiff lawyers know what they get with Dr. Proctor and Dr. Burns.
If you remember, Dr. Proctor was asked if he is set to be in seven trials in the month of October, he had no idea. Well, that's interesting.
Because what it means is they know what he's going to say when they bring him into court and you can just wind him up and he'll say the same thing at every trial and, make last year, half a million dollars doing that. That's a great gig to have.
Same thing in every trial.
And then as he's testifying here, he wants to play. He doesn't want to answer the question. He wants to play. He wants to help the plaintiff win.
He is not an objective witness. As a physician and someone who was with the public health community, he's not coming here objectively to tell you about what he sees, he's here to try to help them make their case.
And so the judge had to tell him answer the questions that you are asked. And then he began to answer the questions. And when I asked him about the fact that there are over 50 epidemiological studies showing that, in fact, light cigarettes did produce less tar in people and those 50 studies involved millions of people, the plaintiffs put up a study that allegedly was an internal document showing that there was a study at Philip Morris called, do you remember, it's kind of an odd first name, the Barbro Goodman study. How many people
were in the Barbro Goodman study? Nine.
And the Barbro Goodman study actually showed that over four weeks, when people were forced to switch between lights and full-flavor, the people that switched from full-flavor to lights, in fact, some of them got less tar and nicotine. But that's the document that Dr. Proctor said opened his eyes to the -- to the charade going on with the American public.
Things he didn't remember that they had put it up, and when I asked him about that, he didn't know what I was talking about.
But then they came back on redirect, and they -- they had something called the Mendes article.
Now, the Mendes article is really important because, number one, he implied that it was secret.
I don't know what your notes will tell you about that, but he implied it was secret. In fact, it was published in a peer-reviewed journal. There is absolutely nothing secret about it. It came out in 2008, seven years after he published that Monograph
13	that you heard about.
He told you that studies showed that Marlboro Light smokers get the same amount of nicotine as a
Marlboro Red smoker, but actually it shows the opposite, it shows Marlboro Light smokers got less nicotine than the Marlboro Red. And I blew up this section from page 304, which wasn't read to you.
So you have to ask yourself why he did that.
With regard to Dr. Proctor, all I'm going to say is he's the generic witness. And that's not being pejorative to him. He said that, "I'm not here to talk about Barbara Lourie." So in Dr. Proctor's testimony, he painted a generic smoker who was actually absolutely the opposite of this case. He knew knowing about her.
In his testimony, smokers start because of ads. We know she didn't. The generic smoker never read the Surgeon General Report; she did. And in Dr. Proctor's note -- world, the generic smoker was addicted as a youth. We know she wasn't until her 20s, according to their own expert. In Dr. Proctor's testimony, the generic smoker received mixed messages about the health and risks of smoking and then began smoking. In this case,
Mrs. Lourie was not addicted till late 1966 or '67, and she didn't get any mixed message. She knew and she believed the Surgeon General Report.
Dr. Proctor said a generic smoker would switch
from unfiltered to filtered cigarettes. She never did. She never smoked unfiltered cigarettes, so what's the point?
I'm going to try to move through the rest of this now and be done. But I wanted to show you this because I think it's interesting. Do you remember the testimony that said she was always looking for a healthier cigarette? So she would do the research, she wanted to find something with lower tar and nicotine. Well, she started here with Kent, and there were 12 brands lower than Kent in tar and nicotine.
Where this comes from is, I don't know if you remember with Dr. Proctor, I did the thing, what's called the FTC studies, where the tobacco companies said these machines aren't going to test the cigarettes the way smokers do it, but they were forced to do it anyway, according to Dr. Burns.
So according to that, they came up with these lists, and I put up these lists and I began to show -- and I said to Dr. Proctor, show me where Raleigh is, let's see how many brands there were below that.
She shifts from Kent to Raleigh. When she shifts to Raleigh, there are 30 brands lower in tar
and nicotine than Raleigh. So I don't think it can be because of tar and nicotine that she shifted to Raleigh. And then she shifts from Raleigh to Marlboro Red, and there are 46 brands that are lower in tar and nicotine.
Is that a picture of someone that is moving down the chain, according to what they tried to tell you?
And the important thing is, from 1967 on, Barbara Lourie always knew that whatever brand of cigarettes she smoked carried health risks with it. She knew there was no such thing as a safe cigarette. She knew no matter what brand she smoked, it wasn't good for her. There were warnings on every pack of cigarettes from 1966 on, including Marlboro Lights, same warning as on the Marlboro Red.
Barbara Lourie never used the word "safe," ever used the word "safe" when referring to light cigarettes. And the plaintiff, Mr. Lourie, told her that cigarettes weren't safe, and "she understood the argument," were his words.
No one ever said that by switching to Marlboro Lights, Mrs. Lourie was prevented from quitting.
Not a single witness said that.
Mrs. Lourie never suggested that she smoked a low-tar, low-nicotine cigarette because she didn't need to quit smoking. That testimony is not in this case.
And Dr. Burns talked a lot about the cycle of cessation where a smoker is intercepted from quitting. Do you remember that round diagram he put up? Well, you know based on the evidence in this case that Mrs. Lourie was never one of those people who was intercepted.
And what Dr. Burns doesn't have on that circle is an off-ramp, knowing that millions of people take that off-ramp and quitting smoking. According to the diagram they showed you, everybody just keeps going around in a circle except for a few people that might get out.
The plaintiff was telling you that even when she was smoking Marlboro Lights, she allegedly made some efforts to quit smoking. So whoever Dr. Burns is talking about, he was not talking about Mrs. Lourie.
Now, there was some discussion about compensation, that's where people smoke more to get more nicotine. And we heard that during Mr. Bigger's opening statement. And I believe
Mr. Bigger made a reference to the fact that she began to inhale deeper or smoke more cigarettes.
It was on some chart with a lot of words on it.
Think about this as you contemplate that piece of information. When did she switch to Marlboro Lights? 1978, according to what we've been told.
'78, '79, somewhere in there. When did Marlboro Lights first come out? 1971.
Her husband, who is an alleged nonsmoker, says he remembers from 25 years ago that she inhaled more deeply when she smoked Marlboro Lights. How is it that he would remember that from so far back if he's a nonsmoker?
But here is the other thing. She switched in 1978. When did he notice her smoking more or inhaling deeper? When did he notice that? When they started working together; right? And when was that? That was in 1989.
So he wants you to believe that 11 years after she starts smoking Marlboro Lights, he notices that she's now inhaling more deeply 11 years later. And once again, what witness came here to tell you that? One person, nobody else. Nobody else, other than the man that wants you to give him a very large check.
You heard about the credibility of the witnesses.
By the way, Marlboro Lights, sorry, I forgot this, had 58 brands that were lower in tar and nicotine, according to the FTC charts. So she switched to this because she wanted lower tar. She had 58 other brands to choose from and didn't.
You are the sole judges of the credibility of the witnesses, you've heard that. When you look at the jury instruction on the credibility, it says in there that you judge the credibility of the witnesses and you look at lots of different things.
One of the things you are told you can look at is does the person giving you the testimony have an interest in the outcome of the case. What does that mean? That means the person who is giving you the testimony wants you to believe what they're telling you so they can win their case from the witness stand. That's why we do cross-examination, though. There is an old saying that says a person's story seems true until someone comes and examines him. That's cross-examination.
That's what I talked about in opening statement, that we were going to have to come up and do that and ask questions of people that you
might say how can you ask that of these people? Because that's how you can find out whether the person's story hangs true.
Think of the things you heard from Mr. Lourie.
And I just made a short list of them here. She was always quitting. She was desperate to quit.
Terrified without cigarettes for 30 minutes to two hours. Always had the nicotine gum. Was making $50,000 a year. And you've heard from the witness that, in fact, when it was checked out with the social security records, that wasn't true.
How many times she tried to quit. And here is the one that really sticks out. That after Mrs. Lourie passed away, the weekends were absolutely brutal. That was the testimony.
Weekends were absolutely brutal.
If you get to questions 4 and 5, and you should not, but if you do, and you'll hear from these other companies as well, but it should be no for each of these companies, and when it comes down here to -- for concealment, and remember, it has to be the legal cause of Barbara Lourie, you would then go to damages.
And so I just want to explore damages with you briefly. One of the things that I believe the
instructions will say is that the damages have to be fair and reasonable and fit with the evidence.
You decide whether what you are asked fits with the evidence under the facts of this case.
If you do what the law allows, and if you do what the law requires, and you use your common sense, think about what you were just asked for, under the facts of this case.
Any human being feels sympathy towards a family that lost a loved one. And I said that in opening statement. And sympathy can actually rip right to the gut of a human being. And the judge will tell you you cannot decide this case on sympathy. We asked that during jury selection.
You have to decide this case on the facts and the law as Judge Levens gives it to you.
But we are human.
Now, if Mr. Lourie had testified about this on direct exam, about his relationship with that lady named Elaine Berman and his relationship with Barbara Weaver and then his relationship with the woman who became his wife of the last 11 years, I wouldn't have to say anything about this, but unfortunately he didn't say one word about those relationships, and the judge has instructed you --
I'm sorry, I need the -This is the law in the state of Florida and the judge has given you this instruction and you'll have it in the courtroom -- in the jury room. This explains why we brought that information to you. Because the law says, "The evidence of remarriage is admissible only so that the whole truth be known."
It goes to the credibility of Mr. Lourie.
What goes to the credibility of Mr. Lourie is he said he was all alone in his home, and that his weekends were brutal. But to get the rest of the story, and we're not suggesting that what he's doing is replacing Mrs. Lourie, but to have the full story, when someone testifies on direct that the weekends were brutal, and then testifies that within four to six weeks after his wife passed away, he was in a relationship with someone that you heard today was a weekend relationship, and that individual -- I said to you during opening statement, my only comment on opening was, listen to what Elaine Berman says, and then compare to it what you're told by plaintiff's counsel and by Mr. Lourie himself.
She testified that the relationship was a
weekend relationship, he would go there, she would come here. She testified he didn't appear depressed to her. He didn't appear like he was off the rails, like you heard the sons testify. She testified to you today through a deposition we brought to you that he seemed like he was doing fine. That he was settled, happy during that time frame.
That's not to diminish, it's not to diminish the loss of his wife. But remember the jury instruction that says keep in mind when you are assessing credibility whether the person has an interest in the outcome of the case.
So on the one hand, you are being told brutal weekends, all alone, off the rails, completely depressed. And it's up to us, who don't have the burden of proof, to bring you the rest of that story about this case? It's up to us to do that so that you have all the facts?
That's why we had to do that.
The issue with his sons -- and by the way, keep in mind, the relationships started four to six weeks after she passed away and continued on until he remarried. And that's just something for you to consider so the whole truth will be known.
Now, the issue about the sons. They are claiming that they have no relationship because of the death of Barbara Lourie. Mrs. Lourie died in 1997. The evidence is that the sons had a relationship with their father, and what was the year that all three of them said they had a split with their dad, all three said this?
2011 was when they had no relationship with their dad anymore. All three. And something obviously happened in 2011, they just haven't told you what it was. But they want you to think it was because Mrs. Lourie passed away.
MR. BIGGER: I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Objection, Your Honor. That was inappropriate.
THE COURT: Approach.
(The following proceedings were had before the Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
THE COURT: What's the objection?
MR. BIGGER: Well, he's testifying for himself, something obviously happened, I don't know what it was. He's basically suggesting to the jury, based on no evidence whatsoever, that in his opinion, Mr. Fasi's wise and esteemed opinion that something happened in 2011.
The reality is the testimony in this case is that it didn't all end in 2011, it did with Steven, with David it was earlier, with Michael it was a different time, it was not in 2011.
THE COURT: Well, the jury is free to infer things from testimony. It's argumentative comment upon the evidence. You can make opposing observations on redirect.
MR. SEIDEN: One minute.
MR. BIGGER: How much time, do you know that?
MS. TEDDER: 26 minutes remaining.
MR. BIGGER: I thought we said two hours yesterday.
MR. SEIDEN: Well, we never agreed to that.
We had -MR. FASI: I'll wrap up. I'm at the end.
THE COURT: All right.
MS. TEDDER: That's a problem.
MR. SEIDEN: You know, it's a problem because this is what we raised yesterday about me getting squeezed at the end. Maybe we can talk about it when Mr. Fasi -THE COURT: We are all getting squeezed because collectively you have a joint defense agreement and one of you has used more than the
amount of time. Two and a half is it. Step back.
MS. TEDDER: Thank you, Your Honor.
(The following proceedings were had in open court before the Court and jury.)
MR. FASI: The point is, that's not explained by the death of Barbara Lourie. You decide. You decide.
Punitive damages, if you ever get to that point, if you ever get to that point, punitive damages are warranted against these defendants under the facts of this case? You'll have to decide if they're warranted based on conduct that harmed Barbara Lourie and no other smoker.
There is the instruction on damages for punitives. And the word that I mentioned in opening statement is direct and substantial. It's a much higher standard, and you have to be truly, truly convinced that they're appropriate.
So I would ask you what evidence shows conduct that directly and substantially harmed Mrs. Lourie.
I don't get to speak to you again in this case. I want you to remember how we had to get you the whole story. And I won't be able to get up again and talk after this. It has been an honor to be in this courtroom with you for the past few
weeks and to bring this case to you, and I want to close with testimony and ideas that define this case.
There were statements that have been made in this case 50 years apart that are still on point.
Today Mr. Lourie testified he stopped approaching Mrs. Lourie about quitting smoking. Why? Because he made an effort to let her make her own decisions. He recognized and testified it had to be her decision to quit smoking.
50 years ago, Harry Reasoner, in a clip that we showed you, said "In this kind of a country it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. No one is going to forbid an adult to smoke and now it's quite clear no one is going to tell him it's good for him either. The decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it."
Thank you for your attention.



MS. TEDDER: Counsel, Mr. Lourie.
Ladies of the jury, good afternoon. It's now my turn to speak with you. I will be relatively short this afternoon. I do want to thank you for your service in this case. I want to thank you on behalf of myself, I want to thank you on behalf of my colleague, Mr. Larry Brock, and also on behalf of my client. You've been very attentive in this case, we thank you for your attention and for the work that you will do in deliberations. You didn't hear very much from me in this case because frankly, as you have heard now, Mrs. Lourie did not spend a lot of time using products made by my client. I'm not going to repeat everything that
Mr. Fasi said to you this afternoon, you were very attentive and I agree with Mr. Fasi's presentation of the evidence, so I will not repeat all of that, but I do want to talk just a little bit about my client.
As to Kent cigarettes, you've heard a little bit of testimony in this case about Kent. Although Mrs. Lourie may have occasionally smoked a Kent cigarette before 1966, no one told you that she smoked Kent regularly before 1966. We do know from Mr. Lourie that Mrs. Lourie stopped smoking Kent by 1970 or '71.
Lynda Snider, who, as you know, was a friend of Mrs. Lourie's growing up, told you that they first smoked a Kent cigarette not because of advertising, not because of anything that they heard or knew from Lorillard Tobacco Company, not because of a tobacco company document, but they smoked Kent cigarettes because it was the brand that when they were taking cigarettes from their parents, it was a brand, one of several, that they could get. Mrs. Snider said Kent was a brand that her mother smoked.
Again, they didn't smoke Kent because of any ad for Kent cigarettes, it just happened to be one
of the brands they could get their hands on when they were sneaking cigarettes. It wasn't anything that the tobacco companies said, did, or didn't say, they were simply picking what was available, and Mrs. Lourie simply picked the cigarettes that were available to her based upon what her parents and others smoked.
Plaintiff showed you a couple of advertisements for Kent cigarettes, but there is no evidence that Mrs. Lourie ever saw those advertisements or that she picked Kent cigarettes based on those advertisements. In fact, no one testified that she relied the ads, those Kent ads that you were shown, in making any decision based upon advertisements.
Mrs. Lourie wasn't choosing brands because of health reasons, either. There is no evidence that Mrs. Lourie smoked Kent cigarettes because of its tar or nicotine level. Even though you have heard a lot in this trial about tar and nicotine levels and about reasons for smoking low-tar brands, you have heard no evidence that tar and nicotine content dictated Mrs. Lourie's brand choices.
You remember the chart that Mr. Fasi went through with you just a few minutes ago. It talked
about tar and nicotine levels of various brands.
And he showed you that chart said there were, in
1967,	12 brands lower in tar and nicotine than Kent cigarettes. So Mrs. Lourie did not steadily move down to the lowest tar or nicotine brand cigarette that she could find. There were others on the market.
Kent was a filtered cigarette. After she smoked Kent cigarettes, she smoked higher-tar cigarettes. Then she smoked lights cigarettes.
Mrs. Lourie chose the brands she wanted, not necessarily the brands with the lowest tar and nicotine. Whatever Mrs. Lourie's reasons for choosing the brands that she smoked, we know one thing for certain, Mrs. Lourie understood that no brand of cigarettes is safe.
Mr. Lourie told you that. Nothing Lorillard said or did or did not say impacted Mrs. Lourie's decisions about smoking.
Well, what else did you hear about Kent? You heard that in the late 1950s, 1957, Lorillard had every reason to believe that the filter on Kent cigarettes was effective. Dr. Wynder and other notable scientists that you have heard about in this trial had concluded that reducing the tar and
nicotine in cigarettes by 40 percent could work to reduce the risks from smoking. And you heard that by 1959, Lorillard had met Dr. Wynder's challenge.
Reader's Digest, a magazine that you saw and heard about in this trial, conducted independent tests in 1957, '58, and '59 and found that Kent was among the best at filtering out tar and nicotine. Lorillard listened to what public health officials like Dr. Wynder were telling them about reducing risk. Dr. Proctor admitted that out of the millions of documents and all of the documents that he has reviewed, he could not cite to you a Lorillard document from the '50s, the '60s, or '70s that said Lorillard cigarettes were not less hazardous. He didn't cite any document. If it existed, he would have brought it to you. There is no Lorillard document or research that Mrs. Lourie relied on in making her choices and decisions about smoking.
The evidence shows that Lorillard not only tried to, but actually did reduce the tar in its Kent cigarettes after Dr. Wynder and the public health community called for them to do so.
I want to talk briefly with you about punitive damages. As Mr. Fasi said, we don't believe that
you'll reach this question, but again, if you do, the -- it asks whether Mr. Lourie is entitled by clear and convincing evidence, which is a higher burden of proof, to additional damages to punish the defendants on top of any compensatory damages that you might award. And again, punitive damages go to Mr. Lourie and would be on top of compensatory damages.
Well, what did you hear about Lorillard's conduct? Dr. Proctor, plaintiff's expert, who admitted he wants to ban cigarettes, had some good things to say about Lorillard's numerous contributions to scientific research on the health effects of smoking.
Lorillard supported and worked with famous scientists studying smoking, like Dr. Wynder,
Dr. Dietrich Hoffmann, and Dr. Evarts Graham.
Dr. Proctor told you they were pillars of the scientific community. Giants in smoking and health research. Plaintiff's experts all agreed on that.
You heard that Lorillard provided cigarettes for the studies the 1953 that Dr. Wynder and Dr. Graham did that appeared in LIFE magazine in 1953 where they painted tar on the backs of mice.
After 1950s, Lorillard kept working with
Dr. Wynder and Dr. Hoffman to learn what was in cigarette smoke and to identify potential carcinogens in the smoke. Lorillard funded Dr. Wynder's outstanding research lab, you've heard about that, the American Health Foundation. That is not wanton or reckless disregard, that is just the opposite.
Lorillard worked with Dr. Wynder on how to reduce phenols in cigarette smoke, because phenols were suspected as a cause of cancer. Lorillard scientists published that research and ultimately Lorillard was awarded two patents for it. You learned that the Lorillard in 1963 made two submissions to the Surgeon General before the '64 report came out and submitted its research, and the Surgeon General thanked Lorillard for its contributions.
You also heard that Lorillard did research on PMOs to prevent injury to the cilia, the clearance mechanism in the throat.
In the '70s, Lorillard developed a sophisticated smoke inhalation machine. We talked about that with Dr. Proctor. We talked about the fact that Lorillard had shared that with other labs and even made a presentation to the National Cancer
Institute. That again is not wanton or reckless disregard, it is just the opposite.
Dr. Proctor confirmed that Lorillard had a policy not to place its product in movies. That went back as far as the 1970s.
Again, if you look at the punitive damages jury instruction the Court gives you and considers this, you will find this is not conscious disregard, it is not reckless indifference. There was no conduct by Lorillard that was the legal cause of Mrs. Lourie's lung cancer and death because Mrs. Lourie knew that smoking was dangerous and she had the ability to quit smoking if she chose to do so.
The only person responsible for Mrs. Lourie's decisions about smoking, whether to smoke, whether to quit smoking, was Mrs. Lourie herself. Perhaps David Lourie said it best. He told you that Barbara Lourie was the type of person who accepted responsibility for the decisions she made. He told you that he never knew Mrs. Lourie to blame others for the decisions that she made.
That concludes my time to talk to you -- with you today ladies of the jury. Thank you very much for your time and attention.



MR. SEIDEN: Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. My time is limited, so I'll start right now. First of all, thank you very much for your service.
I'm not going to repeat the points that Mr. Fasi made and that Ms. Tedder talked about, but you should know I agree with them, but I want to spend the limited time that I have this afternoon is to talk about Raleigh cigarettes and the Reynolds brands that Mrs. Lourie smoked.
You heard there were four primary brands of cigarettes. Raleigh was the only one that was by R.J. Reynolds.
And so you didn't hear a lot from me at trial, and that's because you didn't hear a lot about Raleigh cigarettes, and we actually tracked it, if I could have demonstrative number 4, we looked through all the direct examination of all the plaintiff's experts to see how many times did plaintiff's counsel either ask them about Raleigh or how many times was it in their answer. Those are their five experts. Raleigh cigarettes, the only one who mentioned them at all was Dr. Proctor,
and here is the two things Dr. Proctor told you, he said he's familiar with Raleigh cigarettes, and Raleigh was manufactured by Brown & Williamson. That is all you heard from Dr. Proctor about Raleigh membership cigarettes.
As for Dr. Burns, zero on Raleigh, which was the primary brand, and there was one sentence, one sentence from him that he was familiar with Raleigh Lights. That's all you heard from their experts about Raleigh or Raleigh Lights. So those were the experts. And if you're -- you might ask yourself why in a case about Mrs. Lourie are plaintiff's experts talking about Reynolds brands of cigarettes she didn't smoke. Why weren't they testifying about Raleigh? This is a case about Mrs. Lourie. You didn't hear it. There was a complete absence of evidence.
Plaintiff failed to connect the evidence to Raleigh and Ms. Lourie. Let me give you some examples. Demonstrative 5, please. You heard a lot in this trial about youth marketing. You didn't see a single ad for Raleigh cigarettes that anyone told you had anything to do with youth marketing. In fact, if you just talk about ads, other than one Mr. Bigger showed you during
opening, no expert showed you any Raleigh or Raleigh Lights ad at all. Didn't see it.
So when you consider youth marketing evidence, I ask you to recall also Mrs. Lourie didn't start smoking Raleigh till age 25. There is simply no connection between this plaintiff and any supposed youth marketing evidence. With respect to other marketing generally, again, no Raleigh ads whatsoever.
If I could have the next slide, please, demonstrative 6. You heard about filter fraud. Plaintiff's experts didn't talk to you about the tar and nicotine content of Raleigh. The only one who brought it up was Mr. Fasi, and he showed you the point, she wasn't switching to a lower tar or nicotine cigarette. There is no evidence of any filter fraud as relates to Mrs. Lourie and Raleigh cigarettes.
If we turn to why Ms. Lourie switched to Raleigh cigarettes, we don't know. Mr. Lourie told you, he didn't know. So the idea that she switched for health reasons, first of all, it's betrayed by the public tar and nicotine levels, but there is no evidence of it. Nobody told you that.
Cigarette design. You received no evidence
about the design of Raleigh cigarettes. And safer cigarettes, no witness, no witness told you Mrs. Lourie thought Raleigh was safer or better for her, it just didn't happen.
Let's talk about the fact witnesses, if I could have demonstrative 7, and I'm sorry to be rushing. Each of these fact witnesses, everyone is up there except Mr. Lourie himself, none of them mentioned Raleigh. R.J. Reynolds' corporate representative, Mr. Bigger took the deposition, he didn't ask a single question about Raleigh. You didn't hear the words. The only witness who mentioned it was Mr. Lourie.
And so let's talk about that. Mr. Lourie talked to you and he tried to tell you about when and how much his wife may have smoked of Raleigh. And he admitted, he was estimating, he wasn't sure, it was difficult to remember the years, and that he wasn't always consistent about it in his deposition. And that's the passage of time, and we do all understand that.
And he estimated and it was an estimate he said sometime around the time we moved into Framingham, '70, '71, to '75, '76. So he's saying four to six years, which I would submit was much
different than what you heard in opening statement when you were told it was throughout the 1970s.
But respectfully, I would suggest that even the four to six years is an overestimate. If Mr. -I'm sorry, if Mrs. Lourie smoked Raleigh cigarettes for four to six years, why is it her lifelong friend, Linda Coven, and her lifelong friend, Lynda Snider, didn't remember Raleigh at all and didn't mention it in her brands? And why is it if she was smoking them till '75 or '76, why didn't Michael Lourie remember Raleigh either. He was young, he was born in 1969, but he testified on direct as early as 1973 he -THE CLERK: Five minutes, Counsel.
MR. SEIDEN: Thank you. As early as 1973, he was aware of his mom smoking. He said at that time, it was ubiquitous, the packs were everywhere, saw them in the car. Would he remember it at four, five, six, seven years old? I don't know. But he didn't. He could have. You'll decide that. But his testimony about the brands smoked was consistent with Lynda Snider and Linda Coven, and it wasn't Raleigh. So did she smoke Raleigh for some period of time? I think the evidence is yes, she did. Was it more than a year or two? I don't
think there is any evidence or any basis to conclude.
Look, the bottom line is she smoked a little bit of my client's product. I don't think it was the four or six years. But any way you slice it, out of 36 years of smoking, Raleigh was a small, small part of it. And the plaintiff's experts never tied any element of youth marketing, improper marketing, filter fraud, lights fraud, or cigarettes design to Raleigh or Mrs. Lourie's use of the product.
May I have demonstrative 8, please. In openings, you got a slide, and remember, I came up, this was the non-primary brands, there were eight of them, and five of them at the time were Reynolds and I said to you, you know, maybe that seems like a lot of Reynolds smoking, but when you hear the facts, it's not going to be that way. Well, two of them, Tareyton and Vantage you were told about, no witness said she smoked it. In fact, when Mr. Bigger put up the slide this afternoon, it wasn't on there. Salem, that was the menthol period, Mr. Lourie said there were two brands there, Salem and Newport and it might have been a matter of weeks. It was weeks to months. So Salem
may have been a week or two. Mr. Lourie said she smoked Winston, but he never said how much, there is no information about it.
Now let's talk about Raleigh Lights because I was surprised to hear Raleigh Lights was the fraud, that's Reynolds' fraud, it was Raleigh Lights.
There is not a single witness in this case who recalls Mrs. Lourie smoking Raleigh Lights. Not a single witness. Not the friends, not the children.
And not even Mr. Lourie himself. What they have it was that picture Mr. Bigger tried to put up during opening statements.
You remember he fumbled with the Elmo, and from back there I yelled -- or during my opening I think I said let me tell you, that's Raleigh Lights in the picture. And you have the picture back there, go and look at it. I don't even think without a magnifying glass you can even tell that it's Raleigh Lights.
But she's there, she's next to them, we don't know if she is smoking them.
But let me ask you these questions about it.
First of all, was she smoking them for any period of time or was she just trying them, we don't know. All of it's a guess. What I think is significant,
is sometimes she talked about an ah-ha moment. Sometimes you see something, you see a picture, you see a computer, you see an Elmo, whatever it is, you see something, and you have that ah-ha moment, now I remember something, something I wasn't thinking of.
We didn't have that ah-ha moment. Mr. Lourie told you he saw the picture. He still doesn't remember his wife smoking Raleigh Lights. Think of all the brands he told you about. And there are other ones. There is Lark and L&M. We didn't hear about them today. But there was no ah-ha moment.
There is no fair basis to conclude that Mrs. Lourie smoked Raleigh Lights for any substantial or significant period of time. In fact, you might infer that she tried them, but there is no basis really to infer that.
She was photographed next to a pack of Raleigh Lights, and that's it. And based on that, you've heard the fraud Reynolds committed was the Raleigh Lights fraud.
Did anyone tell you why Mrs. Lourie may have smoked a Raleigh Lights cigarette? Did anyone tell you she thought Raleigh Lights was safer? Did anyone talk to you about Raleigh Lights
advertising? Not a word. This is all contrived because some photograph when you hold up a magnifying glass shows Raleigh Lights. That's not substantial evidence.
You know, Mr. Fasi was telling you about legal cause.
Could I have the Elmo, please?
Legal cause is a very important concept, you know. If you look at the verdict form, it's in question 1 is legal cause. It's in question 2.
It's in question 3, in 4, in 5. And then Mr. Fasi was reading to you the definition of legal cause.
But the wrong -- he didn't realize it at the time. The wrong slide was up there, so the words on the verdict -- on the jury instruction didn't match it. So I want to make sure you understand it because it's in every question. It's that important.
So here is one example. This is four different places, four or five different places in the jury instruction. Here talking about legal cause, it says, "An addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of lung cancer and death if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence."
THE CLERK: Ten minutes, Counsel.
MR. SEIDEN: I'm sorry?
THE CLERK: Ten minutes.
MR. SEIDEN: Let me just stop there for one second. Raleigh Lights in a direct, natural and continuous sequence? Was there any evidence that Raleigh Lights was used in that sort of way?
Produces or contributes substantially. So let's talk about contributes. It's not just a contribution. It's a substantial contribution to producing such lung cancer and death so that it can reasonably be said that but for, in other words, without that, it wouldn't occur, but for it, in this case, an addiction to cigarettes, the lung cancer and death wouldn't have been suffered.
Is anyone here going to say but for her smoking Raleigh Lights, she wouldn't have developed lung cancer? Is there any sort of evidence that would support that in this record?
And so I told you but for and this is all over the jury instructions. Page 5. And you'll have these back there. Page 7, page 9. Anyhow, I'm really running low on time and a lot of things I would really like to cover.
Where does this lack of brand use, where does
it impact you on the verdict form? Look, I think it's a hundred percent fault to Ms. Lourie for all the reasons Mr. Fasi articulated to you, but even without those reasons for Reynolds, it's certainly zero.
Think about the lack of connection between the products my client made that Ms. Lourie smoked and the injury. And remember, it's not until the 1970s. She is an adult. There is no youth marketing. There is warnings on every pack of a Reynolds product that Ms. Lourie smoked.
I want to go back to the second question on the verdict form, which is after class membership.
I don't think you should get there. I don't know what you're thinking. So I've got to cover it.
May I have the Elmo, please.
Was smoking by each defendant a legal cause. Well, when you see legal cause, one of the things you are going to have to -- one of the things plaintiff has the burden of showing is that it contributes substantially. And they have to show but-for cause. And I want to talk about that for a minute.
The only one who told you that cigarettes contribute to Mrs. Lourie's cancer was Dr. Burns.
Now, it's interesting. You have to do it. For question 2, you have to do the analysis as to each defendant's brand. Separate questions.
So think about it for Raleigh. How did Dr. Burns tell you that Raleigh contributed substantially when he never mentioned that she smoked Raleigh?
THE CLERK: 12 minutes.
MR. SEIDEN: How did he give you an opinion that Raleigh contributed substantially?
And by the way, the words are "contribute substantially". Dr. Burns didn't use the word "substantially". He just said every cigarette contributes. The question is, it's not just contributing, it's do they contribute substantially.
Dr. Burns is no stranger to the witness stand. He knows the standard. He didn't tell you that.
And it's their burden of proof.
You may say to yourself, hey, Seiden, why didn't you ask him that if it contributes substantially? Look, two things on that. One, I don't have a burden to prove my client's product didn't cause the smoking. And two, there has never been a secret in this court.
I told you right in opening statement my client's product wasn't smoked a lot. Plaintiff knew that. They never asked him the question. And by the way, certainly, Dr. Burns never told you that Raleigh was a but-for cause. Never.
So when you get to question 2 and you look to -- first of all, the defendants, you should say no to all of them for the reasons Mr. Fasi articulated, but when you get to Reynolds, you really should say no. Make it -- make it darker.
I don't know what to tell you.
Okay. I'm really running low on time, and I apologize.
One of the things, Mr. Fasi mentioned this, but I want to put it in the context of my client's product. You heard Dr. Burns testified that if Ms. Lourie stopped smoking by 1976, she wouldn't have developed cancer. It's called declining risk.
There is no evidence that she smoked any Reynolds products after 1976. If she had just quit instead of switching, if she had quit when she was finished smoking my client's products, she wouldn't have developed cancer.
It's another reason that legal cause isn't demonstrated on any of the questions as to
Reynolds, and it's another reason, if you get to the comparative fault question, that Reynolds should be at zero.
I told you there were labels on every pack.
Oh, plaintiff came forward with no evidence that Mrs. Lourie relied on any statement from my client or was looking to hear something from Reynolds that they didn't hear. They brought in all these fact witnesses. Didn't hear it from any of them.
THE CLERK: Time, Counsel.
MR. SEIDEN: Your Honor, might I have a couple more minutes?
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. SEIDEN: It should be clear by now, I don't think you should get to the issue of punitive damages. I don't think you should reach it. I think you should say no on the questions of legal cause, no for all the defendants, particularly Reynolds. You should say -- on the issue of concealment, you should say no.
As to all the defendants, particularly Reynolds, given the Raleigh Lights we've talked about, on the concealment generally given the awareness, testimony you've heard and the '64 Surgeon General Report and all that, you should say
no.
But if you get to the question of whether there is entitlement of punitive damages, I want to emphasize, and Mr. Bigger mentioned it, the standard there changes. It's not greater weight of the evidence. It becomes clear and convincing evidence.
And I would submit, given the inability of the -- or not the inability, the failure of the plaintiff's experts to address anything about my client's products, that that standard can't be met.
I don't have a lot of time. Let me -- let me in a minute mention some of the things that -- you know, I crossed Dr. Proctor. Maybe you remember it. He told you about CTR on direct. He told you it was a smokescreen, distraction research. I got him to admit how many times it had been cited by the Surgeon General's Report.
The credibility issue? He said that was distraction research. It was worthless. He hasn't read it. Remember I asked him how many have you read? He mentioned one. He said enough. Well, there were 24 cited in the '88 Surgeon General's Report. He mentioned he had read one. I asked him what about the 200 others that had been cited.
Hadn't read them.
You saw the tobacco companies funded the monsters, The Green Monster, The Blue Monster. I named one The Mustard Monster. Concealment. Worthless research. Dr. Proctor says even today he has all four of those books funded by TIRC and CTR, and he still uses them till today.
I told you about Eclipse and Premier, how Reynolds has spent over a billion dollars to try to get a heat, not burn, cigarette that might be safer, and they published their research in 1988.
Dr. Rodgman, all the constituents he had found, all of them.
Dr. Proctor didn't tell you on direct, but on cross you learned all of them had been reported to the Surgeon General's Advisory Committee prior to '64. So not only weren't they secret, but it turns out when Ms. Lourie was going through the 1964 Surgeon General's Report, not only weren't they secret, she had direct access to them. She didn't need Reynolds' internal company documents. She had direct access to them in the 1964 Surgeon General's Report.
I'll finish by saying this. This -- what does this have to do with Mrs. Lourie? This was
supposed to be a case about Mrs. Lourie, not about the generic smoker. I think there is no greater example than this case being about the generic smoker than if you look at Raleigh and Raleigh Lights and how little evidence there was from anyone about any connection of bad conduct related to those brands of cigarettes and Mrs. Lourie.
So I know this is our 13th day together. I told you at the beginning that you were making a great sacrifice and it was a prospective, but you have now seen it. We all thank you for your service, and it's a pleasure to try a case before you. Thank you very much.
