                    CLOSING ARGUMENT
              MR. WICHMANN:  Folks, first I want to thank
        you on behalf of Hazel Mathis and the Mathis
        family for coming down here and doing your civic
        duty and paying such close attention to the
        evidence that you received in the case.
              What this boils down to is saying that,
        Hazel and Robert Mathis were and are members of
        the Engle Class Objection, Your Honor,
        misstates the law.
              THE COURT:  What did you say?
              MR. PERSONS:  Objection, misstatement of 3733
        the law.
              THE COURT:  He hasn't finished his
        sentence.
              MR. WICHMANN:  -- and R.J. Reynolds, the
        Defense, saying that Mr. and Mrs. Mathis are not
        members of the Engle Class.
              MR. PERSONS:  Same objection.
              THE COURT:  Hold on a second.
              You-all decide, based on the
        evidence that you heard and the law that the judge
        has instructed you on, and you'll get a three-page
        verdict form to fill out after you hear from the
        Defense and when you retire to the jury room and
        get all the exhibits.  The three pages, the judge
        will go over with you or has gone over with you --
        and I'm going to go over with you in my
        presentation, but there are some things that you
        don't have to decide.  The judge just talked to
        you about that, and she said that the Court has
        determined and instructs as a matter of law that
        Mr. Mathis had lung cancer caused by smoking, and
        that the cell type of his lung cancer qualified
        for the membership in the Engle Class, if you
        decide that the other issues pertaining to class 3734
        membership.
              Other issues that are pertaining to class
        membership -- so, folks -- I'm going to go through
        this again, but the first question is:
              "Was Mr. Mathis addicted to nicotine and
        cigarettes, and if so, was such an addiction a
        legal cause of his lung cancer and death?"
              So you if you must answer 1(a) yes.
              (Discussion off the record.)
              MR. WICHMANN:  You must answer 1(a) yes or
        Hazel goes home.  Right there, you must check that
        yes.  Right there, you must check that yes.  The
        second question under 1 is, was his -- was Robert
        addicted to nicotine in cigarettes and, if so, was
        his addiction a legal cause of his COPD?  You
        should answer that yes.
              The other question is, "Please state
        whether Mr. Mathis suffered from or experienced
        symptoms of either or both of the following
        diseases before November 21st of 1996."  Lung
        cancer.  You must check that yes or Hazel goes
        home -- Hazel loses.  You should check number 2
        yes, based on the evidence that you've heard that
        we're going to go over here today.
              The first thing that's important -- the 3735
        judge just read you the instructions on the
        believability of the witnesses that you've heard.
        And in a nutshell you can consider these elements
        when you decide who it is you're going to believe,
        both insofar as the family witnesses are
        concerned, the Mathis family witnesses and insofar
        as the opinion testimony of the expert witnesses
        that you've heard.  So this is how you decide
        whether or not Hazel is a member of the Engle
        Class which we say she is.
              Now, who do you believe, folks, R.J.
        Reynolds brought you yesterday Dr. Abramson, got
        on the witness stand and he said he's never
        treated a single patient only for nicotine
        addiction.  Never done it.  He said that he's
        never published a single article on smoking
        cessation or nicotine addiction.  You recall I
        gave the guy his three-page CV.  That's his --
        that's a professional background.  That's a
        professional history and the word "nicotine"
        doesn't appear on a CV.  The word "smoking"
        doesn't appear on his CV.  And this is the expert
        witness that Reynolds brought you and they want
        you to believe.
              I showed you the U.S. Surgeon General, the 3736
        guy with the beard, C. Everett Koop, we showed you
        a video of him talking about how serious nicotine
        addiction was, how it acts on the brain like
        cocaine and heroin, how the younger that you start
        the harder it is for you to quit in the future and
        how nicotine causes people to smoke that causes
        millions of deaths in this country including
        Robert Mathis.  And the R.J. Reynolds expert,
        Dr. Abramson said I disagree with him, every
        single -- every single thing that the chief public
        health authority figure in this country says
        Reynolds' expert disagrees.
              Why?  It came out that R.J. Reynolds has
        paid him over a million dollars.  He couldn't get
        it right.  First, he said it was 1.1 million, then
        I pointed out to him that just last year he was up
        in Broward County and he said it was between 1.1
        and 1.2 million.  But one thing is clear, that
        he's charged 42, $43,000 before he even set foot
        in this courtroom and -- and he told you that in
        another case, a previous case R.J. Reynolds had
        given him a script, the questions and the answers
        before he testified and he said, I looked at it,
        and then R.J. Reynolds rolled the videotape of him
        testifying in a previous case.  Why?  So he could 3737
        hone himself, so he could be sharper, so he could
        be better.  Why?  Because he's paid, it's a
        script, he's telling you what they want you to
        hear but that goes against common sense, it goes
        against the U.S. Surgeon General and it goes
        against their own, the cigarette industry's own
        internal documents and the history Objection, Your Honor.
              THE COURT:  -- and the history that
        you've heard about from Dr. Proctor, the very
        first witness who came here from Stanford who
        wrote the book that I put up there on the witness
        stand, who wrote the book about the history of the
        cigarette industry.  So he goes against all of
        those folks, he's an outlier.
              Who did we bring?  We brought Dr. Richard
        Hurt.  There's his picture.  He came -- he had a
        neck brace and he had an arm brace because he had
        a fall.  He was -- he's recently retired.  He was
        the medical director of the Nicotine Dependence
        Center for the Mayo Clinic, the number one ranked
        hospital in this country, treated thousands of
        patients, over 50,000 patients he's treated for
        nicotine addiction, for COPD and for lung cancer. 3738
              He's published extensively on nicotine,
        nicotine addiction, disease, he's cited in peer
        review literature, he lectures all over the
        country, all over the world on nicotine addiction
        and he's testified as an expert in front of the
        U.S. Congress concerning nicotine and nicotine and
        cigarette addiction.
              So -- but it's up to y'all.  Are you going
        to believe the Reynolds lawyer -- or, I'm sorry, I
        beg your pardon.  Are you going to believe the
        Reynolds expert Objection, Your Honor.
              MS. HENNINGER:  The Reynolds expert.
              MR. WICHMANN:  The Reynolds expert.
              THE COURT: -- who got paid a million
        dollars, who has no qualifications concerning
        nicotine and cigarette addiction over Dr. Richard
        Hurt, and the other witnesses, and there are more
        witnesses.  There's a whole family.  You heard
        from the three daughters, Hazel's three daughters,
        you heard from Aadron and you heard from Dionne,
        you heard from Viola and I'll go over that
        testimony, again, with you today.  But don't set
        your common sense aside outside of the courtroom. 3739
        Listen to what the folks who knew the most about
        Robert had to say to you.
              Let's start out with slide 11, addiction.
        What is addiction?  Dr. Hurt came in and told you
        it's defined as a chronic relapsing brain disease
        that's characterized by compulsive drug seeking
        and despite -- and use despite harmful
        consequences.
              Let's take it from reverse -- the reverse.
        And we'll go over this again a little bit later,
        but you'll recall, Aadron Mathis got on the
        witness stand and said, "My daddy was so badly
        addicted that when he was in the hospital, he was
        begging for a cigarette."  I'm going to read you
        the testimony.  She said he had lung cancer.  He
        knew he had lung cancer.  He was still begging for
        the nicotine.  That's -- that's using cigarettes
        despite harmful consequences.
              And why?  What is it about their product,
        what is it about this product that they sold to
        Americans that they marketed to African-Americans?
        What is it about the product Objection, Your Honor.
              MR. WICHMANN:  -- that leads somebody --
              THE COURT:  Well, he hasn't finished 3740
        hearing I don't like to cut him off,
        but --
              THE COURT:  Okay.  So if it's based on my
        prior rulings, I'm going to overrule.
              MR. WICHMANN:  May I proceed, Your Honor?
              THE COURT:  Yes.
              MR. WICHMANN:  What is it about this
        product that would lead Robert Mathis to smoke so
        much over 50 years to be on his deathbed begging
        for cigarettes?  It's the nicotine.  And Dr. Hurt
        told you chronic relapsing brain disease, he
        talked to you about how the quickest way to get
        the drug nicotine to the brain is to smoke it.
              It's even quicker than injecting a drug
        into your veins.  It goes right into the lungs,
        right into the bloodstream and right up to the
        brain and it creates receptors and creates
        nicotine receptors and the brain -- the brain
        demands more.  And Dr. Hurt told you that the
        younger that you start, if you have a brain that's
        still developing -- the evidence in this case was
        Robert started at age 9, he started at age 12 Objection, Your Honor.
        Hearsay. 3741
              THE COURT:  Overruled.
              Members of the jury, what the lawyers for
        both sides say during closing arguments is not
        evidence.  You must rely on your own recollection
        of the evidence.  What the lawyers are doing is
        summarizing what they believe the evidence showed
        and in an argument format and the rules allow them
        to do that.  But the jurors must rely on their own
        recollection of the evidences.  Very well.
              MR. WICHMANN:  One of their own paid
        witness, Dr. Abramson came in here said, well, 50
        years, I did the math, he started around age 12.
        That's what Abramson said.  Age 12, the brain is
        not fully developed.  Dr. Hurt went through that
        with you, and the U.S. Surgeon General, who's the
        video you saw said that the younger you start for
        scientific medical reasons the effect nicotine has
        on your brain the harder it is for you to quit,
        the harder it is for you to quit.
              Compulsive drug seeking.  Dr. Hurt talked
        to you, he said nobody -- nobody starts smoking
        three packs a day.  Why?  Because of this medical
        concept called tolerance.  Okay.  It's like --
        it's like -- it's like a sprinter.  No sprinter
        starts out running the 100-yard dash in 9 seconds 3742
        because his body won't tolerate that.  You have to
        work at it, you have to go out there and you have
        to smoke and regularly smoke and get your body
        used to nicotine, used to inhaling.  That's what
        Dr. Hurt said.  So he went from whatever he
        started as a boy to two to three packs a day
        according to the family.
              Now, Reynolds says, oh, no, no, no.
        There's a -- there's a medical record that says he
        only smoked one pack a day for 50 years, so it's
        only one pack a day.  Dr. Abramson got up and said
        to you, oh, man, I don't believe the family.
        They're not creditable.  It's what he said.  He
        said Objection, misstates the
        evidence.
              MR. WICHMANN:  It's what the medical record
        said.
              THE COURT:  The medical record says,
        according to Dr. Abramson, it's only one pack a
        day.  Well, the family knew him the most.  They
        knew him the best, and they told you how his
        smoking progressed from two to three packs a day
        up to when he's in the hospital on his deathbed 3743
        asking for -- asking for nicotine, asking for the
        cigarettes.
              Now, that, folks, is tolerance.  That,
        folks, is over the years the brain crying out for
        nicotine and the body tolerating more and more and
        more and more.  You know what?  During the entire
        time that Robert Mathis was alive smoking
        Reynolds' cigarettes never once did they say,
        don't do that.
              MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
              THE COURT:  Sustained.
              MR. PERSONS:  May we have a sidebar?
              THE COURT:  No.  Sustained.
              MR. PERSONS:  Okay.  Move to strike.
              THE COURT:  Jurors, disregard the last
        statement.  Thank you.
              MR. WICHMANN:  Reynolds continued to sell
        him cigarettes.  He was their best customer.  He
        did what they wanted their smokers to do and that
        is buy more cigarettes, smoke more cigarettes so
        they could sell more cigarettes and make more
        money all the while that they knew, you heard the
        evidence from Dr. Proctor from Stanford, they knew
        in the mid 1950s that their product was addictive
        and that their product causes lung disease and 3744
        death, and they were in America while, I'm going
        to show you the conference -- the consumption
        chart in an minute, while people -- while they
        sold more cigarettes and the line of consumption
        went up.
              And they were here in this country selling
        their product while the lung cancer death rate
        went straight up through the roof and never once
        did they say during the course of the conspiracy,
        never once did they say our products are highly
        addictive, our products are so addictive they're
        like cocaine and heroin and our products are going
        to cause lung cancer and death to millions of
        Americans like Robert Mathis.  They never said
        that.  They never said that until after Robert
        Mathis was dead, but Reynolds is going to blame
        Robert Objection, Your Honor, blame.
              THE COURT:  Just a moment.  I'm going to --
        I'm going to overrule the objection, but remind
        the jurors to be mindful of the jury instructions
        that I read to you on this issue.  Go ahead.
              MR. WICHMANN:  Reynolds has a simple
        argument and that is it's all Robert's fault.
              Go to the next slide, please. 3745
              Let's go through some of the documents, and
        what I've tried to do is -- what we have tried to
        do is we tried to -- to present you with sort of a
        bird's-eye view.  There's literally thousands of
        documents.  You heard that from Dr. Hurt, who was
        one of the first people outside of the cigarette
        industry to be allowed into their vault where they
        kept all their previously secret material.  He
        wasn't allowed in until after Robert died.
              And so we can't -- as he said, we can't
        bring you every single piece of paper, but we can
        bring you what we think are the important
        documents, and you have them back there.  And you
        can look at them, but I want -- I want to go
        through some of them right now.
              Here is one.  This is R.J. Reynolds.  They
        knew that they possess knowledge of the effects of
        nicotine far more extensive than exists in
        published scientific literature.  This is part of
        the concealment and the conspiracy.
              The next one, please.
              They knew that nicotine was the substantial
        chemical that kept addicted smokers smoking.
              I knew I was going to do that.
              MR. PHILIPSON:  Do you want me to get the 3746
        tape from the back of the courtroom?
              MR. WICHMANN:  We'll muddle ahead.
              Okay.  So the question is:  Was Robert
        addicted to -- next one, please -- was Robert
        addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes?
              And this is a summary of what you've heard
        as evidence in this case.  He started smoking age
        14 or 15.  Well, you heard Dr. Abramson say it was
        probably even earlier than that, around 12, and
        you heard the family say 9.
              But y'all -- the point is that he started
        when he was a teenager.  He smoked two to three
        packs a day for 50 years.  He received 40 to
        600 doses of nicotine to the brain every day.  You
        heard that from Dr. Hurt.  Woke up in the middle
        of the night to smoke.  Smoked first thing in the
        morning.  Smoked everywhere including in bed.  I'm
        going to go over that in a minute.  He had burn
        marks on his clothes.  He was described by the
        family as a chain smoker, even though
        Dr. Abramson, the paid Reynolds witness, said,
        "No, I don't believe that."  He didn't satisfy his
        technical definition of a chain smoker.  But y'all
        heard from the family.  You can decide who you're
        going to believe. 3747
              He smoked after he was diagnosed with lung
        cancer.  And I talked a little bit about that.  He
        said he needed a cigarette in the hospital.
        Abramson and said, "Well, everybody knew that he
        was going to pass."  And so they took him out, and
        let him have a cigarette before he passed on.  He
        was very agitated when he was trying to quit, and
        that is because Dr. Hurt told you people smoke
        either to prevent the withdrawal from nicotine --
        addicted smokers smoke to prevent the withdrawal
        from nicotine or to satisfy the brain's craving
        for nicotine.  He had that.  He tried to quit.
        You heard this from the family.  He tried the
        patch; he tried the gum; he tried going cold
        turkey.
              Now, we're talking about events that
        happened 20, 25 years ago.  Some of the family
        dates were off, and Dr. Abramson made that clear.
        He said, "No.  It doesn't qualify for use of the
        patch or the gum because they didn't get exactly
        the right date, exactly what day it was in January
        of 1986 where there was" -- nobody remembers that.
        Nobody remembers that.
              But y'all have to decide.  You heard the
        family come up and say to you under oath, sit 3748
        down, remember, he had the T-shirt on, he had the
        patch on his arm.  You remember the girls that
        came up and told you, "Yes.  He chewed the
        nicotine gum because he had dentures, and it was
        bothering his dentures."  They remember this.
              Also cold turkey.  They told you about
        how -- and I'm going to get into that in an
        second, how Robert Mathis, Hazel's beloved husband
        for many years, okay, raised four girls and Rodney
        Mathis, the eldest son.  And how he was just the
        most even tempered guy you could imagine.  That's
        what you heard from the family.
              Except, except, except when he was trying
        to quit, when he went without his cigarettes for a
        day or so, how he got snappy.  That's what the
        girls said, "He got snappy."
              What's that tell you?  That tells you he's
        having withdrawal symptoms from his brain crying
        out for nicotine, and that's what happens to
        addicts, nicotine addicts.  And also he switched
        to pipes and cigars to try to quit smoking.
              Dr. Richard Hurt, we brought down from the
        Mayo Clinic.  I already went over his
        qualifications.  He sat here and told you in his
        opinion Robert Mathis was unequivocally, 3749
        absolutely addicted to smoking.
              What did he base that on?  He based it on
        the Heaviness of Smoking Index.  He told you about
        that.  He said this is the diagnostic tool that he
        used and that they use at the Mayo Clinic when
        people come to them that are so addicted, they
        have to check themselves into the hospital in
        order to get help to -- to kick this addiction.
              And he talked about using those two
        criteria and how that was the best test to use
        because Robert is not here, unfortunately, to
        answer questions from the doctor.  But he applied
        it, and he said Robert had the highest level of
        dependence.  Highest level of addiction.
              Now, he also talked about the very same
        criteria, the very same book that Reynolds' doctor
        used, the DSM-5, which is what the psychiatrist
        and psychologists use.  Dr. Hurt told you they
        don't use -- the doctors, the clinicians, the
        doctors who actually treat addicted smokers don't
        use the DSM-5 because it's not geared for smoking
        addiction, but he said he applied it anyway.  And
        he got 9 out of 11 criteria, Robert met.  Only two
        were needed for addiction.  He said based on the
        DSM-5 Robert Mathis qualifies as a class member. 3750
        Hazel qualifies as a class member.
              Now -- now, based on what y'all heard from
        the family, based on what y'all heard from
        Dr. Hurt, okay, you got to compare that with what
        y'all heard from Reynolds' paid witness who
        said -- who said -- first he admitted he doesn't
        see addicted smokers because most addicted smokers
        don't go to psychiatrists like him.  They go to
        medical doctors first.  That's what he said under
        oath.
              But he applied this test to Robert.  And
        guess what?  He came up with 0.  He said Robert
        Mathis who smoked for 50 years first thing in the
        morning all day long, smoked in bed, smoked at
        night, smoked in the hospital while he's getting
        treatment for lung cancer.  The family came in and
        told you he was addicted.  The paid Reynolds'
        expert said he didn't meet not a single criteria.
        He's so far out of the mainstream he shouldn't be
        believed.
              Now, one thing he didn't talk to you about
        when he went through his DSM criteria, but I did
        when I cross-examined him, and I think it's
        important.  The other page of the DSM-5 criteria
        that says, "Associated features supporting a 3751
        diagnosis of Tobacco Use Disorder."
              "Smoking within 30 minutes of waking."
              The family told you first thing he did in
        the morning was smoke.
              Smoked daily.  The family told you he
        smoked every single day.
              Smoked more cigarettes a day.  We covered
        that.
              Waking up at night to smoke.  They are all
        associated with Tobacco Use Disorder.  But the
        Reynolds witness he said, "No, he doesn't meet a
        single criteria."
              And importantly for this case the DSM
        recognizes that serious medical conditions like
        lung and other cancers often occur as well as
        pulmonary disease, and that's the COPD.  The COPD
        is the pulmonary disease and the lung cancer.
        Reynolds' own expert's book says that people who
        are addicted often get COPD, and they often get
        lung cancer.
              So I asked him this question yesterday:
        "Can you answer my question?  Who knows more about
        the reasons he woke up?  The family members who
        were living with him, or you who never met him but
        got a million dollars from Reynolds?" 3752
              And he finally admitted the family would
        know more.  So let me just talk to you a little
        bit about what the family said.
              Aadron Mathis, very first family member,
        sitting right back there, was asked here, "Do you
        think your dad was addict?"
              She said, "He had to have been.  He was in
        the hospital hooked up to an IV.  He would have
        other things on his body hooked up, and he still
        wanted to smoke.  When he couldn't smoke laying in
        the hospital, he trembled.  He would shake because
        he needed to smoke."
              Dionne, sitting right over there, licensed
        practical nurse, got on the witness stand and told
        you her dad smoked continuously.  Her dad smoked
        first thing in the morning.  He got up to smoke at
        night.  And she said, "Well, I know that because I
        used to see him get to smoke at night."
              But Dr. Abramson, paid a million bucks,
        wasn't there, never met Robert, said, "No.  No.
        That doesn't -- no.  No.  I'm not gone -- I'm not
        going to factor that in."
              She also said that she remembers his bed
        sheets being burned from him smoking in bed
        because he fell asleep with a cigarette in his 3753
        hand.  He was a chain smoker.  And she was asked,
        "Well, do you think your dad was addicted?"
              She said, "He just couldn't stop."
              Viola, Shari sitting over there, this lady
        served in the U.S. military just like her dad.
        Robert Mathis was a good man.  Robert Mathis' life
        matter.  Robert Mathis was in Korea serving in
        this country.
              What did she say about her dad?  She said
        he was a chain smoker.  That's what she told you,
        even though Dr. Abramson yesterday said, "Oh, no,
        couldn't be."
              She also said he made deep pulls on a
        cigarette, and she described how the ash would
        stay on the cigarette because he was inhaling so
        deeply.
              Dr. Hurt told you the reason for that is
        it's a scientific medical condition called
        compensation because Reynolds put filters on their
        cigarettes so that people would think the
        cigarettes were safe.  But what happened was
        addicted smokers like Robert had to get the
        nicotine.  So they covered the holes in the
        filters with their fingers, subconsciously,
        Dr. Hurt told you, and they inhaled deeply.  And 3754
        they inhaled deeper because they had to get that
        nicotine passed the filter up into their brain.
        And that's what she's telling you that she -- that
        she saw.
              And she also said, "My dad smoked every
        day, all day."  That was an addicted smoker.  She
        said, "He was a continuous smoker."  She said, "He
        smoked all the time."  "Some people referred to
        him as a chain smoker," is what she said.
              Now, they are going to get up and tell you
        he was a free and willing smoker.  He just chose
        to smoke.  So he just could have put it down.  He
        just could have quit, and we wouldn't be here.
              Well, their own document -- and these all
        have PT numbers on it.  This was written in 1980.
        It was a previously secret document.  It was
        secret during the entire time Robert Mathis was --
        was alive.
              It says right here, "Cigarette smoking is
        more addictive than using heroin."  That's what --
        that's what the internal cigarette document says.
        But you heard their expert they paid a million
        bucks to yesterday, say, "No, no, no, no.  I don't
        agree with the Surgeon General," but here is what
        the cigarette industry was writing in secret. 3755
        It's more addictive than using heroin.
              And, "We can't defend continued smoking as
        free choice," which is what they are going to say
        if the person Objection, Your Honor.
              THE COURT:  -- if the person was
        addicted.
              Now, again, their doctor came up yesterday
        said, "He wasn't addicted, and I got this book
        that says so, right?"
              Then I said, "Well, why don't you turn your
        attention to this page?"
              And this page was, "Culture-related
        Diagnostic Issues."  I asked him to read to you
        right in the bottom, highlighted,
        "African-American males tend to have higher
        nicotine blood levels for a given number of
        cigarettes, and this might contribute to greater
        difficulty in quitting.  Also, the speed of
        nicotine metabolism is significantly different for
        whites compared with African-Americans."
              He said, "Well, you know, that's news to
        me."
              Could you put up PT1207, please? 3756
              Why is that?  Well, here it is.  There's an
        internal document, previously secret document.
        You can take it back there, and you can find it.
        And this is what they wrote.  "King-size Kool" --
        remember, that was one of the brands of
        mentholated filtered cigarettes that Robert
        smoked.  They wrote, "King-size Kool has the
        highest nicotine delivery of all the King-size
        cigarettes today, menthol or non-menthol.  One of
        the keys to Kool's success is the high nicotine to
        tar."
              So they knew that.  But they never told
        Robert Mathis that.  How is Robert supposed to
        know that?  How is Robert supposed to know that,
        this cigarette that he's smoking, this Kool
        cigarette, this mentholated cigarette that they
        are marketing has got the highest nicotine
        delivery?
              He didn't know that, just like he didn't
        know all about the cancer-causing chemicals in
        their -- in their cigarettes.  And he didn't know
        all about the ingredients that Dr. Hurt told you
        about.  They put in the cigarettes everything from
        chocolate to menthol, to this, to that to make the
        smoke more inhalable so that folks can inhale 3757
        their cigarettes and buy more.
              Here we go, right here.
              Just an idea of some of the cancer-causing
        chemicals in smoke that the cigarette industry
        denied for all the time Robert Mathis was alive.
        They denied.  They kept saying, Well, we don't
        think there's anything harmful in the smoke from
        our cigarettes, but if there is, we'll find it and
        we'll fix it, and if there is, you got to smoke a
        filter, you got to smoke this, you got to smoke
        that, smoke the filter, use menthol, that's --
        that was what they were saying when they knew
        otherwise; when they knew the product they were
        selling was highly addictive, could cause lung
        disease and lung cancer to people like Robert.
              Here we go to the next one, please.
              So Robert smoked Winston, which is a
        filtered cigarette.  Robert smoked Kools, which
        was a filtered menthol cigarette.  Robert smoked
        Newport, which is a Lorillard cigarette, menthol
        filtered cigarette.  He also, later in his life,
        he smoked Benson & Hedges, a Philip Morris brand.
              Now, this just summarizes what I've been
        through, "Smoking cigarettes is the number one
        cause of lung cancer, and the number one cause of 3758
        COPD in this country."
              Dr. Hurt talked to you about that.  He said
        he's treated over 50,000 patients for nicotine
        addiction and for the diseases.  And he said
        oftentimes COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary
        disease, goes hand and glove with lung cancer
        because they are both caused by smoking.  They are
        both caused by smoking from people who are
        addicted for over 50 years, in this case, two to
        three packs a day, this is what happens.
              Here are over 70 carcinogens including
        polonium, cyanide, arsenic, tobacco-specific
        nitrosamines.  50 percent of all long-term smokers
        die of a smoking-related disease, that was what
        Dr. Hurt told you.  500,000 Americans die a year.
        20 million Americans have died since the cigarette
        companies started their conspiracy in the 1950s,
        and that came from Dr. Robert Proctor, the
        historian who wrote the book on the history of the
        cigarette epidemic in this case.
              Now, I told you, we went over briefly the
        verdict form and some of the questions that y'all
        have to answer.  And let's talk about the
        testimony to support the finding of, yes, on that
        verdict form.  "In addition to COPD, did you find, 3759
        based on your review of the records, that Robert
        Mathis suffered from lung cancer?"
              Dr. Hurt said, yes.  "Would those symptoms
        have been before November 21st 1996 or after?"
              Dr. Hurt told you before, I think
        Mrs. Mathis and the daughter, Aadron, said that he
        had these symptoms at least a year and a half
        before he died.  And he died in June of '97, so it
        would be in 1996, the early part of '96, they
        would have recognized these symptoms from the
        family.
              Another thing that is interesting is,
        Reynolds -- well, we don't have all of Robert
        Mathis' medical record.  The reason we don't
        have Objection, Your Honor.
              THE COURT:  The reason we don't have all
        of Robert Mathis' medical records, you heard from
        the doctors, you heard Dr. Villa, the pathologist
        who testified from Mercy Hospital, you heard from
        the Defendants' own doctor, Dr. Okun and Dr. Hurt,
        is because there's a records retention policy at
        the hospital, that they only keep the records for
        seven years.  After that, they don't keep a full 3760
        set.
              So everybody agrees in this case, that we
        don't have a full set of records.  But we have --
        and that's not Reynolds' fault, that's not our
        fault, that's not anybody's fault, it's just --
        it's just the way it is.
              So we -- but we can reconstruct from the
        family testimony Objection, Your Honor,
        objection.
              THE COURT:  -- reconstruct from the
        family testimony and from the records that we have
        what symptoms did Robert Mathis have before
        November 21st of 1996, because he has to have
        those before so that Hazel can qualify as an Engle
        Class member.
              He had a cough.  He had shortness of breath
        and he had these symptoms going back at least a
        year and a half before his death.
              Talked about an X-ray -- and we're going to
        put that up here in an second, that said, COPD,
        which is emphysema or chronic obstructive
        pulmonary disease has an impression on that X-ray,
        caused by smoking.  "Did you find in your review 3761
        of the medical records any evidence that Robert
        Mathis had had COPD prior to November 21st?
              "Yes.
              "What evidence did you find of that?"
              Dr. Hurt told you, "Well, he had a cough,
        there was a record from, I think, November of
        '96," which said he had a cough for the last two
        months and they treated it with Robitussin.  Went
        to the VA, took a while to get the appointment.
        He wasn't a complainer.  He went to the VA.  They
        gave him Robitussin.  You have -- you'll get the
        records back there, they gave him Robitussin for,
        like, three months.  I mean, come on.  I mean,
        come on, the guy is still coughing for three
        months, and they give him Robitussin.
              Next slide, please.
              And why?  Why?
              Folks.  This is the chest X-ray from March
        of '97 that was first diagnosed the end of January
        of 1997.  Look at this over here.  That's the
        mass -- pass me the tennis ball, please -- you can
        see it right there, right there, that's the tumor
        that he had in his chest.  The tumor he had in his
        chest at the end of January of '97.  It's not --
        makes no common sense to think that somebody who 3762
        had a mass this size (indicating) in January
        wouldn't have been feeling symptoms of it before
        Thanksgiving.
              Why -- Dr. Hurt told you, he said when a
        tumor like this is growing in the human body, the
        rest of the body is trying to fight it off.  It's
        like a massive infection that's going to kill you.
        It's right there in your chest, causes you to
        cough.  It makes you tired because the rest of
        your body is fighting it off, trying to -- trying
        to keep it from growing, from growing.
              And also one of the common symptoms -- and
        you'll see in the medical records is, it causes
        hiccups.  We're going to get to that in a second.
        All of these symptoms, all of these symptoms
        Robert Mathis had before November 21st of 1996, he
        had to have had those to qualify as a class
        member.
              Next slide, please.
              Here we go.  Complaining of a cough times
        two months, for two months.  That's November 8,
        1996.  That puts him back, when, in September '96.
        This document says he's a class member.
              Next page, please.
              Here is what Dr. Hurt told you, "So cough 3763
        is one of those things we know occurs in people
        with COPD."
              It's a symptom of COPD.  Coughing is a
        symptom of COPD.  Their own doctors admitted it.
        "The family members reported that he also had
        these symptoms at least a year and a half or so
        before he died."
              Okay.  Shortness of breath.  One of the
        obstructive lung disease or COPD, one of the
        symptoms is you're not being able to catch your
        breath when you're doing regular activities.
        Shortness of breath.  One of the symptoms we see
        in people with COPD is shortness of breath.  The
        family told you that he was tired.  He had
        shortness of breath.  He was tired.
              Next slide please.
              "Your opinion, as a primary care internist,
        did Robert Mathis have COPD?"
              Absolutely.  He described, what is COPD?
              He said, "It takes a long time to develop.
        When we see an X-ray of a person that has changes
        consistent with COPD, we know that that has
        occurred over probably a decade or two or three
        before.  So we know what this is."
              And this is the -- the next thing is, I 3764
        asked Dr. Hurt, what about this other medicine,
        because he got -- we have records that he got
        Robitussin for the cough.  But we also have
        records that he got a drug called Thorazine.
        Dr. Hurt said, "Yeah, the records show he got
        Thorazine."  What is that?
              When we have a cancer patient, particularly
        a cancer patient with cancer of the lungs, it
        involves the nerve that affects the diagram, the
        main muscle that causes us to breathe.  If it
        affects that nerve, it causes people to hiccup
        because the diaphragm moves quickly and causes
        hiccups, and they are intractable.
              Dr. Hurt told you, Well, it's so
        intractable, that means you can't stop it.  It's
        involuntary.  You can't stop it.  Dr. Hurt said it
        was so severe in Robert Mathis' case, that he had
        to give him medicine for it, Thorazine for it.
              We're going to talk a little bit here about
        weight loss.  All right.  We asked Dr. Hurt to
        summarize the records that we have on weight loss.
        And he found one.
              You have that record, Robert?  Yeah.  The
        weight loss record.
              Yes.  And this is the record that Dr. Hurt 3765
        talked to you about, and you can take it back and
        you can find it, and it was dated March 10th of
        1997.  And in it they noted at the bottom,
        "Unintentional weight loss of 16 pounds."
              So he had lost 16 pounds in March of '97.
        Now, they could have checked, the nurses -- the
        doctors could have checked, fast, one to three
        months, which is what Reynolds wants you to
        believe -- remember, they brought, they showed you
        he weighed this much on this day, but he weighed
        this much on that day.  He weighed this much on
        this day, he weighed this much on that day.
              It went back and forth and back and forth
        with the weight, with the medical records.  It
        was -- but they can't get around this one.  "Slow
        6 to 12 months."  There's the "X."
              So the hospital personnel charted, noted in
        his chart that in March of '97, he had lost 16
        pounds, unintentionally, and it was slow weight
        loss, over 6 to 12 months.  Let's go back six
        months from March of '97, and that puts us before
        Thanksgiving, that puts us into the class
        membership by a month; October.
              Let's go back 12 months.  That puts us back
        to March of 1996.  He's in the class.  He's a 3766
        class member.  They want to keep him out.
              Let's go back to the slide, please.
              And then I asked him, I want to finish up
        with the weight loss.  I showed him the records,
        and he talked about it.  So the highlighted
        portion is, they talk unintentional weight loss of
        16 pounds and show over the previous 6 to 12
        months.
              So this again shows, "This is not something
        that happened overnight.  This is a slow
        progressive sort of thing that occurred over
        time."
              That's the point.  It occurred over time so
        it's a symptom of the COPD and/or the lung cancer;
        one of the two.
              They brought an expert in here, Dr. Amos.
        I guess, he was here yesterday morning, actually,
        "Have you had experience with patients where they
        are not necessarily appreciating symptomatology
        that's taking place, but the family members have
        talked to you about those symptoms?"
              And he said, yes.
              So we know Robert Mathis was not a
        complainer.  He didn't go to the doctor, and he
        didn't say, Hey, I'm losing all this weight.  He 3767
        didn't go to the doctor and say, I got this bad
        cough.
              Well, that's not unusual.  Robert was like
        a lot of other people.  Robert was like Reynolds'
        own doctors's patients.
              But he talks here about family members
        talking about the symptoms.  Let's talk a little
        bit about what the Mathis ladies said to you here
        under oath.
              First of all, Aadron came up and talked to
        you and said -- the question was, "Did your father
        ever have hiccups?"
              She said, "Yes, he did.  He had real bad
        hiccups.  Not normal hiccups."  And she said,
        "They were unnatural.  He would have them all the
        time.  Further down the stretch when the hiccups
        would come, it was just a rolling, rolling hiccup.
        He almost couldn't catch his breath.  It was
        sickening."
              They also told you about the cough, the
        family did.  Said he had a cough.  They talked to
        him about going to the doctor.  He made an
        appointment at the VA.  He went and got
        Robitussin, but he had that cough.  And that cough
        is from this in his lung growing and from the 3768
        COPD.  And that's why on the verdict form is going
        to ask you to check "yes" when it asks about his
        addiction causing his disease and his addiction
        causing his signs or symptoms of both COPD and
        lung cancer.
              Now, this is just a simple slide
        illustrating to you what the judge has talked to
        you about.  And, that is, what our burden of proof
        is.  And, that is, "The greater weight of the
        evidence.  More persuasive and convincing force
        and effect of the entire evidence in the case."
              So if y'all imagine a scale, the Mathis
        family brought -- we brought in the family
        members, we brought in the girls.  They talked to
        you about his addiction.  They talked to you about
        his disease.  They talked to you about him having
        symptoms before Thanksgiving of '96.  So that --
        so we are -- we are -- the evidence is way ahead
        for the family, way ahead.
              Now, I just want to breeze through.  You'll
        see a certified State of Florida death
        certificate.  Cause of death is metastatic lung
        cancer.  The Court has already ruled that as a
        matter of law that smoking caused his lung cancer.
        But they are going to tell you, "Well, addiction 3769
        did not cause his lung cancer."
              Now, you heard from Dr. Koop, U.S. Surgeon
        General in the past, talks about addiction causing
        continued smoking that results in lung cancer.
        That's what Dr. Hurt basically said to you.  He
        explained to you medically why people continue to
        smoke.  Why it's nicotine that is the key
        ingredient in the cigarette that causes people to
        smoke, and why that continued constant exposure to
        cancer-causing chemicals is what causes the COPD
        and what causes the lung cancer. SURGEON GENERAL KOOP:  We should also give
        priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction,
        that is killing more than 300,000 Americans each
        year. WICHMANN:  Okay.  Now, let's look
        briefly at some of the internal documents that
        were secret before Robert died that you'll have
        back there to look at if you'd like to.
              They talked about how important nicotine
        was to their business, because they are interested
        in selling cigarettes, and you saw the chart.  And 3770
        the more they sell, the more money they are going
        to make.
              Said, "Without the chemical compound
        nicotine the cigarette market would collapse.  We
        would all lose our jobs and our consulting fees."
        That's what they were concerned about, folks,
        during the course of this conspiracy.  Their jobs
        and their consulting fees.  They were not
        concerned about smokers.  They were not concerned
        about Americans.  They weren't concerned about
        Robert Mathis.
              They went on to say, "That is to say, if
        the exit gate from our market should suddenly
        open, we could be out of business almost
        overnight."  They were putting their money and
        they were putting their business over and above
        the health and the safety of American consumers,
        American smokers like Robert.
              And this is Dr. Koop again.  He talked
        about cigarettes are addicting, nicotine is the
        drug that causes addiction.  And, again, when we
        went over this yesterday, they denied it.  Their
        expert denies it, but Dr. Koop says, similar to --
        addiction to cigarettes is similar to the
        addiction to drugs like heroin or cocaine in terms 3771
        of how it -- how it acts on the brain.
              So who disagrees with him?  You saw
        Dr. Abramson from yesterday.  You saw this
        gentleman here.  We'll play the video. SPEAKER:  (Inaudible) disagrees with the
        warning, doesn't it?
              MR. HEINMANN:  We certainly do.
              SPEAKER:  You don't think that harms
        smokers so there's no reason to put any warning on
        them, do you?
              MR. HEINMANN:  We believe our product is
        not injurious to health.
              SPEAKER:  As far as you're concerned is the
        Surgeon General simply wrong in concluding that
        cigarette smoking causes lung cancer?
              MR. HEINMANN:  I would use the term
        misguided.
              SPEAKER:  If he's misguided, then I take it
        your opinion is he's wrong?
              MR. HEINMANN:  I'm simply trying to be
        polite about it.
              SPEAKER:  But not being polite about it, in
        your opinion he's wrong. 3772
              MR. HEINMANN:  Dead wrong.
              SPEAKER:  Congress is wrong about it,
        correct?
              MR. HEINMANN:  We do not think they are
        justified.
              SPEAKER:  So they are wrong?
              MR. HEINMANN:  They are wrong. WICHMANN:  This is the position that
        they were taking, and this is what they were
        telling people.  And that -- you remember at the
        beginning of the case in opening statement I stood
        up and told you what the case was about high-level
        executives in the industry making -- making
        conscious decisions, choosing, making choice to --
        to sell their product that they knew was addictive
        and caused disease.  That's what the case was
        about.
              That's an example right there.  That
        gentleman, you heard, was the president at the
        highest level of American Tobacco Company that is
        now part of Reynolds.  This is what he's -- this
        is what -- this is a lie that they were telling
        the American people during the conspiracy so they
        could sell folks cigarettes even though they knew 3773
        they were addictive and would cause horrible
        deaths like the death Robert had.
              What about this gentleman down here? SPEAKER:  In your judgment for the Surgeon
        General and the U.S. Public Health Service and the
        Centers for Disease Control, it's equally
        ridiculous and preposterous for them to say that
        450,000 Americans died every year as a result of
        cigarette smoking?
              MR. SPEARS:  I think it's totally
        unsupportable. WICHMANN:  This is what they were
        saying, totally unsupportable.  But we know today
        that's not true.  That's just not true.  They were
        lying.
              MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.  May
        we approach?
              THE COURT:  No.  Let's go to the number 40.
        Class membership.
              So based on what you heard so far, please
        check 1(a), "Yes," because if you don't, we lose. 3774
        Please check 1(b), "Yes."  Please check 2(a), lung
        cancer, "Yes," because if you don't, we lose.
        Please check 2(b), COPD, "Yes."
              Now, if you find Robert was a class member,
        if you find Robert and Hazel are in the class, not
        outside the class, that the door is open, and you
        come on in and join just like other Americans,
        these are the findings that apply from the Engle
        jury that decided Engle, right down the hall those
        many years ago.
              The judge read this to you and talked
        about, 1, cigarette smoking causes COPD and lung
        cancer.  Cigarettes are addictive.  Reynolds
        placed cigarettes on the market that were
        defective and unreasonably dangerous.  They
        concealed and omitted material evidence.  In other
        words, they lied.  They had information in their
        files that if they had told the American public
        they could have avoided this catastrophe.  They
        knew that the material was false and misleading
        that they put out.
              They entered into an agreement -- that's
        the conspiracy with the other companies -- to
        conceal and omit information regarding the health
        effects of smoking or the addictive nature of 3775
        smoking with the intention -- and this is what's
        important, folks.  I'm going to go into this in an
        second -- with the intention that smokers, that's
        Robert, and members of the public would rely on
        this information, the false information that they
        put out to their detriment.  So these are the
        findings that apply if y'all decide that Robert
        and Hazel are class members.
              Now, I want to take you back just a bit to
        go over some of this that we went over with
        Dr. Proctor, the historian.  And, that is, we have
        to put ourselves back into time, back to the '40s
        and the '50s when everybody smoked, legislators,
        airline passengers, entertainers, everybody was
        smoking.
              The next one, Robert.  Here we go.
              We have got Hank Aaron smoking.  Lenny
        Dawson smoking in the half time -- in the locker
        room of the Super Bowl.  This -- this was the
        atmosphere that the industry created, and they
        created it, how, by spending -- by the biggest
        advertising and marketing campaign in American
        history.
              And here is what the 1967 FTC report --
        that's the Federal Trade Commission report -- was 3776
        to Congress.
              "Cigarette advertising reaches virtually
        all Americans who can read or understand the
        spoken word.  It is virtually impossible for
        Americans of almost any age to avoid cigarette
        advertising."
              That's how massive it was.  They even used
        doctors to advertise cigarettes.  They used movies
        and movie and television stars.  We saw that.
        Y'all remember that.  We had I Love Lucy, and we
        had The Flintstones, and we had Humphrey Bogart.
        We showed you that.  It was different back then.
        But this was the environment that Robert Mathis
        grew up in Florida and down here in Miami.
              Now, Reynolds, in particular, the next one,
        marketed the two brands of cigarettes -- well,
        Reynolds in particular marketed Kool cigarettes to
        African-Americans.  And these are examples of some
        of the ads that they used to sell cigarettes to --
        to black folks.  Okay.
              And part of it was "Got a cold?  Switch to
        Kools."
              Would you pass me the menthol cough drops?
        Yeah.
              Why?  Because they knew, they knew that the 3777
        menthol that they put in their cigarettes, they
        put in their cigarettes would give the smoker the
        same sensation in his or her throat that you get
        from a cough drop.  And it feels cool.  It feels
        medicinal.  It helps the smoke from the cigarette
        get in the body.  It helps the smoker to get more
        smoke and smoke more cigarettes and get more
        nicotine.
              It also gives the smoker this false feeling
        that he's doing something that's good for him.
              The next slide, please.
              Here I want to talk a little bit about
        that.  They are the number one advertiser on TV,
        and these are examples of some of the ads.  The
        next one, please.  We're not going to go through
        that again.
              So we're able today, Dr. Proctor studied
        this, and he wrote about it in his book.  And he's
        able to put a number on how much they spent during
        the course of the conspiracy.
              They spent $250 billion marketing and
        advertising something that they knew was addictive
        and would cause COPD and lung cancer.  They spent
        more -- they spent more advertising cigarettes in
        one day than the government -- that was the 3778
        government agency at the time.  They spent more in
        one day than the government National Clearinghouse
        on Smoking and Health spent in an year.
              This was the example I gave y'all in
        opening statement.  I said, "Well, there were
        some -- there were some publications -- some
        people out there that were warning folks that
        smoking was bad."  And I told you it's like an
        example, you take -- take a penny, put it in a
        glass jar, stand in the back of the courtroom.
        And while the case is going on, shake it.  No one
        is going to hear it up here, but you're going to
        hear it back in the back as opposed to the
        $250 billion that the industry spent marketing and
        advertising these cigarettes so folks -- so
        Americans would smoke their product.  That's like
        taking a tin can and filling it with -- with
        pennies and standing in front of y'all and shaking
        it like this during the whole trial.
              That was the difference between the
        marketing and advertising campaign of the industry
        and what the public health folks were doing.  They
        were totally -- the public health folks were
        totally out there.
              Play this. 3779
              This is just an example. SPEAKER:  What cigarette do you smoke?
        You'll be interested to know how the doctors of
        America -- smoke Camel.
              Yes, according to this survey more doctors
        smoke Camels.
              Do you inhale and you're better off smoking
        Philip Morris.  And here is how you can prove it.
        Try the Philip Morris.  Take a puff.
              THE HOST:  The exclusive Winston filter
        work so effectively.  Let the full rich tobacco
        flavor come right through you.
              (Singing)
              DESI ARNAZ:  Give me a cigarette, will you?
              LUCILLE BALL:  Don't say cigarette.  Say
        Phillip Morris.
              DESI ARNAZ:  Is there any other kind?
              LUCILLE BALL:  Not for you there isn't.
              GRANNY:  Sure wish you could taste it.
              PEARL:  I am tasting it, Darlin'.  Winston
        tastes good.
              GRANNY:  Like a cigarette.
              SINGER:  You get a lot to like with filter, 3780
        flavor, pack, or box?
              MR. FLINTSTONE:  Okay.  How's about taking
        a nap?
              MR. RUBBLE:  Hey, I got is better idea.
        Let's take a Winston break.
              MR. FLINTSTONE:  That's it.  Winston is the
        one filter cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times
        a pack.  Winston has got that filter blend.
              MR. RUBBLE:  Yeah, Fred. WICHMANN:  The next point I want to
        make is, that's just -- that's just a collage of
        examples of some of the ads that they used to
        market and to sell their -- their cigarettes over
        the years.
              And the next question, is, well, you know,
        looking back on it, we're like, well, come on, who
        the heck is going to believe that?  That's the way
        we think today.  But -- could you play this,
        please? SPEAKER:  Do you expect the consumer to
        rely upon your advertisements?
              SPEAKER:  Yes.  Our advertising is truthful 3781
        and we would anticipate that they would rely on it
        if they chose.
              SPEAKER:  But that is no promise as to what
        the consumer can expect from your product, isn't
        it?
              SPEAKER:  Yes, it is. WICHMANN:  That was their position,
        they were not spending $250 billion for nothing.
        They were spending it because their marketing
        people at the highest levels of their company said
        this is how -- this is how you get people to
        smoke, this is how you get people to keep smoking.
        So, of course, we expect people to rely on what
        we're saying.  And that right there was the
        president of American Tobacco Company several
        years ago.
              Now, so we talked a little about
        Dr. Proctor talked about how the conspiracy
        started in 1953 when some scientists were finding
        out that if they painted the back of mice with the
        tar from tobacco smoke, they would cause disease.
        How it got into LIFE Magazine, how all of a sudden
        the sales dropped and I showed you that on the --
        on the consumption chart and how all of a sudden 3782
        the cigarette industry executives in 1953 were in
        a panic, so what they did was around the time of
        Christmas, it was unheard of because they were
        like McDonald's, Burger King and Wendy's, they
        were all competitors, but once this bad news hit,
        what did they do, they interrupted their Christmas
        vacations, went to the Plaza Hotel and they cooked
        up this conspiracy and it lasted over the years.
              In fact, they swore under oath in front of
        the U.S. Congress in 1994 while Robert was still
        alive, they swore that their products were not
        addictive and that there was no proven link
        between smoking and disease.
              Now, here is just some examples of what
        they did in the beginning, instead of going to
        doctors or public health officials, they went to
        Hill & Knowlton, which is a public relations
        person -- public relations firm to figure out how
        they -- they combat this message that cigarette
        smoking was bad and you'll see all this evidence
        back there.
              They put out the Frank Statement.  We
        talked about that.  They put it in the newspaper
        and they said, "No proof that cigarette smoking
        causes lung cancer."  They're accepting 3783
        responsibility.  They'll believe that their
        products are not injurious, and they're going to
        work close with people whose task it is to
        safeguard the public health.  None of that was
        true.  They did that through a public relations
        outfit in order to sell their cigarettes from 1953
        up until after Robert Mathis died.
              And here is, for example -- let me just
        give -- these are some documents.  Let me just
        play this guy over here.  What he was saying in
        1976. SPEAKER:  Anything can be considered
        harmful.  Applesauce is harmful if you get too
        much of it.  Well, when you say it this way, the
        people who eat applesauce die.  The people who eat
        sugar die.  The people who smoke cigarettes die.
        Does the fact that the people who smoke cigarettes
        die demonstrate that smoking is the cause?  There
        are polycyclic hydrocarbons in smoke.
              SPEAKER:  And they are found in mammals?
              SPEAKER:  Under certain circumstances with
        an animal, some have been identified as so-called
        carcinogens.  You will discover there's a great 3784
        deal of doubt with regard to whether or not
        smoking causes all these diseases which are
        alleged to be caused by smoking. WICHMANN:  This is what they were
        telling publically.  This is what they were saying
        to the American people on TV while this is what
        they knew inside.  They knew going back to 1958,
        1961, 1962, 1963 smoking causes lung cancer,
        carcinogens are in our smoke, the evidence
        accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health
        hazard is overwhelming, and cigarettes cause lung
        cancer back in 1963.
              They never told the American public that.
        Instead they spent all this money denying it,
        creating doubt, confusing people with half-truths
        and lies.  And you know what?  It worked.
              Here we go, we went over this, the blue
        line shows the number of cigarettes that were
        being consumed, being sold.  Dr. Proctor talked to
        you about early on lung cancer was practically
        unheard of, 1900 to 1920.  Then when people
        started smoking, look at that, the red line is
        male lung cancer rate, it went straight up.
              Now, this is approximately when the first 3785
        evidence came out that smoking might be bad, the
        number of cigarettes drops.  They go -- they go
        full force with their advertising campaign.  It
        goes back up again all the way back up and notice
        the lung cancer rate that resulted in 500,000
        Americans dying a year.  It went straight up.
              Now, this is -- these are just some
        examples of the confusion that they created in the
        minds of Americans.  They talked about the
        psychological crutch and the self-rationale for
        smokers so they would continue to smoke.  In other
        words, they don't want to tell them the truth.
        They weren't telling the truth because they knew
        if they told the truth, that their sales would
        drop.  Instead they wanted to confuse them, the
        key word is confusion.  Doubt is our product.
              That's what they were selling back then.
        Doubt.  They weren't selling the truth.  They were
        selling doubt and they talked about the -- the
        organizations that they set up that Dr. Proctor
        talked to you about publically and frequently
        denied what others find is the truth, that they
        were set up as -- as shields, propaganda entities.
        Dr. Proctor talked to you about how much money
        they've spent on that.  Take a look at this. 3786 SPEAKER:  I don't believe that most people
        that smoke get lung cancer.  We are now in an era,
        as you know, of moderation.  I don't think the
        industry admits there are any bad elements.  If
        there are bad elements through the Surgeon
        General, through the AMA, through acts of God and
        the like, we hope we may find them, and if they
        are found, they will be removed.
              We do not believe that cigarettes are
        hazardous.  We don't accept that because when, as
        and if, any ingredient in cigarette smoke is
        identified as being injurious to human health, we
        are confident that we can eliminate that
        ingredient.  The babies born from women who smoke
        are smaller, but they're just as healthy as the
        babies born from women who do not smoke.
              What about the high rate of --
              And some women would prefer to have a
        smaller baby. WICHMANN:  Obviously, we're not saying
        that Robert Mathis was a man and that this means
        he's supposed to believe one thing or another 3787
        about getting pregnant.  No.  The point is is this
        was a high-level executive on Face the Nation in
        the 1970s on national TV and the reason he's
        saying that, folks, is it's another reassurance
        message.  He's talking to Americans about the most
        vulnerable members of our society, unborn kids,
        babies and he's telling smokers don't worry about
        it, it's okay, keep smoking, you might have a
        smaller baby, but some women want smaller babies.
              Now, the reason that this is -- the reason
        I was showing you this is to give you an idea
        about the thinking that was going on in the
        cigarette industry at the highest levels because
        part of this case is that you're going to decide
        whether to punish them for what they did, and this
        is the kind of evidence that you need to think
        about and you need to consider in terms of
        deciding whether or not to punish these cigarette
        companies.
              But this shows you what they were thinking
        at the time and what lengths that they would go to
        to preserve their company profits and to conceal
        this information and to lie to the American
        people.
              Next slide, please. 3788
              What they didn't tell Robert and smokers is
        all about the fact that filters were just an
        illusion.  You heard that from the doctor.  They
        didn't make smoking any safer.  They didn't talk
        to you that they could control the levels of
        nicotine in cigarettes.  They never told Robert
        Mathis that, that they would take the nicotine out
        and they spray the nicotine back on, and there's
        internal documents that we went over that shows
        that they regulate the nicotine, they put how much
        nicotine is in their cigarettes.
              They didn't tell Robert all about the
        additives and that they manipulate, the pH, the
        ammonia to give a kick for smokers when the
        nicotine hits the brain.  They didn't tell Robert
        that.  He didn't know that.
              Menthol, they didn't tell Robert how
        menthol would make it harder for him to quit
        because menthol triggers more brain receptors
        which is what Dr. Hurt explained to you, told you
        about scientifically and why the DSM-5 that their
        expert brought in actually says African-American
        men have greater nicotine -- greater nicotine
        levels and it's harder for them to quit.  Why?
        Because menthol and the ingredients and the 3789
        additives in their cigarettes, all of this -- that
        they put sugars in there, all of this Robert had
        no idea.
              Next one, please.
              Now, I'm going to talk to you a little bit
        about what they did to sell their cigarettes to
        African-Americans, to black folks.  Did they have
        a plan?  Yes.  They had marketing and advertising
        people studying this, how do we sell cigarettes,
        more cigarettes to African-American folks?  Well,
        they, at that time, they had the National Medical
        Association which was the black association of
        doctors.
              They shamelessly went to them, the same
        like they did to AMA to tell them, here is free
        cigarettes, distribute them around, it's okay.
        Here we go.  This one, PT5792, 1969 a Reynolds
        document spent $5 million tailoring, advertising
        to the black and Spanish language markets.  To be
        effective, advertisers should use customer
        oriented media in which over 22 million
        African-Americans can identify with.
              This is especially true of brands that are
        heavily advertised like Winston.  So it's no -- by
        no mistake that Robert Mathis was a Winston 3790
        smoker?  Why, because they decided Robert was the
        market that they wanted to sell their products to.
              And Ebony, this is -- this is a Reynolds
        document.  The family told you that one
        periodical, one magazine that they received
        regularly in their life that they could remember
        was Ebony Magazine.  That was -- that was a very
        popular magazine with black folks at the time.
        You think Reynolds knew about it?  Of course they
        did.  Reynolds' own document says, "Ebony has made
        an extensive effort to win advertisers, like them,
        and within the last few years has taken grade
        strides in that direction.  Our marketer says that
        Ebony is for the black folk who had made it."  So
        they're looking -- they are looking at Robert to
        sell Robert their cigarettes that they knew were
        addictive and that they knew caused disease.
              Now, next one, please.
              You heard from Dr. Robert Proctor, got up
        here and said based on his historical study, "Did
        you run across any evidence in your studies of
        Reynolds giving free cigarettes to
        African-American kids?  Yes."  They commonly did
        that from the 1950s.  But in the 1950s Lorillard
        that has historically sold Newport that Robert 3791
        smoked and is now owned by Reynolds, Lorillard
        would distribute free cigarettes from a truck, a
        green truck, okay, giving black folks, black kids
        free cigarettes so they'd get addicted, so they'd
        smoke their product, so they'd buy more knowing --
        knowing how dangerous their cigarette was and
        lying about it.
              Now, here is an example of some of the
        menthol -- and you'll get a big stack of them back
        there.  You can look through them.  They're from
        back in the day.  I know they're from back in the
        day.  But the reason that I'm giving them to you
        is to give you an idea of what was directed
        towards Robert and towards consumers at the time.
              Look at this.  Everybody's smiling.
        Everybody's got a cigarette in their hand.  It's
        nice colors, by water.  Look at there, everybody's
        having a great time.  Nothing in there about poor
        Robert Mathis in -- in the VA hospital in Jackson
        with lung cancer, dying, holding up and begging
        for a cigarette.  No, they're not going to show
        you that.  No, they're not going to show you that.
        This is what they're going to show you.
              Here's another one, menthol.  Here's the
        Newport.  Look at this there, everybody's having a 3792
        good time around the water.  It's nice and cool,
        cool like that, menthol that they put in their
        cigarettes.  There it is alive with pleasure,
        alive with pleasure, all the pleasure but they
        don't show the pain.
              All right.  Now, what do we know about
        menthol?  Dr. Hurt told you it masks the nicotine
        and it makes the smoke more inhalable.  Why,
        because it cools the throat so what's harsh then
        becomes smooth and a man can take it.  That's why
        it's cool, why it's menthol, right?
              And here is what they were writing in '72,
        '74 and '83.  I talked about this a moment ago.
        "King-size Kool has the highest nicotine delivery
        of all the king-size cigarettes today, menthol or
        none menthol."  You think Robert Mathis knew that?
        No.
              "More than 25 percent of the blacks who
        smoke smoke menthols."  They're looking for them.
        They are looking for a market.
               "Nicotine has been described as a major
        irritant in cigarettes, while menthol is known to
        produce the cooling effect that is often used to
        alleviate sensations of irritations."
              These are the previously secrets.  See that 3793
        one there that says Confidential?
              All that was secret until Dr. Hurt got the
        opportunity to go into the vaults and find it
        after Robert Mathis died.  He didn't know about
        this.
              And filters, too, we talked about filters.
        Dr. Proctor talked a little bit about it, from a
        marketing standpoint.  And Dr. Hurt talked about,
        from it a doctor's standpoint, about what effect
        it has on human smoking behavior.  And that's what
        I talked to you, it's just the merchandising and
        sales promotion device.  They just sold it because
        they thought people want it.
              The water might not be so good over here in
        this polluted city up in who-knows-where, so what
        are we going to do?
              We're going to get a water filter, put it
        on our tap.  Get the filter there, run the water
        through it, everything is fine.  That's what they
        thought people would believe, and folks did
        believe it.  Folks did believe it.
              Now, they were also -- we went through
        this, they were also hiding and rewriting and
        destroying documents.  We talked a little bit
        about that.  Dr. Proctor talked about. 3794
              And so here is what they were saying.
        Yeah. California scientist says, "I find no
        persuasive evidence that cigarette smoking causes
        lung cancer."
              A New York doctor told Congress, "To claim
        there is now sufficient scientific evidence to
        establish that cigarette smoking causes disease,
        is, in my opinion, unjustified."
              SPEAKER:  Turning a significant health
        question into a publicity stunt is an insult to
        serious science.
              SPEAKER:  I cannot point to anything that I
        would consider the cause of cancer to the lung,
        but the behaviors of the disease doesn't support
        the idea of cigarettes being the causal agent.
              SPEAKER:  We believe our product is not
        injurious to health.
              MS. BROWDER:  The jury has not come in.
              MR. STOSSEL:  It may not be harmful, you're
        not convinced?
              MS. BROWDER:  It may be or it may not be.
        We don't know. 3795
              SPEAKER:  Insofar as of correlation between
        lung cancer and cigarette smoking are concerned,
        no one knows.  It may; it may not.  How can
        cigarette smoking be the cause of lung cancer if
        the cause of lung cancer is, as yet, unknown?
              In fact, no one knows what causes.
              SPEAKER:  Cigarette smoking does not cause
        cancer, yes or no?
              SPEAKER:  It is not known whether
        cigarettes cause cancer.  It has not been causally
        established.
              SPEAKER:  Cigarette smoking, no causal
        relationship between cigarette smoking and
        emphysema?
              SPEAKER:  Despite all of the research to
        date, there has been no causal link established.
              MR. TISCH:  The data that we have been able
        to see is all the statistical data that has not
        convinced me that smoking causes death.
              MR. CAMPBELL:  We don't know what causes
        cancer in general right now, so I think that we
        might find what causes cancer, and we may find out
        some relationship, which has yet to be proven.
              SPEAKER:  I don't think any of them die of
        diseases caused by cigarette smoking. 3796
              SPEAKER:  Zero?
              SPEAKER:  If they do, I think it's an
        unproven case. WICHMANN:  Folks, Robert is not here,
        unfortunately, to tell you about what effect, if
        any, this message, at the time, had on him.  But
        there's other ways we can tell that it did affect
        Robert, and that's one of the questions you'll
        have to decide.  And when you get to the question
        on the verdict form here in an second.
              But how do we know that Robert was affected
        by this marketing campaign by these advertisers,
        by -- by these false statements that they were
        making?
              Well, first of all, we know that he kept
        smoking.  He kept smoking all those years.  And he
        kept smoking, that tells you that he was getting
        the message that the industry wanted to get out.
        Next, we know why he kept smoking.  He was smoking
        Kools, and he was smoking Newports, and those were
        the two brands of cigarettes that Reynolds and
        that Lorillard was marketing and advertising to
        black folks.
              So we can tell by his behavior, folks, that 3797
        relied on what the industry was saying.
              But there's a little bit more than that.
        He was here in Miami and watched TV, you heard
        from the family, he got Ebony and sat down with
        the girls and went through Ebony and all those
        cigarette ads were in Ebony.  He also watched TV
        here in Miami, and what was on TV in Miami when
        Robert Mathis was living here?
              Play this, please. SPEAKER:  First of all, we know cigarette
        smoking is bad for our health.  Why does The
        Tobacco Institute continue to promote smoking?
              ANNE BROWDER:  Well, the medical institute
        does not promote smoking.  It promotes the right
        of an individual to make a decision to smoke and
        then supports that individual in making that
        decision.  And I have to disagree with you, in
        that, we don't know what causes the illness that
        had been attributed to the cigarette smoking.
              I am not denying the fact that criminals
        could be a risk factor involved with some people
        in some of the problems that they might have.  But
        I don't think that there's a causal relationship 3798
        established between cigarette smoking and any
        disease.  If there were, Diane, I don't think
        there would be a cause without the effect or the
        effect without the cause, and we all know that
        that happens. WICHMANN:  So that's what Robert would
        have viewed right here in Miami.  That was played
        on Channel 10 in Miami.  That's the message they
        were sending out to smokers.
              Now, we have this slide right here, 72,
        please.
              This is one of the questions you're going
        to have to decide.  The issue for your
        determination is, whether Robert reasonably
        relied, to his detriment, on any statement made by
        the Defendant.  You don't -- we don't have to
        prove or identify a specific statement on which he
        relied.  It's not necessary that a direct
        statement be made to him.  It's this climate that
        they created.  It's this smoking culture that they
        created, and then that they perpetrated, that they
        kept going by spreading their lies.
              That's what -- that's what y'all need to
        focus on.  And the answer to that is -- verdict 3799
        form -- a couple of more yes boxes for y'all to
        check.
              First one, "Did he reasonably rely to his
        detriment?"
              Yes.
              "Did he reasonably rely on a statement in
        furtherance of their conspiracy?"
              Yes.
              He was here in America.  He was here in
        Miami.  He was receiving Ebony.  He was watching
        Channel 10, and he continued to smoke, and he
        bought the products that they wanted him to buy.
        So those are two more yeses on your -- on your
        verdict form for the Mathis family.
              Now, I want to talk a little bit about
        apportionment of fault.  Ms. -- Mrs. Mathis
        accepts some fault for Mr. Mathis in this case.
        And there's going to be a section of the verdict
        form for you to check.  And here is why Hazel
        accepts some responsibility for Robert's behavior.
              Y'all are going to apportion it, and we
        submit that you apportion it 90 percent to
        Reynolds and 10 percent to Robert.  Why the 10
        percent?  Because Robert started, he started when
        he was a very, very, young boy, either 9, 12 14 or 3800
        15, so for that we accept some responsibility.
              But this is important, folks, we don't
        accept any responsibility for their intentional
        conduct, for what they did on purpose, for their
        lies, for their conspiracy, for their concealing
        this information.  Why?  Because Robert Mathis
        didn't know that their cigarettes, that those Kool
        cigarettes he smoked had the highest nicotine
        delivery out there.  He didn't know about all
        those additive ingredients.  He didn't know that
        those filters were not going to protect him one
        bit from COPD or lung cancer.  So we don't -- we
        don't accept any responsibility for their
        intentional conduct.
              Now, I'd like to talk with you a bit about
        the Mathis family.  Okay.  First of all, y'all
        heard from Hazel, and it was very emotional
        testimony.  And what you heard from Hazel was
        that, she was 19 years old when she met Robert.
        And she told you -- and here is the testimony, "It
        was love at first sight."
              She said -- when she saw him, she said, "I
        know it's real."
              She said, "I was in love.  He could do no
        wrong." 3801
              The next slide, please.
              She said -- to give you an example of what
        her life has been like, she married this man at
        age 19.  And they were married over 40 years.
        She's here today, 82 years old, now, some things,
        when she's on the witness stand, she got confused
        about, and we made that pretty clear, I think,
        that the girls talked about how important the
        family was to Robert and how important Robert was
        to Hazel and vice versa.
              And these are things that y'all are going
        to have to take into consideration when you decide
        how much to award Hazel in this phase of the
        trial.
              She talked about Robert.  And she said, "I
        never met a man like that.  He was just unique.
        He was calm when I was hyper.  He was kind.  He
        was considerate.  He was humble."
              She said, "You know, he was just the best
        man I could ever have known, better than my
        father."
              Mr. Millard asked her, "Did you depend on
        him?"
              She said, "He's a family man.  He treated
        me like a queen.  I wasn't used to that because I 3802
        was one of the older siblings, and I always" --
        "it was like I had to be a Mama growing up."
              But that's not the way Robert treated her.
        Robert treated her like a queen.  She told you
        here on the witness stand.  It was very emotional.
        Bear in mind, she's 82 years old, this is not easy
        for her.
              She said, "He looked after me, and I looked
        after him."
              She said, "I looked after my man."
              Put up the hospital record, please.
              And this is one of the hospital records
        that survives, and it tells us about this
        relationship that Hazel and Robert had this
        special relationship right here.  "Patient rested
        through the night with his wife at his bedside.
        Patient had morphine.  Spouse -- "that would be
        Hazel," wanted to bathe Robert and make the bed."
              So this man, she met at age 19, got sick,
        and he was dying in the hospital.  And she's by
        his side, telling the hospital staff, I want to
        take care of him.
              Now, who was Robert Mathis?
              Folks, Robert was a family man just like
        Hazel testified to.  He served his country, didn't 3803
        get his high school degree, went into the service,
        was in Korea, got an honorable discharge, came
        back here to Miami, went and got his GED, got his
        mechanic's license.  And there is he and Hazel,
        got married.  She was the one for him; he was the
        one for her.
              Here you go.
              We talked a little bit about this.  Aadron
        was born 1960.  Family bought their home in
        Brownsville.  Robert worked for Miami Transit.
        Then he went -- Robert was a go-getter, he was
        always going, drove a taxicab at night.  Viola was
        born in '65, somewhere in there, Dionne was born.
        I don't know, she got left off unintentionally.
        The kids all attended local schools; Floral
        Heights Elementary, Brownsville (phonetic) High
        School.  Robert worked for Yellow Freight in
        Hialeah.
              The next one, please, Robert.
              There's the family, right there.  Y'all
        heard from every daughter there, you got Hazel and
        you got Robert.
              Go back to the timeline, I think.
              And so it talks about Robert Rodney
        graduated from Miami High, Dionne graduated from 3804
        Miami High.  Aadron graduating from Miami High.
        We talked about Robert, we talked about that.
              THE COURT:  Miami Springs.
              MR. WICHMANN:  Miami Springs, I stand
        corrected.
              THE COURT:  I'm sure there's rivalry
        somewhere there.
              MR. WICHMANN:  So the next one, please.
              Talk about Viola graduating from Miami
        Springs High.  Kind of give you an idea of the
        family and relationship that we're talking about
        here because y'all are going to -- going to be
        asked to give an award of compensatory damages for
        Hazel's loss of Robert's care, companionship and
        protection.  And this is what the law is that the
        judge read to you.
              "The total amount of damages sustained by
        Hazel for the loss of her husband's companionship
        and protection and for her mental pain and
        suffering as a result of Mr. Mathis' death."
              The girls told you about how she's sad, how
        she lost her man, and what effect it had on her.
        We're talking about a 40-plus year marriage, a man
        that she met at age 19.
              Mr. Payne read to you the mortality tables. 3805
        They are statistics about how long folks are
        expected to live.  And the reason for that is to
        give you an idea about how long Hazel may have
        going forward because y'all are going to be asked
        to assess an award from when Robert died on
        through when you think Hazel might live.
              But let me call your attention to this.
        Hazel told you that longevity runs in your family,
        that her -- her dad lived to age 96 and her mom
        lived to age 99.  So there -- you can take the
        mortality tables that show how long she has to
        live without her beloved Robert into account, but
        you can also consider these other factors.
              So this is what the verdict form is going
        to look for -- look like.  And so we're going to
        ask you to award Hazel Mathis $10 million.  Not
        any more, because on behalf of Hazel, that's what
        we think we believe the evidence shows and will
        support.  Certainly not any less, $10 million for
        her past pain and suffering and for her future
        pain and suffering.
              But that's not where your job ends.  The
        judge talked a little bit about punitive damages,
        and the Judge gave you instruction on what the
        level of evidence has to be before you can award 3806
        punitive damages.  We think that you should check
        the box -- go back to the previous one -- right
        here, "Under the circumstances of this case if you
        find by clear and convincing evidence that
        punitive damages are warranted against Reynolds,"
        check "Yes" on that.  Check "Yes" on every box,
        like I said.
              And the reason why is -- 84, please -- you
        can consider harms to others in this phase of the
        trial on the reprehensibility and the wrongness of
        conduct.  In other words, you can consider the
        number of folks that have died from Reynolds'
        fraudulent conduct over the years.  You can
        consider their marketing to kids.  You can
        consider their concealing and their lying in this
        phase to make an award, to make an entitlement
        award to check that box "Yes."
              Now, here are just some of the documents
        that we talked about that you'll have back there
        to look at.  And they go to deliberately
        downplaying the role of nicotine in their
        cigarettes.  That's a previously secret document.
              They talk about misleading youth and
        targeting them as future consumers.  They talk
        about here, backlog of youth.  They are studying 3807
        youth to decide how they can best market their
        products.
              The next one, please.
              They talk about increasing educational
        programs to prevent young nonsmokers taking up the
        practice of smoking.  That's -- that's a problem
        for them.  They considered it a problem that
        people were being educated not to smoke.
              And they talk about the support of Newport,
        being fantastic.  Black folks, all ages.  "The
        base of our business is the high school student."
        This is what they were saying back in 1978 in
        private.  And this is why they need to be
        punished.
              Now, go to the next slide, please.
              They are talking about kids.  They are
        studying kids as young as age 12.  They are
        studying smoking patterns of teenagers.  And they
        are talking about young adults turning away from
        smoking.  "If that happens, the industry must
        decline just as a population which does not give
        birth who eventually dwindle."
              What they knew was they are selling a
        product that if the smokers smoke it exactly the
        way they want them to, they are going to die from 3808
        it.  So what are they going to do about that?
        They got to find replacement smokers.  That's what
        they called them, replacement smokers.  "Younger
        Adults' Importance As Replacement Smokers."  To
        replace folks like Robert Mathis who died from
        using their product.
              We -- also, we talked about controlling
        nicotine.  They controlled the smoke pH to keep
        folks addicted.  We have documents we talked about
        for that.
              And last but not least, they put profits
        over human lives.  They talked about "Who ain't in
        it for more money?"  They talked about our basic
        position -- this was back in 1968.  The cigarette
        controversy is subject to the charge and may be
        subject to a finding that we are making false or
        misleading statements to promote the sales of
        cigarette.
              So they knew, folks, way back in 1968 that
        what they were doing was false -- falsely
        promoting cigarettes in this country.
              And so we already saw the -- if you could
        go to the last slide here.
              Y'all, please, check the last question on
        the verdict form "Yes."  That's the question about 3809
        punitive damages.  If y'all do that -- we
        appreciate the patience that you've shown in this
        length of trial.  If you do that, we're going to
        come back for a very brief, I promise you, a very
        brief punitive damage phase to decide how much to
        punish Reynolds for.
              I will make sure that's brief, but please
        check every box on your verdict form "Yes" and
        award Mrs. Mathis the amount of money that we're
        asking for, the $10 million in damages.
              And so I may have a little bit more to say
        in rebuttal, but that -- that is my argument at
        this point.
              Thank you.  Thank you, folks.


                       CLOSING REBUTTAL
              MR. WICHMANN:  Today Reynolds would have
        you believe that Robert Mathis, while he was
        alive, had a responsibility to quit smoking
        cigarettes.
              Well, if that were the case, why did the
        cigarette companies spend $250 billion on
        marketing and advertising to get people to buy
        their products and to smoke?  So now they are
        blaming their best customer who did just what
        they Objection, Your Honor.
              THE COURT:  Overruled.
              MR. PERSONS:  Blame.
              MR. WICHMANN:  -- who did just what they
        told him to do while he was alive.  Now they are 3720
        saying he should have quit when they denied
        consistently during -- while he was alive that
        there was anything wrong with smoking and health,
        and now they want to talk about the warnings.
              Well, we showed you the high-level guys in
        the company who said, "We didn't think the
        warnings were necessary.  We have fought against
        the warnings."
              Now they want to say, "Well, Robert should
        have heeded the warnings.  He should have quit."
              MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
              THE COURT:  Now, what is their
        responsibility.  What is Reynolds' responsibility?
              Their responsibility, folks, was to tell
        the truth to the American people.  The Defense
        just told you, "Well, if Mr. Mathis had all this
        information, it wouldn't have made a difference."
              Well, I submit had the American public had
        this information the public health community, like
        Dr. Hurt had this information, that they kept
        secret, it would have made a difference.  It would
        have saved lives.  They would have known more Objection, Your Honor.
              THE COURT:  Overruled. 3721
              MR. WICHMANN:  -- they would have known
        more about nicotine, addiction, and the chemicals
        in the cigarette smoke that the cigarette
        companies kept secret during the course of the
        conspiracy.
              And, by the way, Reynolds now would like
        you to believe that the great U.S. civil rights
        leaders somehow knew of the dangers of smoking the
        products that -- that Reynolds was selling because
        they insisted that Reynolds also market the
        cigarettes to black folks.
              Well, guess what?  The great civil rights
        leaders of this country were also lied to just
        like Robert Mathis.  They didn't know about
        chemicals Objection.  No evidence.
              THE COURT:  Overruled.  They didn't know about the
        chemicals, they didn't know about the additives
        and ingredients, they didn't know about the
        cigarettes that Robert smoked that -- like Kool
        had the highest nicotine levels of all cigarettes.
        The American Civil rights leaders didn't know that
        when they were telling Reynolds you need to
        market -- 3722
              MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
              THE COURT:  Overruled.  This is in direct
        response to an argument that you made.
              MR. WICHMANN:  They were lied to just like
        Robert.
              Now, they came in here in opening statement
        and the Reynolds' lawyers, the Defense lawyers
        said, "Well, he didn't have the right kind of lung
        cancer so he didn't qualify as an Engle Class
        member."  Well, that's not the case.  That's --
        that's been disproven.  Now, they come in and
        say Objection, Your Honor.
              MR. WICHMANN:  Now the Objection.
              MR. WICHMANN:  -- Defense comes in --
              THE COURT:  Just a moment.  Just a moment.
              MR. LEPPERT:  We need a sidebar, Your
        Honor.
              THE COURT:  Just a moment.  I need to get
        this back online.  I couldn't hear because of all
        of the objections that were louder than the
        argument.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
                  CONTINUED CLOSING REBUTTAL
              MR. WICHMANN:  The Defense told you that
        Hazel and Mr. Mathis didn't qualify because we
        didn't prove the COPD.  The question directly was
        asked of you, where did the COPD come from?
              Would you put up number 15, please?
              Well, here is where it came from right
        there.  It's in the medical records, "signs
        consistent with COPD."
              Those are Robert's medical records.
              Next, please.
              Right in Impression:  Chronic obstructive
        pulmonary disease.  That's COPD.  They said, Well,
        there's some interrogatories that Hazel signed
        back in 2007.  It didn't mention COPD.
              Well, they want you to believe now that in
        order to qualify Hazel has to be a doctor.  And
        Dr. Hurt told you, he had COPD.  And this is the
        evidence of him having COPD.  Dr. Hurt said they
        didn't treat him for that, why, because, put up
        the chest X-ray, please.  Why?  Why did they not
        treat him for the COPD that he had.  Okay.
        Because he had this in his chest that was growing 3735
        and that was causing him hiccups, that was
        contributing and causing him coughs, and it was
        causing tiredness and that was killing him.
              Defense told you just a few minutes ago
        that they gave him Robitussin, and Robitussin
        cured the cough.  That's what she said.
        Robitussin cured the cough.  Well, here is Exhibit
        No. 82.  Look at the data date on this, folks.
        This is in April of '97, months after the
        Robitussin was given to him, and what does the
        record say that he had?
              Cough, productive of white/yellow sputum.
        So he still has the cough.  After he got the
        'tussin, that didn't cure the cough because the
        cough is coming from the COPD and the lung cancer.
        Dr. Hurt said chemotherapy doesn't cause COPD.
        Smoking for 50 years being addicted to nicotine is
        what causes the COPD.
              Next they said, Oh, well, Robert knew,
        Robert knew, Robert knew, Robert knew.
              PTSG1990, please.
              This is in evidence, this was the 1990
        Surgeon General's Report, seven years before
        Robert died.  What does the Surgeon General say in
        1997? 3736
              "Smokers may have failed to quit because of
        a lack of appreciation of the health hazards of
        smoking and the benefits of quitting."
              Why is that?
              $250 million advertising and marketing
        campaign and all of the lies that they told for 50
        years.  What did the Surgeon General go on to say?
              "30 to 40 percent of smoking in 1990 either
        did not believe that smoking increases these risks
        or cessation reduces the risk."
              And the Surgeon General wrote, "15 to 20
        million smokers in the United States," that 30 to
        40 percent of smokers came to.
              "Clearly our efforts to educate the public
        on the health hazards of smoking and the benefits
        of quitting are not yet complete."
              Why was that?  Because they spent, the
        industry spent more in one day with their lies,
        with their false message to keep smokers like
        Robert from smoking than the government spent in a
        year.  That is the evidence, uncontradicted before
        the jury.
              Now, they told you that it's all a matter
        of choice.  It was Robert's responsibility to
        quit.  We talked a little bit about that. 3737
              But would you put up, please --
              This is what their internal documents said
        that they knew in 1980.  "The entire matter of
        addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting
        attorney can have in a lung cancer case."  1980.
        A secret document.  "We can't defend continued
        smoking as free choice if the person was
        addicted."
              Now, they also told you that the family all
        said he never tried to quit.  He only tried to
        quit, I think, 3 days in 1,000 days of his life.
        Well, you-all heard from Dionne, you all heard
        from Aadron, you-all heard from Viola, and they
        all came up and told you he tried many, many
        times.  He tried cold turkey.  He tried nicotine
        patch.  He tried Nicorette gum.  He even switched
        to a pipe and a cigar.  He tried.  That was the
        testimony from the family witnesses.
              He was unable to quit.  First, they came
        and told you, he -- he quit according to the
        medical records, then they came and told you,
        well, he never quit because he never tried to
        quit.  But we know, because Aadron told you from
        the witness stand, that he was asking for and
        begging for cigarettes when he was in the hospital 3738
        with lung cancer, and she had to wheel him out of
        the hospital for a cigarette.  That's the power of
        nicotine addiction; that's the power of a product
        that they sold to the American people and lied
        about for 50 years.
              I also wanted, just to call your attention
        quickly to some of the testimony, Mr. Persons put
        up slides and the Defense told you-all about what
        the family knew, what the family talked about
        concerning the hazards of smoking.  This is the
        testimony from Aadron Mathis.
              "QUESTION:  While you were growing up
        in the family home in Miami, did your dad
        ever tell you that smoking cigarettes was bad
        because it was bad for your health?"
              Aadron sat right there under oath, looked
        at you, and this was her.
              "ANSWER:  No.
              "Did your dad ever tell you that
        smoking cigarettes could kill you?
              "ANSWER:  No.
              "Did your father ever -- did you ever
        hear your father tell any of your siblings
        that smoking was bad for their health?
              "Not at all." 3739
              That's what she said under oath right
        here in front of y'all.
              "Did you ever hear your father tell any
        of your siblings that they should not smoke
        because it was going to cause lung cancer?
              "ANSWER:  "No.
              "Did you hear your father tell any of
        your siblings that smoking was going to give
        them any health-related disease?
              "ANSWER:  "No."
              That's the sworn testimony from the
        family members.  The girls were all
        consistent on that.  They all said the same
        thing regarding what Robert knew and what
        Robert told them about the dangers of
        smoking.
              Ladies and gentlemen, I submit and the
        Plaintiff would ask that you check "yes" for
        every box on the verdict form, and that you
        award fair award of damages which has $10
        million in compensatory damages.
              The Defense submits that the number
        should be 500,000.  You-all heard the
        testimony from Hazel about what Robert Mathis
        meant to her.  And you-all heard the 3740
        testimony from the girls, from the children.
        Now, we're not up here claiming that they are
        asking for money damages.  They are not.
        What they were doing was telling you about
        this family, about this man, and about Hazel,
        who is now 82 years old.  She got confused on
        some things, that's understandable.
              But we're looking back at the family,
        and we're looking back at the man and the
        relationship between Hazel and the
        relationship with Robert and the family that
        they raised, and their ties to the community
        because it goes to the magnitude of Hazel's
        loss.  Hazel's loss of her man, her man that
        she met when she was 19.  Her man that took
        care of her.  Her man that she cared for in
        the hospital, she offered to bathe him.  She
        offered to change the sheets.  That's her
        man, and her man -- she's unmarried.  She
        still hasn't remarried after the loss.  And
        she's got another ten years to live, ladies
        and gentlemen, and that's why we're asking
        for that large amount of money, $10 million.
              And to suggest that the evidence in
        this case doesn't support that award based on 3741
        the evidence that you-all heard in front of
        the jury is just not so.
              Thank you, folks, and we appreciate
        your attention.
