                       CLOSING ARGUMENT
              MS. HENNINGER:  Good afternoon.  Welcome
        back from lunch, ladies and gentlemen.
              I want to first start by thanking each and
        every one of you because this has been a long
        process, been a lot of waiting sometimes, a lot of
        listening you had to do.  You had to go away from
        your families and your jobs.  And everybody in
        this courtroom appreciates the time and attention
        you've given this case, so thank you.
              And I want to walk through some of the
        facts in this case and the verdict form and talk
        with you a little bit about the evidence you've
        heard in this case.  And I'm going to start where 3628
        Mr. Persons started, and that's talking about how
        this is a case about one smoker, and that smoker
        is Mr. Robert Mathis.  It's not about all smokers
        or all tobacco company conduct.  It's about one
        specific smoker.  And you know that because when
        Judge Butchko gives you, at the end of all the
        closing arguments, which I know you guys will have
        soon, but you'll get a verdict form at the end.
        And the questions you have to ask all ask about
        Mr. Mathis.
              So that's why I start out by saying that
        this is a case about Robert Mathis because the
        issues you're going to decide in this case about
        one smoker, and that smoker is Mr. Mathis.
              And Plaintiff, as you know, we talked about
        it all the way back from jury selection on,
        Plaintiff has the burden of proving their case.
        And they have to prove their case about
        Mr. Mathis, and they have to prove it with
        evidence about Mr. Mathis.  Not generic evidence,
        not with sympathy, not with guesswork or asking
        you to speculate what may have been there and not
        with inconsistent testimony or evidence.
              Now, I want to start talking about
        sympathy, because the Court will instruct you -- 3629
        it's instruction number 21, that in reaching your
        verdict, do not let bias, sympathy, prejudice,
        public opinion or any other sentiment for or
        against either party influence your decision.
        Your verdict must be based on the evidence that
        has been received in this courtroom and the law
        that Judge Butchko is going to give you.
              And why do I start here?  Because
        Mrs. Mathis is a very nice lady.  Nobody is here
        criticizing Mrs. Mathis or her family.  We've
        heard some very emotional testimony.  But that
        testimony is not how you view the evidence with
        sympathy, because the Court is going to instruct
        you that you can't let sympathy influence how you
        evaluate the facts and the evidence in this case.
              Now, I want to talk about what the
        evidence -- my clicker stopped working on me, they
        should never have let me have control of this.
              Try it now?  Okay.  Let's see if I can go
        back.  Sure can.
              Okay.  So I want to talk about what the
        evidence you heard in this room told you about
        Robert Mathis.  And as Judge Butchko has already
        instructed you, the very first thing you're going
        to be asked when you go back and deliberate is, 3630
        you're going to be asked to determine whether or
        not Mr. Mathis was a member of the Engle Class.
              So I'm going to start talking about class
        membership.  And you'll recall there are two
        diseases at issue in this case, the Plaintiffs are
        alleging to make Mr. Mathis a member of the Engle
        Class, for COPD and lung cancer.  And I'm going to
        walk through in a little bit more detail both of
        those diseases.  But let me start by
        summarizing -- start with COPD.
              Mr. Mathis was never diagnosed with COPD.
        There are no medical records that diagnosed him
        with COPD.  The only witness who told you he had
        COPD was Plaintiff's addiction expert, Dr. Hurt.
        There's none of his medical records say diagnosed
        with COPD, no medications for COPD, there's a
        certain test that is the Gold Standard for
        diagnosing COPD, called a PFT.  There's no
        evidence that that was done.
              So there's no evidence he had COPD, and
        we're going to talk about the signs and symptoms
        of COPD, and whether he had any of those as well.
              But with regard to lung cancer, there's no
        evidence in this case that Mr. Mathis had symptoms
        that led his doctors to believe or even suspect, 3631
        knowing that he was a smoker, all the doctor
        visits he had in the class period before November
        21st, 1996, none of his doctors suspected that he
        may have lung cancer.  There are no medical
        records that identified symptoms that are specific
        to cancer within the class period, again, that's
        November 21st, 1996.  And he was not diagnosed, as
        you know, with cancer within the class period.
              You're also going to have to decide issues
        in this case with regard to whether or not
        Mr. Mathis was addicted or whether or not
        addiction caused either COPD or lung cancer.  And
        there's a lot of testimony -- I'm going to walk
        through it in a little bit more detail soon, but
        there's a lot of testimony mainly from Dr. Hurt
        about how hard Mr. Mathis tried to quit.  And his
        family members talked about things that he did to
        try to quit smoking.
              But what you'll also hear when we go
        through the evidence is that all of these quit
        attempts, he continued to smoke the cigarettes.
        When he smoked pipes, he continued to smoke
        cigarettes.  When he smoked cigars, he continued
        to smoke cigarettes, when he had the patch on.
              And keep in mind Mrs. Mathis, who was 3632
        married to him, never told you he had the patch
        on, but when he had the patch on, he continued to
        smoke cigarettes.  When he chewed gum, he
        continued to smoke cigarettes.
              The only testimony about when he may have
        actually stopped smoking for a day to three days
        or two days was the one time, one time he tried to
        quit cold turkey.  You can't say you're addicted
        if you've never tried to quit.
              In his 50 years of smoking that Plaintiffs
        talk about, there's only one time he put the
        cigarettes down and tried to quit.
              There's also claims, as you know,
        Mr. Persons is going to address with you later
        after me, claims for concealment and conspiracy.
              I just want to overview those with you
        right now, because you heard from the Mathis
        family.  And you heard that there's no evidence
        that Mr. Mathis ever heard or read or saw any
        statement from R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
        There's no evidence that he heard or read or saw
        any statement from any other tobacco company.  He
        never discussed advertising, be it R.J.R.'s
        advertising or any other company's advertising
        with any of his family members.  And there's no 3633
        evidence that he relied on any statement by any
        tobacco company in making his decisions about
        smoking.
              Now, one thing you've also been told by the
        Court in the instructions is that Plaintiff admits
        that Mr. Mathis bears some measure of
        responsibility for causing his lung cancer and
        death.  He admits that his actions were a cause of
        his lung cancer and death.  So in this case
        Plaintiff has failed to bring you evidence to
        prove their claims when it failed to prove that
        Mr. Mathis had an Engle qualifying disease that
        manifested prior to November 21st, 1996.
              Plaintiff failed to prove that Mr. Mathis
        was a member of the Engle Class.  Plaintiff failed
        to prove that Mr. Mathis died because the dangers
        of smoking were not otherwise known or available
        to him.  And Plaintiff failed to prove that Mr. --
        Mrs. Mathis is entitled to recover money damages
        because Mr. Mathis smoked despite knowing that
        cigarettes were dangerous and addictive.  And he
        continued to smoke with that knowledge for
        decades.
              So I want to walk through the verdict form
        and start with class membership.  Because that's 3634
        the issue I'm going to address with you is class
        membership and whether or not Mr. Mathis was a
        member of the Engle Class.  Then I'm going to turn
        it over to Mr. Persons.
              And these questions aren't about sending
        Mrs. Mathis home.  These questions are about
        whether or not they brought you the evidence,
        sufficient evidence to meet their burden of proof.
        It's not a personal decision that you like one
        party more than another.  It's whether or not they
        have met their burden of proof with evidence.
              And the two issues that you have to decide
        on class membership -- there's two questions on
        the verdict form.  And the first was, "Was
        Mr. Mathis addicted to nicotine in cigarettes?
        And, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of
        lung cancer and death or chronic obstructive
        pulmonary disease?"  Which I'm going to just say
        "COPD" from now on, just to save that mouthful of
        words coming out.
              But that's the first question.  But that's
        not the end of the analysis as to whether or not
        Mr. Mathis is a member of the Engle Class.
        There's a second question.  And this is an
        important question because in order to be a member 3635
        of the Engle Class, not only do you have to prove
        that you're addicted and your addiction caused a
        disease, there's certain requirements.  And some
        of those requirements are that the disease
        manifested within the class period.  There's a
        specific class period.  And I outlined that for
        you for a minute, but that's part of proving
        you're a member of the Engle Class.
              And the second question asks, "Please state
        whether Mr. Mathis suffered from or experienced
        symptoms of either or both of the following
        diseases prior to November 21st, 1996."  Again,
        lung cancer and chronic obstructive pulmonary
        disease or COPD.
              So I'm going to walk through these
        briefly -- well, maybe not so briefly depending on
        your perspective, but try to do it as briefly as I
        can.  And I'm going to actually start with the
        second question first.  I'm going to go a little
        bit out of order and start with the manifestation.
              But first before I do that, let me remind
        everybody, remember these hurdles that Mr. Persons
        showed during opening statements.  These are the
        hurdles to class membership.  And what we have
        here over to the left are the two diseases, lung 3636
        cancer and COPD.  Plaintiff must clear those
        hurdles for each of those diseases to be a member
        of the Engle Class.
              So the first hurdle is manifestation.
        Plaintiff must prove Mr. Mathis had an
        Engle-qualifying disease that manifested during
        the Engle Class period, which is prior to November
        21st, 1996.
              Then Plaintiff must prove the addiction
        hurdle, which is Plaintiff must prove Mr. Mathis
        was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.
              If those two hurdles are overcome, then
        there's still a third hurdle, which is addiction
        causation.  And Plaintiff must prove that
        addiction to nicotine in cigarettes was a legal
        cause of Mr. Mathis' lung cancer and death or
        COPD.
              So those are the four hurdles, or three
        hurdles I'm going to talk about as we go through
        the evidence in this case.
              And, like I said, I'm going to go a little
        bit out of order, and I'm going to start with the
        first -- the second question on the verdict form,
        which deals with manifestation.
              Now, if you recall there are two diseases 3637
        at issue, lung cancer and COPD.  And there's no
        evidence that lung cancer or COPD manifested
        within the class period.  First and foremost, I'm
        going to be addressing with you the fact that
        Mr. Mathis didn't have COPD.  Plaintiff did not
        prove that he had COPD, and I'm going to walk
        through the reasons and the evidence why.
              Plaintiff did not prove that Mr. Mathis, if
        he had COPD, that that COPD manifested within the
        class period.  And Plaintiff did not prove that
        Mr. Mathis' lung cancer manifested within the
        class period.
              And here is the official definition of what
        it is to be an Engle Class member.  It's, "All
        Florida residents who suffered or died from
        certain diseases or medical conditions" -- and
        keep in mind the diseases or medical conditions at
        issue in this case, are two, COPD or lung
        cancer -- "that manifested by November 21st, 1996,
        caused by their addiction to cigarettes containing
        nicotine."
              So I said I wanted to start with COPD
        because there's an issue as to whether or not
        Plaintiff even proved that Mr. Mathis had COPD.
        And so I first want to walk through the evidence 3638
        and why Mr. Mathis did not even have COPD and
        Plaintiffs failed to prove that.
              And let me back up, because if he didn't
        have COPD, then there's no issue as to whether or
        not it manifested within the class period.  So
        let's go back and talk about the evidence.
              So Mr. Mathis was not diagnosed with COPD.
        You'll have all the medical records.  You can look
        at them.  No treating physician diagnosed him with
        COPD.  He never received any medications for COPD.
              There were no symptoms in any of his doctor
        visits, either before he was diagnosed with cancer
        or after he was diagnosed with cancer -- never was
        there a symptom that a doctor wrote down could be
        related to COPD.  Those records don't exist
        either.
              There are no pulmonary functions tests.
        You'll recall there was evidence that that is the
        Gold Standard as to how he died.  No COPD.  You
        blow into a little tube.  Dr. Hurt even explained
        that for you.  No pulmonary function test.  No
        diagnosis.
              Dr. Hurt talked about the PFT being the
        Gold Standard for diagnosing COPD.  And I want to
        stop right here for a moment because during 3639
        Plaintiff's closing argument there was -- it was
        referred to "our paid experts" in this case.
              Well, I want to remind everybody that
        Dr. Hurt was a paid expert; Dr. Proctor was a paid
        expert; Dr. Villa was a paid expert.  In fact,
        there wasn't an expert from either side that y'all
        heard from in this case that wasn't a paid expert.
        There were no treating physicians.  All the
        experts in this case were paid experts.
              But only one expert in this case, Dr. Hurt,
        gives lectures on how to testify and how he gives
        answers that are direct and concise and don't give
        things away.  So there's only one paid expert who
        is a professional and lectures on the profession
        of being a paid expert.
              So let's go on and focus back on COPD
        briefly.  Plaintiff can't prove that he had COPD
        because the first mention of COPD in the medical
        records is March 1997.
              And let's talk about what Dr. Hurt, the
        only doctor who said he had COPD -- what Dr. Hurt
        said is that COPD is mentioned on an X-ray in
        March of 1997.  And you may recall that when
        Mr. Persons was cross-examining Dr. Hurt he
        pointed out that there were at least nine, if not 3640
        more, chest x-rays before that March '97 one that
        didn't mention COPD.
              None of his x-rays mentioned it until March
        1997.  And why is that important?  Because in
        March 1997, at the time of that chest X-ray,
        Mr. Mathis' tumor, which was 7 centimeters --
        remember, it's the tennis ball -- had grown to 10
        centimeters by that point.
              Dr. Hurt told you that his lungs were
        changing rapidly in March 1997 because the tumor
        had grown.  He even showed a demonstrative on the
        screen showing how a tennis ball, when it was
        diagnosed, and then I think maybe a softball by
        March 1997.
              And what else had happened in March 1997
        before then, before this first chest X-ray that
        says COPD, what else happened?  He had
        chemotherapy, and he had 20, 20 radiation
        treatments targeted straight to his lung.  20
        radiation treatments, chemotherapy.  The tumor had
        grown in size.
              And what else?  Those are the same time,
        March 24th -- do you remember that record where it
        says he had a cough with sputum on March 24th?
        I'm going to show it a little bit later.  It's 3641
        also the record that says he lost 37 pounds
        because he was vomiting five times a day.  That's
        what took place the time that they took the X-ray
        in March that says, "Indication or impression,
        COPD."  That's the first record that ever said
        COPD.
              And Dr. Hurt, the professional paid
        addiction expert, who makes his career treating
        addiction, not pulmonary diseases, came in here
        and told you that that X-ray, not a PFT, but that
        X-ray proved that he had COPD in the class period
        because he said COPD is a long-developing process.
        It takes years, if not decades, were his words,
        decades.
              Well, if it took decades, why do we have
        eight chest x-rays and one CAT scan all before
        March 24th, 1997, that make no mention of COPD?
        There's only two chest x-rays after March 24th,
        1997, that mention COPD or changes of COPD.
              And, again, that was after the radiation,
        the chemotherapy.  He's throwing up five times a
        day, and the tumor is 10 centimeters big at that
        point.
              So if you're weighing what the evidence is
        as to whether or not he had COPD, look at all of 3642
        the chest x-rays, look at the CAT scan.
              Remember, Dr. Amos was here yesterday and
        told you how sensitive CAT scans are and
        everything you can see on a CAT scan.  No mention
        of COPD on any of those eight x-rays and one CAT
        scan, none.
              But yet Dr. Hurt, the paid addiction
        professional, comes in here and says, "I can tell
        you he had COPD because when he was in distress in
        March of 1997 -- I'm going to extrapolate it back
        even though he was never diagnosed, never treated,
        and never tested."
              And we also showed you yesterday
        interrogatories answers that Mrs. Mathis signed
        and swore to asking, number one, "What diseases
        are you claiming your husband had related to
        smoking?"
              And her answer at the time was, "Heart
        disease, hypertension, and lung cancer."  No COPD.
              Well, they are not claiming COPD in this
        case.  But there was another interrogatory we read
        to you, and that interrogatory was, "Name all the
        smoking-related diseases you think your husband
        had and when they manifested."  Whether or not
        you're claiming them.  What did he have, and when 3643
        did it manifest?
              "Heart disease, lung cancer, hypertension,"
        no COPD.
              So where did COPD come from?  Well, I think
        COPD came from Dr. Hurt.  He's the only doctor in
        this case who mentioned COPD, the addiction
        doctor.
              So for all of those reasons the evidence
        shows that Mr. Mathis didn't even have COPD.  So
        in evaluating class membership, COPD is not
        something you need to even consider.
              But you still have lung cancer, and I'm
        going to also talk about COPD just in case you
        disagree with me.  So the next question you have
        to ask is whether Mr. Mathis had an Engle
        qualifying disease, which again is either COPD or
        lung cancer, that manifested during the class
        period.
              Now, I want to refer back to question
        number 2 because the question asks, "Please state
        whether Mr. Mathis suffered from or experienced
        symptoms of either lung cancer or COPD?"
        "Suffered from" or "experienced symptoms."
              Now, Judge Butchko told you don't leave
        your common sense at the door.  So what is 3644
        suffering from?  Suffering is the state of
        undergoing pain, distress, or hardship.  There's
        no evidence in this case that Mr. Mathis had any
        pain, distress, or hardship from either lung
        cancer or COPD prior to 19 -- prior to November
        21st, 1996.
              Now, we don't have to go to common sense or
        dictionaries for the definition of symptoms,
        because we had a medical doctor, Dr. Okun, who
        came in here and explained to you what a symptom
        was.  He defined for you what a symptom was, and
        he told you that a symptom is what a patient
        reports.
              Remember, he said it's objective versus
        subjective.  Subjective is what the patient feels.
        In other words, you say, "I have a headache" or,
        "I have a stomachache."  Those are symptoms.
              There's something different called a sign.
        A sign is something a doctor finds or other people
        find, and, that is, when you go to the doctor and
        they do a test and say, "Hey, you have diabetes,"
        that's a sign.  Or the doctor remember said, if
        the doctor pokes you in the stomach, you don't
        have a tummy ache at the time, but if he pokes you
        and it hurts, that's a sign. 3645
              So he defined a symptom as something that
        you have, something that you feel, something
        that's subjected to that person.  It's what you
        have before you actually go and see a doctor.
              So I want to talk a little bit about
        whether or not COPD -- if he had it, whether or
        not it manifested prior to November 21st, 1996.
              First, if there were no symptoms that led
        his doctors to even suspect or believe that he may
        have had COPD before that date, none of the
        treating physicians that he saw for any of the
        complaints he had in November -- and we'll talk
        about them, you know, he had the cough, he had the
        bursitis, he had the feet problem -- none of those
        doctors suggested that he had COPD, suggested he
        take a PFT or an X-ray.  There's not any mention
        of PFTs anywhere in Mr. Mathis' medical records.
        And there's no reference whatsoever, not even a
        "C" and an "O" and a "P" and a "D" on the same
        record prior to November -- I mean, March 24th,
        1997.  And we talked about what that was.  And
        that's that X-ray.
              Now, Mr. Mathis' lung cancer also did not
        manifest prior to November 21st, 1996.  And the
        evidence is undisputed that he went to the doctor 3646
        at least six times in November of -- or in the
        fall of 1996.  No symptoms were reported that led
        his doctors to suspect he may have cancer.  They
        knew he was a smoker.  Some of those records
        reflect that he was a smoker.
              No suspicion of lung cancer, much less
        COPD.  There's not a medical record that
        identifies a symptom that's specific to lung
        cancer prior to November 21st, 1996.  And, again,
        Mr. Mathis was not diagnosed with cancer, as we
        know, within the class period of November 21st,
        1996.
              In the witness testimony in the medical
        records, they conflict on what Mr. Mathis'
        symptoms were.  And, remember, Mr. Mathis'
        symptoms are what he reports.
              And Plaintiff cannot meet her burden of
        proving that his diseases manifested within the
        class period with inconsistent evidence.  So I
        want to walk through a little bit more of what
        Mr. Mathis told his doctors about his symptoms.
              Now, Mr. Mathis may not have been a
        complainer.  If you believe all the family
        members -- and believe me, they know him better
        than -- than I because I've never had the pleasure 3647
        of meeting him.  He may not have been a
        complainer.  But after he was diagnosed --
        remember he goes to the emergency room.  They find
        out he has cancer.  They ask him what his symptoms
        were when he comes in.  And they ask him if he had
        specific symptoms, which he denied.
              He knows he has cancer at this point.  He
        knows he has cancer, and he goes in with a history
        of a one- to two-week history of a headache,
        sluggishness, and one episode of syncope --
        remember, that's the fainting, and the word that
        nobody can say, right, except for the doctors --
        secondary to dizziness.
              So one to two weeks when he first goes in
        in late January.  So sometime in January he
        develops headaches, sluggishness.  He almost
        faints, and he's dizzy.  That all happens in
        January of 1997.
              And, remember, Dr. Amos talked about how
        patients not only tell you what their symptoms
        are, but doctors will also ask, "Are you having
        any of these other symptoms?"
              And when a patient has lung cancer, they
        ask about a bunch of symptoms.  And doctor -- I
        mean, Mr. Mathis denied any weight loss.  This, 3648
        again, is when he knew he had cancer, denied
        weight loss.  He denied fever, chills, nausea, and
        some other things, but he denied shortness of
        breath, and he denied a cough.  Excuse me.
              These are the symptoms Mr. Mathis told his
        doctors that he had or didn't have knowing he had
        cancer.  This record, the February 15th, 1997,
        discharge summary says it all about Mr. Mathis'
        manifestation of lung cancer and COPD.
              Now, you recall that Dr. Hurt said that he
        had a cough; he had shortness of breath, that can
        be lung cancer, that can be COPD; and he had
        weight loss.  And that's Dr. Hurt said that's from
        his lung cancer.  But, again, if you look at what
        Mr. Mathis said on February 15th, knowing he had
        cancer, he denied everything that Dr. Hurt sat in
        that chair and said that he had.
              Now, what do we know about Mr. Mathis'
        health before January 1997?  Well, we know that he
        went to the doctor several times, that we have
        records for, in 1996.  These are the records we
        have from Mr. Mathis in 1996.
              In none of these records is there any
        mention of lung cancer or COPD.  There's a variety
        of complaints, and we're going to talk about 3649
        those.  Remember, bursitis and the feet, and
        there's even cough.  And I'm going to talk about
        the cough.  None of those say, "We're considering
        or we think it might be COPD or lung cancer."
              Six visits between January 1st, 1996, and
        November 21st, 1996.  The number of records that
        say COPD or lung cancer is zero.
              Now, I said that, of course, there's
        records, some of these records -- well, one of
        those records, only one of the records mention
        that Mr. Mathis had a cough, and that's the
        November 8, 1996, record.  All the other records
        are -- do not mention a cough at all with the
        exception of there was that medication chart that
        talked about some Robitussin.
              But Mr. Mathis had a cough.  He reported
        the cough.  He took Robitussin for it.  But you
        heard every doctor, every single one, even
        Dr. Hurt tell you that a cough is a nonspecific
        symptom.
              Just because you cough doesn't mean you
        have lung cancer.  Just because you cough doesn't
        mean you have COPD.  You can cough because you
        have allergies.  You can cough because you're
        giving a closing statement and you get choked up 3650
        like I did just a seconds ago.  You can cough
        because you have asthma.  There's a variety of
        reasons including a cold as to why people cough.
              And you -- one thing you don't do is treat
        lung cancer or COPD with Robitussin.  That's not a
        treatment for COPD or lung cancer.  And that was
        the medication -- it was over-the-counter, but he
        got it at the VA.  That was the medication his
        doctors gave him for his cough.
              When they gave him the medication, you're
        going to see from the records, that his cough
        resolved.  It gets better.  The Robitussin
        apparently worked.  So none of the doctors that he
        saw this cough for or gave him the Robitussin,
        nobody said, "Hey, you're a smoker.  Maybe we
        should check you out for lung cancer or COPD
        because you're coughing."  None.  It's not a
        symptom.  It's not a manifestation.
              Now, I said that the Robitussin cured his
        cough, and it got better because what we know is
        that after that November 8th, 1996, record where
        he reported having a cough and got the Robitussin
        and December 9th, 1996, he denies any other
        complaints or problems.  He goes in.  He didn't
        complain of the cough.  Once more, I'll remind you 3651
        that when he goes into the hospital in January and
        he's diagnosed with lung cancer, he denies a
        cough.
              There's no medical records that say he has
        shortness of breath at all.  The medical records
        that show that he had a cough also show that his
        cough resolved because December he's not
        complaining about a cough.  And when he goes to
        the hospital and he's diagnosed with cancer, he's
        not complaining about a cough.  Not complaining
        about shortness of breath either.  He denied
        having both of those symptoms.
              Now, the size of the mass does not dictate
        whether or not there's symptoms.  You heard from
        Dr. Okun that it is unfortunately very common for
        patients to present to him with cancer, including
        lung cancer, large masses, and the very first
        thing that they notice is the brain test.  That's
        the first thing that ever causes any problems.
              He said that, "Unfortunately, that's what
        cancer does.  That's what lung cancer does."
              So the size of the mass does not dictate
        that he must have had symptoms.  But we know that
        he hadn't reported any symptoms in the class
        period. 3652
              So let's talk about some of the other
        things besides cough and shortness of breath that
        had been mentioned by Dr. Hurt, the addiction
        expert.
              We have weight fluctuations.  And
        Mr. Wichmann said you can't get around this one
        record.  He showed you one record from -- I
        believe it was April or March -- it was April, I
        believe -- one record that said he had weight loss
        for six to 12 months.  We can't get around that.
              Well, these records get around that because
        he goes to the doctor each and every one of these
        times within the class period, and his weight is
        not fluctuating a tremendous amount.  He's being
        weighed by doctors.  He was not being weighed by
        paid experts or anybody else.
              He goes in -- well, the first one is
        remember the insurance application in 1982, a
        little bit longer ago, but he's 163 pounds.  May
        of '96, he's 170.  One week later, maybe the scale
        is a little different, maybe he ate a big dinner,
        but he's 6 pounds heavier at 176.  Then in June,
        he's 171, that's 5 pounds.  Then in September,
        he's at 171 and-a-half.  He gained a half a pound.
        And then at that record that's when he's diagnosed 3653
        with diabetes, remember, told to walk, start
        following the diabetic diet.  And he goes back in
        in November, and he's 167.
              So we're talking about a 3-and-a-half to
        4-pound weight loss.  That's not the kind of
        weight loss you expect with cancer.  This is the
        kind of weight loss you expect with cancer.
              In March 24th, 1997, they note that he had
        a 37-pound weight loss in a couple of months.
        That's the weight loss that you expect to see with
        cancer.  That's also the record that talks about
        him vomiting five times a day.  He had the fever
        that they were trying to figure out what was
        causing his fever, was it pneumonia, was it other
        things.  This was the type of weight loss the
        doctors look for as symptoms of lung cancer.
              Handwriting.  There's been testimony that
        his handwriting wasn't as good.  Well, the
        handwriting that we have available within the
        class period shows that his signature was
        remarkably similar.  What we do know is that after
        he's diagnosed with cancer, because he has that
        brain tumor and that tumor, remember the swelling
        and the edema that Dr. Amos talked about, did have
        some impact on his left hand. 3654
              He did have a resting tremor, but that
        brain tumor was fast growing and Dr. Amos said it
        was his opinion it was fast growing because of the
        amount of swelling and it existed for days or
        weeks.  It wasn't there in November of 1997.  So
        it wasn't causing any symptoms before November
        21st, 1996.
              Now, hiccups.  Dr. Hurt brought up hiccups
        as a sign of lung cancer.  And he said that
        hiccups can be a sign of lung cancer if it affects
        that nerve.  And remember, that's the phrenic
        nerve that was in one of those records.  You'll
        also remember that Dr. Okun talked about, yes,
        that's very true, it can affect the phrenic nerve.
        It can cause hiccups, but there were a variety of
        things that can cause hiccups in a patient such as
        Mr. Mathis.
              One of those things could be some problem
        with his throat.  Remember, they called him an
        ENT.  One of the other things that could be
        causing hiccups was pancreatitis, and they
        investigated and found he had pancreatitis.  The
        cause of Mr. Mathis' hiccups was never outlined or
        diagnosed within his medical records.  And there
        are no medical records before February of 1997 3655
        that mention hiccups whatsoever.
              So, if you remember, Dr. Amos said that the
        medical records tell a story.  And I would like to
        tell a story with the medical records, and the
        story is how Mr. Mathis presented with his lung
        cancer, how that came to be found out.  And what
        you learned is that sometime in January he had a
        fall.  He had a fall and he hit his head, and a
        week or two later he started getting dizzy, he
        started -- he almost fainted once.
              That injury to his head, the trauma to his
        head is what led him to go to the ER.  When he
        goes to the ER, what do the doctors do?  The
        doctors say, hey, you have lung cancer because
        you're coughing, you're short of breath?  No.  The
        doctors say, hey, we think you have that thing --
        remember the subdural hematoma, which is basically
        an injury or bruise to your brain, and so they --
        the first thing they thought was subdural
        hematoma.
              They go in and they do a CAT scan and
        that's when the cancer was discovered.  It wasn't
        discovered because he had been falling asleep at
        his desk or the family was concerned and took him
        in.  And I'm not saying they didn't take him to 3656
        the ER, but the reason why he went to the ER as
        outlined in those medical records was because he
        had a trauma to his head, not because of a cough
        or hiccups or weight loss.  And when he -- when
        they found this, that's when they looked at where
        it came from, and that's when they found that he
        had lung cancer.
              There's no diagnosis of lung cancer until
        January of 1997.  There's never a diagnosis of
        COPD.  And that's the story that Mr. Mathis'
        medical records tell.  For that reason, Mr. Mathis
        is not a member of the Engle Class -- if I can
        find my pen -- because the second question asks,
        "Please state whether Mr. Mathis suffered from" --
        can we show it up, thanks -- "Please state whether
        Mr. Mathis suffered from or experienced symptoms
        of either or both of the following diseases prior
        to November 21st, 1996?"
              And for all of the reasons I've outlined
        for you now, the answer to lung cancer is "no" and
        he didn't have COPD.  But if he did have COPD,
        there was certainly no manifestation of it in the
        class period, so the answer to 2(b) is "no" as
        well.
              So, because I went out of order and took 3657
        number 2 first, I guess you can guess where I'm
        going now.  I'm going to turn to the first
        question on the verdict form.  And the first
        question asks, "Whether or not Mr. Mathis was
        addicted to nicotine in cigarettes and if so,
        whether or not such addiction was a legal cause of
        his lung cancer and death or his COPD?"
              Now, you remember the little hurdles, this
        is the second hurdle and this was the addiction
        hurdle.
              We heard a lot of criticism of Dr. Abramson
        today during closing arguments, but there's some
        things that Dr. Abramson and Dr. Hurt agree on.
        And one of those things is that not all smokers
        are addicted to nicotine, and the evidence in this
        case is that Mr. Mathis was not addicted.  None of
        his treating physicians diagnosed Mr. Mathis as
        addicted.  There's not a medical record that says
        tobacco abuse or a tobacco addiction.  Mr. Mathis
        never told anybody he was addicted.  What we do
        have is the paid professional expert, Dr. Hurt who
        comes in here and assessed Mr. Mathis as addicted
        almost 20 years after he passed away.  And how did
        he do that?
              Well, he talked a bunch about different 3658
        tests, Fagerstrom, DSM, he gave you various
        definitions.  You were even shown some definitions
        in closing arguments today.  But what did Dr. Hurt
        do to give you the opinion that Mr. Mathis was
        addicted?
              He answered two questions.  He said, that's
        the test I'd use, is the Heaviness of Smoking
        Index, two questions.  And what's really important
        about this test is if you smoke one cigarette a
        day, just one, you're addicted.  That's the
        criteria that their paid expert uses to assess
        addiction.  And Plaintiff can't meet their burden
        of proof of proving that Mr. Mathis was addicted
        by answering two questions.
              Now, the DSM, I thought I heard today that
        Dr. Hurt said that the DSM is not used to evaluate
        people for addiction to tobacco or nicotine.  And
        that's interesting because there's a whole section
        in the DSM-5 called Tobacco Use Disorder where it
        lays out criteria to be examined to determine
        whether or not someone meets the criteria to be
        addicted or have Tobacco Use Disorder.  And,
        according to the DSM, half of all daily smokers
        are not addicted and people smoke for reasons
        other than addiction. 3659
              According to Dr. Abramson, Mr. Mathis did
        not meet those diagnostic criteria.  He walked you
        through why, but one of the important things to
        remember is that not only do you go through those
        criteria, one of the things you must find, like a
        threshold -- well, like a hurdle, I guess, or a
        threshold question is:  Did smoking cause
        clinically significant impairment or distress?
        That's the first thing you must find.  And
        Dr. Abramson explained to you why that wasn't the
        case in Mr. Mathis' example.
              Mr. Mathis is one of those smokers who
        wasn't addicted.
              Now, you did hear from three of the --
        three daughters -- he had three daughters and one
        son, Mr. Mathis did, and you heard from his three
        daughters and you heard from Mrs. Mathis and they
        all told you and gave you their opinion that he
        was addicted.  And no one is going to say that
        they're wrong, but they -- everybody has their own
        definition of addiction.  And we've shown you what
        the medical community uses and that's the DSM-5.
              Now, one of the things that the family
        members didn't tell you is that Mathis --
        Mr. Mathis didn't say any of these things.  He 3660
        never said "I want help to quit, help me quit, I
        can't quit, I'm going to try to quit, I wish I
        could quit, I wish I had tried to quit, I should
        have quit, I tried to quit, quitting would be too
        hard, I'm too scared to try to quit, or I don't
        think I can quit."
              But what did the family tell you about
        Mr. Mathis and his quit attempts?  Remember
        Dr. Hurt talked about how he formed the opinion
        that Mr. Mathis was addicted because he was
        constantly trying to quit smoking.  But the family
        members came in here and testified that during
        these attempts to quit smoking, and we'll talk
        about them, the pipes, the cigars, the patches,
        et cetera, that they never remember him stopping
        smoking at all except for two of the family
        members, Mrs. Mathis and Aadron.  And they
        remember him putting down his cigarettes one time
        when he quit cold turkey.
              Now, the testimony is a little different as
        to how long he was successful in putting those
        cigarettes down, one to two days or two to three
        days, but the evidence that you have, ladies and
        gentlemen, is that in his 50 years of smoking
        Mr. Mathis only stopped and put those cigarettes 3661
        down one time in his life and then it was only for
        a day to three days.
              Can you say a person's addicted when they
        only put their cigarettes away one time, that they
        only fight whatever symptoms or withdrawal he may
        have been having once?  How can you say a person
        is addicted if they don't try to quit?
              Now, the final hurdle is addiction
        causation.  And Plaintiff must prove that
        addiction to nicotine to cigarettes was a legal
        cause of Mr. Mathis' lung cancer and death or
        COPD.  Another way to ask this is was Mr. Mathis
        rendered powerless by nicotine addiction so that
        he had no choice but to continue to smoke until he
        got lung cancer?
              I want to start by reminding you the
        Plaintiff admits that Mr. Mathis bears some
        measure of responsibility for causing his lung
        cancer and death.  So what does that mean?  That
        means that Mr. Mathis chose to smoke for decades
        without making a serious quit attempt.  Remember,
        the only time he put his cigarettes down was one
        time.  Mr. Mathis was not confused about the
        dangers and addictiveness of smoking.  Mr. Mathis
        had the ability to quit.  Mr. Mathis had the 3662
        responsibility to quit smoking.  And Mr. Mathis
        could have quit smoking at a time that could have
        prevented his death.
              One way to think about addiction causation
        is, did Mr. Mathis always have the ability to quit
        but chose to continue smoking or was Mr. Mathis
        rendered powerless by nicotine addiction so that
        he was compelled to smoke against his will until
        he died?  Again, the doctors agree on these two
        things, addiction does not prevent smokers from
        quitting, and addicted smokers quit every day, any
        smoker can quit.
              And you heard the quit statistics, millions
        of people have quit in the United States, and
        millions of those smokers or millions and millions
        of those smokers quit and some of them, the
        majority of them were heavy smokers, and they quit
        smoking while Mr. Mathis continued to smoke.
        Remember, Dr. Proctor walked you through this,
        from 1960 to 1965 there were 9 million.  It was 17
        million if you go back to the 1950s.  By 1970 it's
        30 million.  By 1974 it's 45 million.  It turns
        out that thousands of people quit every day all
        during the period -- this is all before 1974,
        during the period where Mr. Mathis never even 3663
        tried, no pipes, no cigars, none of that, but
        millions of people are trying to quit, and they do
        quit.
              And just because Mr. Mathis started smoking
        at a young age does not mean he couldn't quit.
        The majority of smokers who quit started smoking
        under the able of 18.  The majority of smokers who
        quit were addicted.  60 million smokers have quit
        smoking and Mr. Mathis was no different than the
        millions of smokers who have quit.
              Why was he no different?  Well, his
        cigarettes -- were the cigarettes he smoked any
        more addictive than other cigarettes?  No.  Was
        his brain affected differently than smokers who
        quit?  No.  Was he exposed to different
        advertising than smokers who quit?  No.  Did he
        smoke longer than smokers who quit?  No.  Did he
        smoke more than smokers who quit?  No.  But was
        Mr. Mathis one of those smokers who was not ready
        to quit?  Yes.
              And we've heard a lot about
        African-American targeting and menthol cigarettes
        and whether African-Americans are more addicted.
        There are two things I want you to remember,
        first, Dr. Proctor said that African-Americans are 3664
        less likely to be addicted.  Would you agree
        there's a lower prevalence of percentage of
        addiction among African-Americans smokers 18 to 25
        compared to white, non-Hispanic smokers 18 to 25?
              Yeah.  Dr. Hurt, menthol cigarettes are not
        more addictive than non-menthol cigarettes.  Would
        you agree that all conventional cigarettes are
        equally addictive?
                Conventional cigarettes, be it menthol,
        non-menthol?  Yes.
              Mr. Mathis was no different than the
        smokers who quit.
              To be successful in quitting, you have to
        try, you have to be motivated, and you have to
        keep it up.  That's the persistence.  And that
        might be the difference between Mr. Mathis and the
        60 million people who quit smoking.
              What we have, again, is evidence of one
        time that he stopped smoking.  Dr. Hurt says he
        was constantly trying to quit.  But the family
        tells you a different story.  There's only one
        time they remember him putting those cigarettes
        down.
              Now, the family told you he was trying to
        stop smoking cigarettes by using these -- these 3665
        other things.  Remember, there was the pipes, the
        cigars, the patches, the gum.  But there's no
        testimony that he stopped smoking with the pipes.
        In fact, there's testimony he continued to smoke
        cigarettes with the pipes, same with cigars, same
        with patches, and same with the gum.
              The fact is, if these are quit-attempts, he
        never stopped smoking.
              50 years he smoked, 50 years.  It's in the
        medical records, the Plaintiffs claim 50 years he
        smoked, and only one time around 1978 did he put
        the cigarettes down and say I'm not going to
        smoke, and he was successful at it for anywhere
        from a day to three days.  But 50 years go by,
        that's the only time he stopped smoking.  The
        other things he kept smoking.  Those aren't
        quit-attempts, if you're still smoking cigarettes.
        You have to quit.
              So I'm going to go back -- if I can find
        where I put it, to the verdict form, oh -- and
        question number 1, "Was Mr. Mathis addicted to
        nicotine in cigarettes, and if so, was such
        addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and
        death?"
              He wasn't addicted.  It wasn't the legal 3666
        cause of his lung cancer and death.  The answer to
        1(a) is no.
              The answer to 1(b) is no, not only because
        he wasn't addicted, not only because addiction
        didn't cause the COPD, but because he didn't have
        COPD.
              So the answer to 1(b) is no as well.
              Well, those are the two questions, ladies
        and gentlemen, that answer whether or not
        Mr. Mathis is a member of the Engle Class.  For
        all of the reasons stated, he's not.  We request
        that you find that way as well.
              And I want to end and turn this over to
        Mr. Persons who is going to walk you through this
        verdict form with you.
              Again, thank you for your attention.
              Going after lunch is never the best
        position to be in, so thank you very much, ladies
        and gentlemen.


                     CLOSING ARGUMENT
              MR. PERSONS:  Ladies and gentlemen of the
        jury, good afternoon.
              It seems like it's been a month or more
        since I first stood before you and addressed you.
        Let me add my voice to the chorus and thank you
        for your untired and dedication to this process
        for being so attentive throughout these
        proceedings.  This system wouldn't function
        without you, so I want to say thank you.
              When I stood before you several weeks ago,
        I said, our objective was to present you with the
        information sufficient for you to be able to
        answer those questions on the verdict form at the
        end of this process.  And I believe we
        accomplished that.
              I'm going to talk about -- Ms. Henninger
        talked about questions 1 through 3.  I'm going to
        talk about the rest of the questions on the
        verdict form, starting with questions 4 and 5, and
        they have to do with reliance, "Whether Mr. Mathis
        reasonably relied to his detriment on any
        statement made by the Defendant R.J. Reynolds,
        that concealed or omitted material information not
        otherwise known or available to him, not otherwise 3668
        known or available to him concerning the health
        effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes,
        and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause
        of his lung cancer and death."
              The next question, number 5:  "Please state
        whether Mr. Mathis reasonably relied to his
        detriment on a statement in furtherance of
        Defendants' agreement to conceal or omit material
        information not otherwise known or available to
        Mr. Mathis concerning the health effects or
        addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so,
        whether such reliance was a legal cause of his
        lung cancer and death."
              I respectfully submit the answer to both of
        those questions is no, and I'm going to proceed to
        tell why.
              But before I do that, let's look at the
        jury instruction.  And you're going to have these
        instructions, and I strongly urge you to follow
        them very carefully.  This is instruction number
        10, and it says, "Reasonable reliance on a
        statement of material fact that concealed or
        omitted material information not otherwise known
        or available to Mr. Mathis concerning the health
        effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes 3669
        is a legal cause of injury if it directly and in
        natural and continuous sequence produces or
        contributes substantially to producing such injury
        so that it can reasonably be said that but for the
        reasonable reliance on the statement of material
        fact that concealed or omitted material
        information not otherwise known or available to
        Mr. Mathis concerning the health effects or the
        addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, the injury
        would not have occurred."
              And that's a lot of legalese, but I'm going
        to try to break some of that down.
              Instruction number 11. "Reasonable reliance
        on a statement in furtherance of an agreement to
        conceal or omit information is a legal cause of
        injury if it directly and in natural and
        continuous sequence produces or contributes
        substantially to producing such injury so that it
        can reasonably be said that but for the reasonable
        reliance on the statement in furtherance of an
        agreement to conceal or omit information, the
        injury would not have occurred."
              And what is a material fact?
              A material fact is a fact that is of such
        importance that Mr. Mathis would not have acted as 3670
        he did but for the concealment or omission of that
        fact.  And there was no statement.  You heard the
        family members.  There was no statement that he
        received from R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company or any
        other entity upon which he reasonably relied.
              Now, the Plaintiff has the burden of proof
        on these claims just like all the other claims.
        And in order to establish the claim, there has to
        be a link between the concealment, the statement,
        concealing information or the agreement to conceal
        and Mr. Mathis' death.  In other words, Plaintiff
        failed to prove that Mr. Mathis died because the
        dangerous and addictiveness (sic) of smoking were
        unknown or unavailable to him.  That's what has to
        be demonstrated; that there's something about the
        statement that was made that caused him to die.
              Next instruction.  Thank you.
              "However, if you find for the Plaintiff on
        his claims for fraudulent concealment or
        conspiracy to fraudulently conceal, any damages
        you award will not be reduced by the percentage of
        responsibility you assign to Mr. Mathis."
              That will be very, very important, because
        Mr. Mathis -- Mrs. Mathis has already admitted
        that Mr. Mathis is at fault.  And if you were to 3671
        find for Mr. -- Mrs. Mathis on either one of these
        claims, 4 or 5, if you answer yes to either one of
        those, then that will absolve all fault.  There
        will be no deduction for his fault, even though
        they have admitted fault.
              So I urge you, strongly urge you to
        carefully read these instructions and to --
        obviously, to follow them.
              The bottom line, Mr. Mathis did not die
        because the dangers and addictiveness of smoking
        were unknown or unavailable to him.  It does not
        have to be known, although, the evidence is that
        he did know it was addictive, and he did know that
        it was dangerous.  But the information has to be
        available.  The information has been available for
        a long, long time, about the dangers of smoking.
              Their own expert, Dr. Proctor told you,
        that for centuries, people have written about,
        they have talked about, smoking being bad for your
        health for centuries.  It's been known.  For
        centuries, people have discussed the addictiveness
        of tobacco, and how it's hard to quit, it's hard
        to give up.  In the 1800s, the medical journals
        started talking about smokers' cancer.  Back then
        there wasn't as much smoking cigarettes so they 3672
        were not inhaling, but they were smoking pipes and
        cigars, and there was mouth cancers and throat
        cancer and laryngeal cancer.
              100 years ago, the schools were teaching
        children that smoking was dangerous and it was
        addictive.  Information about the health effects
        and the addictive nature of smoking was known and
        available to Mr. Mathis throughout his lifetime.
              You'll recall in opening statement I showed
        you a 1928 edition of Reader's Digest, talking
        about the link between smoking and cancer.  That
        was before Mr. Mathis was even born because he was
        born in December of 1932.
              I showed you a board in opening statement,
        and I want to show it to you again, information,
        sources of information that Mr. Mathis had about
        the dangers of smoking.  So we don't have to guess
        at it, we don't have to look at some circuitous
        route that the information got to him.  These are
        things that he got directly.
              We know that in the '40s and '50s, his
        parents, by his own testimony, or his own
        statement to his family members, that his mom and
        dad ever caught him smoking, his words, they would
        have killed him.  That's what he said. 3673
              They forbid him to smoke, and that's why he
        would swipe cigarettes, he would sneak cigarettes.
        The schools warned against and prohibited smoking.
        We showed you some of those schoolbooks from
        Florida and from Georgia.  He was born in Hahira,
        Georgia in Lowndes County and then moved to
        Florida.  And so we showed you the textbooks that
        were available and used in the schools talking
        about the dangers of smoking.
              And then in 1953 to 1956, he's in the
        United States Army.  And the military servicemen
        and women received the Stars and Stripes.  That's
        the source of their news, whether they are
        overseas or stateside, they have access to the
        Stars and Stripes, also have access to Army Times
        in the case of the Army.  We know that there were
        articles, during this time period, in the Stars
        and Stripes about the dangers of smoking and how
        deadly smoking is.
              We know that in 1961, Mrs. Mathis was added
        to the Church of Christ, and we know that that
        church teaches that the body is a temple and that
        smoking is wrong.  You heard Mrs. Mathis testify
        that it teaches you it is a weight on you, and she
        also told us that she had conversations with her 3674
        husband about these teachings from the church.
              So that's information about the dangers of
        smoking.
              We know that in 1974 when Mrs. Mathis'
        father was 65 years old, he was born in 1909, he
        quit smoking, and he quit drinking at the same
        time.  And he told his son-in-law, Mr. Robert
        Mathis, "Man, you should try to quit smoking," and
        he told him how he quit smoking.  He quit smoking
        using Wrigley's chewing gum and prayer.  And
        Mr. Mathis' response to that was that he smoked a
        pipe for two weeks.
              Warnings from his own family.  Mr. Mathis
        told all of his children smoking was bad for them
        and difficult to stop, difficult to stop.  That's
        addiction.  That's another word for it can be
        addictive.  It can be habit forming.  It can be
        hard to stop.  And if it's bad for you, that's bad
        for your health.
              Mrs. Mathis beginning in 1965, that was her
        testimony, she began telling her husband to quit
        smoking.  1965 she can't remember that date, that
        was the date, that was the year that their
        youngest child was born.  The daughter Viola goes
        by Shari was born in 1965.  From that time forward 3675
        she continued to urge her husband to quit smoking.
        You can't get a more personal warning than that.
              We know his newspapers.  They took the
        Miami Times and the Herald.  The Times came out --
        that's a weekly newspaper that came out every
        Thursday.  That paper was in their home.  The
        Miami Hearld they had a subscription to it.
              We know from the testimony of the family
        members that he read the paper.  That he would
        usually have a cup of coffee with a cigarette and
        read the paper.
              We are going to show you articles from
        those newspapers talking about the dangers of
        smoking going back into the '60s and so on.
              Daughter Dionne, warned him in the 1970s to
        stop smoking.  "Dad, it's bad for you," those are
        her words.  And Mrs. Mathis warned the children,
        "Smoking is bad for you.  Smoking can kill you,
        and it will kill you."  I showed the deposition
        testimony that she gave to that effect.
              Aadron was born in the 1980s.  "Dad, it's
        bad for you.  You should stop smoking."
              And then, of course, we have warning labels
        on the cigarettes themselves starting in 1966 on
        every pack of cigarettes that he bought or that 3676
        Mrs. Mathis would buy from the supermarket every
        Thursday when she would shop, every pack would
        have this warning on it, "CAUTION:  Cigarette
        smoking may be hazardous to your health."
              And then we had the Surgeon General's
        Report that came out in 1964 warning the family
        about the dangers of smoking.  Before the report
        was even published, they had a conversation about
        it.
              The TV news, the Mathises watched the news
        after dinner.  That was the testimony of one of
        the daughters.  We know from CBS Evening News
        clips that I've shown you that they talked about
        the dangers of smoking.
              So he had all of these warnings that
        smoking is dangerous and addictive, and he warned
        others because he warned his children about it.
        So that's knowledge.  That's information about the
        dangers and addictive nature of smoking.
              We know that in 1952 that Mr. Mathis would
        have been a young man, 20 years old, Reader's
        Digest came out with an article called, Cancer By
        the Carton, and it's a very, very, powerful title
        because what it says is every time you buy a
        carton of cigarettes you're buying a carton of 3677
        cancer.  You're increasing your risk of getting a
        disease.
              You didn't have to have access to the
        research that the cigarette companies were doing
        or their internal documents to have access to this
        information.  It's available, known or available,
        and this was available to the public.
              Dr. Proctor, the Plaintiff's expert,
        testified that when Cancer By the Carton came out
        it started people quitting.  People read this, and
        they started quitting.
              And this was even before the conspiracy
        because the Judge is going to instruct you the
        conspiracy was from 1953.
              "I instruct you the Plaintiff has made no
        claim for agreement to conceal information
        regarding smoking, health, or addiction before
        1953 or after 2000."
              So even before 1953 information is out
        there in the public about the dangers of smoking,
        and I showed you on the board about the Stars and
        Stripes.  Here are just a sampling of all these
        headlines from Stars and Stripes between 1953 and
        1956 about the dangers of smoking.
              Cigarette Cancer Tie Found, that's in 1954. 3678
        Smokers Hack Can Kill, New York Doc says, that's
        1953.  Doctor Links Smoking and Lung Cancer,
        that's October of 1954.  All Smokers Run High Risk
        of Cancer, that's 1956.  Doctors Were Asking that
        Tobacco be Banned, that was in 1954.  Information
        that's known and available.
              And Dr. Proctor tells us that, "These news
        stories about the dangers of smoking scared
        millions of people into quitting.  Smokers were
        fleeing from cigarettes and feared their lives.
        Millions of smokers were quitting, starting
        quitting, or cutting down.  Fears about the
        dangers of smoking drove millions of people to
        start to quit smoking starting in the early
        1950s."
              But Mr. Mathis was not one of them because
        Mrs. Mathis tells us that throughout the '50s she
        knows of no attempt that he made to quit, nor in
        the '60s.  It was only in the '70s that he quit
        for a few days.
              We know that smokers started quitting by
        the millions in the 1950s by -- between 1950s and
        1965, 17 million Americans quit smoking.  13
        million Americans quit between 1966 and 1970.  And
        the quit accelerated due to people being concerned 3679
        about their health.
              And a lot of it had to do with these
        magazine articles that were coming out, the Public
        Service Announcements, the news about the mouse
        skin-painting studies where they painted the smoke
        condensate on the backs of the mice, and the mice
        developed tumors.  All of that information
        prompted people concerned about their health to
        take the initiative, the personal responsibility
        to try to quit smoking.
              Then we have 1964 when the Surgeon
        General's Report comes out.  And these are
        headlines from papers throughout the State of
        Florida reporting on the Surgeon General's report
        of 1964.  And even if you didn't read the paper,
        you talked to people who had read about it who can
        tell you these things, share the information with
        you.  You don't always have to read it yourself
        because people share information, especially
        information this widespread.  This is throughout
        the whole state, all over the state from Miami to
        Jacksonville, from Jacksonville to Pensacola.
        It's all over the State of Florida.
              And then locally, this is a paper that we
        know that Mr. Mathis had access to.  This is the 3680
        Miami Herald, the headline, "I quit smoking at
        2:00 p.m. Saturday."  That was when the Surgeon
        General's report was released at 2:00 p.m. that
        Saturday.  And they did it that time so that it
        would be in the Sunday paper the next day.  This
        is the Sunday paper.
              "Heavy cigarette smoking is the principal
        cause of cancer of the lungs and larynx and a
        health so grave as to call for remedial action, a
        blue ribbon science panel concluded Saturday."
        That's pretty clear.  Cancer of the lungs, that's
        lung cancer.
              And if you didn't get that message and you
        didn't have time to read the whole article, here's
        some things that appeared to the Miami news.  And
        this was common, cartoons.  These cartoons that
        just have these drawings.  There's one, there's a
        coffin full of cigarettes.  I mean, that message
        is clear that this will kill you.  You can't be
        more graphic than that.  That's what a coffin is,
        and that's why they call them coffin nails.  That
        was a slang term, widespread use of that term.
              And then the next one you've got this cross
        that's made of cigarettes in the cemetery getting
        the message across that this is a product that can 3681
        kill you.
              Florida health officials said that, "Nearly
        all Floridians" -- and this was the Florida Health
        Notes, this is 1965, October 1965, Florida Health
        Notes.  So October 1965 in Florida, they are
        saying that, "Nearly all Floridians have heard
        about the Surgeon General's Report on smoking and
        health which was released in 1964."
              And you remember Dr. Proctor said that
        Florida was way ahead of other states in terms of
        addressing this public health issue on the dangers
        of smoking and publicizing it to members of the
        Florida community and providing smoking cessation
        clinics.
              Now, 17 million people quit smoking between
        the '50s and 1965.  That was before the first
        warning ever went on a pack of cigarettes.  1966
        was that first warning.  And that first warning
        said, Cigarette Smoking May Be Hazardous to Your
        Health.
              And Mr. Mathis was warned every time he
        picked up a cigarette pack from '66 to 1970 with
        this warning.
              And that's very important because this was
        the first consumer product, a product that you 3682
        consume, you take into your body, that had a
        warning.  It had a health warning.  And that
        was -- it made people aware that this is a
        dangerous product.  Now, it's a free country.  You
        want to use it, you can.  But with eyes wide open,
        it's dangerous.  The Surgeon General is telling
        you, cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your
        health.  It's a warning.  So you can heed it or
        you cannot.  But you're proceeding at your own
        risk.
              And this warning was effective.  Despite
        all the talk about the advertising and the $250
        billion for advertising, these warnings were
        effective.  And how do we know that?  Because
        people were quitting.  The heaviest period of
        quitting in U.S. history was between 1966 and
        1970.  Quitting accelerated because smokers got
        the message.  People got the message.
              And how do we know they got the message?
        The director of the National Clearinghouse on
        Smoking and Health, Dr. Daniel Horn, testified
        before Congress and then he gave a speech in
        Syracuse that was picked up.  And this was in
        1968.
              He said, "You can stand on a rooftop and 3683
        shout smoking is dangerous at the top of your
        lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything
        they did not already know."
              The information was there.  The information
        was there.  They got it out to the public.  And
        then it was up to the public whether they wanted
        to act on it or not.
              And another way that they got the
        information out was through these Public Service
        Announcements. SPEAKER:  The moment you stop, in most
        cases the effects of smoking will begin to reverse
        themselves until your lungs are nice and clear
        again. PERSONS:  And that's urging people to
        quit smoking because you start realizing the
        benefits smoke -- of quitting almost immediately.
              You remember when Dr. Hurt was testifying,
        and I asked him from this podium on
        cross-examination about a pamphlet that they put
        out at the Mayo Clinic about the changes in the
        human body that take place within the first 3684
        24 hours of quitting and then within the first two
        weeks.  Improvement in your health, blood pressure
        lowering, heart rate lowers, all of these things,
        lungs starting to clear up, all of these benefits
        of quitting.  And that's what these Public Service
        Announcements were about.
              Just imagine if somebody -- you've heard
        these things in the news about the dangers of red
        meat and so forth.  Suppose on a pack of meat they
        said it's dangerous to your health?  Would you
        heed the warning, or would you go ahead and have a
        steak?  It's up to you.  You have to make the
        decision about whether you want to do these things
        or not.
              We talked about Norman Lear with
        Dr. Proctor, and we talked about Sanford and Son.
        And the reason I wanted to show that was because
        that was one of the most popular shows on
        television back in the 1970s was Sanford and Son.
        Normal Lear, the producer of All in the Family,
        Maud, The Jeffersons, Room 222.
              Those shows addressed social issues that
        were prevalent in the country at that time.  And
        smoking was a social issue that this country had
        decided to address.  One, by putting the warning 3685
        on the pack, but also running the Public Service
        Announcements and getting the word out about the
        dangers.
              And here we have Lamont talking to his
        father Fred about the dangers of smoking, and
        Norman Lear uses humor to get a message out.  And
        the message here is about the dangers of smoking.
              (A video clip was played and transcribed as
follows:)
              LAMONT SANFORD:  Did you hear yourself just
        now?
              FRED SANFORD.  Yeah.  I asked if you brung
        me cigarettes.
              LAMONT SANFORD:  No.  I didn't mean now.
        Did you hear yourself cough?  I heard you a block
        away.  It sounded like they was tearing up the
        streets.  And you want to know if I brought you
        some cigarettes?  On the way home, I passed
        something called a breath mobile.  You know what a
        breath mobile is?
              FRED SANFORD:  That's when you spray your
        mouth so your friend don't turn away.
              LAMONT SANFORD:  No.  It's -- it's a mobile
        unit for taking chest x-rays and breathing tests.
              FRED SANFORD:  What's that got to do with 3686
        me?
              LAMONT SANFORD:  Everything, Pop.  Now you
        get to give them up.  You got to give up
        cigarettes some.
              FRED SANFORD:  For what?
              LAMONT SANFORD:  Because they are killing
        you, that's for what.
              Behave, Pop.  Do yourself a favor.  Give
        them up.
              FRED SANFORD:  Give them up?  I enjoy
        smoking.
              LAMONT SANFORD:  Say, Pop, cigarettes will
        kill you.  Don't you believe me?
              FRED SANFORD:  I believe you. PERSONS:  Well, Fred believed him, but
        he continued to smoke.  He continued to smoke.
              Now, in 1970 -- oops -- the warning -- and
        here is says, "The Surgeon General has determined
        that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your
        health."
              That's pretty clear.  It's dangerous to
        your health.  Now, we know that this warning was
        available to Mr. Mathis.  We don't have to guess
        about it because it was on every pack of 3687
        cigarettes from 1970 to 1985.  And every time he
        picked up a pack from 1975 to 1985 this warning
        was on that pack of cigarettes, that cigarette
        smoking is dangerous to your health.
              So there's no reason for anybody who was a
        smoker during that time not to know that it was
        dangerous because the pack warned you that the
        product was dangerous.
              The Miami Times also warned that it was
        dangerous.  This is September of 1978, and there's
        an article that says All About Drugs.  They're
        talking about the drug nicotine.  It says, "It has
        been observed that the more a person is exposed to
        cigarette smoke the greater his chances of
        developing a more serious and dangerous cough.
        This type of cough may develop into such illnesses
        as lung cancer and acute bronchitis."  Information
        that's known or available at those times.
              And then next to it, there's this
        illustration, there's a skeleton basically and --
        purchasing a pack of cigarettes, "Well, the cost
        is pretty high, your life."  In other words,
        smoking can kill.
              And also, The Miami Times provided
        information about access to smoking cessation 3688
        clinics, how to stop smoking.  Do you want to stop
        smoking?  They're talking about these different
        organizations for it that were providing this.
              And then in particular this one, a five-day
        plan to stop smoking offered at Hialeah, at the
        Hialeah Hospital.  Well, we know that Yellow
        Freight, the company for which Mr. Mathis drove,
        was located in Hialeah, access to smoking
        cessation clinic.
              Is there any evidence that Mr. Mathis ever
        went to the clinic?  No.
              You owe that to yourself.  You got a loving
        family, children urging you to smoke -- to quit
        smoking.  Plaintiffs would have you believe that
        if R.J. Reynolds had sent a letter talking about
        the chemicals in smoke, that somehow that would
        have persuaded Mr. Mathis to quit smoking.
              Now, do you need to know the chemical
        formula for Clorox to know that it's dangerous to
        consume?  Of course not.  Of course not.  If the
        product itself tells you that it's dangerous,
        public service announcements telling you it can
        kill you, do you need to know that it contains
        Polonium 210?
              Now, in the beginning of 1985 and 3689
        continuing to the present time, every pack of
        cigarettes has one of these four warnings, and
        these warnings talk about the health effects of
        smoking.  And this one in particular, "Smoking
        causes lung cancer and heart disease, emphysema,
        and may complicate pregnancy.  Cigarette smoke
        contains carbon monoxide.  Quitting smoking now
        greatly reduces serious risks to your health.
        Smoking by pregnant women may result in fetal
        injury, premature birth, and low birth weight."
              All of these warnings are about the health
        effects of smoking and the benefit of quitting is
        on the pack of cigarettes.  It's there.  The
        warning is there.  The information is there.  That
        provides you what you need to know to make a
        choice, an informed choice about smoking.  And we
        know that Mr. Mathis understood the dangers of
        smoking but chose to continue to smoke.  And
        that's not a criticism of Mr. Mathis by no stretch
        of the imagination.  That's just what the evidence
        is in this case, and that was his decision and his
        alone.
              Mr. Mathis warned his children not to smoke
        in the '60s, '70s, and '80s.  Starting in 1965 we
        know that Mrs. Mathis consistently warned 3690
        Mr. Mathis about the dangers of smoking.  Starting
        in the 1970s Mr. Mathis' children consistently
        warned him to quit smoking.  And we discussed
        Mr. Mathis' father-in-law warned him to quit
        smoking.  And at that time Mr. Mathis'
        father-in-law was -- this is 1974 -- was 65 years
        old and Mr. Mathis in 1974 was 42 years old.
              A lot of talk about advertising, you heard
        a lot about it.  You saw a lot of ads.  But
        advertising is legal, and the Judge is going to
        instruct you that, "Manufacturing, selling, and
        advertising cigarettes are lawful activities.
        Therefore, I instruct you that the Defendant
        cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing,
        selling, or advertising cigarettes.  It is lawful
        to advertise cigarettes in the United States of
        America."
              And ask yourself:  What does advertising
        have to do with Mr. Mathis anyway?  Because his
        family members testified that they never had a
        conversation with him where he talked about
        advertising.  He might have seen it, but they
        hadn't -- it wasn't impactful enough to even talk
        about.  Here's what Ms. Aadron Mathis had to say.
              "Question:  All right.  Now, you and 3691
        your father never spoke about cigarette
        advertising at any time, correct?
              Answer:  No.
              "Question:  And you never overheard
        your father talk with anybody else about
        cigarette advertising?
              "Answer:  No, ma'am."
              Ms. Viola Stephens Story.
              "Question:  Okay.  And you and your
        father never had any conversations about
        cigarette advertising, did you?
              "Answer:  No, we did not."
              Ms. Dionne Johnson.
              "Question:  Okay.  Never talked with
        your father about cigarette advertising,
        correct?
              "Answer:  Did I ever talk to him about
        the advertising?
              "Question:  Yes, ma'am.
              "Answer:  No."
              Mrs. Hazel Mathis.
              "Question:  You never had any
        discussion with Mr. Mathis about cigarette
        advertisements, did you, Mrs. Mathis?
              "Answer:  No. 3692
              "Question:  And you never heard any
        conversations that he had with anyone else
        about cigarette advertising?
              "Answer:  No."
              I'm going to talk about targeted
        marketing in a minute, but before I get to --
        oh, here it is.  Before the trial back in
        2009 this is what the Plaintiff's answer to
        interrogatories -- the information they
        provided us.  This is 2009.
              They said, "Among others things, Benson
        & Hedges menthol was a brand that Mr. Mathis
        smoked from 1975 to 1997."
              From '75 until '97, some 22 years.
        Now, none of the families members could tell
        you what brands Mr. Mathis smoked and when,
        but this was pretty precise, '75 to '97.  And
        then they had a lot of other brands in there,
        Pall Mall and a lot of other -- L & M, and a
        lot of other things.
              But yet at trial the thing -- the only
        things you heard about were R.J. Reynolds
        being an early brand -- I mean, Winston being
        an early brand, Kool being a brand, Philip
        Morris being a late brand, but the main brand 3693
        being Newport.
              Now, over here the main brand was
        Benson & Hedges.  So it's a little different
        from the sworn answer to interrogatory which
        has Benson & Hedges 1975 to 1997 versus over
        here where it's talking about Newport.
              I'm wanting you to focus on Newport
        supposedly because Newport targeted
        African-Americans, and we'll talk more about
        that in a minute.
              Let's talk about Mr. Mathis' beginning
        smoking.  There's no evidence that any
        targeted marketing caused Mr. Mathis to start
        smoking or that youth marketing caused
        Mr. Mathis to start smoking.  Mr. Mathis was
        born in a tobacco-growing community in
        Georgia.  In fact, this flyer here says,
        "Tobacco, the weed that made Hahira famous."
        Anybody that knows anything about that part
        of the state of Georgia knows how prominent
        and prevalent tobacco is.  It's the most
        prominent cash crop, especially back in the
        '30s.
              And so he doesn't have to look at an
        advertisement to have access to tobacco.  In 3694
        fact, testimony was by Mrs. Mathis that when
        she met him, he would smoke roll-your-own
        when he couldn't buy the ready rolls from the
        store.  And so the tobacco-growing community,
        access to tobacco.  No one knows when he
        first smoked his first cigarette really.
        They weren't there.  No witness personally
        has that information.
              We know that members of his family
        smoked, that his father smoked, that his
        uncle smoked, and that his brothers with one
        exception smoked.  We know that he smoked
        roll-your-own cigarettes, and no one knows
        why he started smoking.  No one knows when he
        started purchasing cigarettes or when he
        became a regular or a daily smoker.
              That's totally unknown, and you can't
        speculate or guess to fill in the gaps.  It's
        the Plaintiff's burden to put forth proof of
        things.  But what we do know is that it
        wasn't targeted marketing that caused him to
        start smoking.  In fact, he started smoking
        before 1953 when the conspiracy commenced.
              Now, I asked Dr. Proctor, because there
        was some suggestion that African-Americans or 3695
        blacks were singled out for special kinds of
        advertising.  And I asked him about it.  I
        said, "Dr. Proctor, you would agree that the
        tobacco companies have marketed and
        advertised their products to every group in
        American society and to every subgroup in
        American society?"
              And he said, "I can't think of one they
        excluded.  They marketed to everybody."
              And I followed up with that, and I
        said, "I believe you testified on yesterday
        that before the 1960s cigarette marketing was
        largely unsegmented, and it was during the
        1960s that they began trying to market to or
        target different groups based on ethnicity,
        race, religion, income, age, habits, what
        kind of car you drive, what kind of clothes
        you wear, and what kind of music you listen
        to."
              "Answer:  Among other things, that's
        correct.  That's when it really accelerates."
        That's when they got more sophisticated about
        reaching their consumers based on
        demographics, age, gender, ethnicity, what
        kind of car you drive, what kind of clothes 3696
        you wear, and so forth.
              "Isn't it true, Dr. Proctor, that in
        the 1950s, '60s, and '70s there was a
        movement underfoot in the African-American
        business community and by some members of the
        civil rights movement to request American
        companies, including the cigarette companies,
        to include African-Americans in their
        marketing plans?"
              "Answer:  That's true.  There were
        marketing companies that were trying to get
        the companies really to market to
        African-Americans.  And there were civil
        rights leaders who were urging companies to
        include African-Americans in their
        advertising," question.
              "Answer:  Some.  I've seen more of
        these marketing companies doing that."
              And that was part of the effort to get
        companies to advertise to the black
        community.  That was part of the whole civil
        rights segment, that this segment of the
        community, a significant segment of the
        community not be ignored, and so the
        companies responded, and they responded with 3697
        their advertising.
              Now, you can compare these ads, and
        you'll have these back there with you, but
        look at this -- these Kool ads.  They're
        identical in terms of the text, in terms of
        the way they even -- angle at which they're
        holding the cigarette.  The only difference
        is one's black and the other one's white.
              Same thing with these Kool ads down
        here.  The models in this ad are
        African-American, and then you've got whites
        over here, a white gentleman over here.  The
        same thing here with these Kool ads.  And
        there are hundreds of these examples.  They
        are even wearing the same-colored clothes.
        And here are more of them, the same thing.
        You got -- that's a white couple, that's a
        black couple, a Newport.  Newport wasn't
        marketing it exclusively to
        African-Americans.  We've got ads where there
        are white actors or white models, ads where
        there are black models.
              And also you notice, there's the
        Surgeon General's warning.  So at the
        beginning of 1971, see for all of these ads, 3698
        there's the "SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING,"
        whether it's a menthol, whether it's a
        non-menthol, whether it's a filter King or
        whatever it is, it's got a warning on it.
              Now, Dr. Proctor and Dr. Hurt, I
        cross-examined both of them about their
        so-called filter fraud and here is what they
        said.  "No R.J. Reynolds documents use
        phrases like 'gimmick' to describe filtered
        cigarettes.  No documents from the '60, '70s
        or '80s where R.J. Reynolds scientists state
        they believe smokers are getting just as much
        tar and nicotine as smokers of non-filtered
        cigarettes.  No documents from the '60s, '70s
        or '80s in which Reynolds scientists state
        that filters are ineffective."
              None.  In fact, the internal documents
        from R.J. Reynolds, the scientists expressed
        the belief that he genuinely believed the
        filtered cigarettes were better for health.
        They generally believed filters were better.
        Not that it was some sort of a gimmick or
        that it was a fraud.  No evidence that
        Mr. Mathis smoked filtered cigarettes because
        he thought they were safer anyway.  There's 3699
        no evidence of that.
              And who was behind the development of
        filtered cigarettes to begin with?  The
        public health community.  They encouraged the
        tobacco companies to develop filtered
        cigarettes to start with.  The public health
        community reported that filtered cigarettes
        were tasteless.  They believed that.  The
        public health encouraged smokers to switch to
        filtered cigarettes in the '50s, '60s, 70,
        '80s, and into the 1990s.
              Public health community, health and
        human services, Cancer Society, they were
        encouraging people to quit smoking.  But if
        you were going to continue to smoke, smoke
        filtered cigarettes.  That's what they told
        the community.
               "There's no evidence that Mr. Mathis
        ever relied on any tobacco company or tobacco
        industry organization in making his decisions
        about smoking."  There's no evidence that
        Mr. Mathis heard or saw any statements from
        any tobacco company or tobacco industry
        organization or was influenced by such, none;
        no evidence whatsoever.  And so without 3700
        evidence you can't check yes.  To questions
        number 4 and 5, the answer is "no."  There's
        just no evidence to support it.
              So when we get to -- when you get to
        question 4, reliance on a statement, the
        answer is "no."  And the same thing is true
        for number 5, the answer is "no."
              THE COURT:  Sorry.  I sneezed.
              MR. WICHMANN:  No.  No.
              THE COURT:  I sneezed.  I wasn't saying
        anything.
              MR. PERSONS:  You want to let them stand
        for a minute?
              THE COURT:  Yeah.  Jurors would you like to
        stretch?
              Do you have much more?
              MR. PERSONS:  Not a whole lot more.
              THE COURT:  You want to stretch a little.
              MR. PERSONS:  They say they are okay,
        Judge.
              THE COURT:  Okay.
              MR. PERSONS:  I guess they had --
              Now we go to question number 3 on the
        verdict form.  I'm going to move through this as
        quickly as -- I promise I will.  Let me see, 3701
        that's 4 and 5.
              Number 3, "Please state the percentage of
        any fault that was a legal cause of Mr. Mathis'
        lung cancer and death that you charge to R.J.
        Reynolds Tobacco Company and to Robert Mathis,"
        and has to add up to 100 percent.  And we'll talk
        about that now.  We're going to talk about fault.
              And we know that Mr. Mathis, Mrs. Mathis,
        Ms. Mathis has admitted that Mr. Mathis bears some
        measure of responsibility but less than
        100 percent of the applicable fault for causing
        his lung cancer and death."
              What does that mean?
              That he bears some fault.  We'll unpack
        that or break it down.  What it really means is
        that Mr. Mathis chose to smoke for decades without
        making a serious quit-attempt, that's what it
        means, to be partly responsible or partly at
        fault.  It means that Mr. Mathis was not confused
        about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking,
        because if you're confused, you can have no fault.
        It means that Mr. Mathis had the ability to quit,
        because, if you can't quit, you can't have any
        fault.  It means that Mr. Mathis had the
        responsibility to quit smoking.  Absent 3702
        responsibility to quit, you can't be faulted for
        not quitting.  It means that Mr. Mathis could have
        quit smoking at a time that would have prevented
        his death.  We know had he quit, he could have
        avoided the disease that ultimately took his life.
              And in assigning fault, it can relate only
        to actions that were a legal cause of Mr. Mathis'
        death.  Reynolds can't be assigned fault for
        actions that were not a legal cause of Mr. Mathis'
        death; in other words, it's not a comparison of
        choices, Well, Reynolds chose to write these
        terrible things in these memos, these secret
        documents, what does that have to do with
        Mr. Mathis?
              Let's assume that he had access to these
        memos and these other things of internal company
        documents.  Let's talk about that for a minute.
        Suppose he had them?  What would have been more
        influential on Mr. Mathis, his daughters and his
        wife telling him he needed to quit smoking or
        something from R.J. Reynolds?
              If your wife of 41 years, the mother of
        your children --
              THE COURT:  We're not -- we can't put the
        jurors in the position of the litigants. 3703
              MR. PERSONS:  Well, that's true.  I'll
        rephrase that.
              THE COURT:  Okay.
              MR. PERSONS:  If someone's spouse of 41
        years, a very lovely person that's indisputable,
        indisputable is urging you to stop smoking
        starting in 1965 and continues to do that for 32
        years of the marriage, someone you live with,
        someone you love --
              THE COURT:  You can't do that.  We can't.
              MR. WICHMANN:  Let me object.  This was
        violation of the Golden Rule.
              THE COURT:  Sustained.
              MR. PERSONS:  Someone he loves is urging
        him to stop smoking, and he doesn't heed that
        warning, would he listen to something from R.J.
        Reynolds?
              Absolutely not.
              Your daughter, daughters, his daughters are
        urging --
              MR. WICHMANN:  Objection, Your Honor,
        another violation of the Golden Rule.
              THE COURT:  Sustained.
              MR. PERSONS:  His daughters urged him to
        quit smoking. 3704
              MR. WICHMANN:  I'll object.  I don't think
        that was the testimony at all.
              THE COURT:  Overruled.  The jurors must
        rely on their own recollection.
              MR. PERSONS:  Dionne, "Dad, it's bad for
        you."
              Aadron, "Dad, it's bad for you.  You should
        stop smoking."
              Viola, "Dad, it affects my sinuses."
              That was the testimony.  It bothers my
        sinuses.  And so he would keep a distance from
        her, but he wouldn't stop smoking.  If that wasn't
        enough to cause him to stop smoking, surely
        nothing R.J. Reynolds said or did would have been
        enough to stop him from smoking.
              In terms of the fault, the Plaintiff has
        the burden to prove each and every percentage
        point of R.J. Reynolds's fault that caused --
              MR. WICHMANN:  Your Honor, let me object.
        This was not the law.  Percentage points, fault,
        that's way outside the jury instructions.
              THE COURT:  Just a moment, please.  Just a
        moment.
              MR. WICHMANN:  May we come sidebar, Judge?
              THE COURT:  I'm going to sustain the 3705
        definition on the burden was read to you by me.
        There is no degree of percentage, and it's the
        instruction that I gave on the greater weight of
        the evidence, which is instruction 4 in your
        packets.  "Greater weight of the evidence means
        the more persuasive and convincing force and
        effect of the entire evidence in the case."
              Okay.
              MR. PERSONS:  Thank you, Your Honor.
              THE COURT:  That's the Plaintiff's burden.
              MR. PERSONS:  Plaintiff has the burden of
        proof which -- I'm not ready to go there yet.
              Plaintiff has the burden of proof, and when
        they put these percentages, when you put a
        percentage of fault on the verdict form in order
        to assign any percentage of fault to R.J.
        Reynolds.  Plaintiff would have had to prove by
        the greater weight of the evidence that such fault
        should be imposed on R.J. Reynolds.  That's what
        that means.  That Plaintiff has to prove it.  It
        can't be assumed.  It can't be guessed.  It has to
        be proved.  That's all that means.
              We know that Mr. Mathis quit cold turkey
        for two or three days.  If you multiply 50 years
        times 365, you come up with 18,250 days.  Out of 3706
        that time, three days.  If you do the math, that's
        less than 1 percent.  Of the days he smoked, that
        he gave it up for three days.  So tell me who was
        at fault.
              I submit to you a overwhelming amount of
        fault, in fact, 100 percent of responsibility is
        that of Robert Mathis.  We know that Mr. Mathis
        had knowledge about the dangers of smoking.  Just
        set aside what he was told by his father-in-law
        and by his wife and by his children, just by the
        pack itself, it told him it was dangerous.
              We know he had control over his smoking.
        Both of the experts, Dr. Hurt and Dr. Abramson who
        said that only the smoker can control the smoking.
        The manufacturer can't control your going in and
        buying a pack of cigarettes and smoking, or
        somebody going in and asking for cigarettes and
        then lighting up.  Only the smoker can control
        that.
              Mr. Mathis has a responsibility to choose
        health over smoking.  He had that ability and
        chose not to do it.
              Okay.  I'm making progress.
              So on number 3 when it talks about
        assigning, and it says, "Please state the 3707
        percentage of fault," 0 for Reynolds and 100
        percent to Mr. Mathis.
              I'm going to talk about damages, not
        because Plaintiff has proven their case, but
        because there's jury instructions on damages and
        just as soon as I don't talk about damages, I'll
        be accused of omitting a discussion of damages.
        But the damages have to be fair and just in light
        of the evidence in the case, in light of the
        evidence.  And Plaintiff has the burden to prove
        an entitlement to each and every dollar of
        damages.
              MR. WICHMANN:  Your Honor, I object.
              THE COURT:  Just a moment, please.
              MR. WICHMANN:  Each and every dollar of
        damages?
              THE COURT:  Just a moment.
              You can leave that up there.
              MR. PERSONS:  You got to prove --
              THE COURT:  Just a moment.  I'm looking at
        it.
              Members of the jury, I think it goes
        without saying that a juror is not going to put
        something on a verdict form that they don't
        believe has been proven. 3708
              So overruled.
              MR. PERSONS:  Thank you.
              You have to prove it.  They can't just come
        in and ask you for $10 million without proof.
        That's all I'm saying.
              And you heard evidence about COPD, but the
        judge is going to instruct you that Plaintiff
        makes no claim for COPD so you can't even consider
        COPD on assessing damages.  That's not part of the
        case in terms of damages.  Plaintiff is not
        claiming damages for COPD.  And as a matter of
        law, you can't consider medical expenses, funeral
        expenses, lost wages or earnings, any pain and
        suffering by Aadron Mathis, any pain and suffering
        by Viola Story, any pain and suffering by Dionne
        Johnson.
              MR. WICHMANN:  Let me object, we're not
        claiming this, Judge.
              THE COURT:  Folks.
              Members of the jury, please disregard --
        put that back up there because I'm talking about
        it because the jurors have seen it.
              There is no claim for medical expenses.
        There is no claim for funeral expenses.  There are
        no claims for lost wages or earnings.  There are 3709
        no pain and suffering claims for Aadron Mathis,
        Viola Story, or Dionne Johnson.
              So that -- I'm going to sustain the
        objection.  The jurors are to disregard that
        exhibit.
              MR. WICHMANN:  Your Honor, may I approach
        sidebar, please?
              THE COURT:  Yes.  Now you can take it down.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
              MR. PERSONS:  For the record that's
        slide 133.
              THE COURT:  Okay.  Thank you.
              MR. PERSONS:  All right.  So the only thing
        that can be considered for purposes of
        compensatory damages is pain and suffering, loss
        of companionship of Mrs. Hazel Mathis, not for --
        I mean, Mrs. Hazel Mathis.  Not for Aadron --
              MR. WICHMANN:  Your Honor, let me object.
        It's the same thing you just admonished him on.
              THE COURT:  No.  It is a little different.
              Members of the jury, I think that you
        realize that the only claims at issue are the ones
        that Plaintiff is suing for.  A jury can't award
        damages if nobody is suing for them. 3712
              So the only thing that the Plaintiff is
        suing for are the damages associated with
        Mrs. Mathis, as a personal representative and
        individually, as stated in the jury instructions.
              Do y'all understand that?
              Yes.
              So let's move on to a different topic.
              MR. PERSONS:  All right, Your Honor.  I
        want to wrap up here.
              THE COURT:  Just for the record, the jurors
        nodded their heads affirmatively.
              MR. PERSONS:  It's undeniable that
        Mr. Mathis knew that cigarette smoking was
        dangerous.  It was bad for him.  That it could
        kill him.  And he took no steps to stop smoking in
        time to avoid getting a disease.
              But if you're inclined to award
        compensatory damages to Mrs. Mathis, I would
        suggest to you that $10 million is way, way --
              THE COURT:  I can't hear.  And my screen is
        frozen.
              Could you speak a little louder, please?
              MR. PERSONS:  Sure.
              That there's no evidence to support an
        award of even a million dollars much less 3713
        $10 million, but I would suggest to you that if
        you wanted to award something that it be in the
        range of $500,000.
              Now, let's talk about punitive damages.
              Question.  "Under the circumstances, state
        whether you find by clear and convincing evidence
        that punitive damages are warranted against R.J.
        Reynolds Tobacco Company?"
              I submit they aren't warranted.  The
        evidence demonstrates there is no need to impose
        punitive damages.  You may only impose punitive
        damages for conduct shown by clear and convincing
        evidence to have been a legal cause of Mr. Mathis'
        lung cancer and death.
              And there's been no such showing.  And the
        burden of proof on punitive damages, unlike the
        other claims in the case, which is by greater
        weight of the evidence -- punitive damages is by
        clear and convincing evidence.  That's higher than
        greater weight of the evidence, but less than
        proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
              And the jury instruction says, "Clear and
        convincing evidence differs from the greater
        weight of the evidence in that it is more
        compelling and persuasive. 3714
              "As I've already instructed you, greater
        weight of evidence means the more persuasive and
        convincing force and effect of the entire evidence
        in the case.
              "In contrast, clear and convincing evidence
        is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in
        confusion, and of such weight that it produces a
        firm belief or conviction without hesitation about
        the matter at issue."
              So if there's any hesitation whatsoever
        about whether punitive damages are warranted, then
        they are not.  The burden has not been met.
              And for punitive damages, they can only be
        awarded for harm suffered by Mr. Mathis, not for
        harm suffered by other smokers.  You may not
        punish Reynolds for harm suffered by anyone other
        than Mr. Mathis.
              Punitive damages are in addition to
        compensatory damages, which fully compensate the
        Plaintiff.  And they can only be awarded to the
        Plaintiff and not to someone else.
              You must not consider the Engle findings in
        determining whether punitive damages are
        warranted.  You can't even take into account the
        Engle findings in determining whether punitive 3715
        damages are warranted.
              And you can take into account what's called
        mitigating evidence.  And there's a jury
        instruction on that.  And in the interest of time,
        I won't go through it, but it's in the packet that
        you'll have.
              And Dr. Proctor admits that Reynolds has
        spent more than a billion dollars developing
        heat-not-burn technology to make a safer
        cigarette, because what we know is the combustion
        of tobacco is what makes cigarettes dangerous.
              Anytime you burn organic material, tobacco
        included, it releases cancer-causing chemicals.
              "Burning tobacco is what makes the lions's
        share of the harm."  That's Dr. Proctor.
              "In determining whether punitive damages
        are warranted, you may take into consideration any
        mitigating evidence.  Mitigating evidence is
        evidence which may demonstrate there's no need to
        impose punitive damages."
              And we talked about Reynolds having spent
        more than 50 years and a fortune trying to make
        cigarettes safer.  That was Dr. Proctor's
        testimony.
              "From the 1950s to the 1990s, Reynolds made 3716
        efforts to remove known carcinogens from the
        smoke, started developing heat-not-burn
        technology.  Reynolds spent $1 billion in the '80s
        trying to develop a less harmful cigarette.  Those
        products failed because consumers didn't buy it
        due to the taste."
              It was a safer product, not completely
        safe.  No cigarette is safe, but it was safer than
        a conventional cigarette, but people didn't --
        didn't like the taste of it.  So they didn't buy
        it.  So it failed.  You can't force people to buy
        things.
              "Smoking rates have declined more rapidly
        among African-American smokers."
              This is in mitigation in response to the
        contention that somehow more African-Americans
        smoke menthol and menthol cigarettes are harder to
        quit.  Well, this is the data.
              "You would agree that the data shows in any
        the 1970s and 1980s" -- Dr. Proctor -- "that
        cigarette smoking declined more steeply among
        black adolescents than white adolescents?
              "I wouldn't dispute that.  But I just don't
        know one way or the other."
              Okay.  And then Dr. Proctor said that, 3717
        "Smoking has become demoralized."  In other words
        it's stigmatized.  "It is in decline.  The
        cigarette is a horse-and-buggy technology.  It is
        outmoded and obsolete."  And he says, "Cigarette
        smoking will become extinct as smoking is on its
        way out."
              So the evidence demonstrates there's no
        need to impose punitive damages against R.J.
        Reynolds Tobacco Company.
              And if you do decide that punitive damages
        are warranted, we'll have a second trial where
        evidence will be presented and argument will be
        presented on punitive damages.
              But I submit to you they aren't warranted,
        and you should answer the question, "No."  That's
        question number 6 on the verdict form -- I'm
        sorry -- question number 7.  I'm sorry.  Question
        number 7 on the verdict form, and the answer
        should be "no" to that one.
              All right.  And I want to wrap up with just
        two things I'd like to show you, Dr. E. Cuyler
        Hammond.  This is from, I believe, 1954 after he
        had done an epidemiology study.  He was with the
        American Cancer Society during his entire career
        doing research and smoking and health.  And here 3718
        is what he said on television back then reporting
        on the research that he had done. DR. HAMMOND:  It is now, in my opinion,
        beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking
        greatly increases the probability of developing
        lung cancer.
              In my opinion people can be warned of the
        dangers and they are being warned.  What they want
        to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is there
        own business. PERSONS:  Then we have another
        broadcast.  This was about the Surgeon General's
        Report.  This is 1964, Harry Reasoner.
              Play that, please. MR. REASONER:  In this kind of a country it
        comes down to you, whether you like it or not.  No
        one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it
        is now quite clear that no one is going to tell
        him it's good for him either.  The decision is
        his.  The decision and the health that may depend 3719
        on it.
              This is Harry Reasoner.  Good night. PERSONS:  Ladies and gentlemen, it's
        been a pleasure presenting the case to you, and I
        again thank you for your kind attention.
              Your Honor.
