         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Folks, in a little while, you're going to
    retire to the deliberation room, and you're going to
    have three jobs.
         The first job is to answer the questions the
    judge gives you.  The second job is to make sure
    everyone on the jury follows the law the judge gives
    you.  And the last job is, before you answer any
    questions, make sure you explain to each other why
    you feel the way you do about the answers, your own
    personal beliefs about the answers to those
    questions.
         And next, while -- I'm going to give you some
    tools that I hope will help you do those three jobs.
    So the first thing that I need to tell you is -- 4118 kind of explain what this is all about.
         You've heard some of the judge's instructions.
    I don't know about you, I've been doing this a long
    time, but sometimes when I hear jury instructions,
    it sounds like the teacher's voice in Charlie Brown;
    all I hear is wa-wa-wa.  So it's easier if we break
    it down.
         The Engle class is comprised -- a class is just
    a group of people.  And the Engle class is comprised
    of cigarette smokers who, on or before that date,
    suffered from a disease or medical condition caused
    by an addiction to cigarette smoking.  If you fit
    that description, you're in that club, that class.
         So the first question on the verdict form,
    which you'll get and you'll have to fill out, "Was
    Jane McCabe addicted to cigarettes containing
    nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal
    cause of her lung cancer and death?"  Okay.  That's
    the question.
         What's not the question?  Sometimes when you're
    answering a question, it helps to focus on what's
    not involved in that question.  Class membership is
    that question.  It's not about choice, ability to
    quit, knowledge of dangers, brand uses.  It's about
    addiction.  So sometimes knowing what's not involved 4119 helps you focus on what's involved.
         I had a friend who used to introduce himself --
    his name was Stan Musial.  He'd say, "I'm Stan
    Musial, not that Stan Musial."
         So what is this about?  It's not about those
    things.  It is about addiction.
         So if you're back there and you're deliberating
    on that first question, trying to decide about
    whether Ms. McCabe was addicted, and somebody says,
    Well, she had the choice, she could have quit,
    remind them that that's not part of the first
    question.  First things first, was she addicted?
         Comparative fault is not part of the first
    question.  Whether she -- whether Ms. McCabe bore
    some responsibility for her smoking, that's not part
    of the first question.  Choice is not part of the
    first question.  So remember, first things first,
    was she addicted?
         And the standard by which you're making a
    decision -- you know, if you're playing a basketball
    game, you want to know before you start whether
    you've got to win by two.  In tennis, you've got to
    win by two.  That's different than a swimming race
    where you can finish a hundredth of a second ahead
    of the person that you beat.  So you've got to know 4120 what the standard is.
         So the standard by which you're going to answer
    that question, the standard of proof is the greater
    weight of the evidence.  That's more likely than
    not, whether we're more likely right than wrong.
    Okay?
         This case is not about doubt.  You can have as
    many doubts as you want on both sides.  It's not
    about being sure.  If you're deliberating and
    somebody says, I'm just not sure, remind them, for
    every question but the last question, You don't have
    to be sure, it's the greater weight of the evidence,
    just which side is more persuasive.  You could have
    as many doubts as you want, as long as you answer
    the questions -- all but the last one -- based on
    more likely than not or the greater weight of the
    evidence.
         Doubt.  You see in their documents that
    we've -- addicted.  Doubt is the tobacco company's
    product.  Doubt has no role in this courtroom,
    period.
         "Was Jane McCabe addicted to cigarettes
    containing nicotine?"
         So when you're answering that question, keep in
    mind, this is not some question about were there 4121 aliens.  This is not looking for a unicorn.  This is
    was she addicted to an addictive substance.  So when
    you're trying to determine whether she was addicted,
    you have to determine, first of all, is that
    possible; does that happen; is that likely; are we
    looking for a needle in a haystack or is this
    something that commonly occurs?
         And you have these items in evidence.  And
    these PT numbers -- you have a list of what they
    are.  We've bubbled out some quotes from there about
    nicotine being addictive.  They're in the business
    of selling nicotine, an addictive drug.  That's not
    1963.  They knew it was addictive in 1963.  1972,
    they're talking about nicotine delivery, because
    that's what they're doing.
         And you can write down these PT numbers if you
    want and look at these documents yourself.  Don't
    take my word for it.
         "Nicotine is a potent drug."  Okay?  "Our
    industry is based upon design, manufacture, and sale
    of attractive dosage forms of nicotine."  That's
    1972.
         1977, "We provide a product that is an
    essential commodity and a habitual act.  Put a
    hungry rat in a cage, put a lever in the cage, 4122 rat will push the lever."
         Rats don't have a choice.  Smoking the
    cigarette is the lever push.
         1994 -- can we play that?
         (The video clip was published to the jury in
open court as follows:)
         "Let me begin my questioning on the matter of
    whether or not nicotine is addictive.  Let me ask
    you first -- I'd like to go down the row -- whether
    each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive.
    I've heard virtually all of you touch on it.  Just
    yes or no.  Do you believe nicotine is not
    addictive?
         I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
         Mr. Johnston.
         Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do
    not meet the classic definitions of addiction.
    There is no intoxication --
         We'll take that as a no.  Again, time is short.
    If you could just -- I think each of you believe
    nicotine is not addictive.  We would just like to
    have this for the record.
         I don't believe that nicotine or our products
    are addictive.
         I believe nicotine is not addictive. 4123 I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
         I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
         And I, too, believe that nicotine is not
    addictive."
         (The video clip concluded.)
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Each one of those guys worked
    for a corporation that had documents that revealed,
    without any kind of doubt, that they knew nicotine
    was addictive.  And they went before Congress, took
    an oath to tell the truth, and -- there is no way to
    sugarcoat it, each of them lied about whether --
         Remember that first question:  Is this
    reasonable; is this space aliens; is this a unicorn
    we're looking for or is this substance addictive?
    1994, 30 years after documents saying nicotine was
    addictive, they lied.
         Addiction is a disease.  It's not about free
    choice.
         These documents are also in evidence:  1967,
    1963, 1980, 1989.
         "Cigarette smoking is more addictive than using
    heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who ever
    smoke.  We can't defend continued smoking as free
    choice if the person was addicted."
         1980, of course they've got to deny addiction. 4124 They can't defend continued smoking as free choice
    if the person was addicted.
         These PT numbers, they're in evidence.  You can
    take a look at them for yourself.
         But you heard from Dr. Michael Herkov.  And we
    can play this excerpt. testimony clip of Michael
Herkov, Ph.D., was published to the jury in open court
as follows:)
         "Q.  First of all, did you reach a conclusion
    about whether or not Dorothy Jane McCabe was
    addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?
         A.  Yes, I did.
         Q.  And what is that conclusion?
         A.  She was.  She was severely addicted.
         Q.  This jury has to make all the decisions,
    except one, based on more likely than not or the
    greater weight of the evidence.
         Do you hold that opinion more likely than not?
         A.  Yeah, it's -- it's much more likely than
    not.  Absolutely, yeah.  I think the evidence, as we
    go through the case, is pretty clear." testimony clip
concluded.)
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Dr. Michael Cummings. 4125 (The videotaped trial testimony clip of Kenneth
Michael Cummings, Ph.D., was published to the jury in
open court as follows:)
         "Q.  And have you had an opportunity to review
    certain depositions in this case of the witnesses.
         A.  I have.
         Q.  And did you review some medical records?
         A.  I did.
         Q.  And was there sufficient information for
    you to render whether or not you believed that she
    was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and
    the level of that addiction?
         A.  Yes, there was.
         Q.  And what is your opinion in regards to the
    R.J. Reynolds cigarettes that she smoked?
         A.  There is no doubt in my mind that she was
    addicted to the cigarettes she smoked, including the
    R.J. Reynolds cigarettes.  And so she was addicted
    to nicotine in the cigarettes that she smoked." testimony clip
concluded.)
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Jane McCabe -- the answer to
    that question, Jane McCabe was more likely than not
    addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.
         Addiction, remember, is defined as a chronic 4126 relapsing brain disease that's characterized by
    compulsive drug seeking and use despite harmful
    consequences.  That's not my definition.  That comes
    from the National Institutes of Drug Abuse.
         While nicotine is the key chemical compound
    that causes and sustains the powerful addicting
    effects of cigarettes, other ingredients and design
    features make them even more attractive and more
    addictive.  You heard about -- you heard testimony
    about how the pH of cigarettes was manipulated and
    adjusted to make it more inhalable so that nicotine
    could be free-based and it would be more potent.
         "The powerful addicting elements of tobacco
    products affect multiple types of nicotine receptors
    in the brain."  You heard testimony about that.  And
    you heard that adolescents' bodies are more
    sensitive to nicotine, and adolescents are more
    easily addicted.
         85 to 90 percent of smokers start before the
    age of 18.  Their brains are not fully developed at
    that point in time.
         Up to 90 percent of regular smokers are
    addicted.  You heard that from Dr. Cummings.
    Dr. Cummings has devoted his life to tobacco control
    and prevention.  When the Surgeon General has a 4127 question or wants somebody to edit his report, he
    doesn't call Dr. Barnett; he calls Dr. Cummings.
         And Dr. Cummings will tell you about
    nicotine -- or did tell you about nicotine
    dependence, equally nicotine addiction, and the
    prevalence of that phenomenon. testimony clip of Kenneth
Michael Cummings, Ph.D., was published to the jury in
open court as follows:)
         "Q.  Based upon your skill, experience,
    knowledge, and training in this field, what
    percentage of smokers who smoke at least a pack a
    day for multiple decades -- 20, 30 years -- are not
    addicted?
         A.  How many are not addicted?
         Q.  Yeah.
         A.  I would say zero.
         Q.  And in all your years working in clinics,
    working in your peer-review literature involved in
    research with other scholars in your field, have you
    ever seen or researched or read or heard about a
    smoker who smoked two to three packs a day for 50
    years and was not addicted?
         A.  No." testimony clip 4128
concluded.)
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  There are other issues in
    this case.  You heard about them.  They were trotted
    out before you about Ms. McCabe's alcohol use.
    Alcoholics are three times more likely to be
    addicted to nicotine.  Smokers are four times more
    likely to be addicted to alcohol.
         So Mrs. McCabe was a human being with all of
    the failures that human beings have that make them
    human.  The evidence is really unrefuted that she
    tried her best, but she had some conditions.  She
    had some situations going on that created an
    interplay between alcohol and nicotine.  And that
    made nicotine more potent to her and predisposed her
    to addiction.  Alcoholics are three times more
    likely to be addicted to nicotine.  And nicotine is
    addictive.
         The Surgeon General, in his 1998 report, which
    is in evidence, says that cigarettes and other forms
    of tobacco are addicting.  Nicotine is the drug in
    tobacco that causes addiction.  The pharmacologic
    and behavioral processes that determine tobacco
    addiction are similar to those that determine
    addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine.
         We've got Dr. Herkov, Dr. Cummings, C. Everett 4129 Koop.  And here is what C. Everett Koop said.  This
    is in evidence.
         (The video clip was published to the jury in
open court as follows:)
         "The Surgeon General, C. Everett Koop, has
    issued two major reports on smoking; one on the
    dangers of secondhand smoke, the other on nicotine
    addiction.  The tobacco industry disputes both
    reports as more political than scientific.
         We have been told so frequently by the
    cigarette industry that smoking is a matter of free
    choice, you start when you want and you quit when
    you want, but anybody who has ever smoked knows that
    is not true.
         What does the record, the long-time record, say
    is the most dangerous age to get hooked on tobacco?
         Indications are very clear that the people who
    are most heavily addicted to nicotine and have the
    greatest trouble quitting are those who began
    smoking at the age of 14 to 16.
         I think the studies all over the world, in
    every country and every culture, the younger you
    start, the greater the addiction and the more
    difficult it is to quit.
         Now, you said that you considered tobacco as 4130 addictive as cocaine or heroin.  Isn't that an
    overstatement?
         No, I think the evidence is very clear, if you
    understand what we're talking about.  Addiction is a
    specific physiologic problem.  And the manner in
    which you become addicted to nicotine is exactly the
    same manner in which you become addicted to cocaine
    or to heroin.  And that even after you have quit and
    you think you're clean, that there is a tremendous
    tendency to relapse.  There is no such thing as a
    safe cigarette.  There is no such thing as a quality
    death."
         (The video clip concluded.)
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Ronald Reagan's
    Surgeon General.
         Nicotine receptors in the brain, you heard
    testimony about how they're affected.  Nicotine
    smoke is inhaled.  It goes to the lung, to the
    lungs, oxygenated, pumped by the heart into the
    brain.  It takes seconds for nicotine to hit the
    brain.  It affects dopamine receptors.  It affects a
    bunch of other neurotransmitters; serotonin,
    epinephrine, acetylcholine, vasopressin, glutamate,
    and one of the endorphins, B endorphin.  It has an
    immediate effect on mood. 4131 And what is that effect?  Well, when these
    nicotine receptors are full, you feel good, you feel
    normal, you're not nervous or stressed.  But they
    don't stay full.  They get empty and you feel
    stressed, jittery, nervous, you crave cigarettes.
    You just feel out of sorts.
         Some people say that they smoke to relieve
    stress, without realizing that the stress is caused
    by not having nicotine in their nicotine receptors.
    So the idea that you're smoking to relax misses the
    mark.  You need to relax because you're stressed.
    And you're stressed because nicotine is out of your
    system.  And withdrawal -- withdrawal is from
    cigarette to cigarette, from pack to pack, from
    sleeping to waking, and there is no cigarette.
         Anybody who has ever smoked for long periods of
    time will tell you, there is no cigarette like that
    first cigarette in the morning.
         One of the things that Dr. Herkov and some
    other folks talked about was the his, the Heaviness
    of Smoking Index, used to evaluate the extent of
    addiction, how bad the addiction is.  There are two
    questions:  How soon after you wake up do you smoke
    your first cigarette and, then, How many cigarettes
    do you smoke a day? 4132 For Jane McCabe, she was highly addicted.  She
    smoked immediately upon waking up, certainly within
    five minutes.  And she smoked more than 31
    cigarettes a day.  There are 20 cigarettes in a
    pack, so she smoked 40, 50 cigarettes a day for 50
    years.  She was highly addicted.
         Now, you don't have any specific criterion that
    you're told that you have to use when you're
    deciding whether or not Ms. McCabe was addicted.
    You can use your common sense and experience.  There
    are a number of sources that have been suggested to
    you.  The most restrictive one is the DSM.  That's
    the one that the defense picked to try and describe
    addiction.  That's okay, we'll use that.
         According to the DSM criteria, which are the
    most restrictive criteria, Jane McCabe was addicted.
    Dr. Herkov told you that.  She met -- you needed to
    meet six or more symptoms to be highly addicted,
    have severe disorder.  Jane McCabe met between seven
    and 11 out of 11.  Dr. Herkov told you, for four of
    them, he was kind of on the fence.  He wasn't sure.
    But for seven of them, no doubt.  She met seven out
    of 11 criteria, based on addiction -- based on
    meeting seven out of 11 criteria in the DSM-5, the
    most restrictive definition of addiction, Jane 4133 McCabe was highly addicted.
         And that's really consistent with common sense,
    right?  She started smoking cigarettes, the
    testimony is, between the ages of eight -- I'm
    sorry -- 11 and 14.  By 14, high school, she was a
    persistent daily smoker.
         We know that nicotine made structural changes
    in her brain that made it more likely for her to
    keep smoking and harder for her to quit.  She smoked
    two to two-and-a-half packs of cigarettes a day for
    50-plus years.  She was exposed to millions of doses
    of nicotine.  Each cigarette contains about ten
    puffs.  That's -- each puff is a dose of nicotine.
    She took in millions of doses of nicotine over the
    years.
         It would be foolish to say that somebody that
    took in millions of doses of cocaine or heroin over
    the course of 50 years wouldn't be addicted.  It's
    just implausible that somebody that took in millions
    of doses of nicotine in the form of a cigarette over
    50-plus years is not addicted.
         In this photo, she was already a persistent
    daily smoker.  She smoked first thing in the
    morning.  She smoked in bed.  She kept an ashtray by
    her bed.  She got up to smoke in the middle of 4134 night.  She smoked while she was pregnant with her
    children.  She was caught smoking at the convent.
    She barely made it through church services.  You
    heard about how she was fumbled and was preparing
    her cigarettes and her matches when she went out the
    door.  And she chain smoked, according to people
    that were in a position to observe her chain
    smoking.  People that weren't there obviously didn't
    see that.  But remember, absence of evidence is not
    evidence of absence.  Somebody's not in China, it
    doesn't mean China doesn't exist.  Can't see China
    from here, but China exists.  We know it from other
    people.  We know from the people who were in the
    position to see her chain smoking that she chain
    smoked.
         This is her when she was a nurse in Orlando at
    Orange Memorial Hospital.
         There are other genetic factors that
    predisposed her to smoking and addiction.  She had
    first-degree relatives who smoked.  They want to
    talk about the fact that she had a father and
    uncles.  Well, her father smoking genetically
    predisposed her to starting and continuing and being
    addicted to nicotine.
         Remember, she needed a nicotine patch to quit, 4135 and the nicotine patch wasn't available until 1992.
         Romayne McCabe.  She's kind of almost a double
    for Jane McCabe.  This is the lady that was with her
    when she was a young smoker.  She went to school
    with her.  She's a year older than Ms. McCabe.  And
    she'll tell you that she smoked and she considered
    herself addicted, and she considered her good friend
    to be addicted, too. testimony clip of Romayne
McCabe was published to the jury in open court as
follows:)
         "Q.  Did you personally feel like you were
    addicted?
         A.  Yes.
         Q.  Why did you feel like you were addicted?
         A.  Because I wanted a cigarette first thing in
    the morning and craved for cigarettes during the
    day.
         Q.  All right.  And did that ever go away?
         A.  No.
         Q.  Up until the time you quit, which we're
    going to discuss later on, did you feel you yourself
    were addicted?
         A.  Yes.
         Q.  Now, from your vantage point of lifelong 4136 friends with Jane, your smoking history together,
    your being together, your seeing how she was smoking
    and how much she was smoking, did you consider Jane
    addicted to cigarettes?
         MR. CARTER:  Objection, Your Honor.  Calls for
    speculation, lay opinion.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         THE WITNESS:  Yes." testimony clip
concluded.)
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  So one of the instructions
    that was towards the end -- I don't know if you
    heard it, but in evaluating a witness's testimony,
    you get to look at things like their intelligence,
    their experience, their frankness or lack of
    frankness, and the reasonableness of their testimony
    in light of all the other evidence in the case.  And
    for expert witnesses, you do the same thing that you
    do for lay witnesses.
         And you also are told in the instruction -- and
    by the way, you get to take these instructions, the
    written ones, back to the jury room with you.  So
    you can check these out while you're deliberating,
    if you have any instructions [sic].
         But for expert witnesses, you know, there's a 4137 saying, you don't check your common sense at the
    door when you go back into the jury room, and you
    don't check your common sense.  You get to take that
    back with you.  And I'll tell you, common sense
    ain't that common, but it's the most important thing
    that you're going to have -- the most important lens
    that you'll have in evaluating the evidence.
         And with respect to expert witnesses, the Judge
    has told you, and you'll see in the written
    instructions, that you get to evaluate the opinions
    of experts in light of all the things that you use
    to evaluate lay witnesses, and you get to compare
    their testimony to the rest of the evidence in the
    case and whether it's consistent with your own
    common sense and experience.  And based on those
    things you can accept it, reject it, or give it the
    weight that you think it deserves.
         So the rest of the evidence in the case,
    compared to Dr. Barnett's testimony.  Every single
    witness that testified in the case -- Dr. Herkov,
    Dr. Cummings, Romayne McCabe, Jim McCabe,
    Melinda Norman, Rosemary Borter, Polly Edwards,
    Susan Beddingfield -- they all told you that they
    thought Mrs. McCabe was addicted based on their
    personal observations -- I'm sorry.  Dr. Cummings 4138 and Dr. Herkov didn't have personal observations.
    But the people that did, the people that were there
    on the ground told you that their mother or their
    friend was addicted to cigarettes containing
    nicotine.
         The doctor who was paid almost a million
    dollars, hasn't written anything on addiction,
    hasn't given lectures on smoking and addiction, has
    treated just one patient who came to her
    deliberately for smoking problems, she says that
    Mrs. McCabe wasn't addicted.  She found zero out of
    11 factors in the DSM applied.  She said during a
    period of time, maybe one applied.
         You get to compare that testimony and determine
    whether that testimony is reasonable.  Does that
    make sense to you?  Does that make sense to you,
    that a woman that hasn't written anything, isn't
    noted for her expertise in tobacco, is approached,
    prepared for two years before she testifies, and she
    comes in and says -- first of all, she picks the
    most restrictive criteria for addiction and then she
    tells you she meets zero.  Really?  Zero?  Smoked
    for 50 years.
         Mike Cummings is the foremost authority,
    arguably, on tobacco control in the world.  And he 4139 says he's never seen a smoker who wasn't addicted
    who smoked as long and as hard as Mrs. McCabe was.
    So consider that when you're evaluating the
    reasonableness of Dr. Barnett's testimony.
         Interest in the outcome of the litigation,
    interest in the outcome of the case, that doesn't
    just apply to the people who are plaintiffs.  That
    applies to people who testify for the defense.  Does
    she have an interest?  Doggone right she's got an
    interest; she wants to keep receiving cases like
    this.
         MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.  Attacking
    the witness.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  She wants to keep receiving
    the compensation that she's receiving.  And she's
    received a lot of it.  Fifty percent of her income
    at this point is derived not from treating patients,
    but from testifying and doing work in connection
    with tobacco cases.  So consider that when you're
    considering the instruction about how to judge
    credibility.
         So we know that addiction was a -- I'm sorry --
    that she was addicted.  So the next question -- next
    part of that question is, was addiction more likely 4140 than not a cause of her death?  Did it cause her
    continued smoking, lung cancer, and death?  And the
    evidence is much more likely than not that it did.
         She more likely than not had lung cancer.  You
    heard from Dr. Villa and Dr. Schiff that she had
    lung cancer.  There's really no dispute about that.
    The records say it.  There was some
    cross-examination that seemed to suggest that you
    ought to doubt that.  But there is really no
    evidence.  There is a difference between evidence
    and argument.  Your decision has to be based on
    evidence.
         So you heard from Dr. Schiff.  Now, out of all
    the people that testified who are health care
    providers, he's the only guy that met Mrs. McCabe.
    He was her treating physician during the period of
    time when she had the -- when he had the unfortunate
    occasion to tell her she had cancer and she was
    going to die.  This was her doctor. testimony clip of Ron D.
Schiff, M.D., Ph.D., was published to the jury in open
court as follows:)
         "A.  I do have an opinion.
         Q.  What is that, sir?
         A.  The opinion is that, well beyond a 4141 reasonable medical probability or certainty, that
    lung cancer was -- that cigarettes were the cause of
    her lung cancer." testimony clip
    concluded.)
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  So we know she had cancer.
    We know that cigarettes caused her lung cancer.  You
    have not heard any contrary testimony from anybody
    in this case.
         She presented to the hospital in August of
    1995.  And Dr. Schiff told you they did what they
    do.  Somebody comes in.  They've got a productive
    cough.  He took down the history.  Basically, what's
    going on, Ms. McCabe?  What brings you here?  She
    had a cough.  She was coughing up blood before she
    came.  It had stopped at the time of her
    presentation.  So what do they do?  They looked at
    her.  She had a large pleural effusion, in a patient
    with greater than a hundred pack-years of smoking.
         So these are doctors.  And even though this is
    1995, and a year earlier cigarette heads had denied
    addiction and denied the causal link between -- they
    were still denying that cigarettes cause cancer in
    1995.  Okay?  But the doctors knew by 1995, and they
    didn't have any interest.  So they looked at this. 4142 You know, when you hear hoof beats, think horses,
    not zebras.  Somebody smokes cigarettes for 50 years
    and she's got something, a foreign object in her
    lungs, got to -- first thing we got to worry about
    is whether or not this is a malignancy, whether or
    not this is cancer.  So that's what they do.
         And you heard that she went through a
    bronchoscopy, because they go from least invasive to
    most invasive.  The bronchoscopy wasn't
    determinative.  She ended up having to have this
    operation, a thoracotomy.  They go in, spread your
    ribs, take out a piece of your lung.  They did that
    with her.  It's called a biopsy.  There was a frozen
    section that's done intraoperatively, and it
    revealed a large cell carcinoma.  That's the cell
    type.
         They sent that to pathology, and it came back
    consistent with a diagnosis of poorly differentiated
    adenocarcinoma.  That's a smoking cancer.  And
    that's what she had.  And that's what caused it.
         She went on to develop metastasis.  Now,
    Dr. Schiff reminded us -- and as soon as he did, the
    next witness, one of the daughters, broke his rule.
    Cancer gets its name from where it starts.  So she
    didn't have brain cancer.  She had lung cancer that 4143 metastasized or spread to her brain.  So don't be
    confused by that when you get instructed about
    whether or not she had lung cancer.  If somebody
    says, No, she had brain cancer and she had bone
    cancer, remind them that cancer gets its name from
    where it starts.  And even though it spread to her
    bone, it's still lung cancer.  It's metastatic lung
    cancer in the bone.  If somebody says, No, she had
    brain cancer, remind them it's metastatic cancer
    from the lung that spread to the brain.  Okay?  And
    that's what Dr. Schiff said.  There is no contrary
    evidence.  That's not disputed by anyone.  Cancer
    that starts in the lung and spreads somewhere else
    retains its name, even though laymen, including
    myself, sometimes get confused by that.
         So it spread to the brain.  She decided that
    she was going to forego invasive or drastic
    treatment because, basically, she had a death
    sentence.  She tried some experimental treatment in
    Mexico.  And she's within her right to do that.
    Desperate people do desperate things.  And she was a
    little bit desperate.  She didn't want to die.  But
    she knew that chemo and radiation was going to be
    brutal.  She was a nurse.  She was familiar with it.
    And she chose not to undergo it.  And everybody in 4144 this case, I think, agrees that we've got to respect
    that choice.
         But she ended up dying 11 months after her
    first diagnosis.  And the death certificate that's
    in evidence tells you she had adenocarcinoma of the
    lung and metastatic cancer.  That's just what the
    witnesses told you.  That's just what I went over.
         So we know that she died of lung cancer, and we
    know that the lung cancer was caused by cigarette
    smoking.
         So did addiction to cigarettes containing
    nicotine cause or contribute substantially to
    Jane McCabe's lung cancer and death?  Let's hear
    from Dr. Cummings on generally how you make that
    call. testimony clip of Kenneth
Michael Cummings, Ph.D., was published to the jury in
open court as follows:)
         "Q.  And, Doctor, I want you to assume that
    there's a medical doctor who will give medical
    testimony that smoking caused lung cancer.  Okay?
         A.  Okay.
         Q.  And I just want you to explain to the jury,
    in general -- just in general, if you could explain
    how addiction is a cause of lung cancer and death in 4145 individuals.
         A.  Sure.  Nicotine addiction is what causes
    somebody to have the repeated exposures to the many
    harmful chemicals in cigarette smoke.  Every puff on
    a cigarette does DNA damage to the cells.  And the
    repeated accumulated damage to the cells is what
    eventually results in a normal cell converting to a
    cancerous cell, which ultimately leads to the
    development of cancer." testimony clip
concluded.)
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  So that's the chain of
    events.  That's how it happens.  So let's hear from
    Dr. Herkov. testimony clip of Michael
Herkov, Ph.D., was published to the jury in open court
as follows:)
         "Q.  Do you believe that her addiction to
    cigarettes containing nicotine was a substantial
    contributing cause of her heavy smoking over that
    50- to 60-year period.
         A.  I would say it was -- it was her addiction
    to nicotine that made her smoke.  She's not -- yes,
    absolutely, it's the addiction to the nicotine that
    has her smoking. 4146 Q.  And you believe that more likely than not?
         A.  Absolutely.
         Q.  And beyond that, how certain are you?
         A.  I mean, that was clear to me that it was
    her addiction to the nicotine.  That's why she
    smoked.
         Q.  I want to phrase it another way.  Are you
    saying that, but for the addiction to cigarettes
    containing nicotine, she wouldn't have smoked as
    long and as hard as she did?
         A.  Yeah.  If all this -- if it's not for the
    brain reward, if it's not for the withdrawal, if
    it's not for all the changes in the brain we've
    talked about that is due to the addiction to
    nicotine, then she would have little reason to
    smoke.
         Q.  And so, therefore, she wouldn't have?
         A.  I don't think she would have.
         Q.  And do you hold that opinion more likely
    than not?
         A.  Yes." testimony clip
concluded.)
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  And Dr. Villa also puts it
    together for us. 4147 (The videotaped trial testimony clip of Luis
Villa, M.D., was published to the jury in open court as
follows:)
         "A.  There is absolutely no doubt that this is
    a primary lung carcinoma, highly likely that it is
    associated with this history of smoking.
         Q.  How confident are you this primary lung
    cancer was caused from smoking in this case with
    this women's hundred pack-year history of smoking?
         A.  Way beyond any doubt.  This is -- it's
    classical.
         If this lady, Ms. McCabe, was addicted and that
    was the cause of her necessity to continue to smoke,
    then addiction is related to the cancer and to her
    death.
         Q.  When you say 'related,' do you mean more
    likely than not it was a substantial contributing
    cause of her lung cancer and death?
    A.   Definitely more likely than not, yes." testimony clip
concluded.)
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  So there you have it.  She
    was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.
    That's why she smoked.  And her smoking caused her
    lung cancer and death. 4148 We had to give you that testimony in pieces,
    because addiction experts are different than medical
    experts.  So the addiction experts have to testify
    about addiction, and the medical experts, the
    pathologists and the treating doctor, had to testify
    about the medical part.  But you can put it
    together.  It's not that complicated.
         You're going to get an instruction on
    causation, and this is some of that language.  I'm
    going to take a few minutes to go through it,
    because it's a little bit confusing.  It's put
    together by a bunch of lawyers who are trying to be
    precise.  And it is precise, but you've got to kind
    of take it a little bit at a time.
         So an addiction to cigarettes containing
    nicotine is a legal cause.  I want to point out why
    that "a" is highlighted.  As my seventh-grade
    teacher told me, that's the indefinite article, not
    the definite article.  Okay?  It doesn't exclude
    other causes.  It's a cause, not the only cause.
         "A legal cause of lung cancer and death, if it
    directly and in natural and continuous sequence
    produced or contributed substantially to producing
    such lung cancer and death so that it can be
    reasonably be said that, but for the addiction to 4149 cigarettes containing nicotine, the lung cancer and
    death would not have occurred."  So it doesn't have
    to be the only cause.
         Did it basically set in motion a chain of
    events such that -- like dominoes.  You knock down
    the first domino, it causes the loss, the knocking
    down of the last domino.  There can be as many
    dominoes in between as you want, but pressing that
    first domino caused all the dominoes to fall,
    including the last one.  And it's the last one that
    matters.  Okay.
         And when I say negligence need not be the only
    cause, there is actually an instruction that talks
    about -- just in this case nobody points out the
    definite article and the indefinite article, the
    instruction tells you.  And these causation
    instructions, you're going to see them for every
    claim.  They're going to recur in the jury
    instructions, and they're going to get repetitive.
    It's the same interpretation each time.
         "In order to be regarded as a legal cause,
    addiction to cigarettes need not be the only cause."
         You're going to hear that about negligence,
    you're going to hear that about strict liability,
    you're going to hear that about concealment -- 4150 fraudulent concealment, conspiracy.  Every count
    that's in there -- there is four counts -- causation
    applies, and it's the same instruction.
         What it is, it's got to be direct and
    continuous and need not be the only cause.  So it
    need not be the only cause.  It can operate in
    combination with the act of another, some natural
    cause, or some other cause, if the negligence
    contributes substantially to producing the death.
         So some other cause.  Well, if somebody says,
    well, she wouldn't have got addicted if she didn't
    drink alcohol, well, that's some other cause that
    preexists.  There is something called the eggshell
    plaintiff.  If you hit somebody in the head and they
    got an eggshell --
         MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  And their head and skull --
         MR. BELASIC:  Not -- not a jury instruction.
    This was argued.
         THE COURT:  Let's move on, please.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  You take the plaintiff as you
    find them.  Okay?  So if she's got a predisposing
    condition that made her more likely to be addicted,
    they're responsible for --
         MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.  This was 4151 argued yesterday.
         THE COURT:  Let's move on, please.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  So if it operates in
    combination with the act of another, some natural
    cause or some other cause -- that's what the
    instruction is, some other cause.  As long as those
    dominoes go together.
         So in plain English, more likely than not, did
    she get lung cancer and die, in large part, because
    of her addiction to smoking cigarettes?  That's what
    that "but for" is, substantial contributing cause.
    It's a cause, not the cause.
         What does it mean to substantially contribute?
         I talked about the dominoes.  Think about a
    peanut butter and jelly sandwich.  Without jelly, it
    ain't a peanut butter and jelly sandwich.  It's only
    one out of three ingredients, right, but it
    substantially contributes to a peanut butter and
    jelly sandwich, because, but for jelly, it's not a
    peanut butter and jelly sandwich.
         If you go to the -- to someplace, a sandwich
    shop, and you order peanut butter and jelly, and
    they come back and there's no jelly on it, you're
    going to say something because it's not what you
    ordered. 4152 So addiction needs to substantially contribute
    to what happened to this lady.  And I think we know
    what "substantially contributes" means.  Somebody
    says it wasn't the only cause, remind them it
    doesn't have to be the only cause as long as it
    substantially contributes.
         This is what it looks like.  Directly produces
    or contributes substantially to lung cancer and
    death.  Addiction causes the smoking, causes the
    lung cancer, causes the death.  Think of them as
    dominoes falling down.
         There can be other causes.  Somebody says, she
    didn't just smoke because of addiction, she smoked
    when she was stressed.  She didn't just smoke
    because she was addicted, you heard that she liked
    it.
         Well, all those things can happen at the same
    time as long as addiction was a substantial
    contributing cause.  Addiction need not be the only
    cause.
         She smoked when she was going through her
    divorce.  You heard that testimony.  So what?  As
    long as addiction was a substantial contributing
    cause, we meet the test.
         So the answer to the first question on class 4153 membership is yes.  Really, the standard is greater
    weight of the evidence.  If you look at the
    evidence, there's much more than the greater weight
    of the evidence in this case.  But if somebody says,
    I have my doubts or I'm just not sure, remind them,
    that's not what this is about.  More likely than
    not, Jane McCabe was addicted to cigarettes causing
    nicotine, and that caused her lung cancer and death.
         So once that happens, I talked about -- I think
    I talked about in jury instruct -- or jury
    selection.  If I didn't, let me talk about it now.
         Think of it as that first question as the key
    to a room.  Once you answer that first question yes,
    you get the key to a room and it's the Engle room
    and you walk into that room and there are the Engle
    findings.  And those Engle findings came from a case
    that took place in 1999 and 2000, was tried over the
    course of a year, and the jury, believe it or not,
    just like you, heard way more evidence.  We've only
    given you a fraction of the case -- of the evidence
    that was in the Engle case because we don't have to
    prove everything once we prove addiction.  And we've
    done that based on the evidence.
         And so you get to go into the Engle room and
    you get the benefits of what that jury found after 4154 hearing a year's worth of testimony and looking at
    many times more exhibits than we've given you.
         No. 1, smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer.
    Specifically, adenocarcinoma, the type of cancer
    that's involved in this case.
         No. 2, the nicotine in cigarettes is addictive,
    the thing they denied for 50 years.
         No. 3, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company placed
    cigarettes on the market that were defective and
    unreasonably dangerous.  Every cigarette they placed
    on the market when used as intended caused disease
    and death.
         4, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company concealed or
    omitted material information not otherwise known or
    available knowing that the material was false and
    misleading or failed to disclose a material fact
    concerning the health effects and/or addictive
    nature of cigarette smoking.
         No. 5, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company agreed
    with other entities to conceal or omit information
    regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their
    addictive nature with the intention that smokers and
    the public would rely on this information to their
    detriment.
         No. 6, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company was 4155 negligent.
         No. 5, they did those things.  They concealed
    information.  They conspired to conceal with other
    entities with the intention.  They wanted other
    people to believe what they were saying and
    what they -- and not have the information they were
    concealing.
         You're going to hear some suggestion that
    didn't work with Jane McCabe.  Their specific
    intention was that it work with Jane McCabe and
    everybody like her.
         So when you hear that argument and you evaluate
    that evidence, remind yourself that that was their
    intention and they spent a lot of money and devoted
    a lot of time and resources to making it happen.
         Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by
    R.J. Reynolds -- see, we have to prove that they're
    their cigarettes.  That's important because they're
    not responsible for cigarettes they didn't make.  So
    we have to prove that cigarettes manufactured by
    R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company were the cause.
         We know that cigarettes.  Were they their
    cigarettes.  And the evidence in this case, this is
    what she smoked.
         Now, you didn't hear Lucky Strike in the jury 4156 instructions, but there has been a stipulation that
    they're responsible for Lucky Strike, and
    Dr. Cummings told you she smoked Lucky Strike.  They
    were manufactured by a predecessor to RJR.  There's
    no dispute that they're responsible for
    Lucky Strike.
         These are the brands she smoked, all but Merit
    were R.J. Reynolds.  85 percent of the cigarettes
    that she smoked over the course of 50 years were
    manufactured by this defendant or people they now
    own.
         And Dr. Villa told you, there's no question
    that you can't separate out one cigarette from
    another.  It's a substantial contributing cause of
    her lung cancer and death.  So the cigarettes
    manufactured by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company were a
    legal cause of Jane McCabe's lung cancer and death.
         So we get to the third question, and this is a
    hard question.  This is where you have to compare
    the fault of Jane McCabe to R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
    Company.  And you heard the judge instruct you that
    when you do that, it's only with respect to the
    nonintentional torts.  That with respect to the
    intentional torts, there's not going to be any
    reduction, okay? 4157 So with respect to the two claims, that's
    negligence and strict liability, R.J. Reynolds
    Tobacco Company's fault and Jane McCabe's fault.
         Remember, when Jane McCabe started smoking, she
    was between 11 and 14 years old.  She couldn't drive
    a car, she couldn't rent a house, she couldn't sign
    a contract.  She couldn't do that until she was 18.
         There wasn't a caution on cigarettes until
    1967, so she was smoking for more than 20 years
    before a caution went on a pack of cigarettes.
         And well after that, the cigarette industry,
    through their spokesmen, through their -- the
    Tobacco Industry Research Committee, and other
    entities continued to deny that smoking caused
    cancer.
         So let's take a look at her conduct.  Let's
    think about where she was in various points in time.
         She bears more responsibility later in time
    than earlier in time.  There's no question about
    that, if you're going to be fair and reasonable.
         So you get to decide.  My suggestion to you, if
    you think this is right, go with it.  If you think
    that it's wrong, you know, I can't -- you've got --
    there are a bunch of you.  Each of you have been
    here observing things that we all missed, okay? 4158 So I defer to your collective wisdom and your
    recollection of the evidence in this case.  This is
    just a suggestion, but it's a starting point for
    discussion anyway.  90 percent and 10 percent.
         So the fourth question, please state whether
    R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's concealment or
    omission of material information about the health
    effects or addictive nature of smoking was a legal
    cause of lung cancer and death.  And remember when
    you're answering this question, you've already got a
    finding that they did it, okay?
         So if somebody says, I don't remember
    concealment, remind them, it's already been
    determined.  The other Engle jury and the original
    Engle case made that determination, and you've got
    to accept that.  You took an oath to follow the law
    and this is the law of this case.  Once you find
    addiction, that finding is as if you reached it
    yourself.
         So we know they did it.  Did it have an effect?
         And that's the same thing with No. 5.  There
    was an agreement to conceal, what we call a
    conspiracy.  There's a Engle finding that they did
    that.  We know that they did that.  The other Engle
    jury heard more evidence and reached that finding. 4159 You have to accept it as if it was your own
    decision.
         So did it cause harm?  Did she rely on it?  Did
    it work, basically?
         This is the stuff that they concealed.  This is
    the kind of stuff I think you'd like to know if
    you're putting cigarettes in your mouth and you're
    smoking around your children.  Would you like to
    know about addiction?  Would you like to know that
    it's a drug before you put it in your body, okay?
         We know that they knew all this stuff, and this
    is what they hid.  This is stuff you'd kind of like
    to know.  This is stuff that if you're taking a
    drug, you know, there's -- there's more information
    on the side of a bottle of aspirin than they ever
    put about these effects.  You know, you'd watch
    commercials for drugs where they're marketing drugs,
    half of the commercial is about the side effects
    that they tell you about the drugs.
         They didn't do any of that.  They didn't reveal
    any of that to Jane McCabe, okay?
         And they knew that most of those who smoked for
    any significant time would like to stop.  Many, but
    not most, of those who would like to stop smoking
    are able to do so.  They knew.  They knew.  That's 4160 1982.  They knew back then that they were selling an
    addictive product.
         They knew about pH.  They manipulated pH.  They
    designed, engineered, and manipulated cigarettes to
    promote and sustain addiction.  Think about that.
    Think about that.
         They designed cigarettes to be addictive.  This
    is not an accident.  You know, this is not selling
    some product that you think is good for people and
    finding out that it's bad for people and taking it
    off the market.  This is not cyclamates.  This is
    not any of the things that have been recalled, okay?
         These are people deliberately, you know,
    engineering a product to be addictive.  Why?
         I'll tell you why.  Because you're going to die
    if you smoke it.  You got to keep you smoking it.
    And then we've got to go get young people,
    replacement smokers to replace our loyal customers
    because our loyal customers are going to die from
    what, from the thing we're giving them.
         They knew, and they said in their internal
    documents.  You know, some of this stuff, you got to
    read a couple times because it's a little bit hard
    to believe.  Did that really say that?
         Without the chemical compound, the cigarette 4161 market would collapse.  PM.  That's a
    co-conspirator.
         Philip Morris is not the defendant in this
    case.  If somebody says Philip Morris is not the
    defendant in this case, remind them they're one of
    the conspirators.  It's as if R.J. Reynolds did it
    themselves, because they agreed to conceal together.
    They're partners in crime, so to speak, okay?
         Without the chemical compound, the cigarette
    market would collapse.  The chemical compound is the
    designed, engineered and manipulated cigarette.  And
    we'd all lose our jobs in consulting fees.
         You heard the about taking tobacco -- I'm
    sorry, nicotine out of cigarettes.  1972, if we move
    toward reduction or elimination of nicotine from our
    products, then we shall eventually liquidate our
    business.
         They were worried about going financially
    abrupt, and in the process, they went morally
    bankrupt.  They marketed cigarettes to kids.  They
    lied, denied, and conspired and concealed what was
    going on.
         They had a plan.  Hook them young, set the hook
    deep.  Hence the addictive properties of their
    product. 4162 Deny the truth.  Giving a psychological crutch
    to addicts.
         You know, there is a saying among addicted
    people or recovering people that denial ain't just a
    river in Egypt.  Denial is part of the addiction.
    Disease, the disease of addiction.
         People want to hear anything that -- that will
    support that they're doing.  People -- you don't die
    in your own dreams.  You don't want to think that
    your own conduct is wrong, okay?
         People look for anything to support what
    they're doing.  And so this psychological crutch,
    they're much more receptive to the information that
    says what they're doing is okay than the information
    that says they're not.
         Think about it yourself.  Which do you want to
    hear more, a compliment or criticism?  Which is
    easier to listen to, "You look great today" or "You
    got spinach in between your teeth"?  I mean, answer
    that question honestly.  It's -- the answer's
    obvious.  Okay?
         "We cannot ever be comfortable selling a
    project -- product which most of our customers would
    stop using if they could.  That is to say, if the
    exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we 4163 would be out of business over night.  If people
    could ever stop smoking cigarettes, we'd be out of a
    job, we'd be out of business."
         I got a problem with my clicker here.  There we
    go.
         And as I said, they marketed to youth.
         Now, you know, I don't know if you've ever had
    the experience of being up late at night and
    watching those commercials for "feed the hungry
    children" where they have, you know, really
    emaciated kids and just horrible conditions, flies
    and filth.  It's hard to look at that.  I confess, I
    change the channel.
         This is a case where you can't change the
    channel.  You got to look at this.  You got to look
    at this.
         What they did here, you know, a lot -- lot of
    intellectuals have a debate about whether there's
    really such a thing as evil, whether evil exists in
    the world.
         MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.
    Inflammatory.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  This is bad.  This is
    reprehensible.  You get to decide the
    reprehensibility. 4164 This is reprehensible conduct.  Marketing to
    kids, a product that you know is going to kill kids,
    if that doesn't justify punitive damages, then we
    should rip up the statute book that has punitive
    damages in it, because it doesn't mean a thing.
         "Our company is to survive and prosper, we must
    get our share of the youth market."
         And make no mistake, they ain't talking about
    kids 21 to 24.  14 to 24 is the age group.
         "This will require new brands tailored to the
    youth market.  The fragile developing self-image of
    the young person needs all of the support and
    enhancement you can get."
         Are you kidding me?
         "The fragile developing self-image of the young
    person needs all the support and enhancement it
    get."  They're going to groom -- they did groom kids
    to smoke.
         They wrote to high school students.  And they
    lied about it the whole time.  The whole time, they
    said they weren't doing it.  The whole time.
         The 14 to 20 market, in hopes of uncovering the
    secret of this instant popularity.  That's a 1980
    document.  "To increase our young franchise to
    ensure increased and longer-term growth for Camel 4165 filter, the brand must increase its share
    penetration among the 14 to 24 age group."
         Now, that's 1975.
         1984, younger adult smokers are the only source
    of replacement smokers.  I don't know about you, but
    1984 wasn't that long ago to me.  1984, we had put a
    man on the moon and given -- space travel became
    boring.  Moon -- moon shots became boring by 1984.
    Okay?
         And they're talking about recruiting kids 14 to
    24.  They got movie placements.
         And then we got the filtration business.  Okay?
         They put filters on cigarettes that didn't
    filter a doggone thing, and they lied about it, and
    they were patting themselves on the back about it.
         They said in 1961, "Present technology does not
    permit selective filtration of particulate smoke."
         1976, the smoker of a filter cigarette was
    getting as much or more nicotine and tar as he would
    have gotten from a regular cigarette.
         PT3678, 1966, "The illusion of filtration is as
    important as the fact of filtration.  Give the
    smoker a psychological crutch.  Intercept him or her
    on the way to quitting."
         Goes back to 1954, the Frank Statement.  Okay? 4166 They got together and they made promises.  They
    broke them all.  They told people -- and, you know,
    you heard questions about, did your mother ever
    mention the Frank Statement?
         No.  She didn't mention the title of her
    history book, but I'm pretty sure she knew who
    George Washington was.  Okay?
         The Frank Statement was meant to get the buzz
    out.  We call it a buzz today.  Today, you get a
    buzz out with Twitter and other -- other stuff, you
    know.  Social media.
         Back then, you did it with newspapers that had
    circulations that were large enough.  They put an ad
    in over 400 newspapers.  Every city that had a
    population or a circulation over 25,000.  And that
    was a big deal.  And it was reprinted and talked
    about and they made promises.
         Our products are not injurious to health.  They
    lied.
         They said, if we ever find out something that's
    addictive or -- I'm sorry -- anything that's
    injurious in our product, we'll take it out.  They
    said the public health was paramount.  It wasn't.
    They lied.  People relied on that, okay?
         It continued.  And you can look at all of these 4167 exhibits.  I won't sit here and read all of them to
    you.  But I want to talk about this letter.
         If we go back, in the right-hand corner,
    there's a letter to a fifth grade class in 1990.
         "A number of your fifth grade students have
    written R.J. Reynolds commenting that they do not
    feel our company should allow the use of our brand
    names on children's toys and candy cigarettes."
         And then they go on to deny a link between
    smoking and cancer.  And they say that they still
    need -- that there are many unanswered controversies
    surrounding smoking and the fundamental causes of
    diseases often statistically associated with
    smoking.  We believe those questions -- and I'm
    paraphrasing -- can only be determined through much
    more scientific research.  "Our company intends,
    therefore, to continue to support such research in a
    continuing answer -- in a continuing search for
    answers.  We appreciate your passing this
    information along to your students."
         I mean, if it weren't so serious, it would be
    comical.  Their research were their tobacco fronts
    with their paid-for researchers.  And they weren't
    interested in the truth.  They were interested in
    continuing the controversy.  And they wrote to fifth 4168 graders.  They wrote to fifth graders.  That's
    reprehensible.
         They continued to say they didn't know.
         (The video clip was published to the jury in
open court as follows:)
         "Take the controversy about cigarettes.  In the
    91st Congress, a House committee heard testimony
    from leading experts on smoking and health.  The
    record shows that many of the country's most
    respected doctors openly challenged anticigarette
    claims.
         I have to disagree with you in that we don't
    know what causes the elements that have been
    attributed to cigarette smoking.
         Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer; yes or
    no?
         It is not know known whether cigarettes cause
    cancer.  It has not been causal established.
         Cigarette smoking, no causal relationship
    between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
         Despite all of the research to date, there has
    been no causal link established.
         The case is still open.  The jury has not come
    in.
         It may not be harmful?  You're not convinced? 4169 It may be or it may not be.  We don't know.
         Do cigarettes cause cancer?
         I don't know if they do or not.
         I'm not in a position to give you a does or
    does not answer.
         Okay.  They agree that smoking causes lung
    cancer.  Do you agree?
         It may.
         Do you know whether it does?
         I do not.
         We don't know what causes cancer in general
    right now, so I think that we may find out it causes
    cancer and we may find out some relationship which
    is yet to be proven."
         (The video clip concluded.)
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  So while this is going on, we
    have the public health community, the
    Surgeon General's office, and they're doing their
    jobs.  They're trying to promote public health.  You
    heard in opening and you heard from Dr. Cummings
    about President Kennedy commissioning the first
    "Surgeon General's Report on Smoking and Health."
         And so what happened?
         That process goes on on the one hand.  The
    public health community is trying to look into these 4170 questions seriously.  The tobacco folks are way
    ahead of them.  They're way ahead of them in terms
    of research and knowing their product.
         So while it's going on, the Surgeon General is
    trying to save lives.  And the cigarette folks are
    bashing the Surgeon General.  "In 1972, we believe
    that the number one problem is the extent to which
    these officials" -- talking about the
    Surgeon General -- "knowingly mislead the American
    public."
         So we got people that are actually misleading
    the American public and what are they doing?  You
    know, they say the best defense is a good offense,
    right?  They hurl accusations at the Surgeon General
    saying the Surgeon General is misleading the
    American public.  Okay?
         1988, I mean, this is not one isolated event.
    You heard in opening some of the documents are taken
    out of context, all that stuff.  You got the
    context.
         1988, "Claims that cigarettes are addictive are
    irresponsible and scare tactics."  Really?  1988.
    Ronald Reagan -- the end of Ronald Reagan's second
    term.  Try to remember where you were at that time.
    Okay? 4171 1988.  They're still doing it 1972, 1988.
         Bill Dwyer in 1979.  You saw that cut in
    evidence where he comments about the
    Surgeon General's report and he talks -- he said
    something about "God help us if the Secretary of HHS
    ever decides to give up alcohol, because we'll all
    have to be teetotalers."  Okay?
         Joseph Cullman in 1971, he talks about
    lower-birth-weight babies, and that's okay, because
    they're just as healthy as the babies of nonsmokers.
    I mean, it's just -- it's just -- again, it's hard
    to believe.  It's so far out there that with the
    passage of time, it's hard to believe.  But these
    things really happened.  And, of course, the Waxman
    hearings which you've seen several times.
         So they're on TV, they're taking up oxygen, and
    they're putting out this message.  Make no mistake
    about it, it resonated with people who wanted to
    hear that kind of message, because it allowed them
    to continue smoking.  It gave them the psychological
    crutch that they needed.
         So more likely than not, Jane McCabe relied to
    her detriment on the concealment or omission by RJR
    of material information not otherwise known or
    available, or their failure to disclose material 4172 facts concerning the health or addictive nature of
    smoking.
         More likely than not, R.J. Reynolds' agreement
    to conceal information about the health effects or
    addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both was a
    legal cause of her death.
         Okay.  We know that.  We know that they spent a
    ton of money on advertising.  We know that tens of
    millions of people died while they were perpetrating
    their campaign of deceit.  Okay.
         Think about what they would have done, think
    about what would have happened if they did what they
    said they were going do on the Frank Statement.  If
    they put public health paramount.  There would have
    been no room left for controversy, there would have
    been no debate, there would have been no doubt, and
    nobody would have been able to, with any kind of
    intellectual honesty, engage in denial.
         There would have been a clear and present
    danger.  There would have been the highest threat
    level.  There would have been maximum deterrence,
    maximum motivations.  Okay.
         Think about asbestos.  Nobody could create a
    controversy about that.  That's why it's not used
    anymore.  If they would have done what they said 4173 they would have done, this wouldn't have happened.
    We'd be living in a different world.
         So these are the people that were involved.
    This is not an isolated event.  These aren't
    documents taken out of context.  These are all the
    people and this is who they did it to.
         And you could pick a mosaic.  You know, they've
    done t-shirts with, you know, individual pictures of
    people to form a big picture, you know, like the
    Iraq war dead or something like that with a number.
    You could do a mosaic with all the faces of the
    millions of people that died due to what the
    cigarette companies did.  And you could cover
    several buildings in Tampa with that mosaic of
    pictures that size.  Okay.
         You know, kind of like the AIDS quilt.  You
    could do a quilt with a little photograph like that.
    If you had a photograph that size, for everybody
    that smoking and the cigarette industry killed by
    their deceit, you could blanket Tampa.  This is just
    one of those people.  She's just one.  It's just
    like you landed on that picture on the composite and
    you got to hear about the Jane McCabe case.  But
    there are millions of other cases just like it.  And
    that's -- 4174 MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  -- that's something --
         MR. BELASIC:  Objection.  Millions of other
    cases.  There certainly aren't.
         THE COURT:  Let's move on, please.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  There is something you get to
    consider.  It's a specific jury instruction.  You
    get to consider the harm to others in determining
    reprehensibility.  So I'm telling you this so you
    can realize the harm to others that happened in this
    case.  That happened by this deceit and this
    concealment.
         And, again, this is that cause instruction.
    It's the same instruction.  You'll see it repeated
    over and over again.
         Okay.  Can I get the ELMO?
         MR. PHILIPSON:  It's in your system.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Oh, it is?  Okay.  Never
    mind.
         So this is the same instruction.  I'm not going
    to go over it again.  You get the picture.
         So the cigarette industry has spent a quarter
    of a trillion dollars -- trillion, t-r.  I don't say
    that often.  That number is a big number.  A quarter
    of a trillion dollars.  $250 billion on cigarette 4175 advertising.  In this case, they're going to argue
    to you that it made no difference for Jane McCabe.
    Think about that.
         You heard those guys.  Those are pretty smart
    guys.  They went to good schools.  They're
    intelligent, good businessmen.  Okay?  They're
    definitely concerned about their bottom line, right?
    You saw the documents where they're talking about
    profitability.  These are not people that throw
    money away on things that don't work.
         And you'll see documents in evidence, they're
    back there, where they evaluate the effectiveness of
    their advertising campaign and they say that it
    works.  You saw that graph of smoking that we went
    to and we saw the dip and then we saw the campaign
    after they got together at the Plaza Hotel, put out
    the Frank Statement.  You saw how sales went back
    up.
         That's not an accident, folks.  You know, it
    went back up in response to the advertising.
         Now, they denied cause and effect on cancer.
    They're going to deny cause and effect on
    advertising.  There is a cause and effect.
         Okay?  What the industry concealed.  Tobacco
    Industry Counsel and Committee For Tobacco Research. 4176 That's what those initials stand for.  They launched
    that conspiracy in 1953.  Hired Hill & Knowlton to
    put out the PR for them.  They hired scientists and
    doctors to mislead the public about the health
    effects and addictive nature of smoking.
         They misled the Surgeon General.  The
    Surgeon General relied on the industry that it was
    regulating for some information.  And they misled
    the Surgeon General.
         They had already studied nicotine and knew it
    was highly addictive.  They studied and targeted
    teenage smokers.  And they knew that 80 to 90
    percent of all smokers start as teenagers.  They
    still do.
         They knew that 50 percent of all smokers would
    die from a smoking-related illness.  Think about
    that.  One out of every two regular smokers, all
    smokers, I'm sorry, die from a smoking-related
    illness.
         Think about an airline industry where half of
    the flights crash.
         MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Move on, please.
         MR. BELASIC:  Approach.
         THE COURT:  Approach the bench, please. 4177 (The following bench conference took place
outside the hearing of the jury:)
         MR. BELASIC:  All right.  So with
    Mr. Trentalange here in the week of hearings we had
    with Judge Barbas, we specifically talked about his
    use of the airline crash analogy.  And that was in
    the Evers case.  Specifically talked about it with
    him here.  Judge Barbas ruled that out.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Can I see what he's pointing
    at?
         MR. BELASIC:  There's the quote where he ruled
    it out.
         All right.  Second, Your Honor, it's even
    worse.  When they gave us their demonstratives, one
    of the very last demonstratives was the jumbo jet
    going down, 400,000 deaths.  During opening, we gave
    that to Baron and asked that he take it out and
    showed him the Barbas ruling, the Judge Barbas
    ruling.  I'm sorry.  Baron took it out.
         So Baron, their assistant, takes it out and
    then this lawyer gets up and violates Judge Barbas's
    ruling.  So we move for a mistrial.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Judge --
         THE COURT:  Mr. Trentalange.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  What we were talking about in 4178 those hearings was a demonstrative aid.  We had a
    picture of a jet.  Okay.  In the Evers case --
         THE COURT:  That's been removed.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  That's been removed.
         THE COURT:  Very good.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  That's what we agreed to
    remove.
         THE COURT:  I'll deny the motion for mistrial
    and give a curative instruction.  Thank you.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  And for the record,
    Your Honor, I object to the curative instruction.
         THE COURT:  I'll note your objection.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  And if I could, for the
    record, point out that argument that that was
    improper argument was raised in the case of RJR vs.
    Evers.  It went up to the Second District Court of
    Appeal, they argued that was improper, and the
    Second District Court of Appeal rejected that
    argument.  So that argument has been specifically
    proved --
         THE COURT:  They can reject it again if they
    want to.  That's fine.  That's their job.  Thank
    you.
         (End of bench conference.)
         THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, the reference 4179 to a jumbo jet is improper.  Jury is to disregard
    it.
         Let's move on, please.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  So think about this industry
    that knows that 50 percent of its smokers are going
    to die from a smoking-related illness.  Think about
    an industry that knew that smoking was killing half
    a million Americans every year and persisted in
    telling lies about its product.
         Now, one of the things that's determined once
    you find out class membership and you decide that
    R.J. Reynolds' products caused Ms. McCabe's lung
    cancer and death are the negligence and strict
    liability counts.  And you're entitled to assess
    punitive damages based on that as well, so consider
    the fact that they manipulated the levels of
    nicotine to keep smokers addicted and buying their
    cigarettes.  That's separate and apart from the
    conspiracy or the concealment, the deliberate
    manipulation of nicotine levels.
         There is 70 cancer-causing agents in every puff
    of smoke Jane McCabe inhaled.  There are 9,000
    chemicals like arsenic, cadmium, and phenols in
    cigarette smoke.  RJR knew that filtered cigarettes
    were no safer and they purposely misled the public 4180 about the safety of filters.  We've already talked
    about that.
         So let's talk about whether or not it was okay
    for Ms. McCabe to rely upon the statements of the
    cigarette smokers -- I'm sorry -- the cigarette
    companies.  Let's talk about whether she reasonably
    relied and whether they expected her to reasonably
    rely on those statements.
         (The video clip was published to the jury in
open court as follows:)
         "Throughout your tenure with American, it was
    not only American's position, but your position,
    that cigarettes weren't injurious to health.  Is
    that accurate?
         Through my tenure?
         Yes.
         Yes, that is so.
         That's something American Tobacco wanted the
    public to believe; is that correct?
         Yes.
         It's a statement that American Tobacco takes
    great reliance on?
         We issued that statement, yes.  We want them to
    believe it.
         As far as you're concerned, a person is 4181 justified in relying on that statement?
         Yes."
         (The video clip concluded.)
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  That was the American Tobacco
    Company's CEO at the time.  And R.J. Reynolds has
    taken over and is responsible for American Tobacco
    Company.
         So in terms of the concealment, conspiracy to
    conceal, you should check "Yes" on both questions
    based on the overwhelming evidence in this case.
         So now we get to damages.  And this is where we
    shift gears.  We stop looking at the tobacco
    company, R.J. Reynolds, and their conspirators, and
    we shift focus to the victims of their conduct.
         And we have to look at the compensatory damages
    in this case.  And under the law, each surviving
    child is entitled to compensatory damages.
         Compensatory damages are different than
    punitive damages, because they focus on the person
    who is harmed.  Okay?  Mrs. McCabe is not the person
    that was harmed in this case, although clearly she
    was harmed for purposes of punitive damages.  But
    the people that you have to compensate are the
    survivors under the Wrongful Death Act.
         The survivors are defined in that statute as 4182 her children.  And they're adults and grown up now,
    because this happened so long ago, but the Court has
    explained to you that's the way this case has shaked
    out.  Okay.  That's nobody's fault.
         So compensatory damages in this case are pain
    and suffering, loss of companionship, relationship.
    And damages in this case are meant to fix what can
    be fixed, put back what can be put back, and make up
    for what can't be fixed or put back.
         This is Jane McCabe.  Those are her children
    when they were young.  Those are her children when
    they were older.  I put this up here because there
    is a tendency to detach one's self from people
    involved in this case.  It's called cognitive
    dissonance.  It's almost a defense mechanism.  When
    you deal with painful subjects, the tendency is to
    minimize or look away.
         We talk about Jane McCabe and her family in the
    abstract.  I want you to remember these are real
    people with real emotions and real feelings.  They
    eat, they sleep, they go to the bathroom, they do
    all the things people do.  They've got dreams and
    aspirations and they're real.  They're not just a
    name on a page or a verdict form.  And they've been
    living all this time since their mother died and 4183 since you saw them in the courtroom.  And they've
    been experiencing ranges of emotion during that
    period of time.  I put these pictures up here to
    remind me to remind you of that.
         So I want to tell you the time for sympathy is
    over.  We told you this is not about sympathy for or
    against either party.  This is the time for
    compensating harms and losses.  This is the time
    where you award damages in dollars to fairly and
    adequately compensate each of the survivors.  And I
    put the estate, but that's wrong.  The estate
    doesn't have any monetary claim for the harms and
    losses they suffered.
         Now, your job is to weigh only the harms and
    losses in this case.  You can't consider any outside
    factors.  So if somebody says that's too much money
    for one person, remind them their verdict has to be
    based on the law and the evidence, not any outside
    factors.
         If somebody says that's going to change the way
    they live, remind them that's not a proper
    consideration.  Your verdict has to be based on the
    evidence and you just have to weigh the harms and
    losses.
         Compensate.  Words mean things.  Sometimes we 4184 use them without remembering what they mean.
    Compensate comes from the Latin "compensare," hang
    at the same level, scaled to hang at the same level.
         So what you're doing is putting the harms and
    losses on one side of the scale and you're putting
    an amount of money on the other side of the scale
    that causes the scale to hang at the same level in
    terms of putting back things you can put back,
    fixing things that can be fixed.  And if you can't
    fix it or put back, putting an amount of money in
    there that makes up for the fact that you can't fix
    it or put it back.
         So -- I'm sorry.  Let me go back to these
    questions.
         So let's talk about these people.  You heard
    them testify.  And you get to decide the amount of
    damages that's appropriate for each of them.  And
    here is my suggestion to you.  Each of them, you
    saw, reacted differently and testified differently.
         So I don't know whether you want to award the
    same amount for each one of them.  I think if you
    make an individual determination of the damages for
    each individual survivor, that's the best thing to
    do.  And then talk among yourselves about what
    amount is appropriate. 4185 This is a substantial case, this is a big case,
    these are serious damages, and I think -- this is a
    suggestion to you -- that you work in a range
    between two and a half and three and a half million
    dollars per survivor, so that you work in that
    range.
         They're all her children, they were all
    affected differently, but that's probably a good
    range to work within for each survivor.
         You heard Mr. McCabe.  The questions are -- I
    just didn't write out the question for each one of
    them.  But the question is going to be the same for
    each one of them on the verdict form.
         The total amount of any damages sustained by
    Jim McCabe, James McCabe, for the loss of parental
    companionship, instruction and guidance, and for his
    pain and suffering as a result of her death.
         Let me talk just a little bit about Jim McCabe.
    Jim McCabe testified last in the case and he talked
    about his mother and he talked about visiting her
    grave.  And I just want you to think about what he
    said and think about the times that he's done that,
    going early in the morning at times to her grave.
         And you're there now as we're thinking about
    it.  The air is so still.  It aches like the place 4186 in your mouth where the tooth was the day after you
    went to the dentist or like your heart in your bosom
    when you stand on the corner waiting for the light
    to change and you think about the way things were
    and might still have been if what happened hadn't
    happened.  That's the kind of ache they feel.
    That's real.  That's compensable.
         You know, we live in a civil society and this
    is a civil case, so that people who are injured can
    do the civil thing and not take the law into their
    own hands or -- you know, so that they can have
    their losses addressed by a jury of their peers.
         So somebody says to you pain and suffering is
    not real, remember, there are people who during jury
    selection didn't think they could follow the law.
    The judge sent them home.  The law in this case
    allows for pain and suffering.  And there is no more
    significant loss than death.  I mean, that's it.
         You know, there's a -- there's a Clint Eastwood
    movie called Unforgiven, and there's a line in that
    movie where Clint Eastwood said, "It's a hell of a
    thing killing a man.  You take away all he has and
    all he'll ever have."
         Well, it's a hell of a thing killing a woman
    with cigarettes that you manufacture.  You take away 4187 all that she'll have and all she'll ever have and
    you leave a hole in the lives of her children that
    can't ever be filled.
         Yeah, that -- things get better.  Time heals
    things to a certain extent, but there is a gap.
         You know, you throw a pebble in a pond and it
    sends out ripples.  And the ripples are still being
    felt in this case.  And you can be cynical and you
    can be skeptical or you can be sincere in doing your
    job and looking at the harms caused to this family
    by this defendant.
         And I'll tell you something, the instruction
    about treating corporations the same way as you
    treat individuals, both are persons in the eyes of
    the law, amen.  Treat this corporation the way you
    would if Johnny Red -- if Johnny Reynolds did all
    these things.
         If there were a man sitting over there instead
    of a corporation that did all of these things, I
    want you to treat that corporation the same way
    you'd treat that man.  Don't be afraid -- don't let
    them hide behind a corporate veil.  Don't give them
    any different justice.  Don't give us any different
    justice, okay, because different justice is
    injustice. 4188 Treat them the same way you would treat a guy
    off the street who did that, because at the end of
    the day, they're a person in the eyes of the law.
    And there's no exception for corporations.
         If somebody back there says, you know, they're
    a business, they're a corporation, that's the way
    they act, you got to expect.  No.  Uh-uh.  Not in
    this country.
         What they did just wasn't right, whether
    they're a corporation, a limited liability company,
    a partnership, or a person.  What they did was wrong
    and what they did hurt people.
         So those are my suggestions for damages in this
    case when it comes to compensatory damages.  Those
    are damages where the focus is on the survivors to
    fix what can be fixed.  Okay?  Those are
    compensatory damages.
         Now, we get to Question 11, punitive damages.
    And that's the part where we focus on the defendant
    and its wrongful conduct and all the evidence that
    you got to hear about what they did and how they
    lied.
         Please state whether you find by clear and
    convincing evidence that punitive damages are
    warranted against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company 4189 under the circumstances of this case.  And the jury
    instruction on clear and convincing evidence is,
    "Clear and convincing is evidence that's precise,
    explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight
    that it produces a firm belief or conviction,
    without hesitation, about the matter in issue."
         He who hesitates is lost.  Don't get lost.
    Okay?  This evidence, if this isn't a punitive
    damages case, then there isn't a punitive damages
    case.  Okay?
         The evidence in this case that you heard was
    that there are 500,000 deaths a year from
    cigarettes.  That's 1369 deaths per day.  One out of
    every two smokers dies prematurely because of
    cigarette smoke.  That's 30 million people over the
    course of time.  30 million people.  That's all --
    that's more people than all the wars in the
    United States history.  You couldn't fill all the
    veteran cemeteries with the people that have died
    from smoking.
         MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.  Improper.
         THE COURT:  Let's move on, please.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  That's a lot of people, 30
    million.  I'm not sure that the human mind can grasp
    30 million people.  You know, there's a point at 4190 which numbers lose their meaning.  30 million sounds
    like it's close to 31 million, but it's not.  It's a
    million less than 31 million.
         So there's a point at which it's really hard,
    when you're talking about big numbers, to really
    understand what we're talking about.  But if you
    break it down, 1,369 deaths per day, do the math on
    how many that is an hour die from cigarette smoke.
    That goes to their conduct.
         Do you find by clear and convincing evidence
    that the damages -- that punitive damages are
    warranted in this case?
         So ask yourselves, is it okay -- is it okay --
    what I tell people that I was responsible for, that
    I'm supervising, that I'm teaching, that I'm
    instructing, that I'm coaching, would I tell them
    it's okay break the rules, would I tell them it's
    okay to lie about it, would I tell them it's okay to
    sell a product that kills people?
         MR. BELASIC:  Objection.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         Let's move on, please.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Is it proper --
         MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Move on. 4191 MR. TRENTALANGE:  Is it proper to act like
    that?
         That -- that's really the question here.  What
    it all boils down to is do they deserve to be
    punished or do they deserve not to be punished?
         That's what punitive means, punishing them,
    trying to get them to not do this anymore and to
    realize what they did was wrong.  That's the purpose
    of punitive damages, to deter such conduct.  Okay?
         You got to think about the conduct in this case
    and whether or not it needs to be deterred.  So ask
    yourselves, is this conduct okay, is this the kind
    of conduct that we tolerate in a civilized society,
    or is it not?
         Do we want people who head corporations to lie,
    to conceal, to get together with other corporations
    to lie and conceal, or not?  It's up to you.  You
    decide whether this is okay.
         I'll tell you that if it -- that it's just not
    okay.  It is not okay to act like this under any
    circumstances.
         And clear and convincing evidence, you know,
    one good thing about this instruction is it tells
    you and highlights and reinforces the greater weight
    of the evidence is a lesser standard.  Okay? 4192 Because it -- the instruction will tell you and
    contrast the greater weight of the evidence.
         Greater weight of the evidence is a lighter
    standard, much lighter, but this standard is met
    based on the evidence in this case.  The only -- the
    only evidence that you have in this case are the
    defendant's documents and Dr. Cummings' testimony
    about the conspiracy.  And you saw the documents.
    You can read them for yourselves.  It's unrefuted,
    unrefuted testimony about really bad acts over a
    really long period of time killing a really big
    number of people.  It's as bad as it gets.
         You cannot engage in hyperbole when you're
    talking about this conduct, because it's as bad as
    it gets.  You can't exaggerate how bad this conduct
    is.
         So the answer to the Question No. 11 is "Yes."
    Check that box.
         And let me just tell you that if you don't
    check that box, you might as well just give them a
    gold ribbon, tell them a good job, we approve of
    what you did.  And you can't tell them that.  Can't
    tell them that.
         Your verdict has to be based on the law and the
    evidence in this case.  It's clear, it's precise, 4193 it's lacking in doubt.  They need to be punished for
    what happened.
         You know, sometimes -- I told you at the
    beginning of jury selection, I talked about the
    symbol, the statue of Justice.  She's got scales in
    one hand, she's blindfolded, and she's got a sword
    in the other.  She's got a sword in the other.  And
    this is the time to use the sword.
         MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.
    Inflammatory.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  This is the --
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  This is the time to use the
    sword.  This is the time to punish wrongful conduct.
    You folks are the ones to do it.
         It's a hard job.  It's a hard job.  But it's
    the right job.
         Thank you.
         Oh, let me just go through this.  This is just
    a graphic.  I think you get the point.  You're
    probably slided out at this point.
         Thank you very much.


           MR. TRENTALANGE:  Thank you, Your Honor.
           May it please the Court.
           Folks, I've got a lot of stuff to go over
      because I want to not waste your time and I want
      to directly address what was said by counsel.
           A couple of times you heard the Judge say
      that I'm going to instruct you on that.  He gave
      you instructions.
           Mr. Belasic told that you there was no 4330 evidence of prior quit attempts.  And, frankly,
      that's just plain wrong, because you heard
      testimony from the witness stand from two people
      who told you that their mother told them that she
      had quit before.
           What's with the patch?
           It went like, What's with the patch, Mom?
           I'm trying to quit.
           How come you didn't tell us?
           Well, I tried before a couple of times, and I
      wasn't able to do it.
           That was given under oath.  The evidence in
      this case consists of the sworn testimony of the
      witnesses, all exhibits received in evidence, all
      facts that were admitted or agreed by the parties,
      and any fact of which the Court has taken judicial
      notice.
           When a person gets up on that witness stand
      and subjects themself to perjury charges if he
      doesn't tell the truth and tells you something,
      that's evidence.  It doesn't become not evidence
      because you're on one side or the other.  It's
      evidence.
           You can argue against it, you can argue not
      to believe it, but it's just not right to tell 4331 jury that that's not evidence.  That is absolutely
      evidence.  And if you believe it, you can base
      your decision on it.  So that was evidence.
      That's the first thing.
           The second thing, let's -- let's talk about
      the simple truth in this case.
           And before we get to that, let me just tell
      you, you know, reasonable is a word that you hear
      about in the law and common sense.  And -- and
      there was an admission of partial responsibility
      in this case because the position of the plaintiff
      in this case is it just would not be reasonable to
      say that Ms. McCabe, as a nurse, smoked for as
      long as she did and didn't bear even 1 percent
      responsibility.
           The phrase "it takes two to tango," we
      believe that.  And we're not going to try and put
      something over on you and make some disingenuous
      argument or take some position.  If you remember
      the deposition testimony of Mr. McCabe, who's not
      a lawyer, he was a police officer for -- for most
      of his life, most of his adult life, okay, but
      he's not a lawyer.  So he was asked, do you think
      that your mom is responsible, in one part of the
      deposition. 4332 And then a few questions later, I had to
      stand up and say, rule of completeness, and they
      read the rest -- or they showed you, took them a
      while, but they called up that clip --
           MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.  Took
      them a while.
           THE COURT:  Sustained.
           MR. TRENTALANGE:  I'm just trying to refresh
      your recollection about the events.  But you
      remember that it was shown to you on a video and
      there was a gap in between the first questions --
      first question and the second question.  That's
      not really that important other than to remind you
      of what happened.  But when he was asked the rule
      of completeness questions, questions went like,
      Did your mother do everything she could have done
      to stop smoking?  No.  She could have done more?
      Yes.  He said that back at the time.
           This is nothing new, folks.  This is not a
      new position that we just decided we were going to
      take.  That's been the position since well before
      that deposition.  Okay?  So -- because it's just
      not reasonable when something like this happens.
      You know, you look for your part in things.  And
      Ms. McCabe had a part in it.  It would be 4333 disingenuous for us to suggest otherwise.
           But let's talk about the simple truth about
      addiction.  If you look at this exhibit from --
      it's the American Journal of Psychiatry.  They
      made a big deal about their witness is a
      psychiatrist.  Okay?  Their psychiatrist, I guess,
      wasn't aware of this article, but this is from
      1963, "Heavy cigarette smokers thus appear to be
      true addicts."
           She said the Heaviness of Smoking doesn't
      impact whether or not you're addicted.  Well, it
      does to the people who publish the American
      Journal of Psychiatry, a peer-reviewed
      publication.  "Heavy cigarette smokers thus appear
      to be true addicts."
           It's a drug addiction.  It's got different
      withdrawal symptoms.  You know, you don't get
      cirrhosis from smoking.  So, you know, you don't
      get DTs from smoking.  You get a different set of
      symptoms when you're withdrawing from cigarette
      smoke.
           Next slide.
           Doctor -- you want to talk about
      reasonableness?  Now, this is a medical doctor.
      And remember, Dr. Herkov is not a medical doctor, 4334 but he's a professor -- former professor, used to
      be professor at the University of Florida.  He
      taught psychiatrists during their residency.
           Now, as you can tell, Dr. Barnett didn't go
      to the University of Florida Medical School,
      because if she did, she wouldn't be testifying as
      she represented here, that somebody who smoked
      five packs a day for a long period of time was not
      addicted.
           MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.  There's
      no basis in the evidence for that.
           THE COURT:  Sustained.
           MR. TRENTALANGE:  Your Honor, she testified
      to that.
           THE COURT:  I realize that.  But the
      University of Florida comment.  Let's move on.
           MR. TRENTALANGE:  Okay.  She went to the
      University of South Florida.  She was never a
      student of Dr. Herkov.  Dr. Herkov taught at the
      University of Florida.  Sorry.  She went to the
      University of South Alabama Medical School.  She
      did her internship and residency at University of
      South Florida.  If I misspoke, I was saying she
      never took Dr. Herkov's class, okay?  But he did
      teach medical students. 4335 So you have to ask yourself is that
      reasonable, does that make common sense?  I mean,
      you could smoke five packs a day for decades and
      not be addicted, when the Journal of Psychiatry
      say that heavy smokers appear to be addicted, true
      drug addiction?
           Next slide.
           Okay.  This legal cause business, I mean, the
      instruction is as straightforward as that could
      be.  It has to be a legal cause, natural and
      continuous sequence.  I mean, if you want to try
      and create doubt, you can create doubt.  But
      remember, it's the greater weight of the evidence.
      You can have as many doubts as you want.  You
      can't speculate about what would have happened if.
           We have the facts in this case, and they are
      what they are.  Okay?  She smoked for a long time
      because she was addicted.  "She" being Ms. McCabe.
      Smoked for a long time.  Started when she was
      either 11 or 14 or somewhere in between.
           That's the evidence from somebody who was
      there with her.  And that's Romayne McCabe.  She
      said she doesn't know if it was her first
      cigarette, but she was there when a whole group of
      them were smoking about around age 11.  She's 87 4336 or 88 years old right now.  She's not clear on
      that.  But she knows, certainly by high school she
      was smoking a half a pack or more a day.
           So that's the testimony, that's the evidence,
      and that's consistent with the behavior in this
      case and what happened.
           It takes heavy smoking to cause lung cancer.
      But for the addiction, if she was not addicted to
      nicotine, would she have smoked two to three packs
      a day for approximately 53 years -- that's a
      hundred plus pack-years -- and developed lung
      cancer?  Common sense tells you no.  People who
      are not addicted don't continue to smoke
      cigarettes for 50-plus years.
           Next slide, please.
           Concurring cause.  It doesn't have to be the
      only cause.  Defense counsel gave you a bunch of
      examples, hypotheticals.  The evidence in this
      case suggests the possibility of other causes,
      that she smoked when she was stressed or because
      of her divorce.  But there could be more than one
      cause.  You don't escape responsibility because
      somebody else contributed to the harm or something
      else contributed to the harm.  That isn't the way
      it works.  That's why we have this concurring 4337 cause instruction.  There could be more than one
      cause.
           Next slide.
           Our burden is the greater weight of the
      evidence, the more persuasive and convincing force
      and effect of the entire evidence in this case
      more likely than not.  If you were on the street
      and somebody asks you about someone that smokes
      cigarettes for 50-plus years and got lung cancer,
      how hard would it be to decide that question?
           Here, you've got the benefit of evidence.
      It's even easier to answer that question.  And
      it's just tipping the scales.  This is not about
      whether there are doubts or whether you can come
      up with theories that are not supported by the
      evidence to suggest some other cause.
           Next slide.
           Believability of witnesses.  That's the
      instruction.  Look for it.  I'm not going to read
      it all to you because I don't have enough time,
      frankly, to do that.
           So let's go to the next slide.
           But these are the folks that have testified.
      And you've got to ask yourself, who do you
      believe?  In addition to the lay witnesses, 4338 Dr. Herkov has published in peer-reviewed
      journals.  He's a co-author of a book chapter on
      nicotine addiction.  He's a former University of
      Florida professor, taught psychiatry residents,
      taught nurses, taught physician assistants.  He
      evaluates professionals on the issues of substance
      abuse for state agencies.  He's done competency
      evaluations in murder cases.  He told you about
      that.  And literally, he's made decisions that
      affect people's lives and death -- life and death.
      That's one of the folks that testified that
      Ms. McCabe was addicted.
           Now, he doesn't treat, but he refers.  And
      the reason we didn't bring a treatment person is
      because Ms. McCabe didn't get treatment.  She's
      dead.  Okay?  This isn't a case about whether the
      treatment was appropriate or what treatment was
      warranted.  This is a question about identifying
      whether or not she was addicted.  And Dr. Herkov
      is an expert at identifying whether people are
      addicted and then making the appropriate referral,
      precisely because he can't prescribe medication
      and he's not a medical doctor, but he is somebody
      that identifies whether or not people are
      addicted. 4339 Dr. Cummings, you heard about him.  He's
      treated over 10,000 patients for nicotine
      addiction.  10,000 patients, published 450 or more
      peer-reviewed articles.  He is a contributor to
      almost every Surgeon General report since 1988.
      And you can read the rest of it.
           And then you've got Dr. Barnett, who touted
      the fact that she was board certified in forensic
      psychiatry and board certified in addiction
      psychiatry.  But she's so up on those two
      specialties that she let her certification lapse
      for four years and, I think, five years,
      respectively.
           And she's certified in geriatric psychiatry,
      addiction psychiatry, forensic psychiatry, and
      general psychiatry.  So if you've got four
      specialties, how can you really be a specialty in
      one thing?  You know that phrase, "Jack of all
      trades, master of none"?
           She's also involved with a sleep apnea
      program now, and she spends 50 percent of her time
      testifying in tobacco cases.  Before 2007, she'd
      never written or published on tobacco issues,
      cigarette and health issues, nor has she done so
      since.  But she met with tobacco attorneys, 4340 prepared for two years to testify, and now that's
      what she does.
           And I'm not calling her a liar.  I'm just
      saying that she's influenced by the fact that
      she's being paid.  I don't know if it's a chicken
      and egg thing; I don't know which came first; I
      don't know whether she was predisposed to testify
      the way that she did, whether she had those
      preexisting beliefs on addiction and that's why
      they went to her and met with her or vice versa.
      But I do know that her qualifications don't stand
      up and her opinion testimony doesn't fit with the
      rest of the evidence in the case and it's counter
      to common sense.
           Next slide, please.
           Nicotine addiction is the most substantial
      ingredient in their business.  And these are
      documents, okay?  I showed them to you before.
      But nicotine addiction is a big deal.  And they
      know about the addictive properties of nicotine,
      and they denied it over and over again.  And I
      guess the argument with respect to reliance is, we
      are so unbelievable -- believe us now when we tell
      you that we were so unbelievable that nobody would
      believe us when we spoke.  That's basically 4341 argument.  And nobody would believe us.
           Next slide.
           So this idea that Reynolds cooperated with
      the public health authorities, okay, this is the
      rest of that story.  This was the -- the Tobacco
      Working Group was the public health group that was
      looking into safer cigarettes.  And this is from
      Philip Morris -- I'm sorry -- from R.J. Reynolds
      about their participation with the Tobacco Working
      Group.  And here's their plan.
           "After careful consideration of the views of
      the Tobacco Working Group" -- that's the TWG --
      "of the Tobacco Institute staff with regard to the
      public relations and political effects of the
      public withdrawal from" -- I'm sorry -- "Tobacco
      Working Group.  It was concluded that the research
      directors can't withdraw.  We should take steps to
      give the industry as much protection as is
      possible and, at the same time, remain in the
      Tobacco Working Group.  To best meet this goal, a
      three-point proposal was adopted."
           So they're going to give the industry as much
      protection by staying in this government group as
      possible.  "When called by Gori" -- that's the
      government guy -- "scientific directors declined 4342 to concur with or comment on Gori's
      recommendations.  Remind Gori that the scientific
      director's role is to provide expertise with
      respect to tobacco and smoke chemistry.  Some
      companies will decline to respond other than in
      writing and will state the above in their letters.
      Dr. Gori should also be informed that the
      scientific director does not accept the premise
      that smoking is harmful."
           So that's their cooperation.
           And then they say, "Scientific directors will
      informally try to persuade Gori to eliminate or
      modify those proposals which are propaganda
      oriented rather than scientific, e.g." -- that's
      for example -- "cessation clinics."
           So in 1973, they're talking about how she
      never went to a cessation clinic, she never tried
      to quit.  Their cooperation is they're working
      with this government agency and they've got their
      people at the group and their people have an
      agenda.  And the agenda is, let's try and
      privately get rid of what they call propaganda.
      And they're talking about cessation clinics as
      propaganda.  That's how they're cooperating.
           Next slide. 4343 This has to do with filter.  Okay.  "Today's
      filter-tipped lower tar and nicotine cigarettes
      produce lower rates of lung cancer than do their
      higher tar and nicotine predecessors."
           That's the '81 Surgeon General's report.  The
      Surgeon General didn't have their documents yet,
      folks.  The Surgeon General didn't get to see what
      you saw.  That's why the Surgeon General relied on
      that cooperation, but didn't get the whole story.
      Okay?  And this is what they knew.
           "Health filter may have some prestige value.
      The public has been conditioned to accept the
      filtered effects of charcoal in other fields, and
      when charcoal was added to cigarette filters, it
      proved to be an effective advertising gimmick.
      Filter-tipped smokers, health reasons are
      apparently the primary reason, at least the stated
      reason, for smoking filtered tips.  The
      tabulations reveal the highest interest in trying
      filter-tipped cigarettes is shown among the
      younger smokers.  Health factors again show up as
      the basic reason for people trying them."
           Next slide.
           But we know what the Surgeon General didn't
      know, because he didn't get to see these 4344 documents.  "The illusion of filtration is as
      important of the fact of filtration.  In most
      cases, however, the smoker of a filtered cigarette
      was getting as much or more nicotine and tar than
      he would have gotten from a regular cigarette.  He
      had abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on
      the grounds of reduced risk to health."
           So this is what the Surgeon General didn't
      see.  This is the point they pulled the wool over
      the public health authority's eyes.  That's why
      this is so outrageous and needs to be punished.
      Okay?  And you're supposed to treat them the same
      way you treat an individual.  Doesn't matter if
      people changed jobs at the corporation.  The
      corporation is the same corporation, just like an
      individual is the same individual.  Doesn't matter
      that it was a long time ago and that they're
      regulated now.  The point is, they weren't
      regulated for years and they got away with this
      stuff.
           Next slide.
           Is that it?  Okay.
           So this is a review of internal reports
      regarding cigarette smoke, pH, and sales trends,
      6/24/96.  Okay.  '96, remember. 4345 Program 247, Legal and Regulatory Responses.
      They're in litigation at the time this is written.
      Okay?  So let's look at the date on that first.
           Back in December of 1969, they said,
      "Invalidation of some reports in the research
      department.  We do not foresee any difficulty in
      the event a decision is reached to remove certain
      reports from research files.  Once it becomes
      clear that such action is necessary for the
      successful defense of our present and future
      suits, we will promptly remove all such reports
      from our files."
           So if there's litigation, they're going to do
      a document dump; what we would call shredding
      today.  We'll remove them from the files if we
      need to.
           "As an alternative to invalidation, we can
      have the authors rewrite those sections of the
      reports which appear objectionable."
           Folks, that's what they did in litigation in
      1996.
           MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.  There's
      absolutely no evidence of that.
           THE COURT:  The jury will rely on their
      recollection of the evidence and the instructions 4346 of law that I give them.
           MR. TRENTALANGE:  You get to make inferences
      and reach deductions -- make deductions.  When
      somebody tells you that they need to -- if they
      need to, if they get in litigation, to rewrite a
      report and then you have a report like that while
      they're in litigation, I'd submit to you that it's
      a fair inference that they did what they told you
      they were going to do.
           These are the documents.  These are the
      things that they said to each other when they
      thought no one would ever find out.  These are the
      things they say when nobody's listening.
           Next slide.
           In terms of the stuff -- we saw that
      reference to carcinogens.  "Carcinogens are found
      in practically every class of compound in smoke.
      Present technology does not permit selective
      filtration of particulate smoke."
           Those documents are in evidence.
           "None of the chemical substances listed
      therein, to our knowledge, has been found by
      scientific research to be harmful to the health of
      the smoker in amounts reported in smoke."
           When he told you they disclosed the list of 4347 carcinogens, they also told the folks that they
      were disclosing those carcinogens to that "none of
      the chemical substances listed, to our knowledge,
      has been found by the scientific research to be
      harmful to the health of the smoker in the amounts
      reported in smoke."
           That was a lie.  That was an outright lie.
           So they listed the carcinogens, he's right,
      but it's a partial truth and it leaves out the
      fact that they also said that in the amounts in
      the cigarette smoke, it wasn't cancer causing.
      And they knew that was false.
           Now, is that the kind of information that
      somebody who's going to smoke relies upon?
      Absolutely.  This is going to give you cancer
      versus this is not going to give you cancer.
           Next slide.
           Awareness versus belief.  And Mr. Belasic
      showed you polls about awareness.  Have you heard
      or read a story about smoking causing cancer?
      That's like, have you heard or read a story about
      aliens?  Everybody's heard or read a story about
      aliens.  That's a different question from whether
      you believe there are aliens; right?
           So let's look at what the figures were.  Have 4348 you heard or read anything about UFOs?  Yes,
      90 percent; no, 10 percent.  But do you believe in
      UFOs?
           PT2050, our 1970 public opinion survey,
      showed that a majority, 52 percent, believed that
      cigarettes are only one of many causes of smokers
      having more illnesses.  It also showed that half
      of the people who believed that smokers have more
      illness than non-smokers accepted the
      constitutional hypothesis as the explanation.  In
      other words, it's just something in them, the way
      they're made up.
           Next slide.
           So I'm going to jump to something else while
      we pull that up.  Let's talk about cause and
      effect and what happens, all right?
           This is in evidence.  We showed this to you.
      This is total cigarette consumption, male lung
      cancer rate, female lung cancer rate.  Okay?
      They're talking about whether or not something
      would make a difference.  We know it made a
      difference.
           This is the mouse paintings right here.  This
      is when the report comes out in LIFE magazine.  We
      see that downward trend. 4349 This is when they start their campaign, the
      fraud, deception, deceit, concealment.  This is
      when the meeting takes place and we see a spike in
      cigarette sales.
           Okay.  Every time a bad news story comes out,
      they respond with a publicity campaign.  Every
      single time.  So we know it works.
           And with respect to filters having health
      benefits, well, if that's true, then when the
      filters came out and took off, you would expect
      the cancer rate to drop.  But it didn't drop.  The
      cancer rate keeps going up.  The cancer rate keeps
      going up until this drop right here, okay?  And
      then it trails off because it lags behind
      cigarette smoking.  So there's the evidence and
      what happened as a result of their campaign of
      advertising.
           And brand usage has been established through
      testimony.  There's no question about it.  Rely on
      your recollection.  Obviously, people didn't
      remember things as clearly when they were younger
      or when they were not around and they had to rely
      on habit and practice.  But these were the brands
      that were involved.  And every single brand except
      Merit, 85 percent of her cigarette smoking, was 4350 manufactured by the defendant in this case.
           So let's talk about CTR.  And by the way, CTR
      was disbanded.  Why would you disband something if
      it was such a good thing?
           It was disbanded.  CTR began as an
      organization called Tobacco Industry Research
      Council.  It was set up as an industry shield in
      1954.
           CTR has helped our legal -- this is one of
      their documents.  They're saying it was set up as
      an industry shield.
           "CTR" -- that's Committee for Tobacco
      Research -- "has helped our legal counsel by
      giving advice and technical information which was
      needed at court trials."  CTR supplied spokesmen.
           Okay.  "Bill Shinn feels that special
      progress are the best way that monies are spent on
      these projects.  CTR has acted as a front."
           Their words, not mine.  It's PT2268 if you
      want to look at that document for yourself.
           Next slide.
           While you're doing that, let me talk about
      damages.
           Mr. Belasic, I guess, had some problem with
      my suggested -- suggestion to you of 4351 two-and-a-half to three-and-a-half million for
      each surviving child.  I told you that was a range
      that I was suggesting you to work in, that you
      should rely upon your own recollection of the
      evidence.
           He didn't give you any suggested range, okay,
      other than zero.  I don't think zero is borne out
      by the evidence.
           This is a significant loss.  This is a
      significant case.  We spent significant time
      talking about it, and we're talking about
      significant damages in the case.
           You've been given no other suggested amount.
      So if you think that those amounts are too high,
      lower them.  If you think that they're too low,
      raise them.  I defer to your collective judgment.
           You're going to get an instruction that
      the -- the only instruction is that there's no
      precise standard for these damages.  You should
      amount an award that's fair and just in light of
      the evidence.  So that's what the law is.
           And if that instruction is lacking, I
      apologize, but that's the actual instruction.
      It's not an easy thing to do.  Fair and just in
      light of the evidence. 4352 For nearly 20 years, this industry has
      employed a single strategy to defend itself on
      three major fronts; litigation, politics, and
      public opinion.  While the strategy was
      brilliantly conceived and executed over the years,
      helping us win important battles -- and it's only
      fair to say that it is not, nor was it intended to
      be, a vehicle for victory.  It's a holding
      strategy.  It is and has always been.
           And what's that strategy consist of?  No. 1,
      creating doubt about the health damage without
      actually denying awards.
           Let's talk about the warnings.  The Federal
      Trade Commission, June 30th, 1967.  The
      effectiveness of cigarette labeling.  There's
      virtually no evidence that the warning statement
      on cigarette packages has any significant effect.
      They knew it wasn't going to have any significant
      effect.
           THE CLERK:  Five-minute warning, Counsel.
           MR. TRENTALANGE:  They know it doesn't have
      any significant effect, but it's a real good thing
      to say when you're in between saying "choice," you
      say "choice" as many times as you want or can, and
      then you throw in something about the labels, it's 4353 got surface appeal.
           But anybody who knows anything about
      addiction knows that addicts look for things that
      support their addiction, look for the
      psychological crutch.  They knew it.  They knew it
      and they acted upon it, and they pat themselves on
      the back about it.  And this information was out
      there in 1967.
           Next slide.
           MR. PHILIPSON:  That is the next one.
           MR. TRENTALANGE:  Okay.  That's the last one?
           MR. PHILIPSON:  No, there's one more.
           MR. TRENTALANGE:  Okay.
           The failure of the warning statement on
      packages to have any discernable effect on
      cigarette consumption is easily explainable.  The
      warning statement on the package alone has proved
      to be ineffective mainly because few people seem
      to pay attention to it.
           Romayne McCabe testified to that.  You saw
      her deposition.  They didn't play all of it, but
      they told you, or she told you, that she didn't
      pay any attention to the warnings.  They call them
      warnings even when the first one was only a
      caution, not a warning. 4354 1981, FTC report on advertising.  They say
      that we can't point to a specific statement, okay?
           "There are two major objective indicia of the
      ineffectiveness of the current warning discussed
      in detail below.  First, staff's investigation of
      consumer knowledge has demonstrated a substantial
      portion of the public remains uninformed about the
      hazards of smoking.
           "Second, tests conducted by the FTC indicate
      that the warning is neither noticed nor read by
      the vast majority of people."
           So real briefly, to award punitive damages on
      No. 11, you don't have to find either concealment
      or conspiracy.  There's strict liability in this
      case for making a defective product.  And if the
      conduct is reprehensible, you can still get to
      Question 11 on the verdict form.
           Now, the evidence in this case should dictate
      that you answer "Yes" to Questions 4 and 5 -- did
      I say Question No. 11, the last question?
           Fraud and conspiracy, those questions should
      be answered "Yes."
           Now, there's something called blanketing the
      airwaves or flooding the airwaves and the
      wallpaper effect.  The Federal Trade Commission 4355 did a staff report.  Cigarette advertising reaches
      virtually all Americans who can either read or
      understand the spoken word.  Cigarettes are
      advertised on both network and spot television, on
      radio and magazines and newspapers and outdoor
      media and by means of many types.  So pervasive is
      cigarette advertising that it is virtually
      impossible for Americans of almost any age to
      avoid cigarette advertising.
           As stated above, youth is also exposed to
      cigarette advertising.  During the week of
      January 11th, '67, the aforementioned 60 network
      programs played before 322.7 million viewers under
      the age of 21 years.  These included 151.1 million
      viewers age 2 through 12 and 141 million viewers
      age 13 through 7 -- 17.
           Folks, if she ever read even one sentence in
      Reader's Digest -- and given the paucity of
      articles that -- that were available during the
      applicable timeframe, she clearly was exposed to
      cigarette advertising.
           And Romayne McCabe said in her -- in her
      testimony, that the reason both she and Jane
      McCabe started smoking was because it was
      glamorous.  They saw it depicted as glamorous in 4356 the movies, okay?
           So there's direct and indirect evidence,
      what's called circumstantial evidence.
      Fingerprints are circumstantial evidence.  DNA is
      circumstantial evidence.
           You don't have to have eyewitness testimony
      to prove a case.  You can have circumstantial
      evidence.
           Circumstantial evidence doesn't have bias or
      interest or any of those things that eyewitnesses
      have.  The circumstantial evidence in this case is
      what they did and what she did in response to it
      and what everybody else in the country did.
           Now, I've got about 40 seconds to tell you
      something, so I'll talk even quicker.
           This stuff is outrageous.  This is really,
      really bad conduct that took place over a really
      long period of time.  And just saying choice and
      trying to blame the smoker for what she did should
      not absolve the tobacco company of any
      responsibility for what it did over a long period
      of time.
           Those people that -- that they said were
      lessons to Mrs. McCabe, her uncles, they killed
      them with cigarettes.  They killed Yul Brynner. 4357 MR. BELASIC:  Objection.
           THE COURT:  Sustained.
           MR. TRENTALANGE:  They died of cigarette
      smoking-related diseases, as did Yul Brynner, as
      did Edward R. Murrow, as did all the other people
      that you heard about, and the rest of the 30
      million dead.  That's reprehensible conduct.
           This choice thing, just like they said back
      in their documents, they can't really effectively
      argue choice if the smoker is addicted.  And this
      smoker was addicted.  And that was their plan all
      along.
           I thanked you at the beginning of my opening
      statement.  I said we'd walk together on the path
      towards justice for Jane McCabe.
           Now, I'm going to have to leave you.  You're
      going to have to take the rest of that walk on
      your own.  I urge you to do the right thing, and I
      wish you God speed.