mc         MR. BELASIC:  All right.  So, ladies and
    gentlemen, you're here and you've heard the
    instructions from Your Honor.  You'll have the
    instructions in writing.  And if there is any
    question as to what you can consider -- you've seen
    a lot of different types of evidence.  There have
    been instructions by the judge as to what type of
    evidence can be considered.  You've seen objections
    sustained and upheld.  But if there are any other
    questions that you have, the answers are here in the
    instructions.
         Now, at the end of the day, the plaintiff here,
    Mr. McCabe, is now, we know, asking for $15 million.
    And those punitive damages will be paid only to him.
    They won't go, for example, to --
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Excuse me, Your Honor.  I
    object to this argument.  It's improper argument. 4707      THE COURT:  Move on.  Sustained.
         MR. BELASIC:  So these punitive damages are
    going to be awarded in addition to the compensatory
    damages that you've awarded.  I know that you
    awarded Mr. McCabe $1 million.  I know that you
    found 70 percent fault for Ms. McCabe, 30 percent
    fault to Reynolds.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Objection.  Improper
    argument, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. BELASIC:  He would get $300,000.  You've
    just seen that the judge's instructions say -- and
    can we turn on the ELMO -- "The amount of punitive
    damages you award must not be unreasonably large
    when considered in relation to the amount of
    compensatory damages you awarded to plaintiff."
         You awarded the plaintiff a million dollars.
    You found in this case --
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Your Honor, I'm sorry.  I
    object.  That's a misstatement of the law.
         THE COURT:  I'm sure that Mr. Paige will clear
    that up -- thank you -- in his closing.  Thank you.
         MR. BELASIC:  You found, in balancing, that
    Reynolds was 30 percent at fault and his mother was
    70 percent at fault.  We're not relitigating that 4708 today.  But he'll receive that $300,000.  I would
    submit that $15 million, 50 times higher, is an
    unreasonable amount.
         The judge has also instructed you --
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  I'm sorry, Judge.  I don't
    want to waive this.  I have to object.
         THE COURT:  I'll note your objection.  Thank
    you.  Overruled.
         Let's move on.
         MR. BELASIC:  The judge has also instructed you
    that you may not impose punitive damages to punish
    defendant for harms caused to others whose cases are
    not before you.  And we know there are almost 3,000
    cases, 2800, almost 2900 other lawsuits.  You've
    heard that evidence just today.
         The judge instructs you that you may not -- you
    may not -- and it says, "award an award such that if
    it was replicated in cases brought by other injured
    smokers, that it would not produce an excessive
    total punishment."
         Now, Mr. Trentalange says that they want
    $15 million for the case of a single smoker.  You've
    heard that there's 2800 or 2900 other lawsuits and
    that you're forbidden from awarding an amount in
    this case that if it was given in the other cases 4709 would be unreasonable.
         Fifteen million dollars times 2800 or 2900 is
    over $40 billion.  You heard that the operating
    income of R.J. Reynolds was, at most, 1 to 2 billion
    a year.  You heard that the entire stockholders, all
    of the individual stockholders together, was only
    70 billion.
         This amount, if replicated in other cases,
    would wipe out the stockholders, but it would be 40
    times what they're making in operating income.  And,
    again, if there is any question, the judge has said
    that you may not do that.
         I would suggest that in this case, when you
    take into account the facts and you look at what the
    conduct is today, consider the conduct that you
    found to be important in this case.  We know that it
    wasn't fraud, because you found that concealment and
    fraud did not cause her injury.  We know that it
    wasn't the conspiracy, because you found, no, the
    conspiracy was not a legal cause.
         Consider what the conduct was back in the day
    that you found warranted this verdict, and then
    consider whether writing a check to Mr. McCabe for
    $15 million is going to stop that conduct or whether
    that conduct has already stopped. 4710      If we can go back to the screen.
         Much of the conduct that they've spent talking
    about, the entire first part of the trial, was on
    the concealment and conspiracy.  You voted no on
    that.  The judge's instruction says that you can
    only punish the defendant for the conduct that --
    quote, "You may punish defendant only for injury
    caused to Ms. McCabe by the specific conduct of
    defendant that was the basis for your finding that
    punitive damages may be warranted."
         Now, when the lawyers on both sides talk about
    that, this is not argument.  That is the actual
    instruction of the judge in this case.  All of you
    have sworn to follow the law.  You cannot punish
    R.J. Reynolds other than for the conduct that you
    found caused Ms. McCabe's injury.  And you've
    already found that the concealment, the fraud, what
    they're talking about, this eerie voice from the
    past, you've already found that that was not -- that
    that was not a legal cause.  We know that these
    people are gone.
         And in 2016, Reynolds isn't denying that
    smoking causes cancer.  It says on every pack of
    cigarettes, the rotating warnings, "Smoking causes
    lung cancer."  Reynolds agrees not just in the 4711 courtroom, but in public, that smoking causes lung
    cancer.
         They say that's not a change.  That's a very
    significant change.  It's the opposite of what the
    company was doing.
         The Tobacco Institute, CTR, all of those
    organizations, those haven't been around since 1998.
    Their expert admitted that.  They say it's an eerie
    voice from the past.  In the past, they talked about
    having a public relations group.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Excuse me, Judge.  Excuse me.
    This is all fraud and concealment.
         THE COURT:  Right.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  I was precluded from that.
         MR. BELASIC:  You can't base your decision --
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. BELASIC:  You can't base your decision on
    these.  They're gone and you've already found that
    the Tobacco Institute and CTR was not a legal cause.
    You answered that in your Verdict Form Question 4
    and Question 5, no.  We know that those documents
    are in public.
         Now, today, in 2016, in the environment we have
    today, are punitive damages really warranted?
    Writing a check for 15 million is not going to force 4712 Reynolds to admit that smoking causes lung cancer.
    They already do.  They already have for 20 years.
    It's not going to force them to warn.  They already
    do.  The lung cancer warning is on the packs now and
    has been for 30 years.
         Writing a check for 15 million to Mr. McCabe is
    not going to have Reynolds admit that smoking causes
    cancer or is addictive.  They already do.  They
    admit it publically, they admit it privately, they
    put it on their website.
         The plaintiffs say that's a repeat of the past.
    No, that is a dramatic change.  You, more than
    anyone, know from seeing that for the three -- for
    the three weeks of evidence, that's a dramatic
    change in behavior between the tobacco companies of
    the '50s and the tobacco companies of 2016.
         And so when the Judge's instructions tell you
    that you have to decide in deciding whether to award
    any punitive damages, whether it will deter the
    company from continuing that conduct, that conduct's
    already changed.
         They admitted it causes cancer.  They admit it
    is addictive.  You know what they haven't done?
    It's very clear from the cross-examination what the
    plaintiffs think.  What they haven't done is go out 4713 of business.
         And from the very beginning in this case, the
    Judge has instructed you that the companies' sale
    and manufacture and advertising of cigarettes is
    legal.
         Now, there's a lot of people that think it
    should go out of business.  And, perhaps, even you
    think they should.  But under your oath as jurors,
    you cannot impose liability merely for selling
    cigarettes.  You can only impose damages here for
    the specific conduct that harmed Ms. McCabe, not
    because they haven't gone out of business.  No one
    disputes that.
         We know they're selling Pall Malls.  We went
    through all the brands they're still selling.
         Here's where they admit it.  And, of course,
    the pack says "lung cancer."
         Any future -- any future Ms. McCabe can pick up
    a pack and see from the very first cigarette they
    smoke, Smoking causes lung cancer, and grow up in an
    environment where the tobacco company agrees.  So
    when you're looking for the purpose of punitive
    damages, and the Judge says that that's to deter
    future conduct, that conduct has already changed.
    No child today will ever grow up in an environment 4714 where a tobacco company disputes that smoking causes
    cancer.
         And we know today that it's only about
    7 percent of high school students who are smoking,
    only about 2 percent of middle school students.  As
    Dr. Cummings -- not just the vice president of
    R.J. Reynolds, but Dr. Cummings, plaintiff's expert
    said, that's the lowest measurement in modern
    history.  They've never measured a youth smoking
    rate for regular cigarettes lower than it is today.
         Those programs are working.
         They talked about ingredients.  Those are
    disclosed.
         Writing a check for whatever millions of
    dollars to Mr. McCabe isn't going to force
    R.J. Reynolds to turn over their ingredients.  They
    already have.  It's public.  It's on the website.
         Anyone who smokes today can find every
    ingredient.  But more importantly, every single one
    of those ingredients is under the control and the
    authority of the FDA.
         And as we've seen, there's no dispute.  The FDA
    can make the companies pull any ingredient out.  If
    they think that the type of ingredients that are
    used here are increasing the risk or it's too 4715 dangerous, the FDA has the full authority to pull
    those ingredients out and to tell them to stop
    making those cigarettes.  They never have.
         The Food and Drug Administration, they're not
    aligned with the tobacco companies.  It's -- it's an
    antitobacco agency that, as we've heard, for years
    wanted to regulate the tobacco companies.  Now they
    do.
         They take the tobacco companies' money and they
    can take any ingredient out.  As we know, they can
    set nicotine levels.  They can do the plant
    inspections.  They can shut down a brand, if they
    want.
         Now, you just heard the plaintiff criticize
    Reynolds' attempt to make safer products.  Safer
    than what?  We didn't hide the ball on that.  It's
    always been safer than regular cigarettes.
         And the idea, again, apparently is you should
    go out of business.  You shouldn't sell any
    cigarettes.  You shouldn't sell Snus or
    e-cigarettes, you should just go out of business.
         That can't happen.  That would violate the
    instructions that His Honor gave you.  You cannot
    impose liability for products and for manufacturing
    and for sale that is legal. 4716      So would it be better to continue in business,
    say that smoking doesn't cause cancer and produce
    the regular cigarettes with no opportunities for any
    alternatives?  No.
         And here's what they've done.  They
    specifically say -- they don't say Don't quit,
    there's no harm.  They say the opposite; there is
    harm.  And if you want -- if you're concerned about
    health, you should quit.  That's their policy.
         If you're going to continue to smoke, and the
    truth is that we know in this country, people have
    the right to smoke, no matter how dangerous it is.
    They have to make up their own minds, just like Mrs.
    McCabe did.  But if they're going to continue,
    R.J. Reynolds says they should consider the
    reduction of risk and go to products that don't
    light tobacco on fire, that don't create smoke.
         From the very beginning in this case,
    Dr. Cummings has said that it's the smoke.  When you
    set tobacco on fire, it causes that chemical
    reaction.  He called them polycyclics and the other
    types of chemicals.  And the whole idea over the
    last 20 or 30 years has either been to reduce the
    smoke, and now, in these modern products, to not
    have any smoke, to not have anything that's inhaled 4717 into the lungs.  It's common sense that that reduces
    the risk.
         A changed company.  A changed company would be
    trying to promote this migration, going to products
    that have less risk.  And the plaintiff's answer is,
    Well, that's not good enough.  It's too little.  You
    should go out of business.
         You cannot impose even a dollar of damages to
    go out of business.  It is legal to sell cigarettes.
         There was no dispute that Premier reduced the
    cancer causing agents in smoke by what we see here.
    There was no dispute in this case.  Even
    Dr. Cummings said that Premier was a good idea.
         We just saw the government document from the
    '80s.  And by the way, in the '80s, Mrs. McCabe was
    smoking.  Reynolds was making a cigarette the
    government said -- we just saw -- significantly
    reduced the risk of cancer.
         Reynolds wasn't inside trying to make its
    cigarettes more dangerous.  We saw the government
    said that they were making their cigarettes less
    dangerous.
         This was the brand of '80s.  And we know from
    the document and from Dr. Figlar's testimony that
    the government tried to kill it.  They didn't want a 4718 product that was safer.
         And the specific sentence in that was --
    remember, it said the panel is concerned --
    concerned about the ramifications of an actually
    safer cigarette.  They were nervous that maybe
    people wouldn't quit if a safer product was given.
         e-cigarettes, the Royal College of Physicians.
    Remember, in Phase I, you talked about echoes of the
    prior trial.  And in Phase I, remember, it was John
    F. Kennedy in the '60s was asked, Hey, what about
    the new study on smoking?  The Royal College of
    Physicians, the British scientific organization, had
    just said that smoking caused lung cancer.  The
    reporters asked him back in the '60s.  And he said,
    I don't know, we will convene our own panel.  And
    that led to the Surgeon General.
         Well, now here you are 50 years later, and the
    Royal College of Physicians -- again, not some
    tobacco company -- says that e-cigarettes could be
    90 percent safer.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Judge -- excuse me.
    Objection, Your Honor.  That's not evidence.
         THE COURT:  The jury will rely on their
    recollection of the evidence.  Thank you.
         MR. BELASIC:  All right.  It was evidence.  You 4719 saw Dr. Figlar testify specifically that it was a 90
    to 96 percent reduction found by the Royal College
    of Physicians.  Again, not some tobacco company.
         Now, a 90 percent reduction in the cancer risk
    of cigarettes, there isn't anyone that could dispute
    that's a good idea.  That's a good idea.  They want
    to say, too late.  The company should go out of
    business.  You cannot award a dime to go out of
    business.
         R.J. Reynolds, now, not only says that smokers
    should quit if they're worried about health risks,
    they're selling products that would enable people to
    quit.  Isn't that what a responsible company -- that
    has no duty to go out of business, but isn't that a
    responsible action to help people stop smoking
    cigarettes?
         We saw that this is FDA-approved, and that the
    FDA approved the special marketing where, for the
    first time, you don't have like gum and patches
    behind a locked -- behind a locked cabinet or you
    have to go ask the CVS clerk to go back there.
    Instead, it's right there at a gas station that
    anyone can buy for $2.50, a fraction of a pack of
    cigarettes, and help themselves to quit smoking.
    And that's R.J. Reynolds that's doing it, promoting 4720 a way for its customers to quit smoking.  That's
    responsible.
         We know about the other products, the Snus,
    Premier, VUSE that the Royal College of Physicians
    says decreases the risk of disease by 90 percent.
         Now, they criticize this.  They say, Well, you
    know, you're not happy the FDA is regulating.
    That's not the question for you to decide.
         The question for you to decide on the very
    first page of the instructions is, is there a
    continuing need for deterrence of future bad conduct
    in light of any changes in the conduct of the
    defendant from the conduct on which you based your
    determination.
         We know their conduct has changed.  They admit
    the risks.  They propose and promote that their
    customers should quit.  They offer them products
    that will help them quit.  They're not in any way
    fighting the government again.  In fact, they're
    paying for their own regulation.
         There is no comparison between the FDA having
    the entire control over making a cigarette and what
    goes into it and all of the ingredients and writing
    a check to a single individual.  Which has more
    deterrent power, the government 's ability to say 4721 take any ingredient out, the government FDA's
    regulating and determining whether these new
    products are safe, or whether they're doing anything
    to cigarettes to make them unsafe?
         Of course, the deterrent effect of the FDA has
    all of the weight of the United States Government
    behind it.  There's no comparison between the
    regulatory safety that's being promoted by the FDA
    and what they say the effect would be if you give
    James McCabe a check for $15 million.  Making him a
    multimillionaire won't deter conduct that
    R.J. Reynolds has already changed and that the
    government --
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Excuse me.  Objection, Your
    Honor.  Improper argument.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         Let's move on, please.
         MR. BELASIC:  -- and that the government has
    already prevented.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  I'd ask for a curative
    instruction, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  I'll deny the request.
         MR. BELASIC:  We know that the FDA has
    authority over every aspect, from what goes into the
    cigarette, the tobacco and the ingredients, to how 4722 they package it, to how they market it, and to how
    they sell it.  And that's one of the reasons why
    almost no young people are smoking today, why only
    2 percent of the kids in middle school have smoked
    even one cigarette in the last 30 days.
         You saw -- well, Dr. Figlar was criticized for
    that.  It's not zero.
         No, it isn't.  Kids are going to smoke.  And I
    don't think there'll ever be a day, as Dr. Figlar
    said, where it's zero.  But 2 percent of middle
    school kids who have only smoked one cigarette in 30
    days, 98 percent who are smoke-free.  That is an
    enormous change, not just in tobacco companies, but
    it's an enormous change in society.  You all saw how
    many people smoked in the '50s.
         Awarding money, writing a check to Mr. McCabe
    didn't accomplish that.  That's already occurred.
    The companies have already changed, and the FDA is
    now in control.
         We know that they have to disclose all of their
    health research -- all of their health research to
    the FDA.  All of the ingredients.  We know the FDA
    has enforcement power.  They can shut down brands.
         In effect, what this question says, is there a
    continuing need for deterrence based on punitive 4723 damages.  I ask you, well, would making them pay
    extra money regulate this company, prevent it from
    doing something bad in the past?
         No.  The regulation is in place, and those
    changes have been made.  And there's a big
    difference between that and going out of business.
    And trying to force the company out of business is
    impermissible.
         15 million a smoker times 2,900 cases wipes out
    the stockholder equity and is 40 times the operating
    income.  The Judge says that you cannot award that
    type of award.
         Now, there aren't too many cases -- there
    aren't too many circumstances in our lives where
    we're asked to punish.  I don't know if maybe in
    employment situations we determine punishment, but
    for most of us, it's probably with our kids.  And
    one of the things that we learn as reasonable people
    in this country is that punishment without a purpose
    doesn't make sense, that punishment without a
    purpose doesn't serve a valid goal.
         In this case, each of you decided, and you
    reached a collective agreement among yourselves, on
    what the exact amount that was necessary to fully
    compensate Mr. McCabe and his sisters was.  And you 4724 reached that, and you awarded that exact amount.  We
    know that they are fully compensated for what they
    lost.
         This is different.  This is whether Mr. McCabe
    should get extra money as some sort of punishment
    that must deter future conduct.  Well, is it a
    punishment without a purpose?  Would it make
    Reynolds tell smokers that smoking is addictive and
    causes disease?  That's a good idea, but they
    already do.
         Would it make them tell smokers about less
    dangerous tobacco products, for example, products
    that have a 90 percent reduction in risk, according
    to one of the leading organizations?  They already
    do.  Would it force Reynolds to help their customers
    quit?
         And we saw so many documents in Phase 1 about
    what if smokers could quit and what would happen.
    There is no way that anyone who wrote those
    documents in the '50s or '60s could imagine a day
    when a tobacco company is telling smokers on its
    website that they should quit if they're concerned
    and providing them the cheap and effective way to
    quit, a way that's been FDA approved.  The FDA
    approved not just the gum, but the way it's 4725 marketed.  No one could have imagined that a tobacco
    company would be doing that, a tobacco company
    selling a product that could put a cigarettes out of
    business.
         No amount of money to Mr. McCabe could
    accomplish that.  It's already occurred.
         There's no dispute and there is no evidence in
    this case that any tobacco company in the
    United States, let alone Philip Morris or any of the
    hundreds of other small companies that you heard
    about, there's no dispute and no evidence that
    Reynolds is not the industry leader in developing
    reduced risk tobacco products.  And the criticism in
    this case has been simply they didn't go out of
    business.
         You can't give an award that would put them out
    of business.  And the award of 15 million -- with
    the Judge's instruction that you have to think about
    what would happen if that was replicated in the
    remaining lawsuits -- would wipe that company out.
         I submit to you that under all of the facts in
    this case, the change in conduct that you're
    required to consider, the fact that this is not a
    case where the smoker had no responsibility for her
    own action, that an award of -- 4726      MR. TRENTALANGE:  Objection, Your Honor.
    Improper argument.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. BELASIC:  That we should be talking about
    an award of hundreds of thousands of dollars and not
    tens of millions.
         I know it's been a long process.  When you're
    done here, you'll go home, and maybe some day you'll
    think about this tobacco case.
         But right here and now, everyone thanks you for
    all of your concentration, just the tremendous
    amount of effort that you've given.
