         MR. BELASIC:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Way back when we started this case, a couple
    minutes into opening statement, I told you the
    following, that -- what if smoking was the cause of
    her lung cancer?  That's not really at issue in this
    case.  And the issue in this case is, was addiction
    to cigarettes the legal cause of her disease.
         Mr. Trentalange says they presented two medical
    experts, Schiff and Villa.  And they talked about
    the medical cause of her disease and they said 4199 smoking causes cancer, cancer was the cause of her
    death.  That's not really at issue.  There isn't a
    dispute about that.
         What's at issue is what you're going to decide
    here:  "Was Jane McCabe addicted to cigarettes
    containing nicotine and, if so, was addiction a
    legal cause of her lung cancer and death?"
         If you look at this question, it has the word
    "and" in it.  The first question is actually two
    questions.  First, was she addicted?  But then even
    if you find that she was addicted under whatever
    definition you choose to apply was she addicted, was
    the addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and
    death?
         And so the issue in this case, and the premier
    issue, the first issue, is not whether smoking
    caused the cells in her lung to change or whether
    smoking caused her lung cancer and lung cancer
    caused her death.  That's not in dispute.  The issue
    is not the medical cause, but whether addiction was
    the legal cause of her lung cancer and death.
         Now, you heard this morning, well, that
    addiction is a choice.  Choice has nothing to do
    with addiction.  Ladies and gentlemen, I suggest
    that the evidence you heard is exactly to 4200 opposite, because you have to decide if addiction
    was the legal cause of her death.  And if she had
    the ability to quit, if she had the ability to
    choose to quit and to choose to continue, then
    addiction didn't cause her lung cancer and death.
         Now, why do I say that?  Every one of the
    family members, the family members who testified --
    and including Romayne McCabe, the sister-in-law --
    said either that it was Jane McCabe's own business
    to smoke or that they regarded it as her personal
    decision to smoke.  Those were the family members,
    including the five family members who are suing, we
    now know, for between 12 and a half million and
    17 and a half million dollars.  And those family
    members said that they regarded it as her personal
    business or her personal decision.
         Now, how strong was the belief of the family
    members, Mr. McCabe, the four daughters,
    Romayne McCabe?  Well, we know how strong it was
    because, first, they told you over and over again,
    we saw from the fact witnesses, they didn't tell
    their mother to quit smoking, not once.  They didn't
    tell her smoking was dangerous, not once, except for
    five-year-old granddaughter Jenna.
         Now, why didn't they do that?  No one is 4201 blaming them.  They don't have to warn her.  But why
    didn't they do that?  And that's when they told us
    under oath, they didn't tell her to quit smoking and
    they didn't warn her to quit smoking, even though
    they thought she was addicted, because it was her
    business, because it was her personal decision.
         Now, those aren't words that some tobacco
    lawyer cooked up.  I didn't write them down on a
    notepad and come in here.  That was the testimony of
    the people who loved her.  So the people who now say
    that they should receive between 12 and a half
    million and 17 and a half million dollars are the
    same people who told you under oath that it was
    their own mother's personal business or their own
    mother's personal decision.  And I'm going to go
    over that testimony later.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Before you do, I have an
    objection, Your Honor.  May we approach?
         THE COURT:  Approach the bench.
         (The following bench conference took place
outside the hearing of the jury:)
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Judge, there was a pretrial
    ruling on blaming the victims.  That's exactly what
    just happened.  He's blaming the victims for failing
    to warn their mother and pointing out that they're 4202 going to get compensation and suggesting they should
    not get compensation because they're the same people
    that failed to warn their mother.
         THE COURT:  That's not how I heard the
    argument.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  That's how I heard it, and
    that's why I'm objecting.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  Overruled.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  You're overruling the
    objection.  Okay.
         (End of bench conference.)
         MR. BELASIC:  We talked about dominoes this
    morning -- or you heard about dominoes.  Let's talk
    about addiction and a legal cause.
         What does addiction mean?  How does addiction
    cause cancer?  You're going to hear later --
    Dr. Cummings told us nicotine doesn't cause lung
    cancer, so we know it's not a direct cause.
         How does addiction cause cancer under their
    theory?  Well, Dr. Schiff, Dr. Herkov,
    Dr. Cummings -- not Dr. Schiff -- they say, well,
    addiction is the reason she smoked.  But you didn't
    hear any evidence that addiction prevented her from
    quitting.  Addiction didn't force her to go to the
    store and buy a pack of cigarettes.  It didn't force 4203 her to light the cigarette.  It didn't force her to
    put it in her mouth.  And when you consider that --
    put aside the expert testimony.  The people who knew
    her and saw her, the children, Romayne McCabe, they
    thought it was her business and her decision.
         So the suggestion is, well, addiction makes you
    smoke, and then smoking causes the cancer and it's
    just a straight line.  Well, it's not a straight
    line.
         Now, I love dominoes.  I didn't know we'd talk
    about dominoes today, so I didn't bring enough.  If
    I put dominoes in a giant row here and I stretched
    them all the way back, if I put the dominoes close
    enough together, I click over the first domino, we
    know what happens.  All of them go down in a row.
         But if we do this, if we pull one domino out
    and there's enough space, five or six dominoes might
    fall and then none of the rest of them will fall,
    because it breaks the chain.
         And the evidence in this case is that
    Mrs. McCabe always had the ability to break the
    chain.  Whatever they say is this chain of
    causation, there is no denying that she had the
    ability to quit.  We know she did.
         Even Dr. Cummings, even Dr. Herkov never said 4204 that addiction somehow made it impossible to quit.
    Remember what they talked about?  Well, addiction is
    smoking a lot of cigarettes, addiction is smoking
    last thing at night, addiction is smoking first
    thing in the morning.
         They didn't say, because they couldn't say,
    that it was impossible for her to quit.  And the
    people that knew her best thought whether she could
    quit and whether she should quit was up to her, that
    it was her business and her decision.
         But, yet, they're the same people that are
    suing for money.  And I would argue they shouldn't
    be compensated for their mother's decision.
         Now, there was some talk about sympathy, and
    then Mr. Trentalange rightfully suggested that you,
    of course, can't base your decision on sympathy.
    But let's get real.
         The testimony in a case like this, when you see
    that a mother died, there is no denying that all
    five of them loved their mother.  No one is
    suggesting that she wasn't anything but a good
    person.
         And in this world, we all have to face the
    death of our loved ones, or we all have.  And what
    happens when loved ones die is you usually hear -- 4205 often hear people say things like, I wish he had
    taken better care of himself, I wish he had watched
    his weight, I wish he had dieted, if only he had
    exercised more, wish he hadn't smoked, wish he
    hadn't drank.
         And that type of hindsight is absolutely
    natural.  And it's absolutely painful to look back
    in hindsight and say, I wish my loved one would have
    done something different.
         Well, that's the case here.  Now they're
    looking back in hindsight and they're
    second-guessing a decision that they themselves said
    was her decision, that they couldn't make for her.
    They're second-guessing a decision.
         And I suggest that when you look at all of the
    evidence, they shouldn't be getting two or three
    million dollars each, 12 million or 17 million
    dollars for what they themselves believe was
    Mrs. McCabe's decision.
         Now, even when Mrs. McCabe first started
    smoking, she knew she wasn't supposed to smoke.  We
    heard that she and Romayne hid their smoking from
    the parents.  We heard from Romayne that smoking was
    prohibited in high school, so she knew right off the
    bat you are not supposed to smoke; it's barred at 4206 the high school.  Mrs. McCabe said that they were
    sneaking around even in high school.
         By the late '40s, she was in nursing school,
    and she was at the nursing school that the top lung
    cancer expert in the country was at.  We're going to
    go over that evidence.  She was at the nursing
    school where Ochsner was saying that lung cancer was
    causing smoking [sic].  This wasn't hidden.  She was
    right there in school.
         By the '50s, she was warned by the nuns.  And
    no one says that the nuns gave her health warnings.
    But we heard very specifically from Mr. McCabe, from
    Dr. Cummings, the nuns caught her.  They gave her a
    lecture, smoking was a vice.  She knew even then she
    wasn't supposed to smoke.
         By the '50s, we know that the lung cancer was
    in the news.  You're going to see the evidence that
    almost everyone in the country had heard that
    smoking caused lung cancer.  Meanwhile, she was
    doing surgery or assisting in surgery.
         We know that in the '60s -- and this is
    30 years before she developed lung cancer -- she was
    a county school nurse.  And I'm going to show you
    some of the evidence that suggests that she had to
    be aware from that job that smoking caused lung 4207 cancer.  Because in '63, the schools, the same
    county schools she was the nurse for, were running
    an anticancer program that even Dr. Cummings
    admitted told the kids smoking caused lung cancer.
         Now, did -- do we have a videotape of her
    attending that?  Do we have an audio recording of
    her discussing that?  Of course not.  But come on.
    She was responsible for the school's nursing
    program.  The same schools that she was the nurse
    for were running programs telling kids that smoking
    caused cancer.  Use your common sense there.
    There's no way she missed that.  There's no way she
    missed it.  The kids were being taught what she
    already knew.
         In '64, it was official.  We know the
    Surgeon General said that there -- that smoking
    caused lung cancer.  And that was 30 years, 30 years
    before she got lung cancer.  She had 30 years to
    take that domino out of the chain, 30 years to break
    the chain.  And there isn't one expert in this case
    that said she lacked the ability to do it.  And her
    own kids said that that decision was up to her.
         Now, whatever bad things the tobacco companies
    did and however upset, if you are, at what the
    tobacco companies did, that doesn't change what 4208 kids thought was her decision and what the evidence
    shows was her ability to quit smoking.
         30 years before she develops lung cancer,
    there's a warning on every single pack.  And no one
    in this case can say -- can pretend that she thought
    smoking was safe or that she thought smoking wasn't
    bad for her, that she thought smoking wasn't
    dangerous.  It was right there on the pack every day
    for 30 years.
         That's a decision our society made.  Ban
    cigarettes like Florida did at the turn of the
    century, no.  Cigarettes are legal.  The government
    requires a warning on the pack.  She saw it.
         We know that she had dramatic personal
    warnings, dramatic personal examples of what could
    happen.
         She took care of Uncle George with emphysema.
    Her Uncle Bernard died of lung cancer.  That was
    almost 30 years before she came down with lung
    cancer.  She knew.
         There's no one that can dispute that she had
    firsthand evidence that smoking could kill.  The
    kids all knew that too.  And that's how the
    testimony came out from the children.  So they knew
    it. 4209 Mr. McCabe, in fact, said one of the reasons he
    never smoked was the Uncle George experience was so
    disgusting, left such an impression on him.  The
    kids all knew it.
         They didn't warn her not to smoke.  And why?
    Because they believed it was her choice.  They knew
    that she was aware, just like they were.  And they
    left the decision up to her because it was her
    decision.
         We know she went into rehab at '69.  We know
    she didn't ask anyone.  There's no evidence she ever
    asked anyone for help in quitting smoking.
         By 1970, there was another warning, and still
    here, she's 25 years away, 25 years away from that
    horrible day when she gets diagnosed.  25 years for
    her to break the chain, 25 years for her to quit.
         We know she could quit.  We know no expert said
    that addiction stopped her or -- from quitting or
    forced her to continue.  25 years to break the
    chain.
         Next one in this evidence shows addiction
    wasn't the legal cause of her lung cancer.  Her
    decision to smoke for the 40 or 50 years and that
    smoking was.  That's the medical cause.  Addiction
    was not a legal cause. 4210 We learned something from one of the children,
    that Mr. McCabe warned his kids in the '70s when
    she's still smoking.  And think about that.  That's
    20 years before Jane McCabe is going to get lung
    cancer.  And her husband is in the same household.
    They're living together every day.  She's seeing
    him.  He's talking about "cancer sticks."
         We know he, himself, quit ten years earlier.
    And, again, your common sense and your knowledge of
    the family, is there any possible way that this
    trained nurse and addiction professional who saw her
    own relatives pass away from smoking in the '60s,
    whose own husband is running around telling the kids
    about "cancer sticks," can anyone seriously say that
    she was tricked or deceived?
         Now, did she read every single internal
    document from a tobacco company, the documents the
    plaintiff's lawyers want you to be mad at?  Of
    course not.  But did she know, just like her own
    husband, that smoking could cause cancer.  When she
    saw Uncle Bernard go down, did she know it could
    kill you from emphysema when she saw Uncle George
    pass away?  Of course she did.  The children told
    us.
         By '85, there were new pack warnings that were 4211 even more specific.  They had no effect on her.
         And in '93, she quit smoking and she never
    smoked again.
         Now, at any time in that chain of events, she
    could have quit smoking.  That's what Dr. Barnett,
    who's seen hundreds or thousands of substance abuse
    patients, not just the one, she told you that she
    had seen up to hundreds or thousands of substance
    abuse patients, hundreds of patients with smoking
    issues.  And, yes, only one person came in and said,
    that's the only thing I want.
         That's the only board certified addiction
    professional medical doctor in this case.  And she
    told you quite frankly, she has received cases from
    tobacco companies where she says, this smoker is
    addicted.  You heard that testimony.
         In the instructions that you'll get, you'll
    have the written copy.  It says -- right off the
    bat, there's an instruction on legal product.  And,
    obviously, making cigarettes is legal, selling
    cigarettes is legal, and advertising cigarettes is
    legal.
         And the judge is instructing you, Reynolds
    cannot be held liable -- that means forced to pay
    money -- merely for manufacturing, selling, or 4212 advertising cigarettes.  The companies have a legal
    right to be in business.
         Now, there's a lot of discussion about the
    Engle findings and this other jury.  Remember,
    you're the only jury that's ever heard any evidence
    about Mrs. McCabe.  That previous jury didn't hear
    anything about Mrs. McCabe.
         And if you look on this form, you're not going
    to be asked the same questions the Engle jury was.
    We're not retrying those.  This is Jane McCabe's
    trial.  The questions on the verdict form are about
    Jane McCabe, Jane McCabe, Jane McCabe.
         None of those findings here determine whether
    or not R.J. Reynolds should pay millions of dollars
    to the children for the death of their mother when
    they themselves say it was the mother's decision to
    smoke.
         Now, what did we hear about when she started
    smoking.  And, obviously, the evidence is a bit
    sketchy.
         First of all, none of the children, obviously,
    were there when she started smoking.  Romayne McCabe
    was the only person who was there.  And Romayne
    tells us, right off the bat, she wasn't there when
    Mrs. McCabe started smoking.  In fact, she said 4213 there was a small group of kids, and she wasn't sure
    if she was in it.  And I want to go over some of the
    things that Romayne McCabe told us.
         But first of all, no dispute, Romayne McCabe,
    an elegant, charming woman, she certainly was very
    candid about what she remembered, what she believed,
    and what she didn't remember.  And here's what she
    said.  The first thing she said is that she didn't
    see Mrs. McCabe smoke before high school.  She said
    she wasn't certain.  They asked about the group.
         Then Mr. Uiterwyk asked her, Well, what about
    the eight or ninth grade?  Turns out Mrs. McCabe
    says, in the eighth or ninth grade, that's when Jane
    McCabe was in Orlando.  And so the first time she
    definitely saw her smoke was in high school.
         Now, could she have smoked, stolen a few
    cigarettes from her parents, snuck some cigarettes
    at 12 or 13, sure.  But when she gets back, she's in
    tenth grade.  And think of that.  Tenth grade is
    when you get your driver's license.  Tenth grade is
    15 and 16.  After you finish tenth grade, you're two
    years away from -- from finishing high school.
    You're not 11 years old in high school, you're not
    12 years old in high school.
         What Romayne McCabe said -- and Mr. Uiterwyk 4214 asked her these questions.  He said, Was she a
    regular smoker?
         She said, well, when the cigarettes were
    available, when they had money, and she said they
    were sneaking around.  And they had to sneak around
    because they couldn't smoke at school.  And she
    said, when they were available, when they had money,
    they smoked.
         No one -- no one in this case claimed she was
    smoking two packs a day in high school.  And Romayne
    McCabe says they were sneaking around to smoke even
    what they could get when they had money.
         Now, Romayne said that she personally --
    remember, Mr. Trentalange said she's sort of like a
    double.  And I agree.  In some ways, because she's
    the only one who was there, in some ways, it's
    almost like Romayne McCabe is a proxy for or
    substitute for Jane McCabe.  But, you know, let's
    not be confused.  These are two separate people.
    And Romayne McCabe doesn't know why she started
    smoking.
         And, in fact, Romayne said she personally never
    tuned in to cigarette advertising.  She said she
    remembers it in the movies, but she personally
    wasn't influenced by advertising. 4215 So we asked her, Did Jane McCabe ever tell you
    that she started to smoke or continued smoking?  And
    she answered no.  There's no claim from Romayne
    McCabe that an advertisement made Jane smoke, let
    alone an advertisement that was false.  Because,
    again, in the 1940s, it was legal to have an ad.
         Now, you look at those ads, and those ads are
    weird.  You think, if they ran today, we'd all get
    mad and maybe you're mad just seeing them, but it
    was legal to put an ad, it was legal to have, just
    like everyone else, an ad that had Santa.  It was
    legal to put a celebrity in an ad.  And there's no
    evidence that those ads were concealing information
    way back in the '40s.  And I'm going to talk about
    that in about 30 seconds.
         Now, Romayne continued and said, when it came
    to the movies, she and Mrs. McCabe never discussed
    smoking depicted in the movies.  And that's why
    Romayne said she has no idea why Mrs. McCabe smoked
    any particular brand.  In fact, she's the only
    person that could have known and could have had
    firsthand knowledge what she smoked.  And what you
    heard from her was Mrs. McCabe -- Jane McCabe's dad
    smoked unfiltered Camels and they snuck some
    cigarettes.  So you get a few unfiltered Camels that 4216 they snuck.
         But then she was asked, Well, what brand?  She
    said, I don't remember brand.  I didn't pay
    attention to brand.
         There is no evidence in this case from the
    eyewitness that she smoked unfiltered Camels for any
    length of time.  There is no evidence from any
    eyewitness that she smoked Lucky Strikes.  There was
    no evidence from any eyewitness in this case that
    she ever smoked Kent.
         Even Dr. Cummings, who's just relying on
    hearsay, even Dr. Cummings says that Kents was just
    an occasional brand.
         The people who were there, the only person who
    was there doesn't know what she smoked.  And Romayne
    was very candid.  She said that both she and
    Mrs. McCabe enjoyed smoking.  And she said her
    opinion was based on the decade she knew her, from
    the 1930s until the 1990s.  And she said that
    Ms. McCabe enjoyed smoking.
         Now, we know that Mrs. McCabe started smoking
    sometime in the 1940s.
         Plaintiffs have a conspiracy claim in this
    case.  And it's undisputed, undisputed, as
    Dr. Cummings told you, that there was this meeting 4217 at the Plaza Hotel in New York, December 1953.
    That's what he said over and over again.  What he
    calls the conspiracy, this agreement, this meeting,
    was December 1953.
         She started smoking sometime in the '40s, years
    before that.
         Now, obviously, there was no way that an action
    in December 1953 caused her to smoke years before.
    And when I asked Dr. Cummings, he agreed with me.
    We don't have a time machine, so there is no way; it
    is impossible for what they say is the conspiracy,
    for this agreement in 1953 to have caused
    Mrs. McCabe to smoke.
         There's no evidence of any concealment of
    health information when she started.  What
    Dr. Cummings talks about is 1953.  The documents
    that he showed you from 1953, '57, '60, there was no
    evidence in this case that in the 1940s, when
    Ms. McCabe started, that the conspiracy existed.  It
    didn't exist for another ten years.
         There's no evidence in this case that the
    companies concealed something.  And that's
    plaintiff's burden of proof.
         Dr. Cummings didn't claim, well, in 1943, you
    had some duty to tell people that smoking caused 4218 lung cancer.  He didn't claim that.  There's no
    evidence of that.  What they're talking about is
    something that happened years later.  And it's
    impossible for things that happened in the '50s to
    have caused her to smoke in the '40s.
         Romayne McCabe tells us, didn't start smoking
    because of advertising.  There's no evidence that
    there's any concealment in that advertising.
    Frankly, there's no evidence at all that any
    statement by R.J. Reynolds or another tobacco
    company caused her to start smoking.  And that's
    what we know from the eyewitness.
         Now, Dr. Cummings says, oh, smoking is
    inevitable.  And he put up -- how many ads did you
    see?  Ad after ad after ad after ad after ad.  And
    no one denies there was a lot of advertising.  It
    was all over the place.  And no one denies -- did
    Mrs. McCabe see ads?  I presume she did.  No one's
    going to dispute she saw ads.
         But plaintiff's burden of proof, though, is to
    say that she was actually caused to develop cancer
    because of something that was concealed, because of
    some false statement or something that was hidden.
    Was it inevitable?  No.
         First thing, this is from Dr. Cummings.  In 4219 1940s -- and remember he looked at the birth group
    that -- that Jane McCabe was in.
         In the 1940s for the people who were born at
    the time that she was born, at age 12, less than
    1 percent of kids smoked.  It's not like there was a
    nation of 12-year-olds smoking in 1945.  Less than
    1 percent did.
         By the time people in her age group were 14, in
    the 1940s, about when she started smoking, because
    that's tenth grade, a little later, only 2.8 percent
    were smoking.
         Now, those are the statistics from
    Dr. Cummings.  Those are the statistics when
    Mr. Paige came up.  I was done with
    cross-examination, Mr. Paige came up, and he put
    those statistics in front of Dr. Cummings.
         So this idea that she was surrounded or the
    whole nation was inevitable that a 14-year-old
    smoked, no, 97 percent of 14-year-olds didn't smoke.
         Well, what happens when you're adults?
         In the '40s, when she started smoking,
    Dr. Cummings agreed that only 25 percent of adult
    women smoked in the 1940s.  There we go.  This is
    when I was cross-examining him.  Only 25 percent of
    adult women smoked.  75 percent of adult women 4220 didn't smoke.
         So if you looked around in the community and
    the nation, three out of every four adult women were
    nonsmokers.  Three out of every four adult women saw
    the same ads.  They were living at the same time and
    they made a decision not to smoke.
         Jane McCabe made a different decision.  No one
    is blaming her for that decision, but she cannot
    escape responsibility for that decision, just like
    the 75 percent who chose not to smoke.
         So the idea that it's inevitable, one out of
    four ain't inevitable.  Three out of four is the
    landslide majority of women in the '40s chose not to
    smoke.
         Well, did it go up in the '50s?
         Dr. Cummings said in the '50s, adult women, 36
    percent, or about one out of three, smoked.  But 64
    percent, two out of every three women, did not
    smoke.
         It wasn't inevitable.  The tobacco companies
    couldn't wave a magic wand and put pretty women in
    an ad and force people to smoke.  It's just
    ridiculous.  People have minds, they have the
    ability to choose.  We are all bombarded by
    advertisements, and it doesn't make us go like a 4221 robot to the store.
         Neither did she.  She made a decision that most
    women didn't make.  She made a decision that the
    vast majority of women didn't make.  She chose to
    smoke.  Now, they're saying, in effect, that she's
    not responsible for that.
         Romayne McCabe told us that she never saw Jane
    McCabe try to quit smoking.  She told us that
    Mrs. McCabe never, not once, from the '30s, when she
    first met her in the first grade, to 1993, when she
    quit smoking, not once did she ever tell her close
    friend and sister-in-law, not once, that she wanted
    to quit.  She never told her that smoking was hard
    to quit, and Mrs. McCabe never saw her try to do
    anything.
         And we know -- I don't have to keep repeating
    it.  Obviously, it's an important fact.  We heard
    over and over again, every single one of the five
    children, Romayne McCabe, their own experts agree,
    no one ever saw her try to quit smoking until the
    1990s.  No one ever saw her put aside her cigarettes
    for even an hour, said Jim McCabe.
         Finally, what Romayne told us is that her --
    that in her opinion -- and that's what we were
    asking for -- she and Jane regarded smoking as their 4222 own business.  And when she was asked, she agreed
    that she regarded Jane McCabe decision as her own
    personal decision.
         Her family made different decisions.  Her
    father, Leon, we know he was the police chief.
    Obviously, her father had been smoking for many,
    many more years than her in the 1940s.  He's smoking
    the same brand that they claim, without actual
    proof, that she smoked, unfiltered Camels.  And he
    chose to quit.
         There's some dispute, was it in the middle of
    World War II -- remember, this is when I asked
    Dr. Cummings.  And I wrote this down.  Was it in the
    middle of World War II, as James McCabe thinks, or
    was it after World War II, as Dr. Cummings thought
    based on his review of the sworn testimony?
         Whatever it was, she knew her father.  She had
    to know he'd quit.  She was living with him during
    World War II.  And he made a different decision.
         Tobacco companies didn't take his mind because
    in the 1940s there was a picture of a slinky woman
    in a cocktail dress.  Again, that's just ridiculous.
    He made his own choice.  And there's no evidence
    that she couldn't have chosen to do exactly what her
    father did. 4223 And, again, it's not blame.  We have personal
    freedom.  We have personal responsibility.  To
    mention the other half is not blame.
         We know in the late '40s, there she was.
    That's the big -- one of the largest hospitals in
    the south where she attended nursing school.
         And we know that Dr. Ochsner -- Dr. Cummings
    agreed with me, Ochsner was, in effect, a giant.  He
    was one of the leaders of the antismoking movement.
    He was one of the very first scientists and doctors
    in the United States to study a link between lung
    cancer and smoking.  And he did it all, he did it
    all, Dr. Cummings said, at New Orleans Charity
    Hospital.
         I asked Dr. Cummings.  He said it's true; she
    could have passed him in the hallway.
         Now, am I claiming she sat down and had a
    conversation with him?  Of course not.  But she's
    going to school at a place where the most famous
    doctor in the whole hospital just happens to be the
    most famous antismoking doctor in the whole country.
    That's from Dr. Cummings.  And she's going to school
    at this hospital.
         Remember, she's a regular newspaper reader.  No
    one denies that.  She's going to school at this 4224 hospital with Dr. Ochsner there when Dr. Ochsner's
    lung cancer reports are being reported in the
    newspapers.
         It wasn't a secret that smoking could cause
    lung cancer.  And the idea that that's something
    that a tobacco company wrote, but they didn't mail
    to her, caused her to smoke, that doesn't make
    sense.  This was out there.  This wasn't secret.
         We know in the '50s she was warned by the nuns
    not to smoke.  Again, it's not a health issue.  The
    rule was you couldn't smoke, it was a vice.  She was
    in surgery as a nurse assisting.  Dr. Cummings
    agrees she's a regular newspaper reader of the Tampa
    Tribune and the other newspapers where she lived.
    Dr. Cummings agreed that one of the magazines she
    read regularly was LIFE magazine.
         Now, here's what I talked about in 1963.  How
    can the plaintiffs claim that Mrs. McCabe missed
    this?  Come on.  She is, for the county health
    department, the school nurse.  She has the
    responsibility for the health and welfare of the
    children.  Obviously, she's going to be tuned in to
    the health instruction that the kids are getting in
    the schools.  We know that of the 11 counties, Pasco
    County -- 11 counties, 275,000 school children in 4225 Pasco County, can anyone seriously suggest that she
    didn't realize that the children were being taught
    smoking causes lung cancer with the American
    society?  Could she possibly have missed that?
         She couldn't miss it, because the next -- the
    next year, everyone found out.  This was front-page
    news.  It was the front-page news story.  You saw it
    from the Florida Health Department, that they said,
    quote, Nearly Every Adult Floridian, unquote, had
    seen this.  The Surgeon General announced.
         That's 30 years before she developed lung
    cancer.  That's 30 years.  If this -- if causation
    is really dominoes, that's 30 years that she could
    take a domino out, that's 30 years that she can stop
    that link, that she can remove that link in the
    chain, and that she can quit smoking.
         Her husband quits in the '60s.  And what's so
    important about that is, obviously, he's exposed to
    everything she is.  He's seeing the same ads in the
    '60s that you saw.  He grew up in the same
    environment.  He's reading in the newspaper.
    Whatever was out there, he was exposed to it just
    like her.  And he's smoking the exact same
    cigarettes.
         Now, there is no evidence that the companies 4226 did something in the 1960s that made it impossible
    for either of them to quit.  He was smoking the
    exact same cigarettes, and he quit.  He quit smoking
    Salems.
         She made a different choice than her husband.
    She can't be blamed for her choice.  But you know
    what?  She has to be credited for her choice.  She
    has to be held accountable for her choice.  And the
    children obviously wish she made a different choice.
    We all have sympathy, but that can't be the basis
    for decision.
         That same time her husband's quitting in the
    mid '60s, the school kid program in Pasco County is
    talking about --
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Excuse me, Your Honor.  I'm
    sorry.  May we approach?
         THE COURT:  Approach the bench, please.
         (The following bench conference took place
outside the hearing of the jury:)
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  I think he just said -- and I
    need to preserve the objection.  I think he just
    referred to the children and said they need to be
    held accountable.  I may have heard that wrong,
    but -- she made that choice, they made that choice,
    they need to be held accountable. 4227 THE COURT:  I don't see where he said it about
    the being held accountable.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Okay.
         THE COURT:  Just the children wish she made a
    different choice.  We all have sympathy.  She can't
    be blamed.  She can't be blamed for her choice.  She
    has to be credited for her choice.  She has to be
    held accountable for her choice.
         (End of bench conference.)
         MR. BELASIC:  Now, as I was saying, she made a
    different choice than the husband.  Part of what you
    have do in this case is determine whether she will
    be held responsible for that choice or whether her
    children can come into court and say that the
    tobacco companies are very bad people and they wrote
    bad documents and they should get money for her
    choice, something they thought was her choice.
         Here is the warning.  Her husband's quitting in
    the mid '60s.  The Surgeon General has said to
    everyone in the country -- national news, every
    adult heard it -- that smoking causes lung cancer.
    And now there's a warning on her pack.  And the
    children that we asked, they all say, no, she did
    not do anything in response to a health warning.
    Dr. Cummings admitted she never -- there is no 4228 evidence -- she never made an effort to quit in
    response to a health warning.  The only time she
    decided to quit was when her granddaughter Jenna was
    telling her to quit and she knew she wasn't going to
    be able to see her any longer.  That's when she
    decided to quit.
         We know about the -- obviously, the immediate
    and emotional example.  So think what that had to be
    like for her in the '60s.
         Twenty years earlier, back in the '40s, she's
    going to school where the lung cancer giant is
    where, where the lung cancer reports are in the
    paper.  All throughout the '50s, you can see all of
    the reports that were out there.  And then in the
    '60s, within just a period of years, the
    Surgeon General says it causes lung cancer.
         Her own husband quits in the mid '60s, and she
    sees two other uncles die of smoking-related
    disease.  Right in her face, she saw a choice.  Her
    husband chose to quit.  He's not here suing.  The
    two uncles, we don't know if they quit or not.  They
    died of smoking-related diseases.  That's the choice
    that she had to make.  And nothing that the tobacco
    companies did stopped her husband from quitting,
    just like nothing that the tobacco companies did 4229 stopped Jane McCabe from putting the cigarettes
    down.  But she didn't want to.
         By '70, there was a new warning.  That's 25
    years before she developed lung cancer.  Thirty
    years of warnings on the pack before she passed
    away.  We know she was an addiction professional.
    We know that her title was Director of Alcohol and
    Substance Abuse Services.
         So this is a woman who worked daily with the
    concept of addiction, a woman who worked daily with
    the concept of treatment, remedies, quit plans, all
    of the things that you would do to try to get people
    to quit alcohol or to deal with other substance
    abuse.  She's in charge of all of that.  And
    Dr. Cummings said, "She would understand addiction."
         There is a lot of smokers in this country.
    Maybe some smokers were fooled.  Maybe some smokers
    didn't know.  But a woman who was a professional
    nurse for 50 years and a woman who was an addiction
    professional for 20 years, I submit to you, they
    have the wrong plaintiff.  This is not someone who
    was tricked or who didn't know that smoking was
    dangerous, who didn't know that smoking caused
    cancer.  She saw it for herself with her own family,
    with her own uncle.  She understood addiction. 4230 That's their expert.
         Now, basically, this is a fraud case about
    addiction.  And so you have the plaintiff's expert
    saying the plaintiff understood addiction.  That's
    not a good case.  That's not the right plaintiff.
    Maybe there are others.
         In '76, her daughter Rosemary quit.  And,
    again, each of the children, each of the daughters
    was asked, You quit smoking?  You believed smoking
    was dangerous?  You believed you were addicted?  You
    believed your mom was addicted?  But nonetheless,
    the daughters quit smoking.  The kids were quitting
    all around her.
         When asked, Why didn't you intervene and tell
    your mom, they said, Well, it was her business, it
    was her decision.
         They're absolutely right.  It was her decision.
         By '85, the warning was there that said smoking
    causes lung cancer.  That's ten years before she
    developed lung cancer.  And, again, the evidence is
    she made no effort to quit.
         One of the things you're going to see after we
    break for lunch later in the afternoon, the
    plaintiff's claim for fraud, for this concealment,
    requires them to show that if the companies had 4231 acted differently, that but for whatever it is they
    say were concealed, that Mrs. McCabe would have
    changed her behavior, Mrs. McCabe would have acted
    differently.
         Now, can anyone really claim that if
    Mrs. McCabe got a little bit more information, that
    if Mrs. McCabe was told smoking could be dangerous
    for her or that it caused cancer, that she would
    have changed her opinion and that she would have
    quit?  Because we know going back to the '40s, that
    she had information that smoking caused cancer.  We
    know she saw it personally.  We know she saw it in
    the most emotional way.  We know she knew about
    quitting.  And we know that every single time we
    asked the kids, they said she never made an effort
    to quit, that they saw.
         So we know how she reacted to information.
    Health information was not going to change
    Mrs. McCabe's mind.  And that's fine.  We don't
    blame her for that choice, but this case is about
    holding her responsible for that choice.  The only
    thing that got her to quit was granddaughter Jenna.
         In '85, the same year -- the same year that the
    lung cancer is on the warning pack, right on the
    pack, her daughter Melinda quit smoking. 4232 In '92, Susan Beddingfield, the third daughter,
    quit smoking.  Here is what the evidence told us.
    That not only did Melinda, the daughter, say, You
    can't smoke around Jenna, but Jenna, a five-year-old
    in 1993, was warning her to quit smoking.  Now, a
    five-year-old would say, Smoking bad for you, don't
    smoke.  A five-year-old asked her granddaughter --
    or her grandmother to quit.
         And we know what she said in response, because
    one of the daughters told us.  She said she knows
    and she's going to do something about it.  And she
    did do something about it.  And for the first time
    in her life, she made a motivated decision to quit.
         And all during those years, all during this
    link in the chain, all during this long line of
    dominoes, she could have made the same decision to
    quit.  There is no expert in this case, including
    their experts, that says that she -- that it was
    impossible for her to stop earlier.
         The only board-certified addiction
    psychiatrist, the president of the Florida
    Psychiatric Society, says that she doesn't meet the
    criteria and there is no doubt she could have quit
    smoking earlier.
         Your Honor, I think this is a good breaking 4233
    point.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
           MR. BELASIC:  Thank you, Your Honor.
           Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.  Before
      we go any further, I just want to say on behalf of
      everyone here, I want to thank you for what you've
      done.  I know that this is your third week away
      from jobs, family, and of course, your personal
      life.  And I know it's not what you expected,
      maybe not what you signed up for, but it's what
      you volunteered for, and it's what you swore an
      oath to do.
           And as Judge Barbas, who started this case,
      said, the jury system is probably the most
      important underpinning of our Constitutional
      rights.  And it's not just the parties here that
      couldn't do without you, we couldn't have a court
      system without citizens as civic-minded as you.
      So on behalf of everyone, thank you for your time.
           One other thing.  When I'm done in, let's say
      in an hour, Mr. Trentalange will get up and he's
      going to have 30 minutes to finish up.
           So the plaintiffs in these cases, they get
      the advantage of going first, and they get 4241 advantage of talking last.  So whatever
      Mr. Trentalange says, I've said my piece.  I'm not
      going to be able to say anything.  I ask you one
      thing:  You've seen the evidence and you know what
      evidence I think is important; of course, you know
      what evidence you think is important.
           When you hear Mr. Trentalange talk for that
      half hour, think about, if you would, what I might
      say and the kinds of evidence that I might point
      to, the witness testimony that I talked about.
           So I want to start -- when I was done, I was
      talking about what Romayne McCabe had said about
      starting smoking around the time that Jane McCabe
      had and how, despite the fact that she grew up
      with her and that they saw each other almost every
      day in high school -- went to high school together
      and were smoking together and then she knew her
      all the way into the '90s -- she never heard once
      that Ms. McCabe started because of advertising or
      anything else.  I want to play that testimony for
      you.  This is Romayne McCabe.
           (The following videotaped trial testimony
      clip of Ms. Romayne McCabe was played before the
      jury.)
           "Q.  Did Jane ever tell you why she decided 4242 to start smoking?
           A.  No.
           Q.  Jane didn't tell you she started smoking
      because of cigarette ads, did she?
           A.  No.
           Q.  She never said that she continued to
      smoke because of a cigarette ad, did she?
           A.  No.
           Q.  She never said that she started smoking
      because of statements from a tobacco company, did
      she?
           A.  No.
           Q.  She never told you why she became a daily
      regular smoker, did she?
           A.  No.
           Q.  She never told you that she was making
      any smoking decision -- amount, brand, whether to
      quit or not to quit, any smoking decision at
      all -- based on something the tobacco company
      said, did she?
           A.  No."
           (Video clip concluded.)
           MR. BELASIC:  So that's Romayne McCabe.
           You heard some of the witnesses say, "Well,
      she was private."  She must have done something 4243 that would be helpful to the plaintiffs, but she
      never told us.  These were kids in high school.
      Does anyone here think for a second that if Jane
      McCabe started smoking because of an
      advertisement?  Remember, it has to be a false
      advertisement, an advertisement that concealed
      something.  Does anyone think for a second that
      her girlfriend Romayne wouldn't have known about
      it?
           Ms. Romayne was obviously very
      straightforward in what she knew and what she
      remembered, and that was her testimony.
           We know that no one ever saw her make an
      effort to quit before.  You heard that over and
      over and over again.  But the reason I think it's
      important here is because in a case going this far
      back, it's unusual to have eyewitnesses that span
      the whole time.
           Romayne McCabe is 88 years old.  If you heard
      someone was born in 1929 and started smoking in
      the '40s, you probably figured there would be no
      one around to tell the story.  But no, Romayne was
      there and she saw her and knew her for 60 years.
      And she never once -- never once saw her close
      friend and sister-in-law ever make any effort to 4244 quit smoking and neither did any of the children
      and they told you that repeatedly and
      consistently.
           And when they called their experts up here
      and I asked them, the experts agreed no one ever
      observed her make any effort to quit until '93.
           Now, two of the daughters say, "Well, I saw
      the patch on Mom and Mom said, 'I didn't tell you
      about the patch.  I tried to quit before.'"
           And I put up invisible quit attempts, not
      because I'm trying to be a smart aleck, but
      because these are alleged quit attempts that we
      know nothing about, that no one ever saw.  And
      that if these conversations took place --
      remember, there were three other children.
           None of the other three children could
      confirm these conversations.  None of the three
      other children had ever heard their mom say that
      she wanted to quit.  There's no evidence that, for
      example, their mom came up to them in the 1970s
      and said, "I wanted to quit."
           We know there's evidence that she wanted to
      quit alcohol.  And she made no secret of that, and
      she went for professional help.
           So these are invisible quit attempts.  And if 4245 the plaintiffs are going to try to argue to you
      that this is a woman that tried to quit a lot,
      really?  When?  We don't know.  How often?  We
      don't know.  How long?  Did she put the cigarettes
      down for a minute? for an hour?  We don't know.
      That's not evidence.
           The evidence based on eyewitnesses that span
      60 years, from the 1930s to the 1990s, is that she
      never made an effort to quit.  And the
      definition -- one of the definitions of addicted
      smoker, that the experts agreed upon, is someone
      who quits multiple times and then fails and goes
      back.
           Think about it.  Alcohol; she quit multiple
      times, failed, went back.  They call that a
      relapse.  That's what the experts say is the
      hallmark of addiction.  We don't have any of that
      evidence here for her smoking.  There's no
      evidence that she ever stopped smoking for a
      period of time and then went back to it.
           I think you heard Mr. Trentalange say, Well,
      you know, she was on the operating table having a
      kidney removed.  She must have stopped then.
      That's true.  I don't think anyone claimed she was
      smoking while she was under anesthesia.  But 4246 there's no evidence that she stopped for any
      length of time and then relapsed.
           And if this truly is this severely addicted
      smoker that Dr. Cummings and Dr. Herkov say, then
      where's the evidence that meets their own
      standard, a smoker who chronically relapses?  We
      don't have any evidence she ever quit.
           What happened when she did quit, 1993?  Did
      she relapse?  Did she go back over and over
      failing, smoking again?  No.  Every single
      witness, including all the eyewitnesses, says she
      never relapsed.  First motivated quit attempt,
      never relapsed.  That's not definition -- that's
      not addiction even under the plaintiff's
      deposition.
           So let's talk about the evidence on
      Question 1.  And remember, it's two parts, because
      it's was she addicted, first part; and, if she was
      addicted, was addiction a legal cause of her lung
      cancer?  Not was smoking was the cause of her
      cancer, but was addiction a legal cause.
           Let's talk about the first part.  Right off
      the bat, there's no evidence that any of
      Ms. McCabe's own doctors diagnosed her as
      addicted.  There's no medical record that says 4247 that.  There's no testimony that any of her
      doctors ever found her addicted.  None of the
      children say any of her doctors even said it.
           The doctor -- okay.  The doctor who treated
      her who testified was Dr. Schiff.  And remember,
      he's the guy who did the treatment plan.  He
      generated one document.  He recommended chemo and
      radiation.  He didn't testify about addiction at
      all.  In fact, they had to give him a
      hypothetical.  They had to say, Dr. Schiff,
      hypothetically, if she was addicted -- and that's
      because he's a cancer expert.  He wasn't an expert
      on addiction.  So we know Dr. Schiff never
      diagnosed her as addicted.  There's no evidence
      that any of her doctors.
           So when they called Michael Herkov, the
      psychologist, to the stand, I wanted to probe if
      he was relying on some doctor's opinion.  And I
      asked him, Well, who was her family physician?  He
      didn't know.  Who was the doctor who knew her
      best?  Herkov, the guy that they called?  He
      didn't even know.  There's no evidence that any of
      her own doctors.
           So what you have, then, is the witnesses the
      plaintiffs called.  And after all of the witnesses 4248 that the plaintiffs called -- this is
      undisputed -- there isn't a single medical doctor,
      no M.D. in this case who testified that Ms. McCabe
      was addicted.  And the reason is, these first two
      gentlemen are not doctors; they're not medical
      doctors.  They have Ph.D.s, and that's why they
      refer to themselves as doctors.  But they didn't
      go to med school.  They're not M.D.s.  They don't
      treat patients.
           These are the two medical doctors.
      Dr. Schiff, he gave no testimony on addiction at
      all.  And Dr. Villa gave no testimony on addiction
      at all.  And he was straightforward with
      Mr. Quinlan.  He said, not an expert on that at
      all.  He's a cancer expert.  So the two medical
      doctors didn't testify on addiction.
           So now here's the first witness they called,
      Michael Herkov.  He's not an M.D.  He has a Ph.D.
      in psychology.  He never went to med school.  He
      can't prescribe drugs.  He can't give a medical
      diagnosis.  And here's what he said.  And, again,
      this isn't a question I asked him.  This was not a
      trick question.  This is what he responded to
      Mr. Trentalange.  He said, "I don't really treat
      substance abuse disorders." 4249 I should have put the next sentence.  What he
      said was, "I don't really treat substance abuse
      disorders.  I treat almost all other disorders."
           But this is a substance abuse disorder case,
      and this is who the plaintiffs chose to bring in,
      a man who's not an M.D., who's not a medical
      doctor, who can't give a medical diagnosis of
      addiction, and who doesn't even treat substance
      abuse disorders.
           Remember what he said about his practice?  He
      used to be a professor, an academic at the
      University of Florida.  Now he's got a private
      practice.  He told me that he sees between one and
      three patients a week.  That's it.  So imagine, in
      an entire week, he might see one patient.  Now, he
      told me, well, he spends one day out of five on
      patient care.  Those must be some pretty long
      sessions.  From one to three patients a week,
      that's all he has.  And he doesn't treat any of
      them for substance abuse disorders, because he
      says he doesn't treat it.  He gives those to other
      doctors, medical doctors, doctors who really
      specialize in medical treatment.
           Dr. Cummings, not a medical doctor.  No doubt
      that he is -- he's a researcher.  He's a 4250 scientific researcher.  But his Ph.D. is in
      education.  It's in public health education.  So
      he's a great academic.  He's a great lecturer.
      And there's no doubt that he knows a tremendous
      amount about documents from the tobacco companies.
      But he's not a medical doctor.  He didn't give a
      medical diagnosis.
           What was his definition?  Dr. Cummings, this
      was his definition.  He said he wanted to use
      NIDA.  NIDA is the National Institute of Drug
      Abuse.  It's the federal government's drug abuse
      specialty agency.  And he said that the hallmark
      of their definition is that it's a chronic relapse
      disorder.  And chronic means -- acute is
      temporary; chronic means that it's repeated, that
      you relapse over and over.
           And that's what I was talking about just a
      few minutes ago.  We didn't see her relapse over
      and over.  She wasn't the kind of smoker who would
      quit for a week and then go back, and quit for two
      weeks and then it gets really bad and then she has
      to go back, the kind of smoker, the struggling
      smoker that we've all heard about and that many of
      us probably know.  That wasn't her.  She was the
      kind of smoker who made, according to her 4251 eyewitnesses, according to her family, no effort
      to quit until 1993.  And then she didn't relapse
      at all.
           If she's as severely addicted as they say,
      they should have evidence that she's been
      relapsing, quitting and going back.  Instead,
      she's batting a hundred percent.  The first time
      she's motivated -- and everyone agrees they know
      of no other effort to quit and they know of no
      other effort to quit that she's motivated to
      quit -- she bats a thousand, one for one, and she
      never goes back.
           So she doesn't meet relapse.  And without
      relapse, what does addiction mean?  Addiction
      doesn't mean that you can't stop smoking.  And the
      experts agree it doesn't mean that.  You can stop.
      But if addiction means that you don't even
      relapse, then what's preventing her from quitting
      before?
           Now, we called Dr. Barnett, and you heard
      Mr. Trentalange talk about her.  First off, right
      off the bat, she's the only M.D., the only medical
      doctor in this case.  And more importantly, she's
      the only one who's certified, who actually has a
      specialty degree. 4252 All right.  Let's go back.
           So she's board certified in addiction
      psychiatry as well as forensic psychiatry, which
      is psychiatry and the law.  She's the only one who
      sat down for specialized training, the only doctor
      in the case, and the only doctor who specializes
      in addiction medicine.  And so right off the bat
      they say, Well, she's been paid a lot of money.
      And Mr. Trentalange literally said she says what
      she says in order to get money.  That's it.
      Unbelievable statement with no evidence to back it
      up.
           Now, let me ask you this.  If money means a
      person's lying -- because, you know, that's
      clearly what he was implying -- Dr. Cummings makes
      a lot more than her.  Dr. Cummings has pulled down
      1.2 million in just four years; 200,000, 250,000.
      I didn't call him a liar, because he's well paid.
      Judge their testimony on their background, on
      their training, and the credibility and all of the
      other measures that you use to judge them.
           She went very specifically, Ms. McCabe did
      not meet the medical criteria for addiction.  Now,
      DSM-5, that Diagnostic and Statistical Manual,
      those are the medical criteria that doctors use, 4253 not people who are professors like Dr. Cummings, a
      Ph.D. in health education, and not someone who
      doesn't even treat substance abuse disorders, like
      Michael Herkov.  That's what the doctors use.
           And she said that Ms. McCabe did not meet the
      medical criteria for addiction.  And one of the
      obvious reasons she said is, addiction requires a
      pattern of use -- a pattern of use of the
      substance that causes substantial impairment and
      distress.  And you heard us spend a lot of time,
      both me and Mr. Trentalange, about that
      requirement.  Clinically significant, which means
      so bad you need treatment.  Clinically significant
      impairment or distress.
           Now, you saw some examples from Dr. Barnett.
      Obviously, a person who's a heroin addict who
      loses jobs, relationships, family; someone who
      can't fulfill their duties; someone who is
      physically impaired and has their judgment
      impaired.  Nothing of the sort occurred with
      smoking.  She went about her business.  She could
      smoke and do her job at the same time.  She could
      smoke and enjoy it.  She wasn't impaired.
           On the other hand, you saw an example of
      alcohol where she would be impaired to the point 4254 that she had to be hospitalized for the DTs, and
      she had to seek professional treatment.  And none
      of this is a criticism.  No one here -- especially
      if Mr. Trentalange comes up and talks about this,
      no one here is trying to say, you know, she was an
      alcoholic, so don't vote for her.  That has
      nothing to do with it.  You're entitled to know
      the facts.  And here you have two substances that
      she used, one she wants to quit, one she doesn't
      want to quit.  She wants to quit drinking, so she
      goes for help.  She doesn't want to quit smoking,
      so she never goes for help.
           One she tries to quit and relapses.  That's
      addiction.  Alcohol.  One she tries to quit only
      one time and she succeeds, bats a hundred percent
      and never relapses.  That's not addiction.  One,
      she has significant withdrawal, DTs that made her
      to go into the hospital.  The other one, the only
      withdrawal they can even claim is, quote, that she
      was fidgety -- fidgety or a little agitated or a
      little snappy.
           Of course, Dr. Barnett said addiction was not
      the cause of her injuries.  The evidence in this
      case is she chose to smoke and then she chose to
      quit.  And in between, when everyone around her 4255 was quitting and she was getting the warnings from
      the family, from her uncles dying, on the pack, no
      one says she ever made the slightest effort to
      quit.  In fact, both Dr. Barnett and the
      eyewitnesses said she enjoyed smoking.  That's
      what Romayne McCabe told us, that smoking relaxed
      her and it calmed her.  She liked it.  If she
      didn't like it, wouldn't she have made an effort
      to quit in over 50 years?  If she didn't like it,
      wouldn't she have stopped for even an hour before
      she quit for good and never went back?
           Now, you heard that one of the major factors
      in addiction -- it's not the only requirement, but
      one of the major factors is withdrawal.  Are you
      so physically or psychologically dependent on a
      substance that when you stop using it, you have a
      medically significant reaction?  No question -- no
      question she had that with alcohol.  We know she
      was hospitalized.  She had the DTs.  Rosemary, I
      believe it was, is the one who confirmed that.
      But these aren't my words.  These are the words of
      Dr. Cummings and her children; fidgety, a little
      snappy, a little agitated.
           Now, I don't want you to think I'm making fun
      of her or that this means it's easy to quit.  I 4256 have no doubt, based on the testimony -- based on
      the testimony, there's no doubt that she was
      irritable when she stopped smoking.  And no one is
      saying that it was easy, that it was a one-foot
      clap that it was some extremely simple process.
           But this isn't medically significant
      withdrawal.  Being fidgety is not like going
      through heroin withdrawal.  Being snappy is not
      like getting the DTs when you don't drink and go
      into the hospital.  All of us, unfortunately, get
      fidgety or snappy or agitated.  And if all that --
      if all it took was irritability to prevent us from
      accomplishing a goal, none of us would get out of
      bed in the morning, none of us would have finished
      school.  We wouldn't be able to go to work because
      we get irritated, we get snappy.  But you know
      what?  That doesn't force you to a lifetime of
      behavior.  And being a little snappy didn't cause
      her to develop cancer.  It didn't force her.
           Whatever she claims the withdrawal is,
      whatever her family claims, that doesn't make an
      addiction a legal cause of her cancer.  And we
      know that she never smoked again.  So the
      fidgetiness, the snappiness, the agitation, it
      wasn't enough for her to go back.  And she only 4257 wore the patch for a short period of time.  After
      she took the patch off, she never went back
      because she wanted to quit.  And these medically
      insignificant -- and I say medically
      insignificant symptoms never prevented her from
      quitting.  Once she made up her mind, that was
      more important than being fidgety.
           And, again, that's not the definition of
      addiction.  Based on what the experts have said,
      including the plaintiff's expert, the definition
      of addiction would be someone who has significant
      withdrawal, who goes through chronic relapses,
      quitting and starting up again, a tortured-type
      smoker.  We don't see anything like that with her.
           I've talked about these differences.  She
      didn't want to quit smoking until '93, and she
      did.  She never sought help.  The withdrawal
      symptoms were minimal compared to alcohol.  And,
      of course, when she ultimately quit, she quit
      smoking.  She didn't quit drinking.
           Now, remember the testimony from Dr. Barnett?
      And I was at the ELMO.  There was the American
      Academy of Addiction Psychiatry paper that
      Mr. Trentalange had used, and I went through
      Dr. -- through that with Dr. Barnett.  And it 4258 said -- first of all, smoking didn't cause her to
      have a drinking problem.  R.J. Reynolds didn't
      cause her to have a drinking problem.  And there
      is no jury -- there's no legal instruction in this
      case -- you can look at the instructions -- that
      says, well, if she has a drinking problem, that
      means it's on R.J. Reynolds.  No.  She was
      responsible for her drinking, just like she was
      responsible for her smoking.  Smoking didn't cause
      that problem.  And, in fact, we went through using
      Mr. Trentalange's paper, and Dr. Barnett agreed;
      sure, if you quit smoking, it doesn't interfere
      with your drinking.  Smoking doesn't -- stopping
      smoking doesn't make you drink more.  In fact, it
      helps.
           Well, she did stop smoking, but she didn't
      stop drinking.  She made two different choices.
      When her daughter asked her after a period of
      years -- remember, the children's testimony was
      different about how long she'd quit drinking after
      rehab.  Then she went back, and she was drinking
      light beer.  And when her daughter asked her and
      said, you know, you can't drink, her answer was,
      Yes, I can.  And then her daughter said, Why?  And
      her answer was, Because I want to. 4259 Now, this isn't a lawsuit against an alcohol
      company.  This is a lawsuit against a tobacco
      company.  And the evidence is that if she had a
      substance abuse problem, it was drinking.  And the
      evidence is that R.J. Reynolds isn't responsible
      for her other issues.
           All right.  Here's -- that's the -- let's
      talk about the second part.  Let's assume she's
      addicted.  Let's assume that you -- that I'm just
      wasting my time here; you've already decided that
      she's addicted.  All right.  What does addiction
      mean, and does it make it a legal cause?  Their
      experts say, Well, addiction is smoking first
      thing in the morning, you know, as if you waited a
      half hour, you wouldn't get lung cancer.  Their
      experts are talking about, Well, if you smoke late
      at night or you smoke a lot.  And the testimony
      was that the amount, the number of cigarettes you
      smoked, that doesn't make a difference whether
      you're addicted or not.  But does that make
      addiction a legal cause?
           And here's one of the instructions that
      you're going to get.  You'll be able to read it in
      the jury room.  That in order to find that
      addiction was the legal cause of lung cancer or 4260 death, it has to occur directly and in a natural
      and continuous sequence, produces or contributed
      substantially.
           And I want you to think about whether or not
      addiction could really ever be a direct cause of
      somebody's cancer.  There's no dispute in this
      case that it was smoking that --
           MR. TRENTALANGE:  Object, Your Honor.  May we
      approach?
           THE COURT:  Approach the bench, please.
           (At sidebar.)
           MR. TRENTALANGE:  Judge, the statement was, I
      want you to think about -- I want you to think
      about whether addiction could ever really be a
      legal cause.  We know these cases are specifically
      authorized by the Supreme Court.  So, obviously,
      they can be, otherwise summary judgment would have
      been granted.  It's improper argument to ask that
      question and make that suggestion, and it's
      contrary to the Engle findings and this whole
      Engle Progeny litigation.
           MR. BELASIC:  There are no Engle findings
      that addiction causes disease.  The Engle findings
      are that smoking causes disease.  That's why we're
      having these lawsuits. 4261 THE COURT:  The jury will rely on the
      instructions I give them and their recollection of
      the facts.  Thank you.  Overruled.
           MR. TRENTALANGE:  Overruled?
           THE COURT:  Yes.  Thank you.
           (Sidebar concluded.)
           MR. BELASIC:  All right.  So as I was saying,
      I want you to think about whether addiction could
      directly and in natural continuous sequence cause
      lung cancer.
           Let's talk about Ms. McCabe.
           No dispute in this case, as I said from the
      beginning, when it comes to smoking, the total
      amount of smoking, whether it was 40 years or
      50 years, we don't dispute that was the cause of
      her cancer.  The issue -- that's what the doctors
      said medically was the cause of her cancer.
           The issue now is separately, what was the
      legal cause and, particularly, was addiction a
      legal cause?  Addiction is not smoking.  We know
      that.  We know that it's different definitions.
      Her decision to smoke and her decision to not quit
      until 1993, her behavior in smoking for 50 years,
      if she doesn't choose to smoke, if she chooses to
      quit like her father does, if she chooses to quit 4262 like her husband did, she doesn't develop lung
      cancer.  And not even the plaintiff's experts said
      that addiction, whatever they defined it as,
      forced her to smoke.  It didn't make her go to the
      store.  It didn't make her light up.  It didn't
      make her smoke all of those cigarettes.
           So let's look at some more evidence.
           I put "admits" in quotes here, because when
      Mr. McCabe took the stand, the very first question
      he was asked by his attorney was whether he
      admitted that his mother was responsible in part
      for her injuries -- whether she, in part, was the
      cause of her injuries.  And he said yes.  And you
      saw what happened when I got up.  I had to show
      him a videotape where just six months ago, under
      oath, he said, No, my mother has zero
      responsibility.  Those were his literal words,
      zero responsibility.  And I asked him why he
      changed.  You heard his answer.  I asked him.
      What happened in his mind that in six months.
           You remember if that was a satisfactory
      answer, and you determine what the plaintiffs were
      talking about when they claim now that she's
      responsible when he swore under oath six months
      ago, his mom had nothing to do with it.  But now, 4263 they admit that she was the cause of her own
      injury.
           Well, if her behavior, if her failure to quit
      was a cause of her own injury, then doesn't that
      mean the plaintiffs are conceding she could have
      quit?
           We don't have to guess.  We know she could
      quit.  She did.
           And so when he says -- you saw him when I
      asked him, that -- we had to play the videotape --
      did she do everything in her -- in her power to
      quit?  Of course not.  Did she try to quit before
      1993?  No.  He's conceded that.  Even the
      plaintiffs aren't disputing that she could have
      quit and could have quit earlier.
           One of you asked Dr. Cummings a question or
      wrote a question, and the Judge asked
      Dr. Cummings, can nicotine by itself cause lung
      cancer?  And the answer is, no, nicotine doesn't
      cause cancer.
           Let's go back to the legal instruction.
           Addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine
      is a legal cause if it's directly and in a natural
      and continuous consequence.  Well, we know it's
      not a direct cause.  Nicotine by itself doesn't 4264 cause lung cancer.  We know it's not a direct
      cause, it's an indirect process at best.  And
      that's what Dr. Cummings admitted.  Can't be a
      direct cause.
           You're instructed to follow those
      instructions -- to follow the instructions.  The
      instructions require it to be a direct cause.
           Now, we talked about the dominoes.  If she
      stopped smoking in 1951 or 1963 or 1972, that
      chain of dominoes stops falling.
           And we know that it's not rare.  She wasn't
      the only one who quit.  You heard that 60 million
      people alive today used to smoke, and they've now
      quit.  And we know that when she was smoking,
      millions and millions were quitting around her.
      And so there's really no dispute that she could
      have quit back in the '60s.  30 million people
      quit in the '60s.
           The reason I pick that date is in 1964, that
      is 31 years before she got lung cancer.  She got
      that in 1995.  And 30 million people in that
      period, the next 15 years, were quitting.  She
      wasn't one of them.
           Those people smoked the same type of popular
      brands of cigarettes.  They smoked modern 4265 cigarettes with the additives and the ingredients.
      Those people were there when advertising was being
      done and whatever the tobacco companies and the
      Surgeon General were saying, and they quit.  Of
      course, there's no evidence she did anything.
           Even after the pack warning in 1966, again,
      about 30 years before she gets diagnosed, 13
      million people quit, and she wasn't one of them.
      And it wasn't because she was addicted, it was
      because there's no evidence she did anything to
      quit, and there's no evidence that anyone who knew
      her then even thought she wanted to quit.
           We know that she was surrounded by family
      members who quit.  This is when I went through the
      family members who quit with Dr. Cummings.  And we
      know each of them made different choices.  And
      they were exposed to the same advertising, the
      same things in the press.  They smoked the same
      type of cigarettes.
           Her father was the person that she took the
      cigarettes from.  Her husband smoked Salems, just
      like her.  Her daughter, who quit, smoked light
      cigarettes.  They all quit.
           The difference wasn't just luck or
      happenstance.  It wasn't because the tobacco 4266 company did something different.  The difference
      was that these people, her loved ones, made a
      different choice than her.  And so that's why
      Ms. McCabe is here.  That choice.
           Now, Dr. Cummings wrote this Smart Move
      pamphlet, and we know it's a stop quitting guide.
      And one of the things that he showed is the
      testimonials.  "I always thought it would be
      impossible to stop."  He agreed that's not true.
           Next sentence, "Anyone can do it if they set
      their mind to it.  A positive attitude is
      important."
           And you remember when -- when Mr. Paige was
      here -- when Mr. Paige was here that second week
      and he put the testimony of Dr. Cummings on, he
      asked him, you know, if that was a true statement,
      anyone can do it, positive attitude is important.
           Dr. Cummings said, yes, it was.  It wouldn't
      be -- if it wasn't true, he wouldn't have put it
      in his book.
           Here's another one from a three-pack-a-day
      smoker.  And again, this is Dr. Cummings.  This is
      what he's writing as a guide to quitting.  Terry,
      the three-pack-a-day smoker says, "You have to
      make up your mind to stop."  Mrs. McCabe didn't 4267 make up her mind to stop until '93, and then she
      did.
           There were some relapses and some weight
      gain.  Absolutely no evidence that ever happened.
      That's the kind of thing that perhaps a
      nicotine-addicted person would.  She said the
      important thing is to stop.
           And then this is what Dr. Cummings wrote,
      "Develop a plan."  She never did that until 1993.
      "Change some habits."  She never did, whether it
      was drinking or coffee or reading the paper,
      things she associated with smoking.  No evidence
      she ever made any effort to change her habits, and
      there's no evidence she ever made a commitment to
      smoke.  Even her children, and certainly Romayne
      McCabe, don't claim that she was ever committed to
      quitting until 1993.
           And here's what Dr. Cummings concluded.  If
      you answer yes, do you want to stop?  Are you
      willing to make changes?  Can you put up with some
      uneasy moments?
           He said, "If you can answer yes to all three
      questions, you can stop smoking."  That's what he
      wrote, and that's what the American Cancer Society
      says. 4268 So I showed Dr. Cummings a slide.  They were
      joking about this photo.  And it says, anyone can
      quit if they make up their mind to do it.  And I
      asked him, sir, isn't that true?  This is a quote
      from Dr. Cummings.  He tells me, No, it's not
      true.  No, it's not true.
           And so here's what you saw next.  It's
      Dr. Cummings under oath.
           (The following videotaped trial testimony
      clip was played before the jury.)
           "Q.  You've testified in the past that anyone
      can quit if they make up their mind to do it;
      right?
           "A.  I have testified to that, yes."
           (Video clip concluded.)
           MR. BELASIC:  He changed his testimony for
      this trial.  He was under oath in both trials,
      gave different testimony for this trial.
           Then I asked him this:  The success rate for
      people who really want to quit and stick to it is
      100 percent?  And this time he agreed.  In fact,
      he said that's what he tells people in his clinic.
           Now, let's say that Jane McCabe might have
      tried to quit.  Let's make up some quitting
      attempts.  There's no evidence, but she might have 4269 tried to quit a couple of times or three times in
      those 50 years, and then on the fourth time, she
      got it right.  And that would mean that she needed
      to spend parts of four days -- four days out of
      50 years making an effort to quit.  Would we
      consider that a significant impediment to
      quitting?
           If someone told you, I went on a diet in 1955
      for a day and then I went on a diet in 1968 for a
      day and then a couple years ago for a day, would
      anyone seriously say, wow, you're really making a
      committed effort to try to lose weight?
           If someone said, I went on the treadmill
      yesterday for about an hour, and you know what?
      That's the second time I've done it in 20 years.
      We wouldn't say that was a serious effort to
      exercise or a serious effort -- a serious
      commitment to quitting.
           But in this case, we don't have four quitting
      attempts in 50 years.  We'd have to make up that
      evidence.  There is no evidence.  There is one
      quitting attempt, 1993, the only time she was ever
      motivated, and that's it.  But what's amazing is,
      she succeeded that time.  Not a heavily addicted
      smoker. 4270 You build up these 40 years of addiction that
      Dr. Cummings talked about, she took that patch
      off.  She never went back because she cared with
      about Jenna and because she made up her mind.  She
      had changed her mind.
           Her success rate was 100 percent.  And if her
      success rate is a hundred percent, then addiction
      isn't a legal cause of her lung cancer.  Because
      as the testimony is, she could have quit smoking
      at any time.
           And here's what the Department of Health and
      Human Services said.  This is years after -- this
      is a 2002 document.  This is many years after
      Surgeon General Koop was saying, well, if you're a
      smoker, it's probably not a choice.
           No.  In fact, the -- the United States
      Department of Health and Services, the public
      service that the Surgeon General's office is
      located in, says studies suggest that everyone can
      quit smoking.
           So the difference between somebody who tries
      to quit 20 times and goes back to it and Jane
      McCabe, our smoker in this case, is the decision
      she made.
           Now, here's the way her own smoking was 4271 described by the people who knew her.  And the
      five people who now we know are asking for
      two-and-a-half to three-and-a-half million each.
      They say it was her decision -- Romayne, her
      daughter Melinda, her daughter Rosemary, her
      daughter Susan.  They say it was her business,
      Romayne again, and the plaintiff James McCabe.
      That's what they think, her business, her
      decision.  And they said they felt so strongly
      about that that they didn't interfere.  They
      didn't tell her to quit.  They didn't tell her,
      hey, quit like I did.  They thought it was her
      decision and it was her business.  And they were
      right.
           What would have happened if she had quit when
      her father quit?  What would have happened if she
      had quit when her husband quit?
           Well, here's Dr. Cummings telling you, within
      a year, your risk of lung cancer begins to go
      down.  A lot of other good things happen.
      Circulation damage is repaired.  But within a
      year, your risk of lung cancer begins to decrease.
           Now, they brought Dr. Villa to address this.
      And Dr. Villa didn't talk about how he had any
      background in statistics or epidemiology. 4272 There was a question from one of you about --
      about how do they -- how can you say that a smoker
      got cancer from smoking if most smokers don't get
      cancer at all?  He talked about statistics.  So we
      know he had some familiarity with statistics.
           Let's go to the source.  Let's go to what the
      Surgeon General says, no friend of the tobacco
      companies.  Let's go to the source.
           Here's what the Surgeon General said:
      "Ex-smokers experience decreasing lung cancer
      mortality rates" -- so your death from lung cancer
      goes down -- "which approach the rates of
      non-smokers."
           How long does it take to get down to the rate
      of a non-smoker?  Ten to 15 years of cessation.
           So she gets lung cancer and is diagnosed in
      1995.  She quits two years, two-and-a-half years,
      we don't really know when in 1993, could be up to
      two-and-a-half years, could be two years.  This is
      when she quits.  This is when she develops cancer.
           The Surgeon General says that after 10 or
      15 years of quitting, a smoker's risk of lung
      cancer death goes down to approach the rates of a
      non-smoker.
           So let's take 10 or 15 back.  Ten years would 4273 be 1985, right?  15 years would be 1980.  Could
      she have quit in 1980 or 1985?
           Well, if she could quit 15 years later,
      13 years later, sure she could.  Their own experts
      don't claim she couldn't have quit.  Dr. Barnett
      said that based on all the evidence, she could
      have quit at any time earlier.
           Did she know the risks in 1985?  Well, in
      '85, it said on the pack, lung cancer is caused by
      smoking.  It said right on the pack.  That was one
      of the warnings.  So she knew the risks.
           By '85, that was 20 years after Uncle
      George -- almost 20 years after Uncle Bernard died
      of lung cancer, almost 20 years after Uncle George
      died of emphysema.  It was almost 20 years after
      the warnings.
           It was more than 20 years after her -- after
      the county health department was working in her
      Pasco school system to do the cancer program for
      the students.  So there's no doubt that she had
      personal knowledge and personal warning, and
      there's no doubt she had the ability to quit.
           Now, people make choices all the time.  We
      make choices about what to eat, when to sleep,
      whether to exercise, whether to go on a diet.  She 4274 made the choice to continue smoking.  And all of
      her family around her say that she made no effort
      to quit.
           Same thing in 1980.  Wouldn't have been any
      harder to quit back then.  It was even earlier and
      she knew all the risks, lung cancer from Uncle
      George, the warnings that were on the pack.  She
      had the ability to quit.  And if she quits in '80
      or '85, her risk of lung cancer mortality goes
      down to that of a non-smoker.
           Here's one other, 1981.  That's the Surgeon
      General again.  After ten years of cessation,
      meaning ten years after quitting, the risk of lung
      cancer begins to approach that of one who has
      never smoked.
           So let's -- let's -- let's be conservative
      and say it's 10 or 15 years.  If she quits by
      1980, then she doesn't develop lung cancer.  Her
      risk is no greater.  If she quits by '85, her risk
      is no greater.
           So what does choice have to do with it?  They
      say, well, choice isn't an addiction.  They're two
      different things.  Yeah, but you have to answer
      this question, was addiction the legal cause of
      her cancer? 4275 She had the choice to quit, she had the
      ability to quit.  And if she did quit, the Surgeon
      General says her risk goes back, basically, to
      normal.
           For those reasons, for those reasons, her
      smoking over a lifetime and her decision to smoke
      and her decision to never try to quit until 1993
      was the cause of her lung cancer and death.  It
      wasn't what they call addiction.
           So you should vote "no" on that.
           One other thing.  When she quit smoking in
      1993, was she addicted?  The plaintiffs said yes.
      In fact, they say she was severely addicted.
           Okay.  So that first day, she goes 24 hours
      without smoking.  Was she addicted?  Plaintiff's
      experts say yes.  So was addiction causing her to
      smoke that day?  No.  That's the first day she
      quit.
           Was it causing her to smoke the day before.
      Plaintiffs say yes.  What they don't explain is
      how the next day, suddenly addiction isn't causing
      her to smoke, and the second day and the third day
      and the fourth day and the week after that and the
      month after that and then the next year, '93 into
      '94, and the next year. 4276 Her cigarettes didn't change, her brain
      didn't change, the nicotine didn't change.  She
      changed her mind.  And when she changed her mind,
      her ability to choose, her choice, her decision --
      her own kids who say it's her business and her
      decision -- that was more powerful than whatever
      you want to call addiction.
           And whether you said she was addicted or
      habituated, that it was a habit or a dependency,
      once she truly made that committed choice, it
      didn't have an effect.  It didn't make her smoke.
           You have to ask yourself what kind of cause
      is that?  How can something cause me to be injured
      when if I make up my mind and make a committed
      effort, then it doesn't have any effect on me?
           Because that's what happened to her.  She
      never relapsed.  Addiction didn't force her to
      smoke.  She wasn't some out-of-control smoker who
      couldn't stop.  Jane McCabe could, and Jane McCabe
      did.
           Now, on the second question.  Again, from the
      very beginning of this case, I've said that
      whether smoking in general was the cause of her
      lung cancer, that's not disputed.  This is
      different, though.  This is whether R.J. Reynolds 4277 brands was the cause.  And so it was their burden
      to prove that she smoked that.  And I submit to
      you the plaintiff has failed to meet his burden of
      proof in several areas.
           And the first is, if she started in the mid
      '40s, there is some testimony from an eyewitness,
      Romayne McCabe, that they snitched some Camels.
      There is that testimony.
           After that, Ms. McCabe was asked, what brands
      did Jane smoke?  She didn't know.  She's the
      eyewitness, there's no testimony.
           None of the children knew what she smoked in
      the '40s or the '50s, and obviously, they weren't
      eyewitnesses.  The earliest that the children
      remember is 1960 smoking of Salem.
           And let's be clear, several of the children
      say they remember that.  The children were born
      from 1956 to 1960.  So in 1960, James McCabe was
      four years old.  He says he has a memory of his
      parents smoking sometime in the early '60s.  Some
      of the daughters said that they -- and that's it.
      So you have this 20-year gap.
           What was her first regular brand?  Nobody
      knows.  Plaintiffs didn't produce evidence.
           When did she become addicted?  If she met 4278 criteria for addiction, when did that occur?
      Nobody knows.  Dr. Cummings didn't bother to tell
      us that.  Dr. Herkov, the psychologist who only
      sees one patient a week, who doesn't even treat
      substance abuse disorders, he didn't tell us that.
           What was the brand that she was addicted to?
      Was it something that R.J. Reynolds made?  No.  It
      wasn't that at all.
           We know that from around 1980 to 1990 she
      smoked Philip Morris brand.  And how do we know
      that?  Well, first of all, there was testimony
      from the children.  The testimony varied that she
      either smoked this Philip Morris brand for about
      ten years or maybe six years.  When I asked
      Dr. Cummings that, he told me flat out 1980 to
      1990.  This is what Dr. Cummings told me, from
      1980 to 1990.
           So basically, remember, if she quits in 1980,
      she doesn't get lung cancer.  Her risk goes back.
           By '95, when she does get cancer, her risk
      would have been back to normal.  That's when she
      started smoking Philip Morris.  That's testimony
      from Dr. Cummings.
           Now, there's some testimony a little later,
      some testimony a little earlier.  But after 19- -- 4279 at 1980, she can avoid her cancer by quitting.
      And we know from the Surgeon General and the
      evidence in this case, that if she quits as late
      as 1985 -- there's no dispute in 1985 she's
      smoking a Philip Morris brand.  Not addicted to
      any R.J. Reynolds brand.  We know if she quits in
      1985, she can avoid her lung cancer.
           And so for that reason, we submit that the
      plaintiffs have failed to meet their burden of
      proof.  You should vote "no" on No. 2.
           Now, let me show you the third question, and
      that's the allocation of fault.
           You only get to this question if you've
      already found yes on 1 and 2.  So I don't think
      you're going to get here.  But if you do, you're
      going to have to decide what percentage to charge
      to Jane McCabe and what percentage to charge to
      R.J. Reynolds.
           So just think about the facts, the choices,
      and what she knew during her life and who was
      responsible.  In the '40s she already knew she
      shouldn't smoke.  She hid smoking.  It was
      prohibited in the high school; she did it anyway.
           In the '40s she's at nursing school with the
      lung cancer giant; the articles are in the paper, 4280 the most famous anticancer researcher in the
      country.  She's right there, articles in the paper
      frequently talking about lung cancer.
           In the '50s the nuns tell her not to smoke.
      She does anyway.  In the '50s lung cancer news was
      all over in the popular magazines while she's
      working in surgery.  She's a county school nurse
      at a time -- sorry -- at a time that they're
      running cancer education programs with the
      American Cancer Society in the Pasco County
      schools that she services.  No way she missed it.
           By '64, 30 years before, she's been told and
      every American has been told that the Surgeon
      General says smoking causes lung cancer.
           By '66, 30 years before, she's being warned
      every single day.  And think about that.  There
      aren't a lot of products -- consumer products that
      aren't prescription drugs that have that kind of
      warning or have had that kind of warning for that
      long.  We're here in 2016, and that warning came
      out 50 years ago.  That warning came 30 years
      before she got the cancer, and she saw it on every
      single pack.  It was there every single time.
           As we know -- once she saw Uncle George die
      and Uncle Bernard die, can anyone seriously think 4281 that as a nurse exposed to what she had been
      exposed to, the fact that the testimony of the
      children is that they attributed it that the
      family knew and believed that they died with lung
      cancer?  Can anyone seriously say that by the
      1960s she didn't know that smoking was dangerous,
      she didn't know the risk of smoking, the risks
      that she was taking?
           And remember, when her two uncles are dying
      of smoking-related diseases, her husband quit.
      James McCabe said that his dad quit in the
      mid-'60s.  Can anyone dispute she knew the risks?
      She made that decision.
           By the '70s, she's ignoring the new warning.
      Her own husband is talking about cancer sticks
      20 years before she gets cancer.  There's a
      warning that directly says cancer on the pack; she
      ignores it, makes no effort to quit.  And then she
      quits smoking again.
           And I'm going to submit to you -- and we
      talked about it -- that the idea of partial
      responsibility for your own actions just doesn't
      make sense in this case.  Now, you heard from
      opening statement, when plaintiff's attorney got
      up here, that he took partial responsibility -- 4282 partial responsibility for Ms. McCabe in
      conjunction or in combination with the tobacco
      company.
           Now, I ask you if that makes sense.  Do you
      think that in the 1960s that the McCabes --
      Mr. and Ms. McCabe were talking about smoking?
      She saw her own husband quit in the mid-'60s.  Do
      you think they could have had a conversation where
      it was like, "Honey, why don't you quit?  Why are
      you smoking that cigarette?  Who's responsible for
      you smoking?"
           Do you think she would ever say, "I don't
      know.  Maybe I am a little, maybe R.J. Reynolds
      is, maybe you are."  And the person who had to
      look herself in the mirror and the person that had
      to make that decision was Jane McCabe.
           And the decisions of the tobacco companies --
      so the plaintiffs will say, Oh, the tobacco
      companies have to be responsible too.  The
      decisions of the tobacco companies weren't telling
      her or weren't forcing her to smoke, they weren't
      stopping her to smoke, because the man that she
      was living with and ad been married to for
      20 years, he had no problem making his own mind
      up.  She made a different choice. 4283 Her own children -- now, we heard all her
      children say, yes, she's addicted.  But her own
      children still regarded -- their belief is that
      even though they called their mother addicted,
      that it was her business and her decision.  And it
      was.  She was the only one who could decide.
           So I put no one else could decide for her.
      Is there someone at R.J. Reynolds or the Surgeon
      General's office who could have made the decision,
      Today, Jane McCabe will quit?  Did Jane McCabe
      make only 10 percent -- that's what plaintiff's
      lawyer says.  She's only 10 percent responsible.
      A lifelong nurse, an addiction professional.  With
      all the evidence we have of the personal warnings
      she saw and received in her life, their argument
      is she's only 10 percent responsible.  Did she
      make only 10 percent of the decision?  Of course
      not.  She was the only person who could decide for
      herself.  60 million people made a different
      decision.  They quit smoking.
           Her husband, her father, her three children,
      her four daughters all quit smoking.  They made
      the decision.  And each of them -- and I submit
      all of us are a hundred percent responsible when
      we make decisions about health behaviors that can 4284 affect us.
           Now, when it came time to quit, did she make
      10 percent of the decision in '93 to quit?  Of
      course not.  She made the entire decision.  She
      made 100 percent of the decision.  And if she had
      stopped smoking back in 1980 or in '85 or the '70s
      or the '60s, she would have avoided her lung
      cancer, without any effect from R.J. Reynolds.
      And under those circumstances, it's her choice
      that determined.
           Now, they can show you as many bad documents
      as they want, and they've got a half hour to do it
      when I get up.  And they can make you as mad as
      possible about some stupid document that some guy
      wrote sitting in a room.  But he wasn't with Jane
      McCabe, her family members were.  And they say she
      never tried to quit.  And each of them said it was
      her business and it was her decision.
           She didn't take 10 percent of the
      responsibility in life, she didn't make 10 percent
      of the decisions, she made all of the decisions,
      and she quit, 100 percent never going back, when
      she made that decision.  Nothing stopped her once
      she decided to quit.  And for that reason, she's
      personally responsible for her decision to smoke. 4285 There are other things that R.J. Reynolds
      did, and we know the choices they made.  But the
      things that R.J. Reynolds did and the choices they
      made didn't cause Jane McCabe to smoke for
      50 years.  They didn't prevent her from quitting,
      because when she wanted to, she quit, and she quit
      for a hundred percent.
           Now, they have a fraud claim in this case.
      I'm going to take this down.  Here we go.
           They have a fraud claim in this case, and
      it's whether R.J. Reynolds concealed or omitted
      material information.  And then look, it's the
      same requirement.  Was concealment or omission of
      information about health effects or addiction, was
      that a legal cause of her lung cancer?
           Did she really get lung cancer because she
      didn't have enough information?  Did she get lung
      cancer because R.J. Reynolds, in 1979, didn't
      publish a paper saying We agree it probably causes
      cancer, the statistics are enough?  There's no
      evidence of that.
           So here's their expert, Dr. Cummings.  And
      one of the things he said is nobody really takes
      seriously the industry's position.  And he says so
      they got other people to write it, like the guy 4286 who wrote True magazine -- a magazine that no one
      thinks Ms. McCabe read.  This is their expert.
           So in a fraud case, the people who are suing
      for fraud, and the children who want either
      two-and-a-half million or three-and-a-half million
      dollars each, they want that for what they
      themselves have said is their mom's own decision.
      This is who they call.
           And the first thing they say about the
      industry's position is that nobody really takes
      seriously the industry's position.  And remember,
      I confirmed him with that -- I confirmed that with
      him.  I showed him three surveys in a row, Roper
      polls.  Roper's the second-most-famous pollster.
      And each of them said that out of all the
      Americans, only 3 to 5 percent even considered --
      even consider the tobacco companies to be credible
      or reliable.  It didn't even say 3 to 5 percent
      believed them, just 3 to 5 percent even gave them
      a shot.
           And we know from everyone that was asked --
      you heard from each of the daughters and
      Mr. McCabe.  We know from the family members that
      there was no evidence that she ever saw some false
      statement or something from the Tobacco Industry 4287 Research Committee or anything after this 1953
      conspiracy.  There's no evidence.  And Romayne
      McCabe was asked those same questions and she
      confirmed -- we just played the video.  She never
      suggested that she saw any of that stuff.
           Those were the surveys.  Three percent for
      the Tobacco Industry Research Council.
           Now, Dr. Cummings -- when I asked him about
      her being an addiction professional, one of the
      things she said is she would understand addiction.
      And you think about it, for 20 years she worked in
      substance abuse studying addiction.  For her, it
      was mostly alcoholism, but we know she was the
      director of substance abuse services, not just
      alcohol.
           The techniques they used to help these people
      to stop substance abuse, we know that she never
      used any of those techniques.  No one -- there's
      no evidence she ever used any of those techniques
      herself to stop her own smoking.
           And, again, it's a fraud case on addiction.
      And the expert they bring in says no one really
      believes the defendants, and the plaintiff would
      understand addiction.  They have the wrong --
      you've got the wrong plaintiff here.  There may be 4288 people who could say "I was tricked" or there may
      be people who say "I heard something that that guy
      in 1954 on a TV show said, and that's the only
      reason I smoked."  But that's not Jane McCabe, and
      that's not the evidence in this case, and that's
      not what her own children admitted.
           I wanted to point out this.  You're going to
      have an instruction -- and again, you'll be able
      to read these.  It's the plaintiff's burden to
      prove what they call reliance.  And I wanted to
      say that, because the word "reliance" isn't here.
           This instruction explains what they have to
      prove.  They have to show by direct or
      circumstantial evidence that Jane McCabe
      reasonably relied -- reasonably relied to her
      detriment -- that means to her harm -- on this
      concealment or omission of material information.
           And look what it says.  It has to be material
      information that was not otherwise known or
      available.  And you've seen all the evidence that
      shows that the risks of cancer were known and
      available, the warnings on the pack, her own
      family members in the '60s dying of cancer and
      emphysema.
           They have to prove this next sentence, that 4289 she would not have acted as she did but for --
      meaning unless -- the concealment or omission.
      There's no evidence in this case if you had said
      something different or given a -- or given a
      different statement in the papers, that Jane
      McCabe would have quit smoking.
           The very last question -- the very last
      question that I asked plaintiff James McCabe was,
      "Is there anything you could have said to your mom
      that would have caused her to stop smoking?"  And
      he said no.  The only reason she stopped is
      because she wanted to see Jenna.  She never
      stopped for a health warning, and she got health
      warnings in droves.
           And, again, on the issue of concealment.
      They have to prove that but for the concealment --
      if there hadn't been concealment, the lung cancer
      and death would not have occurred.  There's just
      no evidence of that.
           Defendants -- the plaintiffs say that in
      December '53 this concealment started.  She would
      have already been smoking for ten years.  No one
      claims that the conspiracy or that concealment
      caused her to start.  And there's no evidence that
      in the '50s or '60s, if you would have given her 4290 some extra info -- if R.J. Reynolds had an article
      on page 83 of the New York Times, like
      Dr. Cummings is always looking at, that that would
      have changed her mind.
           Even when she was told or given the direct
      examples of her relatives, she didn't make any
      effort.  Even when she saw her husband and her
      father quit, she didn't make an effort.  So that's
      how she reacted to warnings.  We know.  We don't
      have to guess.  She didn't respond to warnings
      about health.  She never made any effort to quit.
           They say, well, one of the fraud -- part of
      the fraud, apparently, is filters.  And they say
      filters are fake.  Well, first of all, there's no
      evidence in this case as to when Ms. McCabe
      switched to filters.  None.  They didn't even
      attempt to provide it.  Romayne McCabe doesn't
      know anything about brands.
           There's no evidence in this case that
      Ms. McCabe thought filters were safe.  But look
      what the Surgeon General was saying.  Look what
      the Surgeon General was saying.
           The Surgeon General concludes that filtered
      cigarettes and -- not just filters, but smoking
      cigarettes with lower amounts of tar and nicotine 4291 decrease lung cancer mortality rates among
      smokers.  That was the official position of the
      Surgeon General.  That's a good thing.  You would
      think you would want to decrease lung cancer.
      That's what the Surgeon General was saying.
           At that point she was 50 years old, and she
      had been smoking for a long time.  There is no
      evidence that there was some sort of filter fraud
      that somehow tricked her.  And remember, they have
      to show that if something wasn't concealed, she
      would have acted differently.  And ask yourself,
      is there any evidence that she was thinking in
      1979, you know, I'm going to quit today, unless a
      new brand comes out, or I'm going to quit today
      unless there's a low tar brand.  No.
           The only evidence that she ever smoked a low
      tar brand was Malibu -- I'll just keep this up --
      was Malibu from 1990 to 1993.  That was the last
      three years of her life.  That's the brand she
      quit.
           We know one thing for sure.  The only time
      she switched to a low tar brand, she quit it in a
      couple of years.  There's no evidence that she got
      lung cancer because of something that anyone said
      about Malibu.  They didn't even attempt to prove 4292 that.  And under the jury instruction, that's what
      they have to prove.
           So here, a couple years later, the Surgeon
      General says basically the same thing, that modern
      cigarette, today's filter-tipped lower tar and
      nicotine cigarettes produce lower rates of lung
      cancer, not higher.  That's the Surgeon General.
           He had researched this issue.  Their experts
      had researched the issue.  They actually looked at
      the cancer rates -- not mice, not in the lab, they
      actually looked at the mortality tables of real
      people.  People that smoked filters got less lung
      cancer.  And that's a good thing.
           Eight years later, '89, studies have shown
      that smoking filtered lower tar cigarettes reduces
      the risk of lung cancer.  The Surgeon General is
      saying it's a good thing to have these filtered
      cigarettes.
           In 1990, a lower risk of lung cancer for
      filtered cigarettes.
           When they show these documents from 1953 and
      they show the dizzying array of companies and
      witness -- companies and employees, I ask that you
      ask yourself:  What does that have to do with Jane
      McCabe? 4293 Because we know that when Jane McCabe got the
      most personalized warning right on the pack, she
      didn't respond.  We know when her uncles were
      passing away in front of her, literally, when
      she's taking care of Uncle George with emphysema,
      we know she doesn't respond.
           So ask yourselves:  What are all these
      documents?  The documents that they say are
      horrible, the bad documents, as they called them,
      what do they have to do with her, with the actual
      real smoker in this case?  And they don't.  There
      isn't any evidence that the tobacco companies said
      anything she relied upon.
           In fact, I want to talk about what Melinda
      Norman said -- her daughter Melinda.  She said,
      "Mom said that she switched to Malibu" -- that was
      around 1990, she was 61 years old -- "because of,"
      and then she wasn't certain, but she said, "I
      think it was an ad -- because of an ad or
      something that somebody said that said Malibu was
      healthier" -- those were her words, healthier.
           Well, first of all, that story is impossible
      because we know there weren't any television ads
      in the '90s.  Those ads went off January 1st,
      1971, the Rose Bowl, the bowl games, that's what 4294 Dr. Cummings said.  There hadn't been a television
      ad for 20 years.  So if her mom really saw
      something about a low-tar cigarette on TV, it
      wouldn't be from a tobacco company, and it
      wouldn't be an ad.
           Now, she only smoked Malibu for three years.
      And, again, those are the ones she quit.  There's
      certainly no evidence that it was something that
      somebody said about Malibu that caused her cancer.
      There's no evidence that if she never switched to
      Malibu and just stuck with her brand that she
      would have avoided her lung cancer.  The
      plaintiffs didn't even try to prove that, and yet
      the Judge's instructions will tell you that's what
      they had to prove.
           Now, one thing we know for sure, the 1990s
      ads, they would never say Malibu was healthier.
      First of all, where's this Malibu ad?  If there
      really was a Malibu ad -- I don't think we had any
      shortage of ads in this case.  They have composite
      exhibits, meaning these combined exhibits, with
      hundreds of advertisements.  Dr. Cummings alone
      probably showed you several hundred exhibits -- or
      several hundred advertisements.  Where's the
      Malibu ad? 4295 No other member of her family confirms this
      Malibu story.  And when Melinda Norman was
      confronted, Hey, that's -- you know, about this
      story, she also had some testimony, well, maybe it
      was in the '70s or '80s.  And that doesn't make
      sense, because she switched to Malibu in 1990.
      Are they really saying there was an unknown ad
      20 years earlier, that there was some sort of
      delayed reaction?
           Let's get back to this.  Those ads didn't say
      healthy because, according to Dr. Cummings, back
      since the '70s, every advertisement since the '70s
      was a print ad, it had to have the exact same
      warnings, the pack warnings.  And in the '90s,
      these are the warnings that would have been on the
      packs and, according to Dr. Cummings, these are
      the warnings in the ads.
           And so if you saw a Malibu ad, a quarter of
      the ad, one fourth -- because they called these
      rotating warnings -- would have said right in the
      advertisement "smoking causes lung cancer."  The
      same disease she would get.  A quarter of them
      would have said "Quitting smoking now greatly
      reduces serious risk."  A quarter would have had
      the pregnant woman ad or warning, and a quarter 4296 would have had that.
           So you've got unsubstantiated testimony that
      is impossible on its face, if it's a television
      ad, where there's no evidence that it had any
      effect on her lung cancer, and it just doesn't
      make sense.  And, of course, neither Melinda
      Norman or any of the daughters ever claimed that
      their mom was choosing between quitting and
      smoking a Malibu.  Nobody claims that.  So nobody
      claims that something that somebody said about
      Malibu is what caused her death.  And that's what.
           They had to do.  The judge's instruction is
      they have to show that if there hadn't been a
      statement or some omission of a fact, that she
      would have acted differently.  And they haven't
      proven that.
           And this is just a run through of everything
      that the fact witnesses said.  Whenever we asked
      them, was it the Frank Statement, CTR, TIRC, The
      Tobacco Institute?  No.  There's no evidence that
      she ever saw, let alone rely -- and there's a big
      difference.  People can see things.  It doesn't
      mean they rely on them.  There's no evidence of
      either for this case.
           So they have the wrong claimant.  She didn't 4297 meet her burden of proof.  No one seriously says
      that some sort of omission is what caused
      Jane McCabe to smoke, because she continued to
      smoke even though she got the most direct and
      immediate warnings.
           Finally, I want to talk to you about -- let
      me, before we go to this next section -- for those
      reasons, because they haven't met their burden of
      proof and they certainly haven't proved that some
      unidentified concealment was a legal cause, you
      should vote no.  And the same thing for the
      conspiracy.
           Remember, Dr. Cummings says the conspiracy
      was in '53.  She smoked years before that.  We
      know off the bat, then, that the conspiracy
      couldn't make her smoke.  And there's no evidence
      that -- whether it was R.J. Reynolds who concealed
      or another tobacco company that concealed, there's
      no evidence that's what caused her to smoke.
      Because when she got the information that smoking
      caused cancer, we know how she acted.  It didn't
      matter to her.  She kept smoking until she
      couldn't see Jenna.  Health issues weren't a
      reason for her to quit.  So you should vote no on
      that. 4298 The next one is damages.  And I'm just going
      to talk briefly about this because I don't think
      you should get there.  I don't think that a woman
      who makes her own choices, that an addiction
      professional, a trained nurse, and a woman who's
      been warned in as many ways as her, under this
      evidence, is entitled to money.  And when her own
      children come in and say it was her business and
      her decision, then I submit they should not get
      money for their mother's choices.
           There's a difference between someone who is
      hurt in a way they cannot avoid and did not know
      and someone who had every opportunity to make her
      own decision, someone who society gives the right
      to decide whether to smoke.
           I submit they shouldn't get any damages.  But
      the plaintiffs gave you a number.  There's five --
      five children on this verdict form.  And
      Mr. Trentalange says two and a half million to
      three and a half million.  How do you come up with
      that number?  Is there any evidence?  Any
      explanation how they came up with that number?  Is
      there any basis, any metric, any measurement that
      would suggest that?  And why such a big gap?  Why
      a million dollar difference?  I mean, it's a 4299 number that's just tossed out into the air.
           And I would submit that you should remember,
      if you are thinking about giving any damages,
      these were not children who saw their mother pass
      away when they were young or when they were in
      school or when they were living with her or when
      they were being raised by her.  And Mr. McCabe's
      40 years old when his mom passed away.  And the
      daughters were between 35 and 40.  And I certainly
      don't mean to belittle that.  We're all going to
      face the loss of our loved ones, or we have, and
      we know that's bad.  But under these
      circumstances, a woman who made a lifetime of
      decisions and got a lifetime of warnings and made
      what they call -- not me, but what they call her
      business and her decision, then that should be her
      decision.  And they shouldn't be rewarded
      financially even with the grief of their mother
      for the decisions she made.
           Now, at three and a half million each, the
      plaintiffs would be asking for a total of 17 and a
      half million.  At two and a half million,
      Mr. Trentalange would be asking for 12 and a half
      million.  But then he said they want even more
      money in the form of punitive damages.  And I want 4300 to talk to you about that.
           Punitive damages.  First of all, punitive
      damages, make no mistake about it, doesn't go to
      the American Cancer Society or anything.  That
      would be a check that goes to the plaintiff.  That
      means more money for the plaintiff.  So you have
      to decide whether you think anything is warranted.
      But here's the difference.
           MR. TRENTALANGE:  Excuse me.
           Objection, Your Honor.  May we approach?
           THE COURT:  Approach the bench, please.
           (At sidebar.)
           MR. TRENTALANGE:  That's an absolutely
      improper consideration.  They do not decide
      whether they think the money should go to the
      plaintiff -- that's not the instruction.
           THE COURT:  I'll sustain the objection.
           Let's move on, please.  Thank you.
           MR. TRENTALANGE:  Can I have a curative
      instruction?
           THE COURT:  Denied.
           (Sidebar concluded.)
           MR. BELASIC:  Mr. Trentalange talked about
      this.  It's a completely different standard for
      punitive damages.  It's no longer 4301 preponderance of the evidence.  They still have
      the burden of proof, but their burden of proof is
      massively more.
           This is what's required.  And you'll have
      this.  To get punitive damages, to answer yes on
      this last question, they have to have clear and
      convincing evidence.
           What does clear and convincing mean?  It has
      to be of such weight that it produces a firm
      belief or conviction without hesitation -- without
      hesitation.  That's not merely a doubt.
           All of us can have doubts about whether
      something -- it says, if there is any
      hesitation -- any hesitation by any of you, that
      they should get not just whatever they ask for and
      whatever you would award in compensatory damages;
      if there's any hesitation about giving him more
      money -- and I have no idea what they would ask
      for in punitive damages.  But if there's any
      hesitation for you, then they haven't met their
      burden of proof.  It's a very, very strict
      standard.
           And you should know, if you vote yes here,
      there will be another phase of the trial.  There
      will be additional evidence for you to consider. 4302 There's going to be more witness testimony.  If
      you vote no, we're done.
           I want to talk about something that I skipped
      over that's very important; these fraud questions,
      fraudulent concealment and a conspiracy to
      fraudulently conceal.  You should know you're
      going to -- you -- if you get to Question 3,
      you're going to assign percentages.  I don't think
      you should get there.  Addiction is not the legal
      cause of her injury.
           But you should know that no matter what you
      would assign on Question 3, if you vote yes on 4,
      fraudulent concealment, if you vote yes on 5,
      those percentages won't be applied.  It will be as
      if Ms. McCabe was zero percent responsible.
      That's going to be the instruction that --
           MR. TRENTALANGE:  Excuse me, Your Honor.
           MR. BELASIC:  -- if you find --
           THE COURT:  Yes, sir?
           MR. TRENTALANGE:  I have an objection.  May
      we approach?
           THE COURT:  Approach the bench, please.
           (At sidebar.)
           THE COURT:  Yes, sir?
           MR. TRENTALANGE:  I want to object to telling 4303 the jury about the effect, the legal effect of any
      reduction.  There's an instruction that the
      Court's going to give that they're not supposed to
      make any reduction.
           THE COURT:  Well, the jury will rely on the
      instructions I give them.  And I'll instruct the
      jury as to that now.
           (Sidebar concluded.)
           THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, you're
      going to rely on the instructions that I give you.
      Thank you.
           Let's move on, please.
           MR. BELASIC:  So if there's any hesitation,
      no punitive damages should be awarded.  It's not
      my opinion.  That's the law.  That's the
      instruction that the judge is going to give you.
           Now, we know punitive damages are damages in
      addition to damages that fully compensate the
      plaintiff.  If you do -- if you do decide damages,
      you'll decide what compensates them fully.  This
      is extra money, the additional money.  And it can
      only be awarded for conduct that was a legal cause
      of the harm suffered by the plaintiff.  So it
      can't be awarded for damage or for conduct that
      didn't cause Mrs. McCabe damage. 4304 Now, think about this.  In the instructions,
      you're told that punitive damages are to punish or
      deter.  I'm going to give you some evidence.
      There was a lot of evidence that shows the context
      of what the companies did and why they did it.
      And let's go through some of that.
           CTR, the plaintiffs attack it.  The Council
      for Tobacco Research.  But it funded research that
      was -- had substantial influence on the public
      health community to the point that the Surgeon
      General, who has to decide whether the research is
      sufficiently good enough to go into his reports,
      found 600 of their research projects to be that
      scientifically credible they were used in the
      Surgeon General reports.  Ten of those researchers
      were Nobel Prize winners.  Six thousand of their
      articles were published in peer-reviewed -- not
      some junk science that a tobacco company writes,
      but peer-reviewed journals like Cancer, the
      journal of National Cancer Institute.  It's not
      the type of phony research that you think of when
      you think of a company that should be punished.
           We know this, whatever you think of the
      Tobacco Institute, the Council for Tobacco
      Research, the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, 4305 they're gone.  They were disbanded in 1998.  There
      isn't any need to deter their actions, because
      they don't exist.  They've been gone for 20
      years -- almost 20 years.  Those employees,
      whether it's Claude Teague or Alan Rodgman, even
      the -- those employees are long gone.  Those are
      documents from the '50s and '60s.  They're either
      dead or retired.
           Every document, the documents they use, are
      publicly available.  There's no need to punish or
      deter.  You can't deter the companies into
      producing the documents.  They've already produced
      them.  They're publicly available.  They're on the
      website.  That's what Dr. Cummings told you.  And
      they've been publicly available since the 1990s.
      So there's no need to force that action.  It's
      already taken place.
           Reynolds admits that smoking is addictive.
      Reynolds admits that smoking causes cancer.  They
      say it right on their website.  And they have said
      that since at least 2000.
           They want punitive damages for what they call
      concealment, and they have to show that that
      concealment caused harm.  That instruction that I
      read to you, that the judge is going to give you, 4306 says you have to see if it was already known or
      readily available.  We know what was known, and
      you saw it.  As far back as the '20s, Reader's
      Digest was saying smoking causes cancer.
           Dr. Ochsner.  This was known.  It wasn't
      secret.  This wasn't something like there is a
      chemical in your food that you've never heard of
      and it will cause you to get cancer.  Instead, the
      disease that she got was being discussed back in
      the '20s and back in the '40s.
           Here's the newspaper that ran when she was at
      the hospital with Dr. Ochsner.  We know Newsweek,
      all of the Reader's Digests in the '50s.  Remember
      they talked about John Kennedy and he didn't know
      anything about lung cancer and everything?  Look
      what he said in '58.
           THE CLERK:  Warning, Counsel.
           MR. BELASIC:  Okay.
           John Kennedy writes an article in Reader's
      Digest and said, "The Digest stories figured
      heavily in the committee hearings such as those on
      the cigarette-cancer relationship."  So Kennedy
      wasn't ignorant.  And anyone -- anyone that read
      Reader's Digest would know.
           American Cancer Society said just this one 4307 magazine had a profound influence in creating
      public awareness about the risks of smoking.
      You've seen all of these.  I'll just flip through
      them.  She read LIFE magazine.  Look at this.
           The Gallup poll, 40 years, ladies and
      gentlemen, before she got lung cancer, 90 percent
      of America had heard that cigarette smoking may be
      a cause of cancer of the lung.  This kind of
      smoking wasn't inevitable.  At that time in the
      '50s, two out of every three women weren't smoking
      at all.  People made their own choices.  Ninety
      percent had heard -- that's 60 years ago, 40 years
      before she got cancer.
           Another magazine that she read about cancer
      and death rates.  All of the coverage of the
      Surgeon General's report.  The Florida Health
      Department saying basically all Floridians have
      heard about the Surgeon General's report on lung
      cancer.  The warnings.  Here's the Surgeon General
      saying that even as far back as 50 years ago, you
      had anywhere from 70 percent to 90 percent who
      agree that cigarette smoking is harmful to health.
           And, of course, the mid '60s is when Jane
      McCabe was being warned on the pack by the Surgeon
      General and saw, unfortunately, her own two uncles 4308 pass away.  She knew.
           No evidence in this case that R.J. Reynolds
      thought filters were fraudulent.  They read you
      some document that said -- I can't remember if it
      was Philip Morris on the illusion of filtration.
      Here's what R.J. Reynolds said.  This is a
      document they used.  This is R.J. Reynolds in '73.
      And look what they're saying about filters.
           They're saying, "The old cigarettes in the
      '50s had more tar, had more enjoyment or kicks,
      nicotine, and had more puffs."  So this is 1973.
      So 20 years later, they're saying, hey, the old
      cigarettes gave more.  Twenty years later, the
      filter, it said it was reducing tar and nicotine.
      They weren't saying that it was a fraud.  They
      were saying that the '50s cigarettes were a lot
      stronger and the modern filtered cigarettes did
      reduce tar.
           That's why I showed you the four Surgeon
      General's reports from the '70s, '80s, and 1990s.
      And the Surgeon General said that the data show
      that people that smoked filters got lower rates of
      lung cancer.
           Now, that's not something that should be
      punished.  That's not something that 4309 plaintiff's should ask for 17 and a half million
      and then tell you we're going to come back and ask
      for more.
           I read this to Dr. Cummings.  When they
      formed the CTR in '53, they said, "The industry is
      strongly convinced there's no sound scientific
      basis."  They point out the National Cancer
      Institute at that time had officially refuted the
      tie-up.  They didn't say, Let's start this and
      let's lie.  The very document that Dr. Cummings
      told you said that they were convinced at the time
      that they were right.
           In '63, Dr. Cummings agreed with me that
      every carcinogen -- every carcinogen, every
      chemical compound that had been found to cause
      cancer -- and at that time, it was in -- in mice.
      No human studies.  Every cancer compound that the
      Surgeon General listed in 1964 was provided by the
      industry.  They didn't leave anything out.  They
      provided that list.
           Did they have a dispute at the time?  Of
      course.  You-all heard it.  They were saying, hey,
      statistics can't prove that something causes
      disease in a particular person.  We even had
      testimony about that from Dr. Villa.  Fifty years 4310 later, Dr. Villa is still talking about
      statistics.  So, yes, they did contest it.  And,
      obviously, they said that painting something on
      the back of a mouse doesn't prove lung cancer.
      And maybe they stuck too long and clung to those
      ideas for too long.
           But in this case, Jane McCabe being warned
      for 30, 40 years, there's no reason -- no reason
      to give them even more money.
           The Surgeon General said in '64 the
      statistics couldn't prove cause.  Here's a
      document that's in evidence that you didn't see
      before.  Murray Senkus -- remember, he is the head
      of R&D -- from his boss Galloway, September 1968.
      Look at what Reynolds' executives are saying
      secretly to each other.
           "In cooperation with others, push the work
      concerning tobacco and health.  Prepare a plan to
      foster a relationship with government personnel.
      If there's a safer cigarette, let's continue and
      increase our efforts."
           The top executives of company were saying
      work with the government, cooperate with the
      government, make a safer cigarette.  And they did.
      They made the Premier cigarette that significantly 4311 reduced cancer.  This is the government's secret
      meeting that I talked about with Dr. Cummings.
      They made a cigarette that significantly reduced
      the risk of cancer.  And Dr. Cummings said Premier
      was a good idea.
           And what happened?  You saw in that document,
      the FDA tried to ban it.  They had to pull it off
      the market.  That's cooperation with the
      government, making a cigarette that the government
      says reduces cancer, and then having to watch the
      government, the FDA, try to ban it.
           There's a lot of talk about design.  And I'll
      tell you a couple of things.  First, did
      Dr. Cummings ever say that the design of the
      cigarettes that Ms. McCabe smoked made them more
      dangerous or harmed her in any way?  No.
           Here's what I asked him.  You've got
      roll-your-owns.  You know, you can go to the
      store, you buy some tobacco, and you roll it up in
      paper.  You got a roll-your-own cigarette; right?
           Well, he says, Oh, the modern cigarette
      design, it's evil; it has all these ingredients
      and additives.  All right?
           So, presumably, the modern cigarette must be
      more dangerous and that roll-your-own you make 4312 yourself is safer.  No.  This is what Dr. Cummings
      testified.  The commercial cigarettes, like the
      Salems, the Belairs, they are not more addictive
      than roll-your-owns.  They're not more addictive.
      In fact, he said, remember, the people that smoke
      roll-your-owns are more addicted than the people
      who smoke the factory cigarettes.
           There's no evidence that any design of a
      cigarette made it any more dangerous for her to
      smoke.  And she smoked the same brand as her
      husband.  Her husband quit smoking Salems.
      There's no design that hooked him.  He changed his
      mind.  She didn't change hers until 30 days [sic]
      later.
           And Dr. Cummings admits that rolling your own
      cigarette with the tobacco you get from the store
      is not safer than a commercial cigarette.  Those
      commercial cigarettes aren't more dangerous.
           The Surgeon General said, when it came to pH,
      not a big deal.  It says here cigarettes in the
      U.S. are mainly below 6.5 for pH and, therefore,
      they essentially contain only protonated nicotine.
      And what that means is, they don't have free
      nicotine.  That's the Surgeon General.  You didn't
      hear that from Dr. Cummings. 4313 An internal document, the correlations
      between pH and sales were simply coincidental in
      nature.  There's no evidence from the historical
      data that the pH of RJR brands was purposely
      increased to enhance sales.  And, of course, there
      was no evidence about any RJR brand that had a pH.
           He talked about reconstituted tobacco.
      That's actually tobacco.  He called it manmade
      because they shape it into a sheet.  It's the
      scraps, the parts of the plant that they form into
      a sheet of tobacco and they chop it up.  And I
      never quite got what Dr. Cummings was saying when
      he said one floated and the other didn't.  But if
      any of you thought that meant it was more
      dangerous to take small pieces of tobacco and make
      it into a sheet, that's not what the Surgeon
      General said.
           Here's the Surgeon General.  "Recon or
      reconstituted tobacco reduces the risk of tumors,
      generally resulted in condensates that were less
      tumorigenic," meaning less likely to produce
      tumors.
           That's a good thing.  It's a good thing if
      you have reconstituted tobacco.
           They show you some -- maybe a scary thing 4314 of -- that said Philip Morris was doing some
      genetic research on modifying the tobacco leaf.
           Look what the Surgeon General says.  It says,
      the main objective of this kind of research is to
      acquire the desired characteristics which will
      meet with the acceptance of smokers -- and then
      look -- and at the same time produce a less
      harmful tobacco.  So that little video he showed
      where they were trying to adjust or trying do some
      sort of genetic research, the Surgeon General has
      said that that's to make a safer, less harmful
      tobacco.
           Here's a chart.  Surgeon General says that
      when it comes to reconstituted tobacco and
      reconstituted tobacco sheets, look what it says.
      It gives a grade of plus or double plus for tar
      and nicotine.
           Now, what on earth does that mean?
           Go down here.
           A plus means it's a significant reduction.
      Double plus means more than a 50 percent
      reduction.
           Here's the big column.  Carcinogenicity,
      meaning the propensity to cause cancer.
      Reconstituted tobacco sheets, they rate it 4315 positive.  Why?
           Because positive means that it is a
      significant reduction.  The Surgeon General said
      that reconstituted tobacco sheets have a positive
      effect by reducing the risk of cancer.  That's the
      Surgeon General's report, and that's the Surgeon
      General's report card on the very design -- the
      very design that Dr. Cummings was talking about.
      That's why even when people smoke roll-your-owns,
      they're no safer than the commercial cigarettes.
           THE CLERK:  Five-minute warning, Counsel.
           MR. BELASIC:  They talk about the purpose of
      punitives being to deter.  Well, you know, it's
      not 1956 anymore.  There's a warning on every
      pack.  It's been there for 50 years.
           The documents are out, they're not concealed.
           The companies don't -- the companies that
      made those statements, CTR, TI, they don't exist.
      Those executives, those guys that wrote that,
      they're long gone.  And now, there's a new show.
      There's a new authority.
           The Federal Drug Administration, since 2009,
      has regulatory authority to control cigarettes.
      The FDA can regulate cigarettes just like it was a
      prescription drug.  Dr. Cummings agreed they have 4316 the authority to control the design, the FDA
      controls the additives in cigarettes, the FDA
      controls the ingredients, the FDA controls the
      nicotine levels.
           So from this point from 2009 on, the FDA can
      take an additive out of cigarettes, as
      Dr. Cummings agreed.  They can set a nicotine
      level, a nicotine cap, if they want.  They can
      take any ingredient out that they want out and
      force the manufacturers to do it.  That's what
      Dr. Cummings agreed.
           There's no need to give money, writing a
      check to James McCabe.  He is not going to
      regulate the industry.  They're already regulated
      like they were a public utility.  And the FDA
      controls what goes in the cigarettes, how they
      make the cigarettes, and how much nicotine is in
      the tobacco.  That's done.
           Dr. Koop wrote that report in 1988.  And the
      video they showed you was an old video from 1988.
      He went on to have a website, Drkoop.com.
           This was his website in 2002, 14 years after
      his report and, of course, years after Ms. McCabe
      quit.  "The choice to light up is always yours.
      You're the one that has control over your 4317 behavior.  It won't light itself and jump into
      your mouth."
           I'd like to close by showing the testimony of
      the children.  It was her decision, and it was her
      business.
           Can we play that?  It's about one minute,
      Your Honor.
           THE COURT:  You may.
           (The following videotaped trial testimony
      clip of various witnesses was played before the
      jury.)
           "Q.  You don't recall ever -- you or your
      siblings ever having a conversation with your
      mother telling her she should quit, right?
           A.  No, I don't.
           Q.  You just figured when she would quit, she
      would quit; right?
           A.  Yes.
           Q.  And it was her decision?
           A.  Yes."
           "Q.  And it was the same with her smoking,
      right?  It was her decision whether she wanted to
      smoke or not; right?
           A.  Yes."
           "Q.  And you believe that it was your 4318 mother's decision to quit smoking in 1993; right?
           A.  Yes."
           "Q.  Is it fair to say the topic of smoking
      didn't come up because smoking was something that
      you and Jane considered to be your own business?
           A.  Yes."
           "Q.  You told us one of the reasons you
      didn't have conversations with your mother about
      smoking during her life is because you thought it
      was her business; right?
           A.  That's correct.
           Q.  As far as you were concerned, smoking was
      her business; right?
           A.  Yes, sir.
           Q.  And we know that you had a few
      conversations with your mother about smoking,
      correct?
           A.  Not really about smoking.  She was -- I
      never really had any types of conversations about
      her smoking.  That was what I -- that was her
      business."
           (Videotaped trial testimony clips concluded.)
           MR. BELASIC:  Her business, her decision.
      Just like it was her decision and the decisions of
      the five family members who quit.  The father, her 4319 husband, all four of her daughters made a
      different decision.
           And that's why we're not here today with a
      plaintiff called Peter McCabe, because he chose to
      quit.  His wife made a different decision.
           We're not here with someone called Leon
      Hudson McCabe.  Her father chose to quit.  She did
      not decide to quit until 1993.
           And there isn't anyone in her family that
      wishes she had made a different -- there's no one
      in her family that thinks she shouldn't have made
      a different decision, but that doesn't mean that
      they get millions of dollars because she made that
      decision.
           Thank you for your time.  And again, this is
      the last chance I'll have to speak to you unless
      we go to a second phase, and I don't think that
      the evidence warrants that.
           I really appreciate all of your concentration
      and attention.  Thank you.
