MR. ALVAREZ: May it please the Court, counsel, Ms. McKeever.
Good morning. Well, this is our last opportunity to address you, and on behalf of Ms. McKeever, I want to thank you for giving up about two-and-a-half weeks of your time. We
really appreciate that.
We know it's a -- it's a burden on you personally to do this, but you all understand how important it is, it's your civic duty, and it's an important day for Ms. McKeever, and it's an important day for the defendant, R.J. Reynolds; okay?
MR. STERN: Philip Morris, Your Honor.
MR. ALVAREZ: I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I apologize. I apologize. Philip Morris. Thank you for correcting me.
I prepared a PowerPoint presentation to go through, and I think it's the most logical way to go through the evidence in the case.
You're going to get a verdict form that's going to have ten questions on it. And I want to go through all the questions, okay?
So the very first question -- the very first question is: Was Theodore McKeever addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his COPD/emphysema?
That's the very first question. And this -- this establishes whether he's a member of the class. In order to go forward --
If you answer "no" to this question, the case is over, we all go home; okay?
This is the very first question. In order to proceed further through the case, you have to answer this question. So this is a very important question, so I'm going to spend some time on it, okay?
And it's asking you really two things:
Was he addicted, and did that addiction -- was it a legal cause of his COPD. And we're going to go through the evidence, I'm going to show you why it is, okay?
The legal definition that you just heard from the Judge on legal cause is very important, because it says: Addiction is a legal cause. Notice that it says "a legal cause." It doesn't say "the legal cause." There's a big difference between "a legal cause" and "the legal cause."
The legal cause -If it was just "the legal cause," it means it's the only reason. Right?
"A legal cause" just means it's one reason, right? And it has to be an important reason.
And it says: Addiction is a legal cause of his COPD/emphysema if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such COPD/emphysema, so that it can be reasonably said that, but for addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, such COPD/emphysema would not have occurred. Okay?
So that's a mouthful, but let me tell you -Let's break it down.
Legal cause, if it directly produces or contributes substantially to producing COPD/emphysema. "Contributes substantially," did it play -- did the addiction play an important role -MR. STERN: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. ALVAREZ: -- that's all that means.
MR. STERN: Misstates the standard. That is not all it means.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen, you rely on the instructions I gave you. This is counsel's argument. He's trying to persuade you to reach a verdict in favor of his clients. Just
remember the instructions that I gave you, and you have a set of them.
Proceed.
MR. ALVAREZ: So that's the way you have to look at it. What does "contribute substantially" mean? All it means is -- it means, is it an important role.
And you know what's missing from the -from the definition? "Choice."
You know what you're not going to see in these legal definitions? The word "choice."
That's nowhere in the definition.
So every time you hear, he made a choice to smoke and that's the reason he had -- he got -- he got lung cancer and COPD, you know what you're not going to find in the definition? The word "choice." It's not there. So, "but for" -But the word "but for" is. It says: But for the addiction, the COPD/emphysema would not have occurred. But for the addiction.
If he was not addicted to nicotine, would he have smoked one, two, three packs per day for over 50 years?
Just think about that. Just think --
just use your common sense. That's one of the things the Judge told you to do, use your common sense, okay?
If he wasn't addicted, would he have smoked one, two, three packs a day for over 60 years? I mean -Here's the other -- you got -You received another charge, okay? So in addition to the "but for," right, that has to be "a" legal cause, just one, "a" legal cause, you also got this instruction, which is very, very important, because it says: In order to be regarded as a legal cause of a disease or medical condition, addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. Right?
Addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause of a disease or a medical condition even though what? It operates in combination with some other cause, if the addiction contributes substantially to producing the disease or medical condition.
So what does that mean?
Okay. Well, listen, if you happen to think that maybe he contributed --
If he contributed to it, if he contributed to it -And there will be a place on the verdict form to place blame on him, and we're going to talk about that, but this isn't the place to do that, to establish whether he was addicted, okay?
But if you think that's -- if you think that's the case, that's what this says, if it operates in combination with some other cause.
So if you think, well, maybe he played a role in his own addiction, well, this says it doesn't have to be the only cause, if it operates in combination with some other cause, if the addiction contributes substantially to producing the disease or medical condition.
So either way you go, either way you go, addiction -- these are the legal instructions that you must follow. This is the law that the Judge gave you, okay?
Now, let's apply the law -- the facts to the law. Addiction causes people to do what?
It causes people to smoke.
And smoking causes what? COPD, right? Addiction causes you to smoke. Causing
you to smoke can cause COPD. Directly produces or contributes substantially to COPD/emphysema. Okay?
Here's an important thing. Philip Morris admits that it was their cigarettes -- their cigarettes were the medical cause of Ted McKeever's emphysema and COPD. Ted McKeever's smoking was -Think about this for just a second: This man smoked one, two, three packs a day, for over 60 years, right? It was enough to cause his COPD, it was enough to cause his lung cancer, but it wasn't enough to be addictive?
MR. STERN: Same objection as before,
Your Honor.
THE COURT: The objection's noted.
Proceed.
MR. ALVAREZ: How does that make sense?
How does that make common sense that someone who smokes one, two, three packs a day, for 60 years, that's enough to cause these two serious diseases, but somehow -- somehow he's not addicted? How does that make sense?
But let's look at what the Surgeon General talks about and what he talks about
addiction, okay? In the 1988 Surgeon General report, they talk about cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting.
Nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction. The pharmacologic and behavioral processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine. This is the Surgeon General.
In 2010, the Surgeon General says what about addiction? Nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases described in this report.
Nicotine is the reason people smoke.
It's the drug that's in the smoke that causes people to stand outside and smoke over and over and over again, day after day after day.
Conclusions in the 2010 Surgeon General report: Nicotine is the key chemical compound that causes and sustains the powerful addicting effects of commercial tobacco products.
The powerful addicting effects of commercial tobacco products are mediated by
diverse actions of the nicotine at multiple types of nicotine receptors in the brain.
You heard Dr. Drobes talk about that, how this is a drug that affects the brain and attaches to your nicotine receptors.
Nicotine is a highly addictive drug.
Addiction keeps people smoking even though they want to quit. Breaking addiction is harder for some people than others. Many people need more than one try in order to quit.
That's how powerful this drug is. That's how powerful nicotine addiction is. That's why it's the number one -- cigarette smoking is the number one cause of preventable disease in the United States of America.
Cigarettes are designed -- that's the other thing -- they're designed to be addictive. Cigarette makers have long -- this is the Surgeon General -- have long known that nicotine addiction helps sell their products. Cigarettes today deliver more nicotine and deliver it quicker than ever before.
MR. STERN: Objection, Your Honor -withdrawn.
Objection, Your Honor, to references to
today with respect to a 2010 document.
THE COURT: Thank you. The objection's noted.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is argument.
Proceed.
MR. ALVAREZ: This document is in evidence and you can see it, okay?
Cigarettes today deliver more nicotine and deliver it quicker than ever before. The additives and chemicals that tobacco companies put in cigarettes may have helped make them more addictive. Once inhaled, nicotine races from your lungs to your heart, to your brain.
You might have thought that the filtered, low-tar, or light cigarettes were less dangerous than others, but research shows that those cigarettes are every bit as addictive and are no more safer than other cigarettes.
Misleading labels are no longer allowed.
2010.
That's how addictive -They manipulate the levels of nicotine.
They try to -- they -- they try to say that low-tar cigarettes are safer for you, that lights are safer, that filters are safer, when
the whole time they're trying to make this addictive product so that they can keep selling it.
Now, let's talk about -You know the other thing that's missing -- you didn't hear the Judge talk about -- is the definition of "addiction"; right? It's not in the instructions. Look at them. They're not there.
You guys decide what the definition of "addiction" is. That's what the jury -That's your job, decide what the definition is, okay? But there is no -- no legal definition that you're required, okay, to accept. None.
But you heard some definitions. You heard some definitions from Dr. Drobes, who is a true scientist, who is a true scientist, a true expert. And what he says is: Addiction is defined as a chronic, relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use, despite harmful consequences.
That, in essence -- that, in essence, is the definition of "addiction." It's a
relapsing -- a chronic, relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use, despite harmful consequences. This is -You know, people who continue to do it, knowing that it's going to have harmful consequences, and they continue to do it over and over because they're -- they have a compulsion to do it, that's what addiction is. That's what nicotine addiction is.
So let's talk about Ted McKeever. Let's look at the facts, let's look at the evidence, let's look at the testimony. Let's listen to the people who knew him. Not people who tried to discredit him, but people who knew him.
He smoked for over 60 years, two to three packs per day the majority of the time.
Smoked first thing in the morning. Why is that important?
Dr. Drobes told you, when you go to sleep and you're addicted, when you wake up, you're in withdrawal because you haven't had a cigarette.
And what's the first thing you do? Boom, you have a cigarette. That is one of the most
determinative facts on whether someone's addicted.
He smoked everywhere. There was no place he wouldn't smoke. He smoked in bed. He tried to quit countless times. He tried quitting on his own. He tried candy, he tried gum, he tried soups.
You know, the doctor made fun of it, but, you know, when you're trying to quit, you'll try anything to try to quit. You'll try anything. And they shouldn't be insulting him because he tried soups, bags of soups, you know, instant soup, to try to quit.
He tried Nicorette gum. And here's -The other thing is, Dr. Ticknor, yesterday, said that, well, I don't believe that he -- that he tried Nicorette gum or that he tried the patch, because that was the wrong time frame.
Well, the man was in his 80s, the man was on oxygen, he didn't remember the time period, but Mrs. McKeever testified about when it happened, and it happened in the '90s, and that was her testimony. She had a more accurate recollection of when it happened.
He knew that it did happen, but they're all over the fact that, oh, you gave us the wrong decade, so it didn't happen.
He tried the patch. They threw out ashtrays, they threw out cigarettes. He smoked before -That's the last thing he did before he put his head on the pillow, was smoke a cigarette.
He smoked immediately before -- or would leave church to smoke, and other places where it wasn't allowed. He would leave movies to smoke. He would leave restaurants to smoke.
Does that sound like a choice, that you're enjoying a movie -This is the choice: You're enjoying the movie, you know, but I guess you're not enjoying the movie too much, because you made a choice to go outside and smoke.
Does that sound like somebody who's not addicted?
Or that you're enjoying a meal with your family and you have to step outside the restaurant to have a smoke?
And look what happened when he tried to
quit. And you saw this slide. He would get upset, he'd get irritable, he would get nervous, he wasn't himself. He would lose focus and concentration. He would have cravings, he would have urges. He just had to have it.
He had trouble sleeping. He would get angry. He was edgy, he was fidgety. His personality would change. He would start to pace. He would lose patience with things, he would lose interest in things, which was out of character for him.
Those are all signs and symptoms of what? Addiction. But when you take the drug away, this is what happens.
We're going to talk about the amount of time that he spent smoking, okay?
Let's use one pack per day. Well, each cigarette has 20 -Each pack has 20 cigarettes in it, okay?
So that's 200 minutes in a day. That's 3.3 hours a day. Over a year, that's 1,216 hours a year. Over 60 years, that's 73,000 hours in the lifetime. Over a 24-hour period, that's 3,041 days, okay? And that equals 8.3 years.
If he were to stay up for 24 hours a day and smoke one pack of cigarettes a day, it would last -- he would be smoking for eight years and three months. That's just one pack. That's just one pack. If he's doing two packs, it's 16.6 years. If it's three packs, it's almost 25 years.
You heard from Dr. Drobes. I mean, he's a real scientist, he's a real expert. He's a senior member of the Department of Health at the behav -- at -- at Moffitt Cancer Center, he's associate director of the Tobacco Research and Intervention program.
He's authored over 60 peer-reviewed articles on nicotine addiction, okay? Sixty.
He's conducted over 30 scientific studies on nicotine and the effects of smoking. He's written over six -- seven chapters in books on the effects of smoking. He's lectured all over the country, over 60 times.
This guy's a real expert. This guy knows what he's talking about. This guy studied the science. This guy has made his life work -his life's work studying nicotine addiction.
And he went through the DSM. He read all
the depositions. He read everything. And he says that Ted McKeever met ten out of the 11 criteria, okay?
Someone who knows what they're talking about, someone who studied the science, someone who's done the research -- because we're going to talk about Dr. Ticknor in a moment -- his opinion is that he was addicted.
But he's not the only one that talked about that, because Ted McKeever's own -- own doctor, his pulmonologist, says he was addicted, okay?
This is part of the trial testimony:
Okay. Based on your training as a physician, your experience for 31 -plus years, the education that you've received, obviously your on-the-job experience and training, based on the records that you reviewed, did you draw any conclusion as to whether or not Ted McKeever was addicted to smoking?
I think he was.
Is there any question in your mind about that?
No.
Is your opinion within a reasonable
degree of medical certainty?
Clearly.
And, again, he goes on here, talking about his opinion.
And what was that conclusion?
The addiction was the cause of his continued smoking. Okay?
Is that conclusion within a reasonable degree of medical certainty?
Yes. I think his addiction was the cause of his emphysema.
Do you have any question in your mind about that?
None.
Is that conclusion within a reasonable degree of medical certainty?
I think so.
Okay. So -- and, you know, here's Dr. -You know, he's not a paid expert. You know, he's not a paid expert. He was his doctor, okay? I mean, he's going to say whatever he's going to say. No one can control him, okay?
Mr. McPharlin, you know, may have tried to -- to lead him into a certain area and ask
him certain questions a certain way, but he wasn't -He's going to tell you what he thinks no matter what, right? That was him, okay? And it was his opinion that his patient -- his patient -- was addicted.
What about his wife? What about Vickie, the lady who was married to him for 57 years, the person who knew him best? No one in this world knew him more or better than Vickie.
What did she say?
You knew your husband pretty well?
Yes.
Was Ted addicted to smoking cigarettes?
Yes. Yes, he was.
Any doubt in your mind?
Pardon me?
Any doubt in your mind?
No, none.
But you know what? You know what? Why don't you hear it from the horse's mouth, the man who smoked, to see if he thought he was addicted.
(A video clip of Theodore McKeever was played and taken down to the best of the
reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: I'm addicted. I need to smoke.
No matter what they told me, if I didn't get a true picture or a true answer, I would continue to smoke. I was addicted and I needed to smoke. I was addictive.
VOICE: You were addictive?
VOICE: Oh, yeah. Being addicted to it, wanting more, being addicted -- addictive, wanting more, and knowing that I can't. I was addicted. I needed it. I needed it.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. ALVAREZ: I mean, he must have said it five, six, seven times.
Let's talk about Dr. Ticknor. This is their paid expert who came in here from Texas to talk to you about what he thought after reviewing the materials. And let me tell you what he -He's never published a single article on nicotine addiction. Not one, okay? He's never conducted any studies on nicotine addiction.
Not one.
He's never even been asked to consult with any Surgeon General, the National -- NIDA,
which is the National Institute on Drug Abuse, the World Health Organization, the Center for Disease Control, or any other governmental health authority.
Not one has come and asked his opinion. So, Doctor, what do you think about nicotine addiction, can you help us? You know, explain this, can you help us do a study?
This man has never studied this material.
He does not know this topic. And he's got some extreme positions. He's got extreme positions that's contrary to the public health authorities.
Look what he says: And you believe that there is a controversy as to whether or not addiction causes disease, correct?
I understand there are differences of opinion about that, yes.
You believe there's a controversy?
Yes.
And those are your words, right?
It's not settled science, in my opinion.
And you disagree with the Surgeon General on this point?
I do.
You disagree with the World Health Organization on this point?
I do.
You disagree with the National Institute on Drug Abuse on this point?
I do.
You disagree with the Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry on this point?
Yes, I do.
And in the Comprehensive Textbook on Psychiatry, nicotine dependence is the most prevalent, deadly, and costly of substance dependencies. You agree with that, right?
I disagree with that.
I mean, this is a man who has extreme positions that's contrary to the experts who know about nicotine addiction, but that's who they chose to bring here, somebody with extreme positions, to try to convince you that this man was not addicted. Without -- no research, scientific or scholarly work to back it up at all.
Addiction to tobacco kills one person prematurely every six seconds. You disagree with that?
I do.
One in two-thirds -One in two long-term smokers, largely in low- and middle-income countries will die from tobacco addiction. You disagree with that?
I'm not an expert on foreign countries.
I mean, we can go through these, but, I mean, this is a man with extreme positions, who'd say what -He says things that not only do not make sense, but did not make scientific sense within the science of nicotine addiction. It just doesn't make sense and it's not valid. He has no backup for any of what he said. None.
So you disagree with the Surgeon General on this point, that nicotine is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products? You disagree with that?
No, I'm saying it's one of the fundamental reasons.
Well, that's not what the Surgeon General says. They're -- they say it's the fundamental reason.
I think that's a blanket statement and it's -- it is not accurate -- actually,
descriptive or accurate.
We can go through these, but you know what the Surgeon General -Let me tell you what the Surgeon General says about that, okay?
This is in the 2004 Surgeon General's report. Because he says -Let me go back to that.
Do you agree that an estimated half a million individuals in the United States die of disease related to tobacco smoking, but an equal number of them become dependent on tobacco yearly? Do you agree or disagree with that?
And he says: I'm not an epidemiologist.
I'm familiar that many people, we believe, die premature deaths from smoking cigarettes. Again, my opinion is very clear that I do not believe they die from nicotine dependence.
I'll read that again. Again, my opinion is very clear. I do not believe they die from nicotine dependence. They die from cigarette smoke. Those are different issues.
Right? That's what he says. That's not what the Surgeon General says.
Nicotine addiction causes people to smoke cigarettes.
These are the carcinogens, okay?
It activates on your -- on your DNA.
It -- those DNAs become mutated, become cancerous, and you get lung cancer, okay?
Look at the first box, nicotine addiction, and look at the last box, okay?
And what does it say here? Scheme linking nicotine addiction and lung cancer via tobacco smoke carcinogens and their induction of multiple mutations in critical genes.
That's how it happens scientifically, but yet he -- he disagrees with the body of scientific knowledge.
So we went -But you know what? Mr. McPharlin finally got him to admit he met one criteria, okay?
One criteria for dependence. Look what he says. And this is the Surgeon General's criteria for drug dependency.
The primary criteria: Highly controlled or compulsive use, psychoactive effects, drug-reinforced behaviors.
Okay. That's the primary criteria. So
we went through the primary criteria, which he meets all of those, right? Those three are the primary criteria?
Yes.
And Mr. McKeever met them -- meets them?
Answer: Yes.
So when we finally pinned him down at least to one, he finally had to admit it.
So smoking caused Ted McKeever's COPD and lung cancer, but it wasn't enough to addict him?
MR. STERN: Same objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: Use your common sense.
So the very first question: Was Theodore McKeever addicted to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his COPD/emphysema?
It should be "yes."
Okay. So let me talk about the second question. This is the second question you're going to get, okay? This is where you decide -Because once -- once you answer "yes" to that question --
Once you answer "yes" to that question, he's a class member and the Engle findings apply, okay? We're in the class, okay? Once you say "yes," we're in the class, okay?
So the next question you got to decide is, okay, so let's apportion responsibility.
What -How much of this is Philip Morris' fault and how much of this is Ted McKeever's fault, okay? That -- this is where you assess responsibility, okay?
So let's think about that for a minute, okay? Let's think about that for a minute.
You know, because -You know, your first impression, well, everything is 50-50 in this world; but, you know, it's only 50-50 when everybody knows the same thing, right?
Because if everybody walks into an agreement and everybody knows the same thing, then maybe it is 50-50. But let's explore that, okay? Let's explore that.
You got the instruction about negligence. Negligence is the failure to use reasonable care, okay? What a reasonable person or
corporation would have done, okay? What's reasonable?
So you got to ask yourself, okay, who was acting reasonable? Okay. You don't target kids.
MR. STERN: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Thank you. What's the objection?
MR. STERN: Your Honor, there's -May we approach?
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. STERN: There's no evidence that Mr. McKeever ever smoked a Philip Morris product when he was a minor. Those events all occurred before the Plaza Hotel; and, in any event, Dr. Proctor testified there was no conspiracy to market to underage youth.
THE COURT: Thank you. Anything else?
MR. ALVAREZ: No.
THE COURT: Thank you. The objection's noted. It's overruled. I think it goes to reprehensibility.
One of the jurors, though, wants a break,
so we're going to take a recess.
MR. ALVAREZ: Okay.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, I understand one of your members needs a restroom break, so we're going to take a short recess.
Do not discuss the case, don't form any opinion about the case, don't allow anyone to discuss the case in your presence. Just leave the jury instructions and your notepads on your chairs. Thank you. We'll be back with you shortly.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
THE COURT: Please be seated.
Let the record again reflect the presence of our plaintiff, plaintiff's counsel, defense counsel, ladies and gentlemen of the jury.
Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Alvarez will continue with his presentation.
Go ahead, sir.
MR. ALVAREZ: So, 85 to 90 percent of all smokers start as teenagers. You know, by the time you reach 24, it's almost 99 percent, okay?
So the tobacco industry knows that the way that they get a long, sustainable customer is to get them while they're young, while they're teenagers.
And when Ted McKeever was 13 years old, the last thing he thought in his mind is that he would be smoking for 63 years.
MR. STERN: Objection, Your Honor; not in evidence.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely upon your own recollection of the evidence.
Proceed.
MR. ALVAREZ: Think about that. A 13-year-old young man, in the Bronx, New York, in 1943, do you think he thought he was going to be a lifelong smoker?
Is that the decision that a reasonable 13-year-old could make and had the maturity to make those decisions?
Could he make an informed decision at 13, that he was going to be a lifelong customer of the tobacco industry?
Now -But they knew. This is an R.J. Reynolds document. It says: Young smokers -- young adult smokers are the only source of replacement smokers. Less than one-third of the smokers, 31 percent, start after the age of
18. Only five percent of the smokers start by the age of 24.
If younger adults turn away from smoking, the industry must decline, just as population which does not give birth will eventually dwindle.
They knew it. They knew it. They knew that that was -- this was their -- this was their niche. They had to get them young, because once you get them young, you get them addicted, you've got them. You got them.
Realistically, if our company is to survive and prosper over the long term, we must get our share of the youth market. Thus, we need new brands designed to be particularly attractive to young smokers.
You know, more documents: Many manufacturers have studied the 14 to 20 market in hopes of uncovering the secret, quote, of the instant popularity some brands enjoy to the almost complete exclusion of others, as shown above. Creating a "fad" in this market can be a great bonanza.
The progression of Marlboro preference share from 50 percent at 14 to 15 to 21 percent
at 21 to 24, while an indication of the brand's great popularity among young people, is also a clear signal of the "in" status the brand enjoys among them. Okay?
There's a reason he started, you know, smoking certain brands.
Surgeon General report, 2012: Tobacco is a global epidemic among young people. As with adults, it poses serious health threat to youth and young adults in the United States and has a significant implication for our nation's public and economic health in the future.
Most young smokers become adult smokers. One-half of the adult smokers die prematurely from tobacco-related diseases. Half of the young smokers die prematurely.
Despite thousands of programs to reduce youth smoking -- smoking, and hundreds of thousands of media stories on the dangers of smoking use, generation after generation continue to use these deadly products, and family after family continues to suffer the devastating consequences.
Nearly all tobacco use begins in childhood and adolescence. In all, 88 percent
of adult smokers who smoke daily report that they started smoking by the age of 18.
I mean, there's no doubt that this is the age. You get them when they're young, when they're teens, and you got them forever. That was the target, that was the plan. They implemented the plan, they got what they wanted.
So, you know, this is the question:
State the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of Ted McKeever's COPD and lung cancer that you charge to Philip Morris and Ted McKeever.
Well, I don't think it should be a hundred and zero, but if you think that Ted bears some responsibility, it's got to be de minimis, it's got to be small, compared to what they do -- what they did, what a corporation like them did to him, and continued to do to him over the decades. It's de minimis.
But if you want to ascribe a percentage, it should be something closer to 95 percent Philip Morris and five percent Ted McKeever. That more reasonably reflects the difference of
knowledge and reasonable conduct between these two parties. Because there's no match.
There's no match.
So after you finish answering this question, there will be -Questions 3, 4 and 5 will deal with damages, and I'm going to talk about those at the end, okay? And you'll look on your verdict form, and that's what it says. Three, 4 and 5 deal with damages.
But I'm going to skip to the next series of questions, okay, which are Questions 6, 7,
8, 9 and 10, because this is the path to punitive damages. This is the path that decides if Philip Morris should be punished, okay, should be punished, and to deter others for conduct like theirs, okay?
And your verdict will tell us, should they be punished for what they did, okay?
And this is the question: Did Ted -- did Theodore McKeever reasonably rely to his detriment on Philip Morris USA Inc.'s concealment or omission of material information not otherwise known or available concealing [sic] the health effects or addictive nature of
smoking cigarettes; and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of Ted McKeever's COPD and lung cancer? "Yes" or "no." That's Question Number 6, okay?
Notice it does -It's about what they concealed.
Concealment or omission of -- or omission of material information not otherwise known or available, okay?
What did they know that T ed didn't know, right? Let's talk about that. Let's look at that. What did they conceal?
Okay. They concealed that they formed a conspiracy in 1953 to conceal the health effects and addictive nature of smoking.
And, by the way -- by the way, you heard from Ms. McKeever that none of those things that we're going to go through, he knew. None. He didn't know that. He didn't know that they hired scientists and doctors to mislead the public about the health effects and addictive smoking -- and addictive nature of smoking.
In fact, they did that on purpose, so to make it seem like there's reliable scientists and doctors who are saying that it hasn't been
proven. That was their plan, that was their scheme. That's what they were doing, to have people who were addicted, who have a diminished capacity -Because when you're addicted, when you're addicted to smoking, okay, and you hear two competing messages, right, you hear -- you hear from doctors and healthcare authorities saying, you know what, smoking causes cancer and other diseases, you should stop smoking, right, and then you hear from the manufacturer of your products, saying it hasn't been proven, we don't know, which one do you think the addicted smoker is going to choose? Which message do you think that addicted smoker is going to embrace?
He didn't know that it was killing 450,000 Americans, that 50 percent of all smokers who suffer a smoking-related disease, that they studied nicotine and they knew it was a highly addictive drug, that they manipulated the levels to keep people smoking, that there were chemicals like arsenic, cyanide, radioactive Polonium-210 in cigarettes.
There were over 70 cancer-causing agents
in every puff that man took, every time he smoked a cigarette.
They knew that filters were no safer than non-filters. They knew that light cigarettes were no safer. They purposely misled the public about the safety of filters, lights and cigarettes, so they could keep selling their cigarettes, so they could keep making money.
They kept all those things away from him. They concealed that information that they knew from Ted McKeever, and he believed them when they told him.
He believed them when they told him it hadn't been proven to be safe, and he continued to smoke and he switched to different brands of cigarettes that he thought were safe and safe and safe. He bought into their propaganda.
They spent millions, hundreds of millions of dollars, on this, and he bought it. And now they want to come in and deny it.
1961, okay? Philip Morris' own head of research: To achieve this objective will require a major research...
Carcinogens are found in practically every class of compound in smoke. Present
technology does not permit selective filtration of particulate smoke, okay?
So they knew back in '61 -- this is the head of research for Philip Morris -- they knew that there was cancer-causing agents in smoke, okay? But what did they tell -Two years later, the same -- the very same science -- it's in evidence -- the very same scientist that wrote that report wrote this report to the Surgeon General, right, saying the complete opposite.
Look what he says: None of the chemical constituents listed therein, to our knowledge, has been found by scientific research -research to be harmful to the health of the smoker in amounts reported in smoke. It is possible, of course, to modify the chemical composition of cigarette smoke by the use of filters.
Two years later, they said they knew their -- it was the opposite. They lied. They lied. And people smoked, and Ted smoked, based on those lies, and he suffered and his family suffered and his wife -- his wife suffered.
MR. STERN: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ALVAREZ: His wife suffered.
MR. STERN: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: 1958, a scientist from British American Tobacco Company comes down to the United States and visits every single tobacco industry -- company, including Philip Morris, and he wants to know, guys, tell me what you think, does smoking cause cancer?
What do you think?
And look what he says: With the exception of this guy Greene, the individual who we met -- the individuals whom we met believed that smoking causes lung cancer if by "causation" we mean by a chain of events which leads finally to lung cancer and which involves smoking as the indispensable link.
In the USA, only Berkson, apparently, is now prepared to doubt statistical evidence and his reasoning is somewhat thought -- is nowhere thought to be sound, okay? This is 1958, okay?
And this is their whole program, their whole propaganda scheme. That's why they spent hundreds of millions of dollars on the Tobacco
Institute and the TIRC and the CTR, so that they could get these front organizations out there and they could hire these scientists and these doctors to spew those lies that they knew were lies.
Obviously, the key word is "confusion," and anything we can do to confirm such a situation could work to our advantage.
Doubt is our product since it is the best means of competing with the "body of fact" that exists in the mind of the general public. It is also the means of establishing a controversy.
Let's hear from William Farone, who worked for Philip Morris during that time.
(A video clip of William Farone was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: Can enough nicotine be removed to make the cigarette not addictive?
VOICE: Yes.
VOICE: Have nitrosamines been known by the industry for a long time?
VOICE: Yeah.
VOICE: About how long?
VOICE: 1961, 1962, in that range of time.
VOICE: And did they express to you that they knew that smoking was, in fact, addictive?
VOICE: Yes.
VOICE: And did they think that -- that these compounds, ammonia, urea, and so forth, enhanced the addictive nature of cigarettes?
VOICE: Yes.
VOICE: Was it thought at Philip Morris that addiction was the reason people smoked?
VOICE: Yes.
VOICE: Is what Philip Morris was selling, nicotine?
VOICE: Philip Morris was selling nicotine in the form of smoke, delivered by smoke, cigarette smoke.
VOICE: And is the same true of the other cigarette companies?
VOICE: Yes.
VOICE: Philip Morris -Did Philip Morris want smokers to smoke as many of their cigarettes as they wanted to?
VOICE: Sure, yeah.
VOICE: Did they place any limits on how
many cigarettes you should smoke?
VOICE: No.
VOICE: Was Philip Morris aware that the more you smoked, the more chance you have of getting cancer or emphysema or some other disease?
VOICE: Yes.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. ALVAREZ: That's William Farone, who worked for Philip Morris during the '70s, into the '80s. I mean, they knew it. They knew it. Their documents tell us -This is not me; this is them. This is their own words and this is their own employee.
You know, let's listen to the president -- the former president of American T obacco Company in 1986. Let's see what he says.
(The video clip of Robert K. Heimann was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: Throughout your tenure with American, it was not only American's position but your position that cigarettes weren't injurious to health. Is that correct?
VOICE: Through my tenure?
VOICE: Yes.
VOICE: Yes, that is so.
VOICE: That's something American Tobacco wanted the public to believe, is that correct?
VOICE: Yes.
VOICE: It's a statement that American Tobacco placed great reliance on?
VOICE: We issued that statement, yes.
VOICE: As far as -VOICE: And we believe it.
VOICE: As far as you're concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement?
VOICE: Yes.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. ALVAREZ: A person is justified on reliance on that statement, okay?
So what did Ted McKeever rely on? Did he rely on those statements? Let's hear it from him.
(The video clip of Theodore McKeever was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: In other words, it's harmful,
it's dangerous. I was getting the pros and cons in the '70s.
I mean the "yeas" -- "yes" -- "yeas" and "nays."
In other words, the -- the tobacco company was telling me it's clear, it's safe, it's non-destructive, whatever, non-damaging, and all that stuff. And then you got the other ones, they're saying, yes, they are, yes, they are, so I was in between.
...I'm hearing from the advertisements of the tobacco company that it's not harmful, it's safe; and then you get the other thing telling just the opposite.
So I'm not giving up smoking, I'm just feeling it out, what -- what can I do now?
All that I can say is I heard it on the advertisements that it was -- they claimed it was safe.
VOICE: Uh-huh.
VOICE: That's as far as I can go in reference to that.
VOICE: Right.
VOICE: Safe and not dangerous.
VOICE: Answer --
VOICE: I wouldn't believe that. In other words -- in other words, I got the two, yes and no. In other words, yes, they are dangerous; no, they're not dangerous. That's as far as my memory can go.
I just told you. It's the pros and cons.
Because I was on the fence. In other words, try to quit and see what would happen.
Because the advertisements were telling me that it was safe.
Radio, magazines, newspapers. All this stuff, I'm starting to look at the pros and cons. That was it.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. ALVAREZ: Okay. He relied, he believed. They got exactly what they bargained for. They paid for people to believe exactly what Ted believed.
And you heard Mrs. McKeever testify: And did you ever at any point -- did you ever point out to him the information that said that it was harmful?
Yeah, but he trusted the tobacco companies. He thought they were telling the truth.
I mean, and you heard -Now I'm going to go through that testimony over -You heard her testimony. It reiterates exactly what he said. But he didn't make that up. He didn't make that up, he didn't take that out of the air. That's exactly what they were doing to people, that's exactly what they were telling the American public.
So, to this question, the answer is "yes." This is the path of punitive damages.
This is the path to punishment to deter other people, other corporations, from doing this, okay? This is how you get there. This is how you get there, by answering "yes" to this question.
Now, the next question is -Question Number 7 says: Did any of the conceal [sic] or omissions of material information by Philip Morris USA Inc. on which you found Ted McKeever reasonably relied to his detriment occur or continue after May 5th,
1982?
What's May 5th, 19 -I didn't hear anything about May 5th.
Listen, you didn't hear any evidence about May 5th, 1982. It has legal significance, okay? It has nothing to do with any facts you heard in this case.
MR. STERN: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: It doesn't have any legal -It doesn't have any factual significance, but it has legal significance, and that's why we had to ask it this way.
MR. STERN: Same objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: All right. So what information do we have that he continued to rely on their information after 1982, okay?
Well, he heard all this information, okay? All this information about filters. He was choosing a filtered cigarette, remember? He was smoking filtered cigarettes because he thought it was safe, okay?
And they knew that the illusion of filtration, that was important. That's what they did. They sold people on the idea that filters were safer, okay?
In most cases, however, the smoker of a filter cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar as he would have gotten from a regular cigarette. He had abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on the ground of reduced risk to health.
The smoker profile data reported earlier indicated that Marlboro Lights -- which is the brand that he switched to in the '80s and the '90s -- remember? -- in the '80s and the '90s, he switched to those cigarettes, thinking what? They were safer, okay? Were not -- were not smoked like regular Marlboros. There were differences in the size and frequency of puffs, with larger volumes taken on Marlboro Lights by both regular Marlboro smokers and Marlboro Lights smokers, okay?
Then, what happened to that? Then, at the very end, what did he do? He's trying to get off. He's trying to get off smoking, so what does he do? He switches to Carlton, which is the lowest. The lowest.
Remember what he said? He goes, I hated it, I hated smoking those things because they didn't -- they didn't -- you know, my -- my --
They didn't get my nicotine fix, okay?
But, by the end, he was trying to quit so hard, he even switched to the lowest brand, the lowest -And look what it says here: Ten packs of Carlton have less than one tar [sic] -- less than one pack of...
What they're saying is -- they're making this ten-to-one comparison, that for every ten Carlton, it's the same as one regular cigarette.
So let's look at Monograph 13, what they talk about, because this came out in 2001 and it kind of took the wool out of -- out of -out of all the public health officials' eyes and told them the truth about lights and told them the truth about light cigarettes.
And what does it say? The recommendations by the public authorities to produce low-tar cigarettes failed to appreciate two important realities. First, smokers were powerfully addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes.
And, second, the public health authorities dramatically underestimated the
ability of cigarette manufacturers to engineer cigarettes that would yield very low tar and nicotine values when machine smoked, but yielded much higher levels of tar and nicotine when smoked by smokers.
And the conclusions: Advertisements of filtered and low-tar cigarettes were intended to reassure smokers -Reassure smokers. That's why he switched to lights, that's why he went to Carlton; right? That's why he went to Winston Lights, okay?
-- reassure smokers who were worried about health risks of smoking and were meant to prevent smokers from quitting based on those same concerns.
Advertisements and promotional efforts were successful in getting smokers to use filtered and low-yield cigarette brands.
Internal company -- internal tobacco company documents demonstrate that the cigarette manufacturers recognized the inherent deception of advertising that offered cigarettes as "Lights" and "Ultra Lights" or as having the lowest tar and nicotine yields.
So what did he say about that? What did he say about the lights? What did he say about Carlton?
Let's play it.
(The video clip of Theodore McKeever was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: I switched -They were lights because they were good. You know, I thought safe, safe to use because they've improved on it.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. ALVAREZ: That's what he thought.
Is that done?
TECHNICIAN: I think so.
MR. ALVAREZ: All right. So this is -this is the manufacturer, Brown & Williamson, manufacturer of Carlton: The Carlton smokes -smokers more freely admit that they wish they didn't smoke at all with -- at all than with any other brand. They are desperate -desperate -- trying to quit or have not been able to quit and they end up with those.
Sound familiar? Their own internal research backs up exactly --
MR. STERN: Objection to "their research," Your Honor. This is not Philip Morris.
MR. ALVAREZ: -- what he says.
MR. STERN: This is not Philip Morris.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, again, this is argument. You rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
Please proceed.
MR. ALVAREZ: And this is important. You know why? Because there is a claim that they engaged in a conspiracy, and we're going to talk about that in a minute, okay?
In the way that -- in the same way that Carlton smokers are typified as nonsmoking -as nonsmoking smokers, so, too, are Carlton cigarettes seen as non-cigarette cigarettes.
Both those in and outside the franchise describe Carlton as being very low in tar.
Yes, it's the lowest. That's as low as you can get.
And there's a Carlton ad: Carlton is lowest. And look at the date. 1990. That is after May 5th, 1982.
And here's the other thing: How do we
know that he kept relying? How do we know that?
Well, we know that because, in 1994, when the Congressional hearings came out and the CEO of Philip Morris and the other tobacco companies went before Congress, swore to tell the truth, and said that cigarette smoking wasn't addictive and didn't cause cancer and other diseases, okay, they heard it.
And that's her testimony: Did you see
it?
Yes.
Did he see it?
Yes.
And what did he say when you saw it?
He turned to me and said, see, I told you they said they were not harmful.
So, on the verdict form, Question Number 7: Did any of the concealment or omission of material information by Philip Morris Inc. USA on which you found Theodore McKeever reasonably relied to his detriment occur or continue after May 5th, 1992 -- 1982?
The answer is "yes."
There's credible, substantial evidence in
this case that it does. And this is the path to punitive damages. This is the path to punish them for what they did to Ted and what they did to Vickie, and to deter other corporations.
MR. STERN: Objection to "other -THE COURT: Sustained. mr. sst: -- "other corporations," Your Honor.
MR. ALVAREZ: That's the -Okay. Well, I'm going to read what the Judge read to you, okay?
As punishment and as a deterrent to others, okay?
Now, Question 8 and 9 deal with the conspiracy, okay? Did they -Did they agree with other tobacco companies to conceal the health effects and addictive nature of smoking? And the answer to both of those is "yes."
But let's go through the evidence. Let's go through the evidence to see what they did, how they were in cahoots with these other people, okay?
Play this video. This is a montage of
all the executives.
Go ahead.
(The video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: These components, we published the results of our work in technical journals which are available to any scientist in any part of the world.
So far, we've found none that give us any cause for concern. If we do find any that we consider harmful, and so far we have not, we'll remove these from smoke and still retain the pleasure of your favorite cigarette.
VOICE: Well, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. I don't think the industry admits there are any bad elements.
If there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find them. And if they are found, they will be removed. But, at this point, we do not know.
VOICE: We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that. Because
when, as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
VOICE: Do you believe that cigarettes are safe?
Have they been proved to be safe,
Mr. Cullman?
VOICE: I believe they have not been proved to be unsafe.
VOICE: Can cigarettes cause cancer?
VOICE: I don't know if they do or not.
VOICE: I'm not in a position to give you a "does" or "does not" answer.
VOICE: What will it take for this institute or for the various tobacco companies to be convinced?
VOICE: Well, that's a good question, and one that I think has been confounding a lot of scientists for decades.
VOICE: To this question, it must be answered insofar as the correlation between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are concerned, no one knows. It may, it may not.
VOICE: The case is still open. The jury
has not come in.
VOICE: It may not be harmful, you're not convinced?
VOICE: It may be or it may not be. We don't know.
VOICE: These pictures are from Superman II. Marlboro, made by Philip Morris, is shown at least 13 times. I asked the Tobacco Institute why Marlboros were shown so often in Superman II.
VOICE: Do you think cigarette manufacturers had something to do with that?
VOICE: Yeah, I think that -VOICE: Cigarette manufacturers don't make movies.
VOICE: So what do you think, that the -the moviemaker just showed Marlboro on his own?
VOICE: Perhaps the moviemaker was a Marlboro smoker.
VOICE: And as far as I'm concerned, the bottom line is that we simply don't know scientifically what makes a normal, healthy cell suddenly go malignant. Whether it's cigarette smoking or diet or genetics or occupational exposures or physical or mental
stress, we simply haven't the vaguest notion.
VOICE: Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, "yes" or "no"?
VOICE: It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer.
VOICE: All right, sir.
VOICE: It has not been causally established.
VOICE: Cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
VOICE: Despite all the research to date, there has been no causal link established.
VOICE: No causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease?
VOICE: No. As a matter of fact, there are studies that while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over ten years that would say, again, that science is still puzzled over these forces.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. ALVAREZ: So this is what they did. They purposely did that, knowing that those statements were false, knowing they were
concealing the health effects of smoking, knowing that they were concealing the addictive nature of smoking. They did it, they continued to do it in the '50s, in the '60s, in the '70s, in the '80s, in the '90s, all the way through.
They continued to do it.
So it wasn't just Philip Morris; it was the tobacco industry and all the rest of those -THE COURT: Five minutes, Counsel.
MR. ALVAREZ: So the answer to this -these questions are "yes."
Now, Question Number 10 is a very important question. It is: Under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted -- warranted against Philip Morris USA. Okay?
Look at this: Without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse. We would -- Philip Morris would collapse, and we'd all lose our jobs and our consulting fees.
However, we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. That is to
say, if the exit gates from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business overnight.
That's the only thing they cared about. That's the only thing they cared about. They cared about one thing. They didn't care about Ted McKeever. They cared about one thing: Money.
We do not foresee any difficulty ...to remove certain reports from our research files. Once... such action is necessary for the successful defense of our present -- of our present and future suits, we will promptly remove all such reports...
...As an alternative to invalidation, we can have the authors rewrite those sections of the reports which appear objectionable.
That's how they did it. They went out and they -Since --
INBIFO was a -- was a -- was a lab that they got in Germany to do research for them so that we couldn't get the information here in the United States. Those are the lengths they went to to hide what they were doing.
And, every year, over 450 [sic] smoking-related deaths occur as a result of -MR. STERN: Objection, Your Honor. Same objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: Every year.
Mr. Heimann again.
I'm going to go over my time.
(The video clip of Robert K. Heimann was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: And the reason is, simply,
American disagrees with the warning, doesn't it?
VOICE: We certainly do.
VOICE: You don't think they harm smokers, so there's no reason to put any warning on them, do you?
VOICE: We believe our product is not injurious to health.
VOICE: As far as you can -- as far as you're concerned, is the Surgeon General simply wrong in concluding that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer?
VOICE: I would use the term "misguided."
VOICE: Well, if he's misguided, then I take it that your opinion is he's wrong?
VOICE: I was simply trying to be polite about it.
VOICE: Okay. But not being polite about it, in your opinion, he's wrong?
VOICE: Dead wrong.
VOICE: Congress is wrong in requiring these warnings, correct?
VOICE: We do not think they're justified.
VOICE: So they're wrong?
VOICE: They're wrong.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. ALVAREZ: Okay. That type of conduct needs to be punished.
So, under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against Philip Morris USA Inc. The answer is "yes."
The next thing I want to jump to is the damages, which are Questions 3, 4 and 5.
And Question 3 is: What is the total amount of damages sustained by Ted McKeever as
a result of his COPD and lung cancer, for his pain and suffering, disability, physical impairment, disfigurement, mental anguish, inconvenience, or loss of capacity for the enjoyment of life, up until the date of his death?
And for Vickie: What is the total amount of Vickie McKeever's damages caused by the loss of her husband's comfort, society and attention as a result of his COPD and lung cancer up until the date of his death?
And then the last one is: What is the amount of medical expenses resulting from treatment of the COPD and lung cancer sustained by Ted McKeever?
So, you know, this -Look, there's no book that you can go into and say, hey, you know, he suffered COPD and lung cancer, he suffered so many years, you know, you go in this book and you figure out some tables. That's not how it works.
You guys use whatever you think is fair and reasonable in light of the evidence that you've heard, you know, but we'll suggest to you that -- you know, that the damages in this
case are substantial, okay?
When this man was -They removed a lung, and he had one lung left, and that lung was diseased, okay? Diseased. And he needed a tube of oxygen to breathe.
For the next eight years -MR. STERN: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. ALVAREZ: -- the quality of his -MR. STERN: Not eight years according to the stipulation.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on -This is counsel's argument. You're to rely on the facts as you understand them. Thank you.
MR. ALVAREZ: It's from December 2005, until his death in May of 2013. So whatever those months are, whatever those years are, if it's not eight years, I apologize, but whatever it is, that's the time period that we're talking about, okay?
But just think about that, okay? Just think about that for a minute.
Because when -- when Ted and Vickie got married, and they looked like that (indicating), okay, they wanted to grow old together and enjoy what? A quality of life. Quality of life together, okay?
That's what they wanted, to spend their life together, holding hands, enjoying each other's company. And that was taken away from them. And the suffering that Ted and Vickie had to undergo after December of 2005, until his death in May of 2013, was dramatic, significant, impactful, and changed the way they lived their life because a tobacco company and other tobacco companies purposely misled them -MR. STERN: Objection to "other tobacco companies," Your Honor.
MR. ALVAREZ: There's a conspiracy claim here, Judge.
THE COURT: Excuse me, Counsel.
Ladies and gentlemen, you -- I gave you the instructions. You rely on the instructions I gave you.
The objection's noted. It's overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: They purposely misled them
into believing something that they knew was false. And they profited from that, and they suffered because of it. And that's not the way they wanted to live their golden years. And it's not right. It just isn't right.
So when you're asked -You know, we're going to suggest some numbers. You may think it's too high, or you may think it's too low. Whatever the amount is, she will accept your verdict. But this is a substantial loss that he suffered and a substantial loss that she suffered.
And for his damages, we suggest $7 million. For her, $4 million. And the medical expenses, which are in evidence, is 298,100 -- $298,170.45.
Now, I'm going to wrap it up now and tell you that I'll have one more opportunity to address you at the very end; but the last thing I want to do is -- is thank you, Vickie, for having the confidence and allowing me to represent you. I appreciate that. Thank you.
Thank you, Your Honor.



MR. ALVAREZ: May it please the Court.
I just have a few moments so I'm going to try to whip through a bunch of different points that I thought were important. I think you heard hypocrisy in certain positions. And let
me explain to you what I mean by that.
a/td ctttdtvt.	Ant
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ALVAREZ: I think there are inconsistent positions being taken. And let me explain what I mean.
Mr. Stern said: In the 1950s the word was out.
Remember?
Well, if the word was out, how come Philip Morris didn't hear it? If in 1950 the word was out? How come it wasn't getting to the factory in Richmond, Virginia? How come they weren't listening on Fifth Avenue in New York City in their offices there if the word was out?
How come they weren't hearing it?
Show me the warning label, 1985.
Mr. Stern took out this warning label and said: The warning label was loud and clear.
But you know who it wasn't loud and clear enough? For Philip Morris. Because they were denying exactly what their own warning label said.
MR. STERN: Objection, Your Honor, preemption.
THE COURT: Thank you. That objection is
overruled.
Ladies and gentlemen, just rely on what the -- your recollection of the evidence and the instructions that I gave you.
Proceed, Counsel.
MR. ALVAREZ: Every cigarette that was coming out of their factory, every pack of cigarettes that was coming out of their factory had that warning label out there and they were telling the public it wasn't true.
So if it was so loud and clear, why weren't they listening? Mr. Stern told you that he -that Ted quit without a problem, it wasn't a problem. Well, listen, let me -- this is what the evidence was: If you recall what Dr. Drobes said, listen, it's easier for people as they get older to quit. And there's another thing that happened to Ted if you look at why it was easier for him to quit at -- when he was in his 70s as opposed to when he was in his 30s, 40s and 50s, because he was smoking a very different brand of cigarette.
Let's bring that up. Carltons.
And this is in evidence and can you see
about in that Carlton ad is that it has the lowest amount of nicotine, the lowest amount of nicotine. It was .002. And then in the ad it compares what the other brands of cigarettes are.
Do you have it, Jeff? Still talking here.
But if you look at the ad -- and he's going to bring it up in a minute -- that's why, because he went from a higher-nicotine-content cigarette to a much lower-nicotine-content cigarette. It was much easier to do that transition from a higher to a lower to stopping.
MR. STERN: Objection, no evidence of that.
MR. ALVAREZ: Well, the ad -THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, excuse you rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
Proceed.
MR. ALVAREZ: So look where it says there. It says right here.
Bring this part out right here, Jeff.
.002 nicotine, milligrams of nicotine. Then it compares the other ones: .8, 1.0, .8, .8, .7,
.9, much, much, much less nicotine content.
That's why it was much easier for him in 2005 and 2006 to quit, because he was on a much lower-nicotine-content cigarette.
Well, Mr. Stern said that you should believe Ted McKeever because he was the one that kne' himself best. But I guess it's selective what they want you to believe what he said. Because if you take in total what he said is, what he said is that he believed them. He believed them.
Mr. Stern told you that Ted is responsible for what happened to him, that at 13 he made a choice at 13. At 13 years old, a young man in 1943, he would want you to believe that he -his decisions, his maturity, his ability to make an informed choice at 13 that he was going to b a life-long smoker. Really? How does that mal any sense that any 13-year-old has the mental capacity to make an informed decision about something that's going to cause significant illness and disease to him? 60 years later, how is that possible?
Mr. Stern told you that Ted never told us that he lied to his doctors. Remember he said that? I wrote it down, he said it. Let's
MR. STERN: Objection to what he really said, Your Honor -MR. ALVAREZ: Well, we're going to listen to it right now.
THE COURT: Excuse me.
Ladies and gentlemen, you rely on your recollection of the facts.
(Video clip was played and taken down to the t of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: As you sit here today, sir, you don't recall any doctor talking to you about your -- about smoking?
THE WITNESS: No. Ah, Dr. Tannozzi asked me once when we were finished, he says, are you still smoking? And actually I lied to him.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. STERN: Completeness, Your Honor, I'd like this to continue to roll.
THE COURT: Thank you. This is counsel's closing argument.
Proceed.
MR. ALVAREZ: You heard him, he lied to his doctors -MR. STERN: Objection, Your Honor. May we
approach?
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. STERN: This is extremely misleading. The very next thing in the testimony is: I only lied once. Mr. Alvarez is giving the impression that he lied to his doctors. It's supposed to rebut that he never lied to his doctors. In fact, he says here: That is the only time I ever lied to my doctors. If he wants to play that whole thing so the jury can evaluate it, I have no objection, but this is extremely misleading.
THE COURT: Objection noted. It's overruled.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
MR. ALVAREZ: Like I was saying, he told his doctor, he admitted in deposition, and you heard it here today, that he lied to his doctor.
Mr. Stern said that this was about choice and personal responsibility is at the heart of this case. That's true, it is. It's about
choices and responsibilities Because how would
made a different choice?
He asked you about what did the 1963 letter to the Surgeon General have to do anything wit] Ted? Remember, he said, what does that have anything to do with Ted? Let me tell you what it had to do with Ted. Because in 1963 when they lied to the Surgeon General, if they would have told the truth, if they would have told the truth in 1963, history would have been different. But they continued for decades to lie. That's why it's important, that's what it has to do with Ted. Because every time they lied they had an opportunity to change history.
MR. STERN: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, you re on your own facts as you recall, your recollection of the facts and you rely on the instructions the Court gave you.
MR. ALVAREZ: Mr. Stern said that in 199 when they came out with this website he knew, that time he knew, he should have known that, you know, smoking caused cancer, that they pu it up in their website. But what they were also doing is advertising lights as a safer
alternative. And the light cigarettes that they continued to advertise and promote as a safer brand, that didn't stop until 2009. And that's the testimony you heard in this case. So from 1999 to 2009 they were still advertising and promoting lights as safer.
You heard him -- excuse me. You heard Mr. Stern tell you that Ted enjoyed smoking, that he loved it.
I want you to hear what he said to you earlier this week.
MR. STERN: Objection, Your Honor, I did n say that he loved it.
MR. ALVAREZ: He enjoyed it.
(Video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: Now you say you hated Carlton. W1 did you hate Carlton?
VOICE: Because they lied on the packages. The Carlton was there for me to have, which I -I didn't want to do it, I didn't want to smoke, but it was there and it was -(Video clip concluded.)
MR. ALVAREZ: Mr. Stern said that this cas< does not meet the burden of proof for punitive
this man, profiting from those lies, causing suffering, this case screams for punitive damages.
Mr. Stern says that when you consider damages, remember that this was just -- this was just a limited time period. Well, when people get older that's one thing they don't have is time. So every moment, every day, every week is precious.
Thank you.
