MR. ALVAREZ: May it please the Court.
THE COURT: Please.
MR. ALVAREZ: Counsel.
Counsel.
THE COURT: How many minutes did I give you? I forgot.
MR. ALVAREZ: I’m going to be very brief.
THE COURT: Three minutes?
MR. ALVAREZ: Three minutes, okay.
THE COURT: No, I’m just kidding. I forgot how much I promised you.
MR. ALVAREZ: I don’t remember either, but trust me, I won’t be long.
Thank you for your attention. This is the time to do two things, to punish Philip Morris for what they did to this lady and by your actions to make sure that you deter other corporations who are even thinking about hurting other people and deceiving people in the American public from doing this. This is the way the system works. This is the way our country works. This is how our country has allowed jurors like you to make sure that you keep corporations in check. This is how it
works. You’re fulfilling your legal obligation by doing that. And by not holding them accountable and awarding punitive damages you won’t be doing your job. And so you have to do it.
You know, they -- punishment is not about hearing it. Punishment is about feeling it.
They have to feel that they’re being punished. Because if they don’t feel like they’re being punished, then the punishment is meaningless.
And you want to make sure your verdict has meaning.
So we would request a verdict of three times the compensatory, 24 million dollars, because they will feel that, they will hear that and it will have meaning and it will deter other corporations and it will punish them for what they did to this lady.
Thank you, Your Honor.



MR. ALVAREZ: Very brief, Judge.
Mr. Reilly said that $500,000 is the appropriate punitive damages. Just think about what he’s saying there. That’s punishment? You
think that that’s punishment, that they’re going to feel punishment at Philip Morris for $500,000? That that’s going to punish, that’s going to deter other corporations for killing millions of Americans and harming this woman -MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. ALVAREZ: -- for 50 years?
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. REILLY: Move to strike.
MR. ALVAREZ: This is about punishment not about compensation. Do you understand? This is not to award her money. This is to punish them. That’s the concept in the law.
They asked you what would it say to the people at Philip Morris if you award punitive damages? Well, those people decided to join a company that had a history of lying, deceiving and killing people. So they made a choice.
And what is the message that you will give through your punitive damage award? It’s don’t lie and don’t be part of a conspiracy that killed 20 million Americans.
MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained on the 20 million Americans.
MR. ALVAREZ: Changes. They talked about this being a changed corporation. They were number one before, they froze the market so that they could stay on top. Changed corporation?
It’s going to take 128 years to get through all these cases.
MR. REILLY: I object to that, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: And this is not extra money. There’s nothing extra. She didn’t get anything extra. This is about punishing them for what they did to her. And she’s living with the voice of extra and the face of extra.
MR. REILLY: I object, Your Honor, that’s compensatory damages.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ALVAREZ: No further questions [sic].
