          MR. ROSENBLUM:  Accept your invitation.
      Thank you, Your Honor.
          Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.  I'm
      going to speak to you first, as the Court has
      told you, then Mr. Alvarez is going to speak to
      you about some of the different issues in the
      case.
          What I want to talk to you first about are
      the first three questions that you're going to
      be asked to answer.  After the Court reads you
      the instructions on the law, you're going to get 3128
      a form.  It's called the verdict form, and it
      has some questions on it.  And what I'm going to
      be talking to you about now are those first
      three questions on the verdict form, which I'm
      going to go through with you, and they relate to
      the issue of class membership.
          You may recall in the opening statements we
      talked about the fact that the first thing you
      have to decide in this case is whether or not
      Carmenza Merino was a member of the class.  And
      in order to do that there are three questions
      you're going to be asked.  And before I go
      through those questions with you, I want to talk
      to you about what class membership is not about.
          And it's not about the following:  It's not
      about fault of any party.
          It has nothing to do with awareness of the
      health risks of smoking, nothing to do about
      that.  So what you just saw, the 30-minute
      presentation that you just saw about all these
      reports and all these articles -- and
      Mr. Alvarez is going to address that in his
      portion -- that has nothing to do with the first
      three questions that you're going to answer.
      Because whether or not Carmenza Merino was a 3129
      member of the class has nothing to do with what
      she knew, what she believed, what she thought.
      It has nothing to do whether people can quit
      smoking.  It has nothing to do with whether she
      bears responsibility for smoking.  And it has
      nothing to do with whether or not she ever in
      her life saw or heard anything from a tobacco
      company.  That has nothing to do with what we're
      going to talk about.
          So the first question that you're going to
      be asked to answer is this:  "Was smoking
      cigarettes a legal cause of Carmenza Merino's
      oral cancer?"
          And what that's essentially asking you is,
      did smoking cause her cancer?  So let's talk
      about that.
          You heard from Dr. Califano, who is an
      otolaryngologist from Johns Hopkins.  He's
      devoted his entire professional career to head
      and neck cancer.  That's all he's ever done is
      head and neck cancer.  And I'm not going to go
      through all of his qualifications.  We talked
      about that.  You saw him.  You heard him
      testify.  And he told you some very important
      things, many of which are not disputed, about 3130
      oral cavity cancer.  And I say oral cavity
      cancer because that's an important point that
      we're going to talk about in a moment.  He told
      you that 95 to 99 percent of oral cavity cancers
      are caused by smoking cigarettes.
          Now, if I stopped right there and I said
      nothing more to you and I said, what is the
      probability that Carmenza Merino's oral cavity
      cancer was caused by smoking cigarettes, just
      knowing that 95 to 99 percent of the time it's
      caused by smoking, there's no question that it
      was caused by smoking.
          And what the Court is going to tell you
      about our burden of proof, what we have to prove
      to you is that we have to prove our case by
      what's called the greater weight of the
      evidence.  As you heard, this is not a criminal
      case.  No one has to prove anything beyond a
      reasonable doubt.  That doesn't apply here.
      It's the greater weight of the evidence.  What
      is more likely than not?  51 percent.  What is
      more likely than not?  Is it more likely that
      smoking cigarettes caused her cancer when we
      know that 95 to 99 percent of the time it does?
          But we're not just resting on some 3131
      statistical association.  We're not just saying
      to you, well, wait a minute, 95 to 99 percent of
      the time it's smoking and your job is done.
      That's where we start, but there's more to it.
          There's no dispute that her cancer was in
      the oral cavity and that therefore 95 to 99
      percent of the time it's caused by smoking.  But
      Dr. Califano also told you about the specifics
      and the characteristics of her cancer that tell
      you why it was caused by smoking, in addition to
      the fact that 95 to 99 percent of the time
      they're caused by smoking.
          We know that it was well-differentiated.
      You've heard about what that means.  You know
      that it was keratinizing.  These are things that
      all tell someone like Dr. Califano, who has been
      doing this exclusively his entire career, head
      and neck cancer, that this was caused by
      cigarette smoking.  And he knows her smoking
      history, one to two packs a day for
      approximately 32 years.
          And so we could stop right there and say you
      can answer that question, the first question,
      yes.  Was it a legal cause?  Was her smoking
      cigarettes a legal cause of her oral cavity 3132
      cancer?
          But we have to talk about something else
      because it's been raised in this case, and
      that's the human papilloma virus.  And I'm going
      to talk to you about the evidence about that,
      but before I do we need to point out a couple of
      things that are actually very important before
      we even talk about whether or not the human
      papilloma virus had anything to do in this case.
          Start with this.  There is no evidence in
      this case that she had HPV.  Let's start with
      that.  It's a nonstarter.  We do not start with
      the proposition that we know that Carmenza
      Merino had HPV, therefore, we must now consider
      whether or not that HPV contributed in some way
      to her cancer.  We start the opposite.  We start
      with there is no evidence in this case that she
      had HPV, because she wasn't tested for HPV.
          So we cannot say that she even had HPV.
      It's a nonstarter and the discussion can stop
      there.  But it doesn't.
          In order to determine that she had -- even
      had HPV, before we even talk about all the
      reasons why it's completely inconsistent with
      HPV, it requires complete speculation on your 3133
      part.  You're going to have to speculate about a
      lot of things that are not in evidence.  And His
      Honor, Judge Cueto, is going to tell you that
      you can't do that.  You're not allowed to
      speculate about matters that are not in
      evidence.
          But this is what it requires you to do.  We
      don't know when she got it.  We don't know where
      she got it.  We don't know how long she had it.
      We don't even know what type of HPV she had.
      And why is that important?  Because everyone
      admits, including the defense witnesses, that
      most types of HPV are noncancer-causing.  The
      vast majority of them don't cause cancer.  And
      we don't even know what type of HPV she had, if
      she had HPV at all.
          But we brought you Dr. Westra, who is an
      expert on HPV in the head and in the neck.  And
      I emphasize in the head and in the neck because
      I'm going to end up talking to you in a moment
      about another witness that you heard from the
      other day, Dr. Felix, who does not specialize in
      HPV of the head and of the neck.  And I'll
      explain to you and I think you'll remember what
      it is he did specialize in. 3134
          I'm not going to go through all of
      Dr. Westra's qualifications.  You probably
      remember him.  He's probably the world's leading
      authority when we talk about HPV as it relates
      to the head and neck.  He has done tons of
      research on this.  He has published extensively
      on this.  He has studied this virtually his
      entire career.  And both Dr. Westra and
      Dr. Califano told you the same thing, that
      number one, if cancers in the oral cavity can be
      caused by HPV, if they can, because you'll
      remember there was some discussion by them that
      some of these are misclassified because of the
      location between the oral cavity and the
      oropharynx, et cetera.  If it occurs it occurs
      between 1 to 5 percent of the time.
          So I go back to what I said before.  If I
      stopped right there you would say that 95 to 99
      percent of the time it's not HPV, and we could
      stop right there based on the greater weight of
      the evidence, what is more likely to have
      happened here, and there is no question that if
      we get beyond the problem that she doesn't even
      have HPV and it hasn't been shown that she even
      has it, we then say, okay, if you want to say 3135
      maybe she has it, there's a 95 to 99 percent
      chance that it's not HPV, this tumor that she
      had in the oral cavity.  It's the wrong cell
      type.  It's in the wrong location.  It's
      keratinizing.  You remember from the pathology
      report this discussion of hyperplasia versus
      dysplasia.  What that basically means is in the
      pathology report the pathologist wrote
      "hyperplasia," which was described to you as an
      inflammation or a thickening of the tissue, a
      completely benign finding, a benign finding as
      it relates to the sample where it says
      suggestive of human papilloma virus.  It did not
      say dysplasia.  And you've heard the evidence
      about the difference between those two.
      Dysplasia basically means pre-cancerous.  It's a
      red flag.  We have to look at this.  That's not
      what this says.
          Johns Hopkins does not even test oral cavity
      cancers for HPV because it's never found.  You
      don't find it in the oral cavity.  They don't
      even test for it.
          So I mentioned I was going to talk to you
      about Dr. Felix, and I'd like to do that.
      Couple observations about Dr. Felix.  If this 3136
      were a cervical cancer case Dr. Felix may have
      been the right person to talk to you.  He
      certainly knows a lot about cervical cancer, and
      he developed or assisted in developing a vaccine
      for it.  He has certainly studied and there's no
      question that he knows cervical cancer.  He's
      not a head and neck pathologist.  He's not even
      the most qualified person at his facility to
      come here and testify, because he told you there
      are pathologists that he works with at his
      facility that specialize in head and neck
      cancer, that specialize in head and neck cancer.
      And that's not him.  He doesn't specialize in
      head and neck cancer, which, of course, begs the
      question, well, you know, why was Dr. Felix
      called as a witness?  Well, he's never testified
      that a cancer was caused by smoking in a tobacco
      case.  He admits that 80 percent, this is his
      statistic, he admits that 80 percent plus of
      cancers in the oral cavity are caused by
      cigarette smoking.  So he won't agree to 95 to
      99 percent, but he agrees 80 plus, more likely
      than not, 51 percent.  Their own witness tells
      you there's an 80 percent plus chance that this
      was not caused by HPV and it was caused by 3137
      smoking, because that's what he told you.  He
      admits -- he gives a little bit of a higher
      percentage.  He won't agree to 1.5 percent, but
      he admits 5 to 10 percent of oral cavity cancers
      are HPV-related.  So there's a 90 to 95 percent
      chance that it's not HPV-related based on
      Dr. Felix's own testimony.
          And of course we talked about the
      differences in the cell types, most tobacco
      well-differentiated, most tobacco ones are
      keratinizing.  We know that these were not
      either of those things, and obviously that
      weighs against it being HPV.
          He admits there's no reason to dispute that
      smoking increases the chance of getting cancer
      in the mouth by a factor of 2 to 400 percent.
      And you know where you just heard that, five
      minutes ago when Ms. Soto showed you some of the
      documents, some of the public documents.  She
      showed you two of them, one of which said that
      the risk of incidence of oral cancer is 4 times
      greater from smoking.  And then she showed you
      another one that said that the risk of mouth
      cancer in women who smoke is six times more
      likely, 600 percent increase in the incidence of 3138
      mouth cancer from smoking.  That's what the
      defense just showed you on the slides they
      presented with you.
          And Dr. Felix actually agrees with most of
      that.  He just said it's a little bit less,
      maybe to two to four times more likely.  But
      those documents said up to six times more
      likely.
          He saw the recommendations for working up
      oral cavity cancer in 2015.  You'll recall this.
      And for oropharyngeal cancer, the back of the
      throat, oropharyngeal, not oral cavity cancer,
      it was recommended to test for human papilloma
      virus.  For oral cavity cancer you don't test
      for it.
          And he told you a lot of other things.  One
      of the things he said was, she wasn't tested in
      1996 because at that time it was just beginning
      to be understood that HPV could cause cancers of
      the oral cavity.  But you'll recall that when he
      was being questioned by the defense he was shown
      documents where he said, oh, we've known since
      the '80s, we've known since the 1980s there's a
      correlation between oral cavity cancer and HPV.
      But then he told you, no, she wasn't tested in 3139
      1996 because we were just beginning to
      understand that.
          He admits it's possible that smoking
      cigarettes may have contributed to her oral
      cavity cancer but he claims if it did it was
      insignificant.
          And you'll recall one of the last things he
      said was -- he was trying to cast doubt on
      whether or not her cancer was relating to the
      oral cavity.  You'll recall that at the end of
      his testimony he said, well, it was really kind
      of back -- it was really on the back part of her
      tongue, almost suggesting that maybe it wasn't
      the oral cavity, maybe it was the oropharynx.
      But of course the problem with that is that it's
      completely 100 percent undisputed in this case.
      These are her medical records.  There's no
      dispute.  This is where her cancer was.  It was
      in the oral cavity.
          And I'll tell you who else tells you it was
      in the oral cavity is Dr. Blaustein, which I'm
      going to get to in a moment.
          So Dr. Blaustein told us a number of things.
      First of all, he gave no opinion -- he's an
      oncologist.  Dr. Blaustein gave no opinion about 3140
      what he thinks caused Ms. Merino's oral cavity
      cancer.  He's a cancer specialist.  He didn't
      come in here and refute what Dr. Califano or
      Dr. Westra told you.  Dr. Blaustein didn't say,
      look, I'm an oncologist.  I deal with this every
      day, and I'm telling you that her cigarette
      wasn't caused by cigarette smoking.  You didn't
      hear him say that.  He didn't give any opinion
      about what he thinks caused her oral cavity
      cancer.  All Dr. Blaustein said was that, I'm
      reading Dr. Saldana's report and this is what it
      says.  That's basically what he said.  He didn't
      dispute any of the testimony of Drs. Califano or
      Westra.  Dr. Felix said she could have been
      tested for HPV.  Dr. Blaustein disagreed, no,
      she couldn't have.  Dr. Felix said she could
      have.
          Dr. Blaustein agreed there was a difference
      in the level of association between the cancers
      of the oral cavity, which is where Ms. Merino's
      was, and cancers of the oropharynx, which is
      where hers was not.  He also confirmed, by the
      way, there's no question that her cancer was in
      the oral cavity.  That was the first question
      that Mr. Olin asked him, and he said that, he 3141
      said, no, there's no question.  It was oral
      cavity cancer, just like her medical records
      say.  He said he's not an expert in HPV.
          And now we get to the final point about HPV,
      just to put this issue to rest once and for all.
      So we started with the fact there's no evidence
      she had it.  Then we talked about the fact that
      statistically it's overwhelmingly improbable
      that she had it.  Then we talked about all the
      reasons why it's inconsistent with HPV and we
      talked about their testimony.
          But here's what it boils down to, even if
      she had HPV, even if she did, which we start
      with the proposition that there's no evidence
      that she did and you have to speculate about
      that, but even if she did, Dr. Califano told you
      that even if she had HPV, smoking cigarettes was
      still the overwhelming cause of her oral cavity
      cancer.
          This is what the judge is going to tell you
      about legal cause:  "Smoking cigarettes was a
      legal cause of oral cancer if it directly and in
      natural and continuous sequence produced or
      contributed substantially to producing the oral
      cancer such that but for smoking cigarettes she 3142
      wouldn't have developed oral cancer."
          We talked about what our burden of proof is.
          The answer to the first question, "Was
      smoking cigarettes a legal cause of Carmenza
      Merino's oral cancer?"  The answer is yes.  If
      you say no to that this case ends, as it says
      right there.  If your answer to this question is
      no, your verdict is for the defendant and this
      case is over.
          They knew, meaning the tobacco industry, and
      Philip Morris specifically, they knew about
      cigarettes causing disease.  The ones in red
      that you're going to see are all Philip Morris
      documents.  These are all historical documents
      that are in evidence.  "Carcinogens are found in
      practically every class of compound in smoke."
          "The amount of evidence accumulated to
      indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is
      overwhelming," et cetera.
          There's no question the industry knew that.
          Second question you're going to be asked:
      Was her addiction to American cigarettes
      containing nicotine -- was she addicted -- I'm
      sorry.
          Was Carmenza Merino addicted to American 3143
      cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was
      that addiction a legal cause of her oral cavity
      cancer?
          So let me talk to you about what the
      evidence is on that.  So we start with the fact
      that this is undisputed in this case.  This is
      undisputed.  She only smoked American brand
      cigarettes.  You have heard no testimony from
      any witness who said that Carmenza Merino smoked
      Colombian brand cigarettes.  She only smoked
      American brand cigarettes.  And you heard about
      the brands that she smoked.
          So the question -- when you determine
      whether or not she was addicted, there's no
      question that if she was addicted it was to
      American brand cigarettes because those are the
      only cigarettes that she smoked, and there is no
      evidence to the contrary in this case to that
      fact.
          We know about smoking Marlboro in Medellín,
      Colombia.  You heard about it.  She smoked it.
      Her parents smoked it.  You heard from her
      friend Alicia Upegui who told you that her first
      husband smoked Marlboro back in Colombia before
      they got divorced.  You've heard about Marlboro 3144
      advertising, et cetera.  And we showed you a lot
      of other evidence about Marlboro worldwide,
      including Colombia.  We know that in a
      second-grader's yearbook in 1959 there's a
      promotion or an advertisement for Marlboro from
      an agent selling Marlboro.  You just saw some
      slides before I stood up that talked about this
      discussion about the health hazards of smoking.
      What message was this sending in the yearbook of
      a second-grader that there's a Marlboro ad in
      1959?
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. ROSENBLUM:  We have Philip Morris'
      annual reports in evidence from 1969.
          MR. REILLY:  Motion, Your Honor.
          (The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
          MR. REILLY:  Counsel's argument that this is
      somehow probative is contrary to Your Honor's
      instruction about whether or not this can serve
      as a basis for any liability in this case.  Yet
      counsel just said, what message does this send
      in Colombia?  That's in opposition to the
      instruction Your Honor is going to give this 3145
      jury, and it's inconsistent with all the
      evidence in the case.
          MR. ROSENBLUM:  The defense just stood up
      and presented a half hour of slides of what
      happened in Colombia, about public awareness of
      people understanding the health hazards of
      smoking.  I have a yearbook of a second-grader
      in Colombia from 1959 where Marlboro is being
      presented and advertised.  And my argument, what
      message does this send?  That is to directly
      refute the idea that public awareness was being
      shaped by the articles.  Public awareness can
      also be shaped in a yearbook by advertising.
          THE COURT:  All right.  Overruled.
          (Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the
following proceedings were held in open court:)
          MR. ROSENBLUM:  And so we have the
      Philip Morris annual reports in evidence from
      1969, the number of countries in which the
      brands are manufactured and marketed by
      licensees continues to grow.  Licensees
      including Colombia.  You've seen that.
          We know that Marlboro was the greatest
      success in tobacco history.  Their annual
      reports, their overseas division in 1955, their 3146
      worldwide sales organization, 150 countries and
      territories.
          And of course Ms. Merino testified.
          It's your recollection that Marlboro had
      more advertising than by far and away the
      largest selling cigarette in Colombia.
          And she said, I don't know if Marlboro
      cigarettes or Pielroja cigarettes were sold
      more, which one was sold more, but in the
      circles where I was the advertising for Marlboro
      were much higher than Pielroja.
          And of course you've seen the video
      regarding Marlboro cigarettes, the greatest
      success in tobacco history.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  To launch the new Marlboro, a
      revolutionary new package was designed, the now
      famous flip-top box.  The flip-top box was bold,
      eye-catching.  Over the years the red roof has
      proved to be an outstanding logo, and it is now
      the most famous symbol in the history of
      advertising.
          The move in 1954 by Philip Morris to
      reposition Marlboro was bold and innovative. 3147
      This decision, combined with many others along
      the way, has made Marlboro the greatest success
      in tobacco history.
          Television advertising of cigarettes ended
      in the U.S. in 1971, but Marlboro made a smooth
      transition to print and outdoor advertising.
      Over the years Marlboro smokers have recognized
      the quality of Marlboro and its leadership
      position, resulting in continued growth.  In
      1950.
          (Video paused.)
          MR. ROSENBLUM:  We have a technical issue
      but I'm going to continue going because of my
      time, Your Honor.
          So let me go to the issues.  So that talks
      about Marlboro in Colombia.  We've now talked
      about that, the advertising, the smoking of
      American brand cigarettes, because her addiction
      has to be to American brand cigarettes.
          Now let's talk about addiction.  So you've
      heard a lot about this.  I'm not going to go
      through all of the criteria and all of the
      things you heard.  You heard a lot about it
      yesterday.  I just want to repeat one thing I
      said to you in the opening statement of this 3148
      case when I stood up before you and I said,
      here's what's not going to happen; what's not
      going to happen is His Honor, Judge Cueto, is
      not going to say to you, ladies and gentlemen,
      in determining whether or not Carmenza Merino
      was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes, you must
      apply the following criteria, or you must look
      at the following test, you must look at the
      DSM-5, you must look at Fagerstrom, you must
      look at the National Institute of Drug Abuse's
      definition.  That's not going to happen.
      Addiction means whatever you think it means.
          But you were brought testimony about certain
      ways that people think about addiction and
      certain criteria that you might think applies,
      but you don't have to apply anything.  It's
      completely up to you in this case what addiction
      means.
          And you saw all these things.  And I'm
      really not going to go through them all again.
      The only thing I really want to mention is two
      things.  Number one, you heard from an expert on
      our side of the case in addiction, and you heard
      from a psychiatrist on the defense side of the
      case on addiction, and I want you to just for a 3149
      second forget the experts.  Let's take both of
      them out of the equation.  Let's say you take
      Dr. Drobes and put him aside and you take
      Dr. Kaplan and you put him aside.
          If a person is sitting at a bar or a
      restaurant and they're having a conversation
      with somebody and that person says, Look, I want
      to tell you about a friend of mine.  I want to
      go through all the things that this person --
      the way they smoked for 30 years, one to two
      packs a day, getting up in the middle of the
      night, leaving church, leaving restaurants,
      crying and telling her daughter the night before
      surgery that she can't stop, smoking after she
      was diagnosed with cancer of the mouth and
      continuing to smoke after all those things,
      trying to cut down but not able to stop, trying
      to stop once and made a promise to God with her
      priest that she would do it if her mother would
      get better.
          And then that person said, let me ask you a
      question.  Do you think that person is addicted?
          You know, you wouldn't need Dr. Drobes, you
      wouldn't need Dr. Kaplan to come in and explain
      it to you because the answer would be obvious. 3150
      The answer is of course that person is addicted.
      There's no question about that.
          And you heard from Dr. Drobes.  And he --
      I'm not going to go through all of his
      qualifications, but he explained to you his
      extensive experience and he told you that
      Carmenza Merino was addicted.  He went through
      some of the criteria.  You heard about the
      Fagerstrom Test and some of the criteria that
      one looks at to determine if a person is
      addicted to nicotine.  He went through that with
      you.  She got a 9 out of 10.  That means she's
      very, very high dependence.  He talked about the
      DSM-5, the same test that Dr. Kaplan talked
      about.  The two of them obviously have a
      disagreement about that, but he went through
      these criteria and he told you that she met 10
      out of the 11, which is severe addiction.
          So there's only one witness in this case who
      has told you that she wasn't addicted and that
      was Dr. Kaplan.  Every other witness you've
      heard -- you've heard that the plaintiff
      believes she was addicted.  Her daughter
      believes she was addicted.  Monica, her other
      daughter, told Dr. Kaplan that she felt she was 3151
      addicted.  You heard that.  Her friend Alicia,
      who has known her since the '80s, said she was
      addicted.  Her brother said she was addicted.
      Dr. Drobes said she was addicted.
          But Dr. Kaplan disagrees, and so let's talk
      about Dr. Kaplan's testimony because I think
      that there's certain positions that Dr. Kaplan
      took that I'm going to talk to you about.  When
      you think about them I just don't know that they
      resonate as comporting really with common sense.
      But when you talk about Dr. Kaplan, we know how
      he got involved in this kind of work.  He met
      Mr. Reilly on an airplane in 1997.  He began a
      long and what I say is a profitable relationship
      with the tobacco industry.  He's earned about
      1.5 million dollars testifying for tobacco
      companies.  Every single time he has testified,
      every single time, it's either been either that
      a person wasn't addicted or, remember, he told
      you that about a third of the time he says that
      people are addicted, but then he had to admit
      when I questioned him that, okay, but even when
      I said that, I then went on to say the addiction
      was not a cause of their illness.  He refused to
      acknowledge that she satisfied the criterion 3152
      about smoking in bed.  Remember that one that
      says smoking in bed was the example?  And
      there's no question in this -- I mean, there's
      no question in this case she smoked in bed.  And
      he said, no, I couldn't give her that one either
      because she didn't light the place on fire.  But
      there's nothing in the DSM-5 that even said that
      that he pointed out to us.  It just says smoking
      in bed.  And he wouldn't give her that.
          You heard about his qualifications.  He may
      be a very, very qualified psychiatrist.  But
      with respect to nicotine addiction, he's never
      researched it, he's never published it, he's
      never been consulted.  There is a board
      certification of addiction medicine.  He doesn't
      have it.  He admits that there's no question
      that nicotine is addictive.  He talked about the
      brains of addicted smokers on autopsy.  He
      admitted that the younger a person starts
      smoking the more likely they are to become
      addicted.  We know that she started at age 14.
      And I think he created some cassette tape that
      you could purchase about addiction.
          He wouldn't even admit that the definition
      and diagnosis of addiction is partially 3153
      subjective.  When he was asked that question
      about that he said, no, it's completely
      objective.  And then I got up and I said, yeah,
      but didn't you tell me you have to apply your
      clinical judgment?  And doesn't that make it
      somewhat subjective?  No, it's completely
      objective.
          Of course you heard about her smoking in
      bed.  And there's no question that that
      happened.
          He wouldn't give her this criterion that
      there's a great deal of time spent using the
      substance, in this case nicotine.  We know that
      if she smoked a pack and a half a day for 32
      years, if she locked herself in a room that
      means she would have spent 12 and a half years
      of her life smoking.  And at two packs a day
      over 32 years if she locked herself in a room
      she would have spent in excess of 16 years of
      her life smoking.  But Dr. Kaplan would not say
      that she satisfied that criterion.
          Addiction is a legal cause if it can be said
      that but for the addiction the oral cancer would
      not have occurred.  But for the addiction, if
      she was not addicted to nicotine would she have 3154
      smoked a pack and a half to two packs a day for
      32 years and developed her oral cavity cancer?
      That's the question.
          Look at what's not in the instruction.
      You're not going to be instructed anything about
      choice.  Judge Cueto is not going to tell you
      that in determining whether or not she was
      addicted to nicotine in cigarettes you should
      consider whether she made a choice to smoke.
      That's not the law.  That's not what the judge
      is going to tell you.
          This is how it works.  Addiction causes you
      to continue smoking, which caused the oral
      cavity cancer.  It directly produced or
      contributed substantially to producing oral
      cavity cancer.
          Was she addicted to American cigarettes and
      was that addiction a legal cause?  The answer is
      yes.  If you say no to that this case ends.  And
      that's what it says:  If your answer is no, your
      verdict is for the defendant.  You sign and date
      the verdict form and the case is over.
          Of course Philip Morris and its
      co-conspirators knew about nicotine, and I'm not
      going to go through all this right now. 3155
          The last question:  Was smoking cigarettes
      manufactured by defendant Philip Morris a legal
      cause of her oral cancer?
          This one is actually I think the quickest
      because there's no evidence to the contrary on
      this issue, and I'm going to show it to you.
          So the question is -- we know the
      Philip Morris brand cigarette that she smoked
      between 1964 and approximately 1982 was
      Marlboro.  We know that.  And that is
      undisputed.  There is no evidence that that
      didn't happen.  There is no evidence to the
      contrary.
          The undisputed testimony from Dr. Califano
      is that Ms. Merino's smoking of cigarettes
      during that time period, and he even backed it
      up a little bit, he even said late '70s into the
      early '80s, was a substantial contributing cause
      of her oral cavity cancer.  And when defense
      called Dr. Blaustein, an oncology expert,
      Dr. Blaustein didn't get up here and say, Wait a
      minute.  That's not true.  That period of time
      is not enough to cause or substantially
      contribute to oral cavity cancer.  This is the
      undisputed testimony.  There's no question about 3156
      this.
          And what the judge is going to tell you on
      the law is that in order to be regarded as a
      legal cause of her oral cancer, smoking
      cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris need
      not be the only cause.  Smoking cigarettes
      manufactured by Philip Morris may be a legal
      cause even though it operates in combination
      with the act of another, some natural cause or
      some other cause.  The reason why you're going
      to be told that is because you heard that she
      smoked other cigarettes too.
          And what Dr. Califano said was all of it
      contributed to her smoking.  So the fact that
      Ms. Merino switched brands in about 1982 to
      Vantage and continued smoking and then went back
      to Marlboro Lights later, but the fact that she
      switched brands doesn't get them off the hook if
      you believe that their cigarette smoking
      substantially contributed to her cancer, which
      is exactly what Dr. Califano said.
          So on the question was smoking cigarettes
      manufactured by Philip Morris a legal cause of
      her oral cavity cancer, the answer to that
      question has to be yes.  There's simply no 3157
      testimony or evidence to the contrary.
          At this time, Your Honor, I would turn it
      over to Mr. Alvarez.


          MR. ALVAREZ:  Counsel.
          Counsel.
          Still morning.  Good morning.
          I started my opening statement a few weeks
      ago with telling you that you were going to
      learn something.  I hope you did.  I hope two
      things happened.  I hope that you learned
      something from some high-quality world-renowned
      experts.  And I hope that this process enriched
      your experience about the civil justice system.
      And remember I said that I needed lucky six,
      seven jurors, and hopefully you feel that way,
      that this was an interesting process.  And we
      really mean that.  So thank you.
          So let me get through this because I only
      have 45 minutes.  Okay.
          So, listen, I don't want to go through the
      Engle findings.  The judge is going to read them
      to you.  You know what they are.  If she's a
      class member they apply.  You have to follow the
      law.  You have to accept the Engle findings.
      And we know what they are, and the judge is
      going to read them to you.  And this is what 3159
      they are.
          So I want to talk to you about the verdict
      form.  And I'm going to go through the verdict
      form.  There's eight questions on the verdict
      form.  Randy went through the first three.
          You have to answer every single one of those
      questions yes, or pretty much all of them yes.
      The first three yes or we go home, we pretty
      much go home.  And I will tell you that we've
      met our burden on each and every single
      question.  Each and every single question we
      have met our burden.
          But let me tell you about these because
      these are very important.  This is question four
      and five.
          Question four is:  "Did Carmenza Merino
      reasonably rely, to her detriment, on defendant
      Philip Morris USA's concealment or omission of
      material facts concerning the health effects or
      addictive nature of smoking cigarettes that
      would have been necessary to make statements by
      the defendant Philip Morris USA Inc. not
      misleading, and, if so, was such reliance a
      legal cause of her oral cancer?"
          Let me tell you what that means.  It's legal 3160
      words and what it means is they had a duty to
      tell the truth and not conceal, okay.  If they
      concealed, and they did, there's an Engle
      finding that says if she's a class member they
      concealed, if she relied on the concealment,
      what they didn't tell her, because they had a
      duty to tell her, okay, not conceal, they had a
      duty to tell, if they concealed information that
      she relied on, and I'm going to tell you what
      those statements were that she made in court,
      we've met our burden of proof on this issue.
          The second one is basically the same thing
      but with regards to the conspiracy count.  Let
      me tell you what the conspiracy count is.  We
      have a conspiracy count that if any other of the
      tobacco companies, whether it's Reynolds,
      Lorillard, RJ Reynolds, Brown and Williamson,
      Liggett, all of those, okay, if they did
      something, if their advertisement, and they did,
      did something that she relied on to her
      detriment, they are responsible for it.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.  That's
      a mischaracterization.
          THE COURT:  Come sidebar.
          (The following discussion was held at 3161
sidebar:)
          THE COURT:  Why?
          MR. REILLY:  Because there's no
      determination of what the conspiracy consisted
      of.  He's just said that whatever they did we're
      responsible for.  That's exactly what he just
      said, if they advertised something we're
      responsible for it.  And, in fact, there is no
      determination of that.  And, in fact, there's
      actually been testimony in this courtroom on
      what is the scope of the conspiracy.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  You can't relitigate Engle.
      They've already been found responsible under
      Engle under the conspiracy count.
          MR. REILLY:  I'm not disputing the finding.
      I'm only saying when counsel says this is it,
      there's no determination on that.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  If she relied on a concealment
      by any of the other defendants in this case,
      i.e., smoked Vantage because she thought it was
      healthier, not as dangerous, that's detrimental
      reliance and they are responsible for that under
      Engle and under the case law.
          MR. REILLY:  Actually, Your Honor has
      actually instructed them on part of this, but, 3162
      again, I object because it's an overstatement of
      what the scope and conspiracy is.  And, in fact,
      they actually got testimony from their
      Dr. Proctor on what was the scope of the
      conspiracy.  And he said, as far as advertising
      was concerned, it was only the failure to report
      some health risk.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          (Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the
following proceedings were held in open court:)
          MR. ALVAREZ:  May I continue, Your Honor?
          THE COURT:  Yes, please.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  So this is the question:  Did
      Carmenza Merino reasonably rely to her detriment
      on the concealment or omission of material facts
      concerning the health effects or addictive
      nature of smoking cigarettes that would have
      been necessary to make the statements made in
      furtherance of defendant Philip Morris USA
      Inc.'s agreement to conceal, not misleading,
      and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of
      her oral cancer?
          And think about it this way.  Think about if
      you have three kids who are up to no good.
      They're playing with rocks and they're throwing 3163
      rocks at cars that go by.  One kid throws a rock
      and hits a car.  All three of them are
      responsible because --
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.  This is
      an inappropriate analogy, throwing rocks at
      cars.
          THE COURT:  You're getting close to it being
      inappropriate so be careful.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  So I just want you to get you
      the concept of what that means, and that's what
      it means.
          Now, what did they conceal?  These are the
      things that they knew, okay, that they knew,
      that Philip Morris knew and had to disclose,
      okay, that my client didn't know. the
      other tobacco companies formed a conspiracy in
      1953 to conceal the health effects and addictive
      nature of smoking.  She didn't know that. their
      co-conspirators hired scientists and doctors to
      mislead the public about the health effects and
      addictive nature of smoking. its
      co-conspirators were misleading the Surgeon 3164
      General and other public health care authorities
      on the health effects and addictive nature of
      smoking. their
      co-conspirators had studied nicotine and knew it
      was a highly addictive drug. their
      co-conspirators studied teenage smoking and knew
      that at least 90 percent of all smokers started
      as teens. their
      co-conspirators knew that 50 percent of all
      smokers would die from a smoking-related
      disease. their
      co-conspirators knew that smoking was killing
      hundreds of thousands of Americans per year.
          They had a duty to disclose that.  They had
      a duty to tell her.  They had a duty to tell the
      American people.  They didn't do it.  And that's
      why they're responsible in this case.  Because
      they didn't come forward and tell the truth.
      They had a duty to disclose, not conceal.
          Philip Morris and their co- -- she didn't
      know that Philip Morris and their 3165
      co-conspirators manipulated the levels of
      nicotine to keep smokers buying their
      cigarettes.
          She didn't know that there were over 70
      cancer-causing agents in every puff of
      cigarettes that she was inhaling.
          She didn't know that there were chemicals
      like arsenic, cyanide, radioactive polonium-210
      in cigarettes. their
      co-conspirators knew that the filters were no
      safer than nonfiltered cigarettes. their
      co-conspirators knew that low-tar cigarettes
      were no safer than nonfilter cigarettes. their
      co-conspirators purposely misled the public
      about the safety of filters and low-tar
      cigarettes so they could keep people smoking.
          They had a responsibility, a legal duty to
      do it, to tell the truth.  They didn't do it,
      and that's why they're responsible because they
      didn't tell her any of those things.
          Let's talk about the history of the lies.
      I'm going to talk to you about when she came in 3166
      1974 what happened, and I'm going to tell you
      before that so -- to put things in context what
      happened, okay.
          Because in 1953 the internal documents,
      which we have now, talk about how linking
      cigarettes to smoking and cancer with some
      smaller companies an opportunity to promote the
      sale of filter-tip cigarettes, making use of
      therapeutic claims.  It is purely a
      merchandising and sales promotion proposition.
          The tobacco companies knew that back then.
          Like I said, the tobacco company industry
      misled the public about the safety of filters.
      This is a Philip Morris document.  "The illusion
      of filtration is as important as the fact of
      filtration."
          "Winds up smoking more units in order to
      provide himself with the same delivery which he
      had before."
          1976.  "The smoker of a filter cigarette was
      getting much or more nicotine and tar than he
      would have gotten from a regular cigarette."
          No one was disclosing that information.
      They were touting low-tar filtered cigarettes as
      a safer alternative.  They were telling the 3167
      people that.
          The campaign of doubt and confusion and
      deceit.  "If this committee had not been formed
      the cigarette industry by now would have been in
      a deplorable position.  The TIRC has been a
      successful defensive operation."
          Smokers -- "we must in the near future
      provide some answers which will give smokers a
      psychological crutch and a self-rationale to
      continue smoking."
          Think about what that means because this is
      very important.  Because by casting doubt in the
      minds of the smoker saying, hey, it hasn't been
      proven, we don't know, put a filter on it, we'll
      put filters, it will keep you safe, what are
      they doing?  Because if you have an addictive
      smoker who's smoking and they get two competing
      information, one from the health care
      authorities and one from a tobacco company and
      the tobacco company is saying, don't worry about
      it, it hasn't been proven, but even if it is,
      smoke filtered or low-tar cigarettes, they're
      completely safe, what does the addicted smoker
      do?  When the whole time they know that's not
      true, they know that's not true.  They know it's 3168
      not true.  And they had a duty to disclose.
      They had a responsibility under the law to do
      it.  They didn't do it.  And that's why they're
      responsible to this lady in this case in this
      courthouse today.
          Another document.  1972.  "For nearly 20
      years the industry has employed a single
      strategy, to defend itself on three major
      fronts, litigation, politics and public opinion.
      While the strategy was brilliantly conceived and
      executed over the years helping us win important
      battles, it is only fair to say that it is not
      nor was intended to be a vehicle for victory."
          Victory, that's how they tout themselves.
      This is a victory; we fooled people.  This is a
      victory; we keep selling cigarettes.  That's all
      they cared about.  They care about profits
      instead of people.
          On the contrary, it has always been a
      holding strategy consisting of creating doubt
      about the health care charges without actually
      denying it.
          That's a confession right there.
          The most important story is one that casts
      doubt. 3169
          The criteria for selection, for example, a
      report indicating some factors or factors other
      than smoking may be involved.
          One indication that a virus may cause human
      cancer, whether or not that cancer is associated
      with smoking.
          They knew internally the dangers of
      cigarettes and they deceived the public and
      public health.  1961.
          This is interesting.  1961 they do a survey,
      Philip Morris, Dr. Wakeham, who ends up going up
      the chain of command and heading research, he
      does the research in 1961 November 19 --
      collects it all.  He says, "Carcinogens are
      found in practically every class of compounds in
      smoke.  And present technology does not permit
      selective filtration of particulates of smoke."
          1961.  But when they submit to the Surgeon
      General in 1963, right before the 1964 report,
      when they -- the Surgeon General says, cooperate
      with us, tell us, do any of these things cause
      cancer?  Look what they say.  "None of the
      chemical substances listed therein to our
      knowledge has been found by scientific research
      to be harmful to the health of a smoker in the 3170
      amounts reported in smoke."
          That's not true.  That was a lie.  They knew
      about it two years before.  And it says, It is
      not [sic] possible of course to modify the
      chemical composition of cigarette smoke by use
      of filtration.
          I'm sorry, it says, "It is possible of
      course to modify the chemical composition of
      cigarette smoke by use of filtration," when they
      know ahead of time it's not.
          They had a duty to disclose, not a duty
      to -- and they concealed.
          Why did they do that?  Because they know
      that 90 percent or more of regular smokers start
      as teenagers, so they have to start looking at
      teenagers.  This is the crop.  So high school
      students.  In 1959 56 percent of them, of high
      school students, and when you break it down by
      juniors and seniors, if you look at that, in
      1959 62 percent of juniors and seniors were
      smokers.  By 1958 it was 64 percent.  So think
      of those numbers, think of those numbers.
          This is, again, Dr. Wakeham.  This is the
      applesauce guy.  "There is a back log of youth
      who have refrained from taking up smoking in 3171
      face of the report.  A substantial number of
      these can be expected to join with this year's
      crop of prospects to produce a healthy increase
      in the number of new smokers."
          That's all they cared about.
          This is another Philip Morris document.
      "There are three groups where smoker percentages
      and Marlboro shares need to be checked, college
      students living on campus, young people 14 to 17
      age group and men in the military service.
      Young people 14 to 17 to get a reading on the
      smoker percentage and Marlboro share among
      teenagers not covered in the benchmark study.
      We recommend interviewing young people at summer
      recreation centers, beaches, public pools,
      lakes, et cetera."
          They knew it.
          And these are just more documents on how
      important, how important historically to the
      tobacco industry, to Philip Morris young people
      were.  Because without the young crops you can't
      bear fruit.
          1972 document, "Some thoughts about new
      brands of cigarettes for youth market.
      Realistically if our company is to survive and 3172
      prosper over the long term we must get our share
      of the youth market."
          Not one word there about warning people.
      All they cared about was profits.
          So here's a study that shows, 1984, that by
      age 12 9 percent, almost 10 percent of smokers
      of people 12 years of age were smoking, and by
      18 it's almost 70 percent.  And by 24 it's
      almost 95 percent.  That's how important the
      youth market is to the industry and to
      Philip Morris, because without them they don't
      get profits.
          Manipulating nicotine and smoke in pH to
      keep smokers hooked and profits up.
          "Happily for the tobacco industry nicotine
      is both habituating and unique..."
          Move toward reducing or elimination of
      nicotine of our products then we shall
      eventually liquidate our business.
          Listen, they know that what people smoke --
      why people smoke isn't for the enjoyment or for
      the taste.  It's for the nicotine.  People get
      addicted to the nicotine.  People don't stand
      outside in the rain under cover trying to smoke
      a cigarette because they enjoy the taste or 3173
      they're socializing.  They do it because they're
      addicted.  And they now knew it.  And they knew
      it back then.  The industry knew it.  Philip
      Morris knew it.  All they were selling was a
      dose of nicotine.
          VIDEO TECH:  Fifteen used.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  So let's talk about her
      testimony because I want to put it in context.
      This is a question that was asked by the Court.
      "Between the ages of 14 and 25 did you believe
      that congestion was the only risk factor
      associated with smoking and therefore the only
      need for filtered cigarettes?
          "Answer:  Yes."
          And "Question:  Why did you not think about
      quitting smoking when you first encountered the
      health warning labels on cigarettes in Colombia?
          "Answer:  Because I was already addicted and
      I really did not pay very much attention to it.
          "Question:  Did you believe the labels?  Did
      you believe that smoking caused cancer back
      then?
          "Answer:  No."
          So let's start when she gets here, okay.
      1974 she arrives from Colombia to Miami.  She 3174
      arrives during the height of the conspiracy.
      When it's at its most feverish pitch she gets
      here.  That's when she gets here.
          So here's the testimony:  "So in Colombia
      television did not have Colombian sponsors for
      the programs that were shown on Colombian
      television?
          "Answer:  Yes, they had some that were from
      Colombia and they also had some that were from
      the United States as well.
          "Question:  Just to be clear, Ms. Merino,
      when you arrived here in the United States in
      1974 and until 1985, you never saw any Marlboro
      ads in Spanish in magazines, newspapers or
      billboards?
          "Answer:  On billboards, no.  In magazines,
      yes."
          And these are the types of -- there were
      many.  Listen, there's thousands and thousands
      and thousands and thousands of newspaper,
      magazine publications.  You know, you heard from
      Dr. Proctor the amount, the tremendous amounts
      of money, the hundreds of millions of dollars
      they were spending a year on advertisement.  You
      had to have been living in the Everglades not to 3175
      see it, not have electricity, not have a
      television, not have a right to anything.
          MR. REILLY:  Your Honor, I have to object to
      this demonstrative.  May we approach?
          THE COURT:  Sure.
          (The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
          MR. REILLY:  Alex put up a collage of
      exhibits of ads and he represented that they
      were all after she arrived here in 1974, yet not
      one of them of them has a warning on it by law
      as of 1971.  So I object to the demonstrative.
      It is misleading.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  So, Judge, the testimony is
      that -- this is demonstrative -- the exhibits
      are in there, the exhibits are in evidence.
      This is a demonstrative to show the types of ads
      that were there.  That's all I was saying, that
      there were ads out there selling their products.
      That's all.  I wasn't addressing the issue of
      the warnings.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  But you can address
      it in your closing.
          (Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the
following proceedings were held in open court:) 3176
1           MR. ALVAREZ:  May I proceed?
2           THE COURT:  Please.
3           MR. ALVAREZ:  So there were thousands and
4       thousands and thousands of ads, thousands of
5       ads.
6           And when she arrived in 1974 it was at the
7       height, getting to the peak of the conspiracy.
8           MR. REILLY:  What was that?
9           MR. ALVAREZ:  Philip Morris -- let me talk
10       about Philip Morris leads the conspiracy.  This
11       is the testimony.  By 1974 -- they may have
12       started off -- Philip Morris may have started
13       off as a small company, may have started off as
14       a small company, but by 1974 they were one of
15       the largest.  And they had the biggest, best
16       selling cigarette in the world, which was
17       Marlboro, okay.
18           And you heard testimony from Dr. Proctor
19       that by 1974 Philip Morris was one of the most
20       prominent member of and the leader of the
21       conspiracy.  Throughout the 1970s and into the
22       next decades Philip Morris contributed the most
23       amount of money to the Council for Tobacco
24       Research and the Tobacco Institute compared to
25       the other co-conspiracy.  They were number one. 3177
      Philip Morris contributed several hundred
      million dollars during that time period.
          Philip Morris headed the Committee of
      Counsel.  Those were the lawyers that made up
      from each of the tobacco companies, the
      Committee of Counsel were the lawyers.  They
      were the architects of the conspiracy.
          Philip Morris headed the Committee of
      Counsel, the governing body of the conspiracy
      from 1970 until it was disbanded.
          So 1974, here's a perfect opportunity, 1974
      she arrives in this country, they had an
      opportunity, they had an opportunity to reveal
      the truth and save lives and save her suffering.
      They had an opportunity in 1974.  And what did
      they do?  They chose the wrong thing.  They
      chose to conceal the truth and make profits.
      That was their decision to make.  And they chose
      wrongly.  And people like her suffered for it.
      And that's why we're here today.
          1977.  "We provide a product that is an
      essential commodity in a habitual act.  You put
      a hungry rat in a cage.  Put a lever in the
      cage.  The rat will push the lever.  Smoking the
      cigarette is the lever push." 3178
          They associate people in these rat
      experiments, they're saying, hey, they're just
      like rats.  Keep giving them nicotine and
      they'll keep smoking.
          Without the chemical compound the cigarette
      market would collapse.  Philip Morris would
      collapse and we'd all lose our jobs and our
      consulting fees.
          1977, she's already here.  That's all they
      cared about.
          Bury the adverse results of Philip Morris.
      Ship all documents to Cologne.
          If important letters or documents have to be
      sent, please send to home.  I will act on them
      and destroy them.  This is Philip Morris
      executives.
          1977.  "We have gone to great pains to
      eliminate any written contact with INBIFO."
      INBIFO was that laboratory, that scientific
      laboratory that they had where they wanted to do
      experiments there that they didn't want to do
      here.  They didn't want the government to find
      out that they were doing these experiments here.
          "Perhaps we should consider a dummy mailing
      address in Koln for the receipt of samples." 3179
          1978.  The CTR began as an organization
      called the Tobacco Research Council.  It was set
      up as an industry shield in 1954.
          Bill Shinn feels that special projects are
      the best way that moneys are spent on these
      projects CTR as acted as a front.
          The Surgeon General's media event was
      preempted by an institute first strike news
      conference.
          Any time, any time that there was news out
      there about smoking and health what would the
      tobacco industry do?  What would Philip Morris
      do?  They would attack.  They'd attack the
      Surgeon General, the Department of health,
      anyone that came out with information that was
      contrary to their profits, they attacked.  Yet,
      yet now it's everybody knew.  But back then when
      she was living here they weren't telling people
      that.  A completely 180 inconsistent position
      than today.
          But listen -- from 1974 to 1999 let's listen
      to some of the representatives from the tobacco
      companies and what they were saying.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:) 3180
          VOICE:  I'm concerned that people make
      claims, including those against our products,
      without adequate knowledge.  There has not been
      the sort of research really that would permit
      anyone to say that.
          I certainly wouldn't be in the business if I
      thought cigarettes were harmful to people.  I
      think it's important that there be a lot of us
      around who are trying to keep the research
      honest and open.
          VOICE:  None of the things which have been
      found in tobacco smoke are at concentrations
      which can be considered harmful.
          VOICE:  But the components themselves can be
      considered harmful, can they not?
          VOICE:  Anything can be considered harmful.
      Applesauce is harmful if you get too much of it.
          VOICE:  And to this question, it must be
      answered, insofar as the correlation between
      lung cancer and cigarette smoking are concerned,
      no one knows, it may, it may not.
          VOICE:  The case is still open.  The jury
      has not come in.
          VOICE:  It may not be harmful.  You're not
      convinced. 3181
          VOICE:  It may be or it may not be.  We
      don't know.
          VOICE:  We believe our product is not
      injurious to health.
          VOICE:  As far as you're concerned, is the
      Surgeon General simply wrong in concluding that
      cigarette smoking causes lung cancer?
          VOICE:  I would use the term "misguided."
          VOICE:  If he's misguided then I take it
      that your opinion is he's wrong.
          VOICE:  I was simply trying to be polite
      about it.
          VOICE:  Okay.  But not being polite about it
      in your opinion he's wrong.
          VOICE:  Dead wrong.
          VOICE:  Smoking does not cause cancer, yes
      or no?
          VOICE:  It is not known whether cigarettes
      cause cancer.  It has not been causally
      established.
          VOICE:  Mr. Campbell, you were also deposed
      and you said, quote, to my knowledge it has not
      been proven that cigarette smoking causes
      cancer.  This is a rather passive and puzzling
      approach, especially in light of the consensus, 3182
      not by some, but all of the scientific
      community.  Will you ever be convinced, and what
      evidence are you waiting for?
          VOICE:  Yes, I may be convinced.  We don't
      know what causes cancer in general right now so
      I think that we may find out what causes cancer
      and we may find out some relationship which has
      yet to be proven.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. ALVAREZ:  That's the president of
      Philip Morris in 1994.
          So this is what they were telling the
      American public when she was here, when she was
      here.
          So if you have to decide did she believe
      them, did she believe the information, did she
      believe them, listen to what her testimony is.
          "And what were they saying?
          "That it had not been proven."
          This is testimony that she gave in this
      trial.
          "And did you believe -- at that time did you
      believe the tobacco companies or did you believe
      the doctors?
          "I believed the tobacco companies. 3183
          "In other words, at some point did you
      change your mind about that and start to believe
      that maybe smoking was bad for you?
          "Answer:  Yes.
          "And when was that?
          "Towards the end of the '80s, beginning of
      the '90s.
          "So you would have been in your 40s at that
      time:
          "Answer:  Yes.
          "I want to ask you some questions about
      statements that you may have seen on television.
      Did you ever see the tobacco representatives on
      television talking about smoking and health?
          "Answer:  Yes.
          "And what were they saying?
          "That it had not been proven that cigarettes
      were harmful to your health."
          Her words in this courtroom to you.
          And they wanted you, the tobacco industry
      wanted people like her to believe that.  That's
      why they were saying that, that's why they were
      spending hundreds of millions of dollars on the
      TIRC, the CTR, the TI, that's why they were
      doing that, that's why they were attacking the 3184
      Surgeon General.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  Throughout your tenure with American
      it was not only American's position, but your
      position that cigarettes weren't injurious to
      health; is that accurate?
          VOICE:  Through my tenure?
          VOICE:  Yes.
          VOICE:  Yes, that is so.
          VOICE:  As far as you're concerned, a person
      is justified on relying on that statement.
          VOICE:  Yes.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          MR. ALVAREZ:  That's their words,
      justifiable in relying on our statements.
          Filters and low-tar cigarettes were a fraud.
      You heard from Dr. Proctor.  Filters are
      actually worse for you.  They actually made you
      smoke more, made you change your smoking habits,
      your compensation, you end up smoking deeper
      into your lungs and getting more carcinogens in
      your lungs and in your mouth.  It's worse for
      you. 3185
          And in 19 -- here it is, in 1982 when she
      switched to low-tar cigarettes look what the
      public was doing.  It's coming up in the height.
      She gets it right at the height, in 1982, when
      she switched to Vantage.
          Vantage, so let me tell you something
      interesting about Vantage, because their own
      internal records talk to you about who is going
      to buy a Vantage cigarette, who's going to buy
      it.  They knew.  They marketed it.  They studied
      it.  They wanted people who were a little bit
      concerned about their health to smoke Vantage.
          "Many of the Vantage group also gives
      special attention and focus to the filter, which
      satisfied some important psychological needs.
      Vantage smokers believe that the filter itself
      is strong enough to catch these impurities.
      These ideas make them think the end product is a
      milder and more 'healthier' [sic] smoke."
          And this is a Doral diet.  And she also
      smoked Doral.  "A terrific taste, and 7
      milligrams less 'tar' than other brands.  That
      adds up to 140 milligrams less tars -- for me
      980 milligrams less tar a week on my Doral
      diet." 3186
          They touted these as healthier.  They touted
      these as better.  They touted them as safer,
      when all the time they knew it wasn't.
          And this is her testimony, "And you liked
      the Vantage cigarettes better than you liked the
      Marlboros, right?
          "It wasn't that I liked them more.  They
      were less harmful for your health, that's what
      they said that they were.
          "Question:  So what caused you to purchase
      the Dorals?
          "The Doral Lights and the Marlboro Lights
      because they had low levels of nicotine."
          "Next question:  What about the filter made
      you think you would smoke less cigarettes.
          "Answer:  It had a special filter which
      wasn't so addicting even though I was already
      addicted to cigarettes and so I thought I could
      quit the addiction.  Well, not quit but just
      reduce it.
          "So you thought that filter made the
      cigarette less addicting; is that correct?
          "Answer:  Yes."
          And it continues on.  "I accept the part
      that I changed over to the Vantage cigarette to 3187
      see if I could reduce somewhat because it was
      less harmful for your health.  I didn't change
      from Marlboro to Vantage because of the taste.
      I changed from Marlboro to Vantage because of
      the health aspect."
          VIDEO TECH:  Thirty used.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  That's exactly what they
      wanted people to believe.  She believed exactly
      what they wanted her to believe.  She continued
      to smoke.  That's reliance.  That's detrimental
      reliance and that's why they're responsible.
          And we know now in 2001 when the Monograph
      13 came out that the whole filter thing was a
      fraud.  The government finally recognized it.
      "Advertisements and promotional efforts were
      successful in getting smokers to use filtered
      and low-yield cigarette brands.  Internal
      tobacco company documents demonstrate that the
      cigarette manufacturers recognized the inherent
      deception of advertising that offered cigarettes
      as light or ultra lights or as having the lowest
      tar and nicotine yields."
          They even fooled the government until 2001.
          Addiction versus free choice.  This is
      internal company documents.  "Cigarette smoking 3188
      is more addictive than using heroin, hooking
      two-thirds of the people who ever smoke."
          "The lawyers remind us, I'm told, that the
      entire matter of addiction is the most potent
      weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung
      cancer/cigarette case.  We can't defend
      continued smoking as a free choice if the person
      was addicted."
          Their words.
          And Nicorette Gum, do you think when
      Nicorette Gum came out they would say, okay,
      good, we'll help people, we'll be behind this,
      you know, we'll get people to smoke less, you
      know?  What do they do?  They attack Dow.  They
      attack Dow.
          Think about this for a second.  I'm going to
      play this in a second.  But I want you to put
      this in context.  This is 1976, she's pregnant
      with her first child.  She's pregnant with her
      first child, okay.  She's smoking.  Do you
      really think that if she thought it was harmful
      to her or her baby she'd be smoking in 1976 if
      she really believed it?
          Play it.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the 3189
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          (Music.)
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Is that a smile of a woman who
      thinks that she's holding a cigarette in her
      left hand and touching the fetus of her baby
      with her right that she's harming herself or her
      child or her unborn child?  You think that
      really that's what she believes?  Because that's
      what you want you to believe.  But look at the
      evidence.
          So on these two questions the answer has to
      be overwhelmingly yes.  Because if you don't
      answer yes to one of these questions we don't
      get to punitive damages.  And punitive damages
      is what this case screams for.
          Now, the next question is about state the
      percentage of fault that was a legal cause of
      Carmenza Merino's oral cancer that you charge to
      Philip Morris and Carmenza.
          Let me tell you something.  If two people
      come into the same union together and whatever
      happens between the two is 50/50 because of
      equal fault.  But when one side doesn't know all
      the information then it can't be 50/50.  It
      can't be 50/50.  And I'm going to suggest a 3190
      percentage to you; you can accept it, reject it.
      It's up to you.  But what I suggest is 90
      percent Philip Morris and 10 percent for
      Ms. Merino.
          So punitive damages.  This is the last
      question, and I think the most important
      question, the most important question.  The most
      important question is:  "Under the circumstances
      of this case, state whether you find by clear
      and convincing evidence that punitive damages
      are warranted against Philip Morris USA Inc."
          This is really the question of the case.
      Should they be punished for what they did to
      this woman?  That's the question.  But you gotta
      get to the end to answer it.
          Look how reprehensible their conduct is.
      Starting from 1974 when they have a chance to
      avoid what happened to this lady, when she came
      here, they had an opportunity to change history
      for this lady.
          VIDEO TECH:  Ten- minute warning.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  "Long-term scientific programs
      should be carefully planned such that the
      results obtained should not be able to harm the
      industry."  That's all they care about.  Don't 3191
      harm the industry.  Don't do studies that's
      going to come back bad for us.
          "Subjects to be avoided.  Attempt to relate
      human disease to smoking."  Why not?  Isn't that
      what you're supposed to be spending money on?
      They tell me, they say, hey, listen, we did the
      green monster.  Well, the green monster only had
      a handful of articles or studies that showed an
      association.  And what happened to those
      authors?  They weren't renewed.
          "If, however, the results with nicotine are
      similar to those we've gotten with morphine and
      caffeine, we want to bury it."
          You have to punish corporations who do
      things like that, who bury things, who lie to
      people, who are deceitful to people, who harm
      people intentionally.  They know their conduct
      does that.  You cannot let it stand.
          "Today's teenager is tomorrow's regular
      customers."
          That's all they cared about.
          "The smoking patterns of a teenager are
      particularly important to Philip Morris.
      Success of Marlboro Red during its most rapid
      growth period was because it became the brand of 3192
      choice among teenagers who then stuck with it as
      they grew older."
          They had a plan.  These were smart people.
      They had a plan.  They executed the plan.  They
      had the money.  They had the smarts.  They had
      all the power in the world.  And they went and
      they harmed this woman.  And that's why we're
      here today, for justice, to make things right.
      And that's your job.  Your job is listen to
      evidence and do justice.
          And they came in front of Congress and they
      lied to the American people.  They not only lied
      to her, they lied to all of America.  And you've
      got to punish that.  That cannot stand.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  So to answer this question,
      the answer is, under the circumstances of this
      case state whether you find by clear and
      convincing evidence that punitive damages are
      warranted against Philip Morris USA Inc., the
      answer is yes.  And make that check mark the
      biggest check mark, the biggest check mark of
      all eight of the check marks.
          Okay.  So now you have to decide what's fair 3193
      compensation in this case for this woman.  And
      this is the question, and this is actually
      question number seven.  It says, "What is the
      total amount of damages sustained by Carmenza
      Merino as a result of her oral cancer for her
      pain, suffering, disability, physical
      impairment, disfigurement, mental anguish,
      inconvenience and the loss of capacity for the
      enjoyment of life sustained in the past and to
      be sustained in the future?"
          Look, there's no book that we pull out and
      you say, these are her losses, this is what it
      is.  It's up to you to decide what's fair and
      reasonable.  But you know what she suffered.
      And I'm not going to overstate it or overplay it
      because you were witnesses to it.  You saw her
      testify for almost a -- couple days.  You saw
      how she struggled to even speak.  You heard how
      she struggles to even eat.  She's deformed,
      distorted, mangled and manipulated -- mutilated.
      And they did it to her.  And they have to be
      held responsible for it.
          She's lost the character of her voice.  She
      hasn't been with a man since she was divorced in
      the early 2000s.  Her loss is enormous.  Every 3194
      time she looks in the mirror, every time
      somebody looks at her face, every time she
      speaks a word, she's reminded.  So it's up to
      you.
          I'm going to suggest a number.  And you
      could agree with that number.  You may say,
      Alex, it's too low, we think it should be more
      or you could say, well, I think it's too much,
      you could lower it.  It is completely up to you
      within your sound discretion.  But we would
      suggest for this enormous loss that she suffered
      and will continue to suffer for another 22
      years, for another 22 years, 16 million.
          And the last thing I want to do is thank
      you.
          And thank you for having trust in me.
          Thank you, Your Honor.


          MR. ALVAREZ:  Thank you.
          I want to go over -- there's a lot to talk
      about.  I've got 19 minutes.  I wish I could
      talk to you about every single point and rebut
      every single point, but I just don't have time
      for that.
          So some of the things I want to talk to you
      about are the instructions on addiction, because
      it was suggested to you that it has to be
      involuntary.  Well, nowhere in the instructions
      does it say anything about being involuntary.
      And addiction doesn't mean that you can't stop.
      Because their own expert, even their own expert
      Dr. Kaplan said it doesn't mean that.
          Can you put up the instruction, please?
          There it is, okay.
          And here it is.  It says, "but for addiction
      to cigarettes containing nicotine, the oral
      cancer would not have occurred."
          Think about it this way, but for, if she was
      not addicted, think about -- use your common
      sense.  One of the things you've got to do is
      use your common sense.  You didn't check it when
      you came in here.  Everybody comes in with your
      common sense.  But just think about this.  If 3268
      she was not addicted to nicotine, cigarettes
      containing nicotine would she have smoked a pack
      and a half to two packs a day for almost 32
      years and developed oral cavity cancer?  Think
      about that.  Why do you think she's smoking?
      She's smoking because she's addicted.  She's
      doing it 40 times a day.  Most people don't do
      anything other than breathe 40 times a day.
          Here's the other thing that's very, very
      important, because Mr. Reilly left this part out
      of his legal cause instruction.  It says, "In
      order to be regarded as a legal cause of disease
      or medical condition, an addiction to cigarettes
      containing nicotine need not be the only cause."
          So it can operate in combination with the
      acts of something else, okay.  So it doesn't
      have to be the only cause, okay.
          I want to talk to you a little bit about
      some of the testimony about Dr. Califano who
      talked about -- he didn't talk about brand
      history.  What he talked about, what he did say,
      he says the interval of smoking between 1964 and
      the late 1970s was a substantially contributed
      to the oral cavity cancer.  And that is
      undisputed.  And you know what's undisputed 3269
      about that?  It's undisputed that between that
      time period what was she smoking?  She was
      smoking Marlboro cigarettes.  So question number
      3 is undisputed in the record that she was
      smoking their product.  We have an expert who
      came in and said during that time period it
      substantially contributed, that's the language,
      that's the law, that's the legal cause
      instruction.
          I want to talk to you a little bit about
      some of the comments about Dr. Saldana.  He did
      not say she had -- that her cancer was HPV, was
      caused by HPV.  Nowhere in the path report does
      he say that.  What he says is it's suggestive of
      HPV.  That doesn't mean that she has HPV.
          And I want to talk to you a little bit about
      some of the things that were shown to you,
      because they try to make it seem like oral
      cavity cancer and HPV, there's an association
      with.  It's been long known and this and that,
      but what they missed -- what they didn't tell
      you was that the information that they're
      relying on is old information.  It's not current
      information.  But they try to pass it off as a
      state of the art when it's not. 3270
          And they put up this document, and they
      showed it to you.  And it's 23 years old.  It
      was authored in 1992.  And if you look at the
      sections that they read to you, right, they read
      these sections, "In addition to the use of
      tobacco products, viral infection is
      increasingly implicated in the pathogenesis of
      oral cancer.  Oral cancer bears a significant
      resemblance" -- and it goes on.  And it talks
      about HPV.  But look at the studies.  Look at
      the years of the studies, 1986, 1984, 1985,
      1986, 1987, 1987.  These are all -- this is old.
      This is old.  This is 30 years old.
          But when you look at the current data that
      we showed you that Mr. Olin, when he
      cross-examined their expert, it talks about the
      following are risk factors for oral cavity and
      oropharyngeal cancer, tobacco use, alcohol use,
      tobacco and alcohol use, family history of oral
      cancer and the following is a risk factor for
      oropharyngeal cancer, HPV infection.
          And what's the date of that?  April 15th,
      2015 [sic].
          But it gets better, okay.  Because when you
      look at this from the National Cancer Society 3271
      general information about lip and oral cavity
      cancer, tobacco and alcohol use can affect the
      risk of lip and oral cancer.  What it doesn't
      have is HPV.  It doesn't have HPV.
          And when -- and look at the science.  Look
      at the date of that, a little over -- today's
      what?  It's two months old.  It's two months
      old.  Okay.  We're not using 30-year old
      science.  We're using the state of the art
      science by the doctors who are doing the
      scientific research now and who knows what the
      state of the art is now, not stuff that's 30
      years old and try to pass it off as now.
          Do you have that slide?  Check marks.
          VIDEO TECH:  Give me one second.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  So let's look at this, tobacco
      versus HPV.  Let's look at the cause.  Tobacco
      causes 80 to 99 percent of all oral cancers.
      HPV is associated with only between 1 and 10
      percent of oral cancers.
          Dr. Saldana said it's keratinizing tumor.
      That's consistent with smoking.
          Dr. Saldana says it's well-differentiated.
      That's associated with smoking.
          Only 16 of 118 HPV viruses cause cancer. 3272
          Dr. Saldana says it's hyperplasia, not
      dysplasia, which is pre-cancerous.
          Dr. Saldana says suggestive of HPV, not
      pathognomonic or diagnostic.
          Dr. Saldana says that there's no --
          How do you pronounce that word again?
          MR. OLIN:  Koilocytes.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  -- koilocytes in the tumor.
      That's suggestive with tobacco.
          More males than females associated with HPV
      get oral cavity cancer.  She's a female.
          The NCI document says HPV is not even a risk
      factor for oral cancer.  NCI suggests testing
      oropharyngeal but not oral cavity cancer for
      HPV.
          That is the state of the science and the
      medicine today, not relying on 30-year old
      medicine and studies which is out of date.
          Mr. Reilly said that she had to hear
      something from the tobacco companies.  That is
      incorrect.  This is a fraud by concealment.
      They had a responsibility and a duty under the
      law to tell the public and this woman what they
      knew.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.  That's 3273
      a mischaracterization of your instructions.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  That is not.
          MR. REILLY:  It requires reliance.
          THE COURT:  Come over here.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
          THE COURT:  It's like giving birth.  Let's
      go.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Thank you, Your Honor.  May I
      proceed?
          THE COURT:  Yes, please.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  By the way, if at any time you
      see that my actions that I get emotional or I 3276
      get --
          THE COURT:  Listen, I'll tell them.  These
      are zealous advocates and they do the best they
      can for their clients.  That's the mark of a
      good lawyer.  They're not mad at each other.
      They're not mad at me.  That's what they're
      supposed to do.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  May I proceed?
          THE COURT:  Please.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  The fraud is a fraud of
      concealment, okay.  They concealed material
      information from Mrs. Merino.  If you find she's
      a class member you have to accept that finding
      in this case.  And then what we have to prove is
      that she reasonably relied to her detriment,
      right.  And I showed you the testimony in the
      record and her actions, and her actions.  Look
      at her actions, okay.
          Would she have been smoking while she was
      pregnant?  Would she?  No.
          Would she have switched to Vantage
      cigarettes?  No.
          Mr. Reilly put up a slide that said that the
      statements did not have an impact on you.  No,
      because she believed them. 3277
          Can you put up the --- yeah.
          It says, "Why did you not think about
      quitting smoking when you first encountered the
      health warning labels on cigarettes in Colombia?
          "Witness:  Because I was already addicted
      and I really did not pay very much attention to
      it.
          "Question:  Did you believe the labels?  Did
      you believe that smoking caused cancer back
      then?
          "No."
          And go to the next one.  Yes.
          "And what were they saying?
          "That it had not been proven.
          "And who did you believe at that time?  Did
      you believe the tobacco companies, or did you
      believe the doctors?
          "Answer:  I believed the tobacco companies."
          That's reliance.  That's believing.  And the
      detriment is what she suffered.
          Thanks.
          They talked about the 1985 warning label.
      It's funny because in the 1985 when the rotating
      labels that he talked about came on and he
      showed them to you was the first time, the first 3278
      time ever, first time ever that they talked
      about what?  Complications with pregnancies.
      Right?  Low birth weight.  Complications with --
      that was 1985.  That was the first time that
      warning label came out, right?  That was four --
      nine years after she got pregnant and was
      smoking.  Nine years later.  So how can they say
      she didn't know [sic]?
          And she saw the congressional hearing.  She
      said she talk -- here's the other thing, when
      they want to tell you that people saw something,
      it's okay to put up the Miami He -- the Nuevo
      Herald, talk about stuff that came out on
      Spanish-language television, right, about the
      health effects, but when the heads of the
      tobacco companies goes before Congress and
      swears to tell the truth and tells the American
      people that smoking doesn't cause cancer and
      it's not addictive, and they think it's not
      covered by every local news outlet in the United
      States of America?  Really?  Really?
          He talked about damages, that 16 million
      dollars is excessive.  It's a million dollars a
      year going forward.  But how about the 19 years
      that she's already suffered?  Because we're 3279
      really talking about 41 years.  And if you break
      that down it's a much smaller number.  And you
      may think 16 million, after listening to some of
      these arguments and evaluating and thinking
      about it, you may think that 16 is too low.  And
      it's within your sound discretion to award more.
          VIDEO TECH:  Five minutes.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I told you this is a case
      about punitive damages, it is a case about
      punitive damages.  You can't do this to people,
      you can't.  You've got to hold them accountable.
      The law gives us the right to ask it and the law
      empowers you to do it.
          Thank you.
