MR. REILLY: Thank you, Your Honor.
Well, why did I bring Mr. Jupe? There are -- the instructions that you are going to get from Judge Cueto are going to tell you a number of things. He’s already read them to
you, but you’re going to receive them, you’ll get another copy of them when you go in to deliberate on this question of the amount of money to award as punitive damages.
So what are they going to tell you? Well, first of all, they’re going to tell you that this is in addition to the amount of money that you’ve already awarded to Ms. Merino. You’ve already made her -- you’ve fully compensated her for her injury as a result of her cancer. So this is extra and on top of that, doesn’t go to anybody but Ms. Merino.
So what counsel, what Mr. Alvarez just asked for would, again, be, if my math is right, 32 million dollars that he’s asking you to give to Ms. Merino.
You can’t compensate -- you can’t award punitive damages for any harm to anybody other than Ms. Merino. You can’t compensate Ms. Merino for harms done to somebody else. You can’t compensate Ms. Merino for 3200 other plaintiffs. Matter of fact, if you were to take -- I haven’t done the math, but if you were to take 24 million dollars and just consider that there are 3200 other cases pending --
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection. This is inappropriate.
MR. REILLY: No, it’s completely appropriate.
THE COURT: Excuse me.
Overruled. Go ahead.
MR. REILLY: I have to use my -- I’d have to use my cell phone because I can’t do this math in my head, but you’d be looking at something in the neighborhood of like 150 billion dollars.
If half the people got that kind of money you’d be looking at 70 billion, 75 billion dollars. I mean, these are astronomical numbers.
The reason I presented Mr. Jupe and the reason I walked you through what it is like today is because you’re awarding punitive damages not to the people who were running the company in the ’50s, the ’60s, the ’70s or the ’80s, you’re awarding punitive damages against the people that are operating the company today. And so it’s important that you stop and think, okay, I’m considering a punitive damage award against who? And what is the message I’m sending to the people who are operating Philip Morris today, and as Mr. Alvarez just
pointed out, to other folks who are watching what goes on in civil litigation here in this courthouse, other companies who are perhaps considering or individuals who are perhaps considering, you know what, should I alter my behavior, should I align myself or should our company align itself more with what’s going on, what the public health community is saying or what some other industry is saying or some other government agency is saying?
And so they look and they say, you know what, I see all the changes that have been made at Philip Morris. I see all the regulation that it asked for. I see the settlement. I see the constraints that are now put on this company.
And so what message do you send to those companies? What message do you send to the people that are currently operating and have been operating Philip Morris since the last 15 years when all these changes came about? And what do you say to them? Do you say, you know what, I’m going to ignore the judge’s instructions that say you should take into consideration, you should take into consideration mitigating circumstances.
The judge doesn’t say, oh, don’t worry about mitigating circumstances or -- no, it says you should take into consideration mitigating circumstances. And that’s why I presented this evidence to you.
Because it’s true that cigarettes are still a legal product. Society, United States has decided -- I’m sorry, thanks, Michael.
I don’t have my alternate juror to help me out anymore.
You know cigarettes are a dangerous product but they’re still legal for people -- for adults to go buy, just like alcohol is a legal product but it’s dangerous and addicting. But we as a society have decided, you know what, we’re going to allow these things to still be sold to people who are old enough to buy them who want to consume them.
The judge’s instructions say, you can’t -this is in the judge’s instructions, they say you can’t punish Philip Morris for making a legal product. Society has made its decision. The law doesn’t permit punishment for harms to others.
Yes, it’s true that the instructions are
going to say you can consider harms to others in terms of reprehensibility, but not in terms of the amount of money that you’re going to award to Mrs. Merino. Any other system would allow for multiple and excessive awards. That’s why we don’t allow juries like you to make a determination of punishment for harms to people other than Ms. Merino.
You can only punish for -- they showed you a whole bunch of stuff during the prior phase.
You guys decided what it was that caused you, out of all that evidence, caused you to decide that you were going to check boxes 4 and 5 yes. Whatever it was that you saw that caused you to check those boxes yes, that’s what you are allowed under the judge’s instructions to punish Philip Morris for.
Now, part of the reason in showing you this position and the position that’s existed now for 15 years, yes, I agree completely that it’s after Ms. Merino had her surgery, after she contracted her cancer. You can call it too late for Ms. Merino, it’s true. But, again, you’re not punishing people in 1990 or people in 1980. You’re punishing the people who run the company
today. That’s -- it’s the company of today that’s being punished.
You know, it makes me think of when you are considering punishment and the concept of punishment, you ask yourself, you know what, there are people that you punish in a particular way because they’re continuing to go in the direction in which you found them to be engaging in wrongful behavior. And then there are folks -- and you punish them in a way, and you can think of children, you can think of animal -- whatever experience you have in connection with punishment. If they continue to do the things that you found to be wrong, then my guess is you’re going to punish them in a particular way.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, golden rule violation.
THE COURT: Overruled, but you’re getting close.
MR. REILLY: However, when you think about punishment, if whoever it is that, or whatever it is that is being considered has changed directions and you see here, I mean, I know that you had to be surprised --
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection about what he knew, Judge.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Let’s get this done, folks.
MR. REILLY: It’s clear that what you saw on the screen in this phase was surprising. After hearing that Philip Morris had denied that smoking caused lung cancer and other diseases for all those years, having heard that Philip Morris denied from the ’80s on that smoking was addicting and the Surgeon General concluded that it was in ’88, there’s no question that when you saw the position of Philip Morris since 1999 on the website you had to be surprised. And yet, there it is. And that’s where they have been since 1999.
Again, no question, too late for Ms. Merino, but again, who are you punishing?
And you know that Philip Morris asked for FDA regulation. You know the FDA has the authority to enforce regulations against youth marketing, they can inspect the facilities, seize the products, shutdown the plants. You know about all of that.
You know the FDA gets to establish levels of
constituents in smoke, including nicotine.
Mr. Alvarez said, hey, you still have nicotine, your cigarettes haven’t changed. In fact, that’s why the FDA -- remember all the voices you heard about in Phase I? You heard about some people said you ought to increase the nicotine and lower the tar, or reduce the nicotine. I mean, there are all kinds of voice.
Well, it’s the FDA’s job now and, as you heard, at the University of Vermont they’re conducting research right now to try to figure out what is the level of nicotine that ought to be permitted in cigarettes? It’s not an easy question. But they’re making that -- they’re doing that research and they’re making that determination.
Just think about the difference today compared to Ms. Merino. If you’re a 14 or 15-year-old today and you’re considering -- or you’re just living, what is the change in circumstances today brought about by all the things you just saw? The Master Settlement Agreement, the FDA regulation and the positions taken by Philip Morris on a voluntary basis?
Well a 14 or 15-year-old today can’t see an
ad, except right there at the point of sale.
But at the point of sale, what’s the situation? Situation is the cigarettes are behind the counter, just as Mr. Jupe said. And they’re controlled by somebody who’s been trained not to sell to a minor. They can’t see an ad in a magazine. They can’t see an ad on television. They can’t see an ad on a billboard. They can’t see an ad in a newspaper. Can’t. There’s no product placements in movies. There’s no -- the FDA gets to make sure to ensure that there’s no opportunity for young people to be influenced by the tobacco industry to begin smoking. There’s no sponsorship of sports. There’s no logoed gear or -- none of that. None of that.
The circumstances today brought about as a result of, in fact, settlement of litigation, but requested regulation and voluntary acts on the part of Philip Morris, it’s a much, much, much different situation today. But it’s today that you’re awarding punitive damages.
So now Mr. Alvarez asked you to award 24 million dollars. I’m not going to -- I could stand here and tell you that the Judge’s instructions tell you, you could award no
punitive damages, but I’m not going to do that. I’m not going to do that. But I have to say to you -- I said to you that when Mr. Alvarez asked for 16 million dollars that that was excessive. And you made that determination. 24 million dollars is horribly excessive in light of the fact that you’ve already compensated Ms. Merino to the tune of 8 million dollars and this is the only place this money goes.
So I’m going to tell you that I think a half a million dollars is a much more appropriate add-on on top of the original 8 million dollars that you’ve already awarded to her. And that means that Ms. Merino -- and it doesn’t go anywhere but to Ms. Merino. That means Ms. Merino gets 8 and a half million dollars. That’s what it means.
You know what, I want to conclude this by saying, thanks again for your service.
