MR. GEISE THE COURT MR. GEISE
May it please the Court. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bigger, Mr. Clark and
Mrs. Nally.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
Obviously, I had hoped that yesterday afternoon would be the last time I would have the opportunity to talk to the six of you, and at the time, the eight of you, about this case. But because I'm speaking to you again, it means that you returned a verdict against my client last night and also found that there was an entitlement to this punitive damages stage. So we're here.
And it's kind of a tough position to be in, in my shoes right here. I talked to my son last night and told him what happened, and he said the same thing I ask him when he gets back from a test or from a game that doesn't go the way he wants.
I always say, What could you do better the next time? So last night, he asked me, Dad, what can you do better?
That's a tough one, because I don't really know. I didn't have a chance to talk to the six of you. I don't know what it was when you went in there that caused you to check yes to those answers and check yes to punitive damages. So I don't really know. So it's tough to get back up here not knowing what I should have done, what I
should have said. I feel like I let my team down, I feel like I let my client down. I'm not sure what to stay to you-all today.
But while I am disappointed for sure in the verdict, I want you to know that I respect it.
You took your roles seriously the last three weeks. You deliberated late into the night last night to come up with it. And as I told you when we started, you made a contribution. And I thank you for that service. Is it the answer I wanted? Of course not. But I thank you for what you did.
And I can tell you my client takes this part of the proceedings very seriously. And you saw that we brought you Dr. Potts to come down and testify today, to tell you some things you didn't hear in Phase 1. And I want to start and talk through some of the things that are going to happen in this process when you get instructed with all the instructions from the judge.
And as Mr. Bigger said, just because we're in this phase of the proceedings, it does not mean that you have to award money damages in this phase. This is actually a separate phase of the trial. There is separate evidence, there are separate jury instructions, and there is a
separate deliberation that you do. And I encourage you, when you go back to deliberate, the instructions today will not be as long as the ones yesterday, but I encourage you to read through the instructions. Because I think you will see that the instructions and the considerations in this phase are a little bit narrower than you may think, and narrower than you may think some of the things that Mr. Bigger just told you.
And specifically, as you mentioned, this is one of the instructions you will receive:
You may, in your discretion, decline to assess punitive damages at all.
So you found we should come to this phase today, but it doesn't mean you have to award money today.
Now, having heard from Dr. Potts, you may opt not to. You learned a lot of things from Dr.
Potts today that you didn't hear in the first phase of this trial. You heard how he's a toxicologist that went to Reynolds because he wanted to make a contribution to public health.
You didn't hear that in the first phase. And if you had heard that and if you had heard some of the things that Reynolds has done, as he
described, it may have caused you to check no yesterday. Again, I don't know.
But in considering your verdict today, you can consider all the work Reynolds has done, what you heard in the first phase and what you heard today. And you can see how they're trying to develop less hazardous cigarettes, and you can see how they're trying to give customers other options for other types of products that have less risk. And you can consider the changes that Reynolds has already made as a company, the efforts they have already taken as a company, and the regulatory environment that they already operate under.
Now, I know that there were probably things that bothered you in the first phase. I think from the testimony from Dr. Potts, many of those, you know, do not happen now, and, you know, I think that all of them could not happen again. We'll talk about that.
So based on that, you can use your discretion, the six of you, and you can decide not to award punitive damages at all.
A second thing is this phase is only about money, as Mr. Bigger said. And it's just about money that would go to Mrs. Nally. Punitive
damages just go to the plaintiff. There is no fund to give them to. It doesn't go to the Cancer Society. It doesn't go to the state. They're just extra money on top of what you gave Mrs. Nally yesterday, in addition to the six million dollars you awarded yesterday. And because the money just goes to the plaintiff, this isn't to determine that cigarettes should be illegal or something on behalf of all public health. It's just an award to one person.
And, finally, you'll see a series of instructions. And this is in a big paragraph that the judge read to you earlier today. He will read it to you again when we're done. And I broke it out into four points. And I think they're all very important, that you need to follow when you deliberate.
The amount of punitive damages must be based only on actual harm suffered by Joseph Nally, Sr.
You may not punish Reynolds for harms suffered by anyone else.
When determining the amount, if any, of punitive damages, you may not impose punitive damages to punish Reynolds for harms caused to others whose cases are not before you.
And you may not punish Reynolds -- you may punish Reynolds only for injury caused to Mr. Nally by the specific conduct of the defendant that was the basis for your finding that punitive damages are warranted.
Those are the guidelines for your deliberations today. So in the last phase, you recall that there were certain things you could infer, there are certain things you could do if you didn't see evidence. In this phase, there needs to be that direct connection in finding your verdict.
In other words, your award, if any, must be on account of the harm to Mr. Nally and not anybody else. No one smoking other brands, no one smoking Newport or Camel or Pall Mall, no one else who may have been addicted, and no one who else who may have suffered an injury. That's not part of the consideration in this phase.
You will hear and you heard a little bit that there are two purposes of punitive damages. One is to punish and one is to deter. And to make your assessment, Judge Radabaugh will tell you that you can consider any mitigating evidence.
And this is really one of the areas where I
wish I could ask you why and I wish I could ask you what you were thinking yesterday and what led you to do that, because it would be easier for me to address those points. If I knew there was something that concerned you, I could focus my discussion on it. But I don't know what that is specifically.
So I will ask you to consider what Dr. Potts said today. He told you the activities that you saw evidence of in that first phase, they won't ever happen again, and they're not continuing now
You answered questions yesterday on concealment. And a lot of what you saw about concealment in this case was internal tobacco company documents. But as you know, those documents are not longer internal or concealed or secret. You heard from Dr. Proctor, that there i a website out there that has like 80 million pages, and you heard from Dr. Potts today that Reynolds has their website where they have them a well. Millions of pages of documents there.
Perhaps you were troubled by Reynolds' position on smoking and health over the years. Perhaps you were troubled by the statements in front of Congress or the statements on Face the
Nation. Perhaps that bothered you. And I can see how those statements and those positions that those guys clung to for far too long, I can see how that upset you, and I can see how that would have bothered you.
But you see that the position is much different now. You heard it from Dr. Potts. He didn't deny anything. He agreed that smoking causes disease. He didn't dispute that at all.
And you know on Reynolds' website they don't dispute it either. He told you that no tobacco product, none, is safe.
He told you that nicotine is addictive. I don't know how many times he said it from the stand today. Nicotine is addictive. Nicotine is addictive.
And if you smoke and you want to know what ingredients are in a cigarette, you can go, and they're all listed there. And then in addition to just all of them listed, you can search cigarette ingredients by brand. You can go and look for that. And as Dr. Potts told you, for at least a couple of decades now, Reynolds has shared that ingredient information with the government, and the FDA has never come back to Reynolds and said,
Stop using this ingredient. They know what's in there, and Reynolds publishes it.
And on the same website, you will see that Reynolds tells people they should rely on the conclusions of the Surgeon General and the CDC and other public health officials. If you were troubled by the fact that they would dispute something that the Surgeon General would say or say don't listen to it or say it was, you know, funny science or something, they don't do that anymore. Reynolds doesn't take that contrary view to the public health community.
And since the turn of the century and before, Reynolds has been telling customers or anybody interested that quitting reduces their risk and the best thing they can do is stop smoking. It's a much different situation. Reynolds doesn't deny the risks. They don't dispute them. They acknowledge them. And they publicize those. It's dramatically different than the evidence you heard in Phase 1.
Another thing I think you heard in Phase 1 talk about, is it a drug company? Is it a pharmaceutical? You heard from Dr. Potts today that Reynolds is a highly, highly regulated
company now. The FDA, Health and Human Services, the EPA.
Dr. Potts told you about how extensive this regulation is and he told you who pays for it. Reynolds pays to regulate itself. So all of the work that the FDA is doing, all of the regulation we're going to talk about that they do, it's funded by Reynolds.
And you saw that the FDA has the authority, from soup to nuts, for everything that my client does. For everything they do, the FDA has authority to shut it down, to stop it, to make them change, to make them do something differently. Manufacturing, marketing, everything. The levels of nicotine, tar delivery, additives, everything.
And they not only have the authority to do that, look at what they require Reynolds to do.
Ms. Baker went through this with Dr. Potts. It is his full-time job complying with what the FDA wants. And it's not just making submissions to them on paper. You heard that they can surprise inspect any plant at any time. They can show up and see what's going on, and you have to give them access to everything. There are very few places
that any of us work where that happens. That is now the environment that Reynolds is in. They're closely watched and they're heavily regulated. There is not a single move they can make with regard to any of these products that isn't regulated and subject to approval and enforcement from the FDA.
You heard more, I guess, in cross-examination of Dr. Potts and then a little bit with Mr. Bigger's remarks about marketing. That's one of the things that FDA regulates now. Since 2009, they read you that thing where they wanted to have restrictions on the sale, the promotion, the distribution on products to youth. Well, that was seven years ago. You know the FDA is able to regulate that. They have put in force whatever risks they want, and they can enforce them, and Reynolds can be penalized if they violate them.
Any marketing at all is subject to the FDA approval.
So if there is any ad or anything that would upset you from 60, 70 years ago, today, if the FDA doesn't want it, it doesn't happen.
I mentioned to you, you can also consider mitigating evidence. And mitigating evidence is
that which demonstrates there is no need for punitive damages, or that a reduced amount of punitive damages should be imposed against Reynolds.
And I think from Dr. Potts, and even in the first phase, you saw several types of mitigating evidence. You may have been displeased about things that happened in the research and development department in the '50s and '60s or '70s. Well, Dr. Potts talked to you at some length today about that product stewardship program, so that when they are investigating and researching and looking at their cigarettes, they don't make any change if they think it's going to add to the risk of an inherently risky product. They are going to check that out. They are going to have different scientists look at it, they are going to send it out for peer review to have people look at that. Reynolds put those steps in place years ago.
Dr. Potts talked about this continuum of risk and how Reynolds has this migration strategy, trying to have smokers move to other forms of tobacco use that have less risk. Nothing is safe, but it's less risk.
We talked about the Reynolds portfolio now, how they have the traditional cigarettes and then they have the Eclipse, they have VUSE, and they have the nicotine replacement therapies.
You heard about, with regard to Eclipse and saw it with Dr. Potts, that how it dramatically reduced the carcinogens in cigarettes, in that cigarette. That's a positive step that they have been taking. Dr. Proctor told you that they were trying to develop less hazardous cigarettes going back to the '50s with benzo[a]pyrene and phenols and all that. You heard about the efforts Reynolds made to change how tobacco is cured, how they shared those efforts with the public and how they paid to have those instituted in the farms and the barns where they were cured.
Dr. Potts also explained to you that Reynolds makes these nicotine replacement therapies, now.
He talked about their work with that company Niconovum and how they have got now ZONNIC on the market. And it's a nicotine replacement therapy that is regulated by the FDA.
When you think about that, think about in this phase what you heard. Reynolds is making a product now that helps people stop smoking.
That's a dramatic change.
And I submit that all of this is mitigating evidence, that there is no need for deterrence at that part of the proceedings.
You heard about VUSE. And there was a lot of talk about vaping and that. Again, this is Reynolds. You only focus on the VUSE part, and you heard what Dr. Potts told you about that.
They make it hard for VUSE to get in the hands of teens. And it's already -- you need to prove your age before you get it. If you see a teenager vaping something on the corner, it's not likely a VUSE that they're vaping, because they would have to show proof of age to get that.
And you heard how he believes that there is a reduction in the chemical exposure for that. It's a reduced risk compared to cigarettes.
And Reynolds immediately put a warning on VUSE long before the FDA ever stepped in and wanted to regulate it. They were ahead of that warning. And now you heard the FDA is coming to the table and will regulate that. And Reynolds welcomes that.
You also heard about Kentucky Bioprocessing, how they're looking at how they can research what
they're doing with tobacco and what's in tobacco plants to help. And they have worked with the government and the FDA in particular to treat the Ebola virus by what they're coming up with. This is an effort to work in collaboration with the public health community for the public benefit.
Now, one of the things that you will be instructed, other persons have the right to bring their own suits and seek recovery of punitive damages in other cases. And that's part of the law that you have been told. And you know that other people are doing that. Dr. Potts talked about the other cases out there and the fact that Reynolds has already paid over $140,000,000 in punitive damages. But you've also heard about the settlements with all of the states and with Florida in particular. Reynolds has already paid billions and billions of dollars for that. That's other mitigating evidence that you can consider.
And another piece of the mitigating evidence you can consider is who are the people you will be punishing? And this is really an issue of fairness. If the people you want to punish are no longer there to be punished, who are you really punishing? If you were persuaded to award
punitive damages because of organizations like CTR and TI, those are gone. They have been gone since the 1990s. If you want to punish the people who testified in Congress or on Nightline,
Mr. Horrigan, Mr. Johnston, they're gone. So if you wanted to punish because of that, you can't punish them. They're gone.
And it is a new company, and it is a new company with new management. That's a fact. And people change and companies change. And this company has changed. You saw the evidence of that. It's not just me saying it, but you saw it. And you didn't see it in Phase 1, but I think you have seen it now in Phase 2.
Punishment. I saved this for last because this is where Mr. Bigger ended. And this is about money, I guess. It's about how much more money you're going to award Mrs. Nally.
Now, one thing to keep in mind is when they put up stats about 500,000 or other millions of people, this is just about one in this case. And also keep in mind that you cannot punish Reynolds for merely selling cigarettes or for making profits. Your instruction from yesterday said that those were all legal acts, legal to
manufacture and sell and advertise. So because they were legal acts, that couldn't have been the basis for your finding for us to come to this phase today.
It's a product that the government has known for decades is harmful but allows it to be sold. It's a government that has the FDA regulating but yet still allows it to be sold. So that can't be the basis of this punishment.
So in light of Reynolds as a changed company in 2016, in light of the sums it already pays out, what extra money should you award Mrs. Nally?
Now, first, yesterday you decided to award six million dollars. And even though you split the allocation of fault 75 percent to 25 percent, that 25 percent would have equalled 1.5 million. That's a lot of money. But because you returned a "yes" answer on questions 5 and 6, you wiped that out. There was no 25 percent responsibility for Mr. Nally. So by wiping that out, you already awarded 1.5 more than you may have thought with the percentage. So keep that in mind when you go back and deliberate today.
And keep in mind that you can't award money to punish Reynolds for harm to other smokers. As
you heard throughout this trial, that's certainly going on in other parts of the state.
Mr. Bigger suggested $12,000,000 to $18,000,000. And like yesterday, he tried to come up with a scenario to get to the six million. He didn't even try that today. Twelve to 18 million.
And I suggest that you not pick a number based on emotion, but, rather, settle on some reasonable and objective basis using your common sense and your good judgment. And obviously, it is up to you.
Here is a couple of thoughts. First, give nothing. You can give nothing based on the mitigating evidence that you heard today from Dr. Potts, and you can decide that that doesn't justify an award of any more money.
Or you can give nothing by thinking, Okay, when we took that 25 percent away, that 1.5 million was already a significant amount that we returned. Those are two thoughts. But let me suggest one other thing. On top of the $6,000,000, Mr. Bigger told you that Mr. Nally smoked a pack to a pack and a half per day for about 50 years. And let's assume that it was two packs per day for that same time period. That
would be about 730 packs of cigarettes each year. Over 50 years, that would total 36,500 packs of cigarettes.
So let's attach an amount to each pack of cigarettes, not a penny, not a nickel, not even a dollar. What if you attached $10 per pack of cigarettes? Now, that's more than Mr. Nally ever paid for a pack of cigarettes. That's not the price throughout time, and you know he bought his at a base exchange where they were even cheaper. But let's attach $10 per pack. At $10 per pack, that total amount would be $365,000. It's a significant six-figure sum. And if you punish Reynolds with that amount, you will have made them return every penny they ever made from Mr. Nally and then some.
Under the facts of this case, it's a rational number. It's a reasonable number. It's a number that makes Mrs. Nally whole because you already did that in the first phase, and it does it without a windfall.
Now, when I sit down, I expect Mr. Bigger may tell you $365,000 isn't a lot of money. But remember that your award here is based on the evidence you saw and rationale and the
instructions you will be given. And, remember, it's money on top of the $6,000,000 you have already given to fully compensate Mrs. Nally.
It's extra money. It's a lot of money.
Finally, punitive damages are available to punish, but also to deter future conduct. And, again, I can't read your minds to know. Maybe when this trial is over one of you will talk to us and I will get some insight to that. But I submit that your decision yesterday was based on the events and the conduct from Reynolds in the 20th century and what you heard in Phase 1.
From what you heard from Dr. Potts about Reynolds in the 21st century, I submit it is a different company with a wholly different culture. And when Mr. Bigger asks you to send a message to Reynolds or any other company, I urge you to think what message is sent if a company continues to be punished over and over for things that it did long ago even after it changes its direction, it changes its approach, and it changes its culture?
Mr. Bigger talked about when you were trying to discipline your child, what you would do. If your child changes his behavior, do you keep disciplining for what they did in the first place?
And the current company and Reynolds asks you to be fair and just to the current company and its employees. This is the last time I will get to speak to you. I do thank you for your service and appreciate it. Thank you.
