             MR. KELLEY:  Good morning.
             When we started this trial two-and-a-half
       weeks ago, my partner, Todd Falzone, said this:
             So, what is this case about?  This case
       is about two things.  It's about addiction and
       it's about fraud.
             Cindy Naugle was addicted to Philip 3631 Morris' cigarettes for 25 years, two packs a
       day for the majority of that time.  Five hours
       a day smoking those cigarettes.  And the first
       part of the trial is about her addiction.  The
       second part of the trial will be about fraud.
             And this is what Mr. Quigley told you on
       that same day, things that the case is not
       about.  Mr. Quigley said:  This case is not
       about -- it's not about old Philip Morris
       documents that Ms. Naugle never saw or never
       read.  You heard Mr. Falzone talk about those
       in opening statement.  These old documents,
       ladies and gentleman, are nothing but a
       distraction.  Nothing but a distraction.
             Could you put up Number P13, Baron?
       These old documents are nothing but a
       distraction.
             Right around the time that Cindy Naugle,
       who was 18 (sic) years old, started smoking
       with her girlfriends that night here in Fort
       Lauderdale, as a young girl, a young woman,
       Philip Morris was back in their headquarters
       asking the question, who ain't for more money?
       Do we really want to tout cigarette smoking as
       a drug?  It is, of course.  But there are 3632 dangerous implications to have such
       conceptualization go beyond these walls.
       That's a distraction?
             Could you put up Slide P19?
             And keep in mind, as you know, these
       documents were hidden from the American public
       for 50 years.  It wasn't until the attorney
       generals of the states took on the tobacco
       companies that these documents finally came
       out, and we saw the truth of what they had done
       the entire -- from 1950 to the year 2000.
       Distractions?
             The entire matter of addiction, is what
       Philip Morris is told, is the most potent
       weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a
       lung cancer cigarette case.  We can't defend
       continued smoking as free choice if the person
       was addicted.
             They knew, but they were continuing to
       defend themselves.  Oh, everybody has --
             It's a free country, right?  It's a free
       country, everybody has the right to choose.
       Let them do what they want, knowing the whole
       time that they're peddling an addictive drug to
       teenagers and young adults. 3633 And many of you remember those times,
       because we lived through them, when the
       cigarette companies, including Philip Morris,
       would say, there's no proof.
             You heard him yesterday, air pollution,
       red meat -- it could be many things --
       genetics.
             Smoking cause lung cancer?  There's no
       proof.  Addictive?  Come on, it's not
       addictive.  Anybody can stop any time they
       want.  Buy another pack.  Buy another carton.
             And they still do it today, don't they?
       They still do it today.  This company engaged
       in a conspiracy to commit fraud for 50 years.
       Every day that she smoked, from the first day
       she smoked till the last day she smoked, they
       were committing fraud on the American public
       and her.
             They were lying.  You've seen them lie.
       Were you shocked when you saw them in front of
       Congress, testifying in the late 90's that it
       wasn't addictive and they didn't know what --
             How could that not be shocking to anybody
       that saw that?  And, yet, you hear the one
       person who came in from -- it's not even the 3634 company, really -- the one person who came in
       yesterday, said, oh, I wasn't shocked, no.  Why
       would anyone be shocked?  I'm a toxicologist,
       it didn't shock me.
             It's shocking.  Lying, lying, lying,
       lying.
             Why?  Why did they do it?  Why did they
       lie?  Do you know the answer?  Of course, you
       know the answer, right?
             Why did they lie?  Money.  Lots of it.
       Money like -- money like we've never seen.
       You'll see in a minute.
             You remember Mr. Johnson who came in, the
       economist from California, told you about their
       revenues and their dividends and their net
       earnings, and he told you they have excess free
       cash?
             Excess free cash.  You'll see it's about
       a little over $10 million a day.  After they
       pay all of their employees, they pay the boss,
       they pay the president, they pay the
       settlement -- Master Settlement Agreement, they
       pay all their expenses, after they've done
       that, they still have ten -- over ten millions
       of dollars a day in excess free cash, just 3635 throw it up to the parent company.  Three --
       more than three --
             Three billion dollars through the third
       quarter, through the end of September.  Three
       billion dollars in excess free cash.  Pretty
       good reason to lie.  I mean, if there is a
       reason, right?  So, that's why they did it.
       Huge, huge money.  So, I'll let --
             What we're going to do here this
       morning --
             I only have limited time, and last night
       I was struggling with how to best use my
       time -- and I still don't know the answer to
       that, to tell you the truth -- but what I'm
       going to try and do is, as quickly as I can,
       just go through some of the documents that
       you've now seen in Phase 2, and try and put
       them in some kind of context, try and put a --
       do a 50-year conspiracy in ten minutes.
             It's going to be hard to do, but I just
       want to hit some of the highlights of what this
       company did, what this company did over those
       50 years.  And the reason for it is this.
             If you could put up Slide P34, Baron.
             At the end of this case, you all are 3636 going to have to determine whether punitive
       damages should be assessed against Philip
       Morris for what they did, punish the company
       for what they did.
             And there's a lot of people that want to
       know how you feel about that.  A lot of people
       are watching.  A lot of people are watching,
       not only here in this courtroom, a lot of
       people will read about your verdict, I'm sure,
       in the newspapers, it will be out in the media,
       whatever it is.  A lot of people are going to
       hear and want to know, should this company be
       punished for what they did.
             And these are the things that the Judge
       is going to instruct you on in just a couple of
       minutes about punitive damages and when they
       should be assessed, when are they appropriate
       under Florida law and federal law.
             If the defendant wantonly or recklessly
       disregarded the safety and welfare of the
       public, or if the defendant's conduct showed a
       reckless disregard of human life.
             What do you think?  Are they guilty as
       charged?
             That's why we're going to try and do the 3637 conspiracy in ten minutes.  I'm going to try
       and show you -- just recap the evidence that
       shows the reprehensibility of their conduct,
       and what they did over a 50-year period.
             So, that's when punitive damages are
       appropriate.  Why --
             The second question up here, why are
       punitive damages allowed.  And the Judge will
       tell you this, too, you'll get the jury
       instructions.
             Number one is punishment, to punish
       someone who does something bad.
             You know, I was laying in bed last night,
       and I was thinking -- tossing and turning --
       what if my neighbor next door came over and
       said, hey, I got this great new business idea,
       okay, I got this product, it will hook kids, we
       can go out and sell it to kids, and we'll make
       a lot of money on it, and nobody will know,
       we'll keep it secret, it will be great.  The
       only bad thing is, it's going to kill them.
       You want to get in on this?  What do you think?
       Good deal, right?  We're going to make a ton of
       money.
             What would you say? 3638 But that's what they do.  It's what they
       did, that's what they do.  So, they need to be
       punished for their conduct.
             And, secondly, why?  As a deterrent to
       others.  Because if you punish this company,
       which you should, and you punish this company
       the only way you can, which is financially, you
       will see that the only way you can punish
       someone who makes the kind of money that they
       make off of their business is to assess a large
       punitive damage award against them.  And that's
       your decision.
             But then it will be a deterrent to others
       who read about it in the newspaper, or on CNN,
       wherever it ends up.  They will read about it,
       and it will serve as a deterrent, do not do
       these things in the future.
             And, then, how much.  These are the
       considerations that you will have.  The Judge
       will instruct you on them.
             Number one, the defendant's financial
       resources.  That's why we brought in
       Mr. Johnson, to explain to you about their
       financial resources.
             Number two -- these are the things to 3639 consider in determining how much -- the nature
       and extent and degree of their misconduct.  How
       bad was it, okay?  And we're going to talk
       about that.
             Number three, the harm caused to Cindy.
             And, then, a caution, you cannot
       financially destroy the defendant.  You cannot
       award such an amount of money that you would
       cripple the company or financially destroy
       them, but you can and should award an amount of
       money that will punish them, that will send a
       message to them.
             Did you believe, I mean, yesterday, when
       he said he was talking to the president of the
       company on Friday, that they didn't talk about
       this?  Do you think he was telling the truth?
       And, if he was, can you imagine that?
             They don't care, they don't come down
       here, they don't even discuss it?
             This woman is dying of emphysema, she
       needs a lung transplant, they don't even care?
             So, either he's lying, and he was sitting
       there in Virginia, talking to the president,
       who --
             Where is he?  Come on in, defend your 3640 company.  He's lying about it, or they really
       didn't talk about it, and nobody cares.  Tough
       luck, you're on your own.  Either way, it's
       reprehensible, right up to this very day.
             And I gave him an opportunity, didn't I,
       at the end?  Do you want to accept some
       responsibility for this?  She does.
             I mean, here, you're not from Philip
       Morris, but you're the closest thing we got.
       Will you accept some responsibility?  Did he?
       No.  They think they're blameless.  They don't
       care.
             So, that's why we have juries.  That's
       why we have juries.  Hopefully, they will care
       after you return your verdict in this case.
             So, now I'm down to seven minutes to do
       the conspiracy.  It started -- P9 -- in 1953 --
       this is in evidence -- when the first stories
       came out about smoking causing lung cancer,
       1953, from Life magazine, big meeting in New
       York at the dental association, lots of doctors
       were there, it got lots of press.
             What was the story in Life magazine?
       While most smokers merely puffed thoughtfully
       when they heard that lung cancer might be 3641 caused by smoking -- of course, the industry
       already knew at that point -- tobacco stocks
       dropped.
             So, what did they do, those CEO's from
       those companies?
             Put up the next slide, please.  Oh, you
       don't know what it is.  It's P4.
             They got together at the Plaza Hotel in
       New York City, fierce competitors, and they
       started a conspiracy.  They hired a public
       relations firm, and they decided that they were
       going to start a campaign to sew the seeds of
       doubt about the cigarette -- what they would
       call the cigarette controversy.
             And to start that, the first thing they
       did was they lied to the American people,
       because they said -- they put out the Frank
       Statement -- we accept an interest in people's
       health as a basic responsibility, paramount to
       every other consideration in our business.
             It's in evidence, you can read it.  If I
       read the whole thing, I wouldn't have enough
       time to get through the rest of these slides.
       But you remember about the Frank Statement,
       right?  That's how it started. 3642 Now let's go to P15.
             They tried to make it look like the
       Tobacco Institute Research Committee was an
       independent organization, right, that was going
       to foster scientific research.
             So, they had all these scientists that
       they were paying money to, to go out and say,
       well, there's a doubt, nobody knows for sure,
       nobody knows for sure.
             What do we find out when we got their
       internal company records at the end of the
       90's?
             We found out that it said, from their
       own -- from their own documents, that the CTR,
       the Council for Tobacco Research, began as an
       organization called the Tobacco Industry
       Research Council.  It was set up as an industry
       shield in 1954.
             You see, it wasn't set up as an
       independent research committee; it was set up
       as a shield to protect the industry.
             And then it became the CTR, and then they
       had special projects through the 80's and 90's;
       and, on these projects, CTR has acted as a
       front.  They had a shield and they had a front 3643 to protect themselves.
             P16.
             Another document we got finally at the
       end of the 90's, talked about -- again about
       the Frank Statement.  They said they accept an
       interest in people's health as a basic
       responsibility, paramount to all other
       considerations in their business.
             What did we find out from the internal
       documents?  That what is truth to one is false
       to another.  CTR and the industry have publicly
       and frequently denied what others find as
       truth.
             Let's face it -- let's face it
       internally, folks -- we are interested in
       evidence which we believe denies the allegation
       that cigarette smoking causes disease.  That's
       what they were trying to do, and that's what
       they were trying to prove.
             P7.
             How did they do it?  Almost the same way
       they did it in this courtroom.  Lawyers would
       actually go out and recruit -- lawyers --
       lawyers would go out and recruit scientists.
             And it was those scientists and those 3644 findings that showed up in these reports, and
       they would put out every year a paper, the
       Cigarette Controversy, sponsored by the lawyers
       and the scientists they hired, like the
       experts, a half-a-million dollars in this case,
       to come in and tell you what they told you.
             They would recruit experts and the
       scientists to pass on a message that there's a
       controversy and it's unproven.  That's what
       they were doing as part of the conspiracy.
             Then, in 1964 -- P8 -- the Surgeon
       General report came out, cigarette smoking is
       causally related to lung cancer in men.
             Now, remember, ten years earlier they had
       promised they were going to work with the
       scientific community, with public health,
       paramount interest in people's health.
             So, you would think when this report came
       out, right, they could have said, okay, we
       agree with the Surgeon General -- because they
       knew it at the time, beyond a doubt they knew
       it -- but they didn't.
             What did they do?  Instead of working for
       the public health, they lied.
             Remember Mr. Cullman, Howard Cullman?  He 3645 was the CEO at the time.  I don't think the
       industry admits there are any bad elements.  He
       went on television right after the Surgeon
       General's report.
             And, then, a couple of weeks later, we
       saw the internal memo, talking among
       themselves, Philip Morris, highest level in the
       company:  We must, in the near future, provide
       some answers which will give smokers a
       psychological crutch and a self-rationale to
       continue smoking.
             It's unbelievable.  All this was going on
       behind the scenes, hidden from everybody.
       They're telling you, oh, yeah, we'll look out
       for you, don't worry.  It's like --
             We'll talk about that in a minute.  But
       they weren't.
             Could you play the video clip, 892, just
       a part of it?
           (Thereupon, the video clip was played and
       taken down to the best of the reporter's
       ability as follows:)
            Are you saying, then, sir, that there is
       something toxic about tobacco which are
       removable by filter? 3646      Well, obviously, a filter takes out
       certain tar and nicotine.  I don't think the
       industry admits there are any bad elements.
             MR. KELLEY:  P10.
             THE CLERK:  Ten minutes, counsel.
             MR. KELLEY:  Ten minutes.  Wow.  I'm not
       going to be able to do it.
             THE COURT:  It's the time you asked for,
       sir.
             MR. KELLEY:  I know.  I know.
             THE COURT:  Right?
             MR. KELLEY:  All right.  Listen, you've
       got all these documents, and I probably am
       telling you things you already know, but you
       can take them back there, and you can see the
       fraud; that they wanted stories about
       concealment -- I mean, they wanted stories that
       would raise doubts about the effects of disease
       and smoking; that they were targeting 16- to
       20- -- 16- to 20-year-olds; that no one's ever
       become a smoker by smoking cigarettes without
       nicotine; that the cigarettes should not be
       conceived as a product, but a package.  The
       package was nicotine.  That was from the Philip
       Morris documents in 1972. 3647 THE COURT:  You're setting a record for
       speed, sir.
             MR. KELLEY:  Sorry.
             THE COURT:  Is this a NASCAR test?
             MR. KELLEY:  P18.
             I apologize, Your Honor.
             THE COURT:  Okay.
             MR. KELLEY:  P18.  This document is a
       Philip Morris document --
             Oh, no, the Tobacco Institute, which
       they're part of with all the other tobacco
       companies.  Their conspiracy came out in 1972.
       We found it at the end of the 90'S.
             For nearly 20 years, this industry has
       employed a single strategy to defend itself on
       three major fronts:  Litigation, politics and
       public opinion.
             While the strategy was brilliantly
       conceived and executed over the years, helping
       to win important battles, it is only fair to
       say that it is not, nor was it intended to be,
       a vehicle for victory.
             On the contrary, it has always been a
       holding strategy, consisting of creating doubt
       about the health charge, without actually 3648 denying it, and advocating the public's right
       to smoke without actually urging them to take
       up the practice.
             That was their strategy, brilliantly
       conceived and employed, and it worked, and
       here's the results in this courtroom today.
             And they made billions of dollars every
       year, not just this year; last year, the year
       before, the year before, going back to --
             MR. QUIGLEY:  Objection, Your Honor.
             THE COURT:  Grounds, sir?
             MR. BRENNER:  Prior years.
             THE COURT:  Overruled.
             MR. KELLEY:  And, then --
             Let's just go to P26 real quick, and then
       I'm going to have to stop with these slides.
       P26.
             Dow Chemical -- can you believe this? --
       when Dow was putting out Nicorette gum, Philip
       Morris was buying some of their chemicals to
       put on their cigarettes, and they said to Dow
       Chemical, whoa, Nicorette gum, what are you
       doing?  You're going to hurt our business.
       We're going to stop placing orders with you.
             Right here -- this was shocking -- look 3649 in the middle.  This is a Philip Morris memo.
       Specific examples of Dow's objectionable
       campaign were efforts to encourage smokers at
       their Freeport plant to give up smoking, to
       give up cigarettes.
             What was objectionable to Philip Morris?
       Dow literature appearing in doctors' offices,
       encouraging smokers to quit by using Nicorette.
       Philip Morris didn't like that.
             A new Richmond doctor's clinic
       discouraging smoking and offering Nicorette,
       Philip Morris said, you continue to do that,
       Dow, we're not going to buy your chemicals to
       put them on our cigarettes anymore.  You're
       trying to get people to quit smoking, to go see
       their doctor and use Nicorette.
             Are they acting recklessly and wantonly
       and just in total disregard for everybody's
       health and safety, or am I imagining things?
       It's shocking.
             And, then, the 1988 Surgeon General's
       report.  You saw their press release.  It's
       irresponsible for public health officials to
       say that it's addictive.  That's what they
       said.  And, then, to top it all off -- 3650 P20, please, the video clip, 397.  1994.
           (Thereupon, the video clip was played and
       taken down to the best of the reporter's
       ability as follows:)
             Mr. Campbell, you were also deposed, and
       you said, quote, to my knowledge, it has not
       been proven that cigarette smoking causes
       cancer.  This is a rather passive and puzzling
       approach, especially in light of the consensus,
       not by some, but all of the scientific
       community.
             Will you ever be convinced, and what
       evidence are you waiting for?
             And let's have the microphone passed
       over.
             MR. KELLEY:  This is the Philip Morris
       CEO, president.
           (Thereupon, the video clip was played and
       taken down to the best of the reporter's
       ability as follows:)
           Yes, I may be convinced.  We don't know
       what causes cancer in general right now.
       So, I think that we may find out what causes
       cancer, and we may find out some relationship
       which has yet to be proven. 3651 MR. KELLEY:  And, then, Video 396, and
       then I'm not going to talk any more about this
       conspiracy and their fraud.
           (Thereupon, the video clip was played and
       taken down to the best of the reporter's
       ability as follows:)
             Let me begin my questioning on the matter
       of whether or not nicotine is addictive.
             Let me ask you first -- and I would like
       to just go down the row -- whether each of you
       believes that nicotine is not addictive.
             I heard virtually all of you touch on it,
       and just, "yes" or "no," do you believe
       nicotine is not addictive?
             I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
             Mr Johnston?
             Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine
       clearly do not meet the classic definitions of
       "addiction."  There is no intoxication.
             We'll take that as a "no."  And, again,
       time is short, if you could just --
             I think each of you believe nicotine is
       not addictive.  We just would like to have this
       for the record.
             I don't believe that nicotine or our 3652 products are addictive.
             I believe nicotine is not addictive.
             I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
             I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
             And I, too, believe that nicotine is not
       addictive.
             MR. KELLEY:  There you have it.  Shame on
       them.  Shame on them.
             All right.  Let's talk about Philip
       Morris' financial resources.
             P1, please.  This is the evidence in this
       case.
             How do you punish a company that makes
       this kind of money?
             2008 net revenues -- revenues is how much
       money comes in, as Mr. Johnson explained --
       18.8 billion dollars.  18.8 billion dollars.
             Their earnings, after they've paid
       everybody, $3.1 billion dollars -- billion
       dollars -- in dividends paid through the third
       quarter of this year, 2009 -- that was last
       year -- having a good year this year -- through
       September 30, $2.9 billion.
             Next slide is P2.
             You remember Mr. Johnson?  And this is 3653 what he said the dividends are, the 2.9
       billion.
             When a company pays dividends up to its
       parent, for that company, those dividends are
       considered, effectively, free cash.  In other
       words, that's how much cash can flow out of the
       company and do no harm.  Do no harm.
             So, 2.9 billion through September 30th --
       that's 273 days this year -- they are making
       excess free cash of 10.6 million dollars every
       day, which means -- Slide P2 -- or P3 -- during
       the course of this trial, when we started jury
       selection on October 28th, up to today, they
       have made over $244 million during the time
       that we've been sitting here in excess free
       cash.  No wonder they didn't show up.  They've
       been busy.
             So, how much money, that's your decision.
       You determine what kind of a dollar figure will
       it take to get their attention.  I leave it
       completely up to you.  Before I sit down --
             And how much time do I have now?
             THE CLERK:  You have three minutes.
             THE COURT:  You can take more of the
       hour. 3654 MR. KELLEY:  I'll take five more minutes.
             THE COURT:  Well, you need to go over
       damages completely in this --
             MR. KELLEY:  I know.  I know that.
             THE COURT:  Yes.
             MR. KELLEY:  Thank you, Your Honor.
             THE COURT:  No problem.
             MR. KELLEY:  Compensatory damages,
       that's --
             So, punitive damages are to punish the
       company.  That's what this --
             Remember, addiction and fraud, that's
       what this case is about.
             Cindy is entitled to be compensated for
       what happened to her, for what they did to her.
       That's compensatory damages.  The Judge will
       give you the instructions on that.
             And we created a chart, P33, which has
       those elements of damage on there.  And here's
       what they are.
             I keep trying to get out of the way.  I'm
       sorry if I'm blocking anybody.
             These are the different elements of
       damage that you will hear and you will see on
       the jury instructions in this case that apply. 3655 One section is medical expenses.
       Remember we talked about economic and
       noneconomic damages in jury selection?  That's
       the medical.
             Now, you heard the life projection, the
       life care plan, how much she'll need depending
       on how long she lives.
             And vice versa is true.  How long she'll
       live depends on the medical care that she gets,
       right?  So, they go together.  And, so, that's
       one part of it, but the other --
             The largest part of this case is about
       what has this done to her as a human being,
       right?  And these are the elements of damage
       that the Judge will instruct you on.
             Pain and suffering.  Does she have pain,
       and does she suffer?  You saw her --
             You know, put up P41 real quick.  This is
       the only slide I'm going to show about her
       damages, because, to me, it was so telling.
             Do you remember when she walked from here
       to here?
             The clerk asked her, please state your
       name and spell it for the record.
             You know, I -- I need a few more minutes 3656 to catch my breath.  I have to breathe.  In a
       few minutes, I'll be able to breathe.
             The Judge said:  Ma'am, let us know when
       you're ready, okay?  Just take your time.
             Almost.  My name is Cindy Naugle.
             Do you remember that?
             Put that other slide back up, P33.
             Does she have pain, does she suffer, when
       she can't walk from here to there without
       having to stop and catch her breath for three
       or four minutes?
             Disability?  Disability, that means many
       things to different people; but I guess if
       you're disabled, you can't work.
             She's still working.  It's unbelievable,
       isn't it?  She goes to work every day, tries
       to.
             Physical impairment.  She's wasting away.
       She's shaking.  The doctors told you, her
       muscles -- her muscles waste away because
       they're not getting the oxygen that they need.
             Disfigurement, mental anguish.  I can't
       imagine what it must feel like to lay in bed at
       night, laying there with your head on your
       pillow, listening to the roar -- the hum of 3657 that machine pumping oxygen into you, hoping
       that it's not going to stop in the middle of
       the night.  The things that she has to worry
       about.
             Inconvenience?  Forget about that one,
       okay?  Inconvenience?  She can't do anything.
       She can't shop, she can't walk the dogs
       anymore.
             Their expert said, oh, well, I don't know
       if she can walk the dogs.
             Walk the dogs?  She can't walk from here
       to there.
             Inconvenience?  Brushing her teeth.  She
       has to get up at 4:30 in the morning to get
       ready for work, it takes so long.  I think she
       said it takes like an hour to make the bed,
       because she has to stop and sit down.
             And loss of capacity for the enjoyment of
       life.
             And she's a wonderful woman, and I think
       you know that, and she's still trying to be
       independent and do everything that she can; but
       has her ability to enjoy life been diminished?
       Has it?
             All those things.  It's mind boggling 3658 what this disease has done to her and will
       continue to do to her.
             And she may need a lung transplant.  I
       can't even imagine what that is.  I mean, when
       I heard the description of it, sometimes the
       heart comes out attached to it; if you have a
       bad heart, they put the lungs and the heart in
       somebody?
             It's mind boggling what she has to look
       forward to.  So, I submit to you --
             And I am going to suggest a dollar figure
       for her damages.  The medical expenses are
       about --
             And I'm giving her the benefit of the
       doubt -- I'm her lawyer, I think she's entitled
       to it -- $3.7 million is what --
             If she lives a normal life expectancy,
       that's what Mr. Johnson told you, on her life
       care plan, that's what she'll need.
             If you think she's only going to live ten
       years, it's 1.6 or 7, something like that.
       You'll have the figures in your notes, I'm
       sure.
             She is entitled to every penny of that;
       and, so, I suggest to you that her total 3659 damages should be seven times that amount,
       because the medical expenses are just
       one-seventh of the equation.
             So, if you multiply it out, seven times
       3.7, whatever it is, that's what she should get
       for her compensatory damages, because the
       medical expenses are the smallest part of any
       case.
             They wrecked her life.  They --
             And I don't mean Mr. Quigley or
       Ms. Brown.  They're fine lawyers, fine lawyers,
       and they've done a great job for their client;
       but their client wrecked her life for money.
       Money.
             And if you add all that up, it comes out
       to about, I think, 25 to $30 million, in that
       range, to compensate her for wrecking her life.
             And, so, I ask you this:  She's entitled
       to that, but you need to punish Philip Morris;
       and I ask you, if you punished Philip Morris
       with another $30 million punitive damage award,
       would that be enough?  Would that be enough,
       three days excess free cash?  Is that
       punishment for a company like them?  No.  But
       that's your decision. 3660 And I would invite Mr. Quigley, when he
       comes up, to tell you --
             You know, because I do this with my kids
       sometimes, and you might have done this, too.
       When they do something wrong, sometimes I just
       punish them, I say, I'm doing this, I'm doing
       that; but, other times, I make it more
       difficult, because you know what I say?  I'm
       your father, I love you, I hate to punish you.
       What do you suggest I do?  Tell me what you
       think would be a good punishment, Colleen, or
       Megan, okay?  Tell me.
             And that makes it even worse, doesn't it,
       because they gotta come up with what they think
       is a good punishment they can live with.
             So, I ask Mr. Quigley that question.
       Assuming this jury thinks that your client
       should be punished financially, what is a
       dollar figure that you think -- that you think
       would be adequate, that would really send a
       message to Philip Morris?
             Thank you.


             MR. KELLEY:  Okay.  Well, it's time to
       finish the job.  It was started by six people
       just like you, before you.
             And, as Ms. Brown told you, in that class
       action trial, certain findings were made that
       the Judge has instructed you on and will
       instruct you on again.
             And, so, put those up for just a second,
       Baron.  That's P42.
             The findings are that Philip Morris USA
       was negligent.  You're probably not surprised
       by that, based on what you heard.
             The findings were that Philip Morris USA
       sold or supplied cigarettes that were
       defective.  Again, I'm sure you're not shocked
       by that.
             Three:  Philip Morris USA placed
       cigarettes on the market that were defective 3713 and unreasonably dangerous.
             Four:  Philip Morris USA concealed or
       omitted material information not otherwise
       known or available, knowing that the material
       was false or misleading, or failed to disclose
       a material fact concerning the health effects
       or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes
       or both.
             And Five:  Philip Morris USA agreed with
       the other tobacco companies to conceal or omit
       information concerning the health effects of
       cigarettes or their addictive nature with the
       intention that -- with the intention that
       smokers and the public would rely on this
       information to their detriment.
             Now, the six of you will finish the job.
       Ms. George-McNeal, I'm sorry; but, from Ms. Van
       Lenten to Ms. Houston, that's the jury now.
       And the six of you, with the six of them, will
       finish the job that needs to be done, to
       deliver justice to Cindy Naugle.
             Why you 12 people?  Who knows?  I have no
       idea.  Why you 12 were selected --
             You know, it says in the Bible, many are
       called, but few are chosen.  And we went 3714 through hundreds of people in jury selection
       before it was you six that were selected.
             So, it's time to finish the job.  How are
       you going to do it?  How are you going to do
       it?  You've heard their arguments.
             Once again, Mr. Quigley didn't answer my
       question.  I said, how much, assuming that the
       jury thinks your client should be punished,
       Mr. Quigley, how much do you think would be
       appropriate?
             And did he answer that?  No.
             Well, he says zero.
             So, that's going to be your decision in
       this case.  That's the decision that you will
       make.
             The verdict form, I just want to go over
       with you real quickly, because I know that
       you've listened to us for a long time now, and
       I'm sure you're ready to deliberate, but I do
       want to go over it with you quickly.
             All the answers to the questions are
       "yes."  Based on the evidence in this case,
       every question here should be answered "yes."
             Was the negligence of Philip Morris -- as
       Ms. Brown said, was the conduct of Philip 3715 Morris a legal cause of Lucinda Naugle's
       emphysema?  Of course it was.
             You heard about their conspiracy, and
       what happened, what -- what this country was
       like during the time that they were putting out
       their controversy, their doubt, their denial of
       addiction, and that she relied on that.
             And we're going to talk about that in a
       minute.  I'll show you exactly where that
       evidence is.
             But was the negligence the cause of her
       injuries, the emphysema?
             Yes.
             Was their defective cigarettes the cause
       of her injury?
             Yes.
             Did Lucinda Naugle reasonably rely on
       statements they made that concealed information
       that caused -- intentionally concealed or
       omitted material information?
             Yes.
             On the claim of fraud by conspiracy --
       and I'm sorry, I talk loud sometimes.  I don't
       mean to.
             On the claim of fraud by conspiracy, were 3716 acts done by Philip Morris, in furtherance of
       the conspiracy, a legal cause of Ms. Naugle's
       injuries?
             Yes.
             Then the percentages of fault, the amount
       of damages.
             And then the final question:  Please
       state whether under the circumstances of this
       case you find that punitive damages are
       warranted against Philip Morris.
             So, the answer to every question is
       "yes."
             And then you have to determine the
       percentages of fault, the percentages of fault,
       and the amount of compensatory damages and the
       amount of punitive damages.
             That's the verdict form.  It's three
       pages this time.  It's longer than the last
       one.  They say --
             You know, they say that there's no
       evidence that she relied on any of this.  No
       evidence that anything that they hid, she
       relied on.
             Well, how can you rely on something that
       somebody's hiding from you, right?  If 3717 someone's concealing it and making it secret,
       how can you rely on it; and then later when it
       comes out that they were hiding it, and it
       was -- and they were not telling the truth
       about what they were saying, they come in and
       say, oh, well, you didn't know what we were
       hiding, you can't rely on what you didn't know.
             But that's -- that's not what the
       evidence is, because what they were hiding --
             They created this whole world where it
       was okay to smoke, where nobody knew for sure
       if smoking would hurt you, where it -- you
       know, it wasn't addictive, you could do what
       you wanted.
             That was what they created through their
       billions of dollars in advertising and
       marketing and the phony research groups that
       they set up.
             Now, they said, well, where is the
       evidence that Philip Morris ever made chocolate
       cigarettes?
             Okay.  Where is the evidence that they
       didn't?
             And that's why we have a jury.  Use your
       common sense and your common experience.  The 3718 Judge will instruct you on that.
             Did anybody here, when they were
       trick-or-treating at Halloween, ever get a
       little box of candy cigarettes, little white
       ones, had a little red tip on the end, you
       could eat them?  They were candy.  Did they
       ever do that?
             Well, the only way we'll know for sure --
       because that was 50 years ago -- the only way
       we'll ever know for sure whether Philip Morris
       did it, is for them to put a witness on the
       stand, under oath, to say, well, we know our
       sales guy thought it was a great idea, and, of
       course, you know, we were marketing to
       children, and we've seen those documents, but
       we never made chocolate cigarettes.
             Did they do that?  Did they --
             Could they have done that?  Of course.
       They got all the documents, the records.  It's
       their company.  But they didn't?
             So, they always --
             No matter what it is, they turn it
       around.  But I guess that's their job.  But you
       all heard the evidence, you saw what they did.
             Did Cindy rely on what they said? 3719 Could you put up 53?  This is a slide you
       may remember.
             And he asked why didn't we call Cindy
       again.  Cindy already testified to all of this
       in Phase 1.  Did you really want me to put her
       on the witness stand again, Mr. Quigley?
             Because, once again, same thing.  If he
       wanted her back on the witness stand, he could
       have put her back up.  If he didn't believe any
       of her prior testimony, he could have said,
       "the defendant calls," and put her back on the
       witness stand.  But he didn't.  Because she
       already testified to this.
             Page 1486 of the transcript on
       November 4th:
             Cindy, do you remember a time in your
       life when the cigarette companies said that
       smoking was not addictive and that there was no
       proof that it caused any diseases?
             Answer:  I remember a time, yes, many
       times.
             Many times she remembers them saying
       that.  Did you live during that time?
             Yes, I did.
             And did you smoke cigarettes during that 3720 time?
             Yes, I did.
             And did you believe what they told you,
       these cigarette companies?
             I believed what they told me.  Why would
       they make something if they thought it was
       going to kill me?
             She heard their message, she heard what
       they were saying, she believed them; and she
       said, why would I think they were lying to me,
       why would -- why would any company make
       something they thought was going to kill me?
             Really, it's a pretty good question,
       isn't it?
             And I asked her --
             Put up 16.
             I said, let me ask you this question
       again:  At this point in your life -- when she
       had her first cigarette -- had you ever heard
       of nicotine?
             Answer:  No.
             Did you know that there was -- that
       nicotine was something in cigarettes that was
       addictive?
             Answer:  No, I did not. 3721 Did you know that cigarettes were
       addictive?
             No, I didn't.
             Could you put up 18?
             Something wonderful happens.  Remember
       that advertisement?  Remember Lucy and Desi?
       And this -- this is the world she grew up in.
       This is their advertisement.  Something
       wonderful happens when you change to Philip
       Morris.
             The ads are in there.  It's right there
       on the top of the stack.  I'm looking at it
       right now.  Something wonderful happens when
       you change to Philip Morris, Cindy, something
       wonderful.  You'll feel better because...
       You'll feel better, you'll feel better, you'll
       feel better.  Yes, you'll feel better when you
       switch to Philip Morris.
             Now, they knew that it would -- that it
       was addictive.  They knew that it would cause
       cancer.  But they told her, oh, you'll feel
       better if you switch to Philip Morris.
             Call for Philip Morris.  She told you she
       remembers that.  And the Dick Van Dyke Show,
       you saw the video clips. 3722 You've been here through the whole trial,
       I asked her.  You saw the video clips from
       television, with Lucy and Dick Van Dyke and
       some of the other people, the celebrities that
       used to advertising smoking.  Do you remember
       seeing that when you were a child?
             Answer:  I grew up with Lucy and Dick Van
       Dyke.  I remember --
             Do you remember --
             -- seeing those, yes.
             That's Philip Morris.  Philip Morris
       sponsored the Lucy show.
             Put up P28.
             And then we asked Dr. Cummings, because
       he had already --
             This was in Phase 1, when he had already
       seen all the internal documents.
             And we asked him, did Cindy have that
       same level of understanding that Philip Morris
       did, and the knowledge about the addictive
       nature of nicotine in 1968?
             Answer:  No.
             Question:  Did Cindy discuss with you
       whether if she had that same knowledge, that
       understanding about how -- that cigarettes were 3723 addictive before she started in 1968, that she
       would have ever started?
             And he said, if she had had that
       knowledge, she would never have started.
             Oh, she didn't rely on anything?
             Next slide is P29.
             Was that information concealed from
       Cindy?
             Yes, it was.
             And did she testify that that information
       would have an impact on her?
             Yes, she did.
             They created the world of the
       acceptability and the safety of cigarettes back
       in the time when she started smoking.
             And she believed them, based on the
       representations that they made to her and to
       the other members of the public, attacking the
       Surgeon General in 1964, attacking the Surgeon
       General in 1988, attacking all the public
       health officials along the way, lying under
       oath on television, all the video clips that
       you've seen, it's not addictive, it doesn't
       cause -- it doesn't cause -- there's no proof
       that it causes anything. 3724 She relied on the things that were out
       there, just like we all did that were living
       during this time.  We heard their message.
       Some people believed them, some didn't.  And
       they want --
             They want you to penalize her for
       believing them, for trusting them.  They're
       saying, what, is she crazy?  She believed us?
       Whoa, how could she believe us?  That's their
       argument.
             So, there's plenty of evidence to answer
       those questions, all of the questions, "yes."
       Was their conduct a legal cause of what
       happened to Cindy?
             Yes, it was a legal cause.
             Now, the question of percentages of
       fault.
             Put up P24, please.
             Philip Morris --
             This document is in evidence.  This is a
       Philip Morris marketing document from 1974.
       This is, what --
             She started in '68.  So, six years after
       she had started smoking.
             The Philip Morris tracking studies, which 3725 report share of smokers, show that this problem
       is especially clear among the most important
       segment of the Marlboro franchise, smokers aged
       18 to 24.
             The most important segment of their
       market, smokers 18 to 24.  She's right in their
       window.
             And, so, what do they do?  Young smokers
       were sought out in 35 locations around the
       country, at popular hangouts, at drive-ins,
       bowling alleys, near military bases, at
       beaches, et cetera.
             They are stalking the youth of this
       country, looking for new customers.  Forty-five
       hundred a day, young adults and teenagers,
       started smoking back then, and still start
       smoking today because of their conduct.
             Next slide, Page 42.
             Dr. Cummings, is the brain, the physical
       brain of a 20-year-old, still developing?
             Everybody -- anyone who's ever had kids
       knows that.  Yes, it is.  Although, when you're
       20, you think it's over.
             But 20-year-olds, their brain is still
       developing. 3726 Slide 57.
             He talked about their advertising, you
       know, primarily talking about the marketing of
       the cigarettes, which are heavily marketed.
       Companies together spend billions every year to
       advertise their cigarettes.
             They're in the store when you see them,
       the power wall when you walk in the convenience
       store.  They're placed there.  It's carefully
       studied to have an effect on smokers.  These
       companies know what they're doing, and they
       know who they're after.
             Slide 72.
             And when she was a child, companies used
       Santa Claus to advertise their products.
       Philip Morris put in an advertisement -- if you
       go through it, you'll find it in there -- it's
       a cigarette ad with Santa Claus in it.  And
       Philip Morris did it, too, during the time that
       she was growing up.
             Slide P22.
             So, you, members of the jury --
             And I, again, am not going to suggest any
       percentages.  I leave this up to you, the
       percentage of fault between Cindy's conduct as 3727 a young woman, who was targeted by this
       company, cold, calculated, conscious corporate
       decisions to target this age range of these
       kids --
             Who bears the greater fault for what
       happened, Cindy -- there she is at the time she
       started smoking, closest photograph we could
       find from around that time period -- or the
       industry?
             Could you play video Exhibit 883, please?
             THE CLERK:  Five minutes.
            (Thereupon, the video clip was played and
       taken down to the best of the reporter's
       ability as follows:)
            Do you believe that cigarettes are safe?
       Have they been proved to be safe, Mr. Cullman?
            I believe they have not been proved to be
       unsafe.  We do talk to the question of whether
       or not cigarettes are hazardous.  We do not
       believe that cigarettes are hazardous.  We
       don't accept that.  And I concluded from that
       report that it's true that babies born from
       women who smoke are smaller, but they're just
       as healthy as the babies born from women who do
       not smoke. 3728      What about the --
            And some women would prefer having smaller
       babies.
             MR. KELLEY:  Who bears the fault?  You
       decide.  You know, they could --
             Oh, this is a good one.  Fifty-nine.
       This has to do with the fault question.
             Dr. Cummings -- this is Phase 1 -- in
       your opinion, does addiction to nicotine
       eliminate free choice?
             In other words, fault; you know, were
       they at fault?  She continued to smoke, she
       continued to smoke.  Does addiction to nicotine
       eliminate free choice?
             Yes.
             And have you seen that opinion in the
       business records of the tobacco industry?
             Yes.
             You didn't see the document until Phase
       2, which is P19.  And we saw it earlier this
       morning, that the entire matter of addiction is
       the most potent weapon an attorney can have in
       a case like this.
             They can't defend smoking, continued
       smoking -- which is what she just did -- they 3729 can't defend it as free choice if the person
       was addicted.  That's from their own documents.
       They know that.
             And then, finally, Slide Number 36.
             You know, it gets back to the whole
       credibility of the company.  And I take you
       back to this slide, again, from Mr. Quigley's
       opening statement, trying to convince you --
             Remember in opening statement he was
       trying to convince you the reason that she --
       the reason that she smoked were the five things
       he listed on the left-hand side?  That's what
       he told you.
             And what he didn't tell you were all the
       other things that she had told them in the
       deposition, about how she craved cigarettes,
       she had to have them.  She didn't want them,
       she needed them.  They didn't just calm her, it
       was something she needed, she had to do.
             She couldn't concentrate because all she
       was ever doing was thinking about cigarettes.
       She couldn't handle it.  They deliberately --
             He deliberately deleted that information
       and did not present it to you to try and make
       you think that the reason she smoked was she 3730 enjoyed it, it was a sense of release and
       calming.  That's not the reason, and he knew
       it.  The reason is because she was addicted by
       his client.
             Where does the percentage of fault come
       in on that?  Who's responsible here?
             We never did get an answer to that
       question in the first place.  Why didn't you
       tell the jury, Mr. Quigley?  I asked --
             When I sat down, I said, just please tell
       the jury why you didn't tell them that.  He
       never told you.
             Like when I just said, how much does your
       company -- how much --
             He didn't answer that question.  Some
       questions are hard to answer.
             How much time do I have, Sherry?
             THE CLERK:  Two minutes.
             MR. KELLEY:  Two minutes.  Wow.  Then I'm
       going to have to go find a hypnotist to tell me
       how total relaxation is possible.  Two minutes.
             THE COURT:  Not anymore.
             MR. KELLEY:  A minute, 50 seconds.
             Put up P6.  If we had --
             This is a Philip Morris document from 3731 1954.  If we had any thought or knowledge that
       in any way we were selling a product harmful to
       consumers, we would stop business tomorrow.
             Now, that makes sense, doesn't it?
       That's what he said, the president -- was it
       the president? -- vice president, George
       Weissman, of the company.
             Now, for 50 years they denied it, and it
       wasn't until it was finally forced out of them
       by the state attorneys general that they put on
       their website, cigarettes -- Philip Morris now
       agrees, 50 years later, that it causes cancer,
       heart disease, emphysema, and other serious
       diseases in smokers, and it's addictive.
             So, now they finally admit, they know
       they make a product that's harmful to
       consumers.
             They forgot one thing, didn't they?  That
       they were going to stop business tomorrow once
       they knew that.
             Now they know, but do they quit?  No.
       Why?  You know why.  $10 million a day while
       we've been sitting in this courtroom in excess
       free cash.
             So, my final slide is -- 3732 I lost it.  Oh, here it is.  P12.
             Why do we have juries?  Why do we have
       juries?
             Trial by jury is the best of all
       safeguards for the person and property of every
       individual, the great equalizer between the
       average person and the giant multi-national
       conglomerate company.  The jury is the best
       protector of the person and property of every
       individual.  And that is the truth.
             And, so, as I sit down, I thank you for
       your commitment.  I do.  And I thank you for
       listening to our cause on behalf of Cindy
       Naugle.  And I thank you for the personal
       sacrifice that each of you have made here in
       the service of your country, and your
       willingness to deliver justice in this case.
       It's in your hands.  Thank you.
