             MS. BROWN:  Good morning, Ms. Naugle,
       counsel.  Good morning, everyone.
             Now, I have to tell you, as I was sitting
       over there listening to Mr. Kelley this
       morning, I was knowing I was coming up next, I
       was wondering, what are you thinking?  What are
       you feeling?
             And I thought you're probably feeling a
       lot of sympathy for Ms. Naugle.  It's
       understandable.  I am.  Because, as Mr. Kelley
       said, after what we've seen in the courtroom
       the last few weeks, there's no doubt in my mind
       that Ms. Naugle's a good woman, and there's
       also no doubt in my mind that emphysema is an
       awful disease.
             And also, as I sat over there, I wondered 3662 if part of what you're feeling or thinking is
       anger, anger towards Philip Morris, anger
       towards some of the authors, employees of
       Philip Morris that you see reflected in some of
       these documents.
             Because like I said a few days ago, when
       I had the chance to talk to you, there are
       documents, 20, 30, 40, 50 years ago, that have
       something in them that you and I wouldn't even
       think about today.
             But the question in this case was -- and
       still is -- what impact did that have on
       Ms. Naugle, because this is Ms. Naugle's case.
             Now, you've been read the findings from
       the earlier class action trial, and you were
       read them before we started this part of the
       trial.
             You're going to be read them again --
       well, probably this afternoon, early this
       afternoon; maybe we'll still get it in in the
       morning -- but those findings relate to Philip
       Morris' conduct.
             And the question in this trial -- or one
       of the main questions in this trial is the
       conduct that's addressed by those findings. 3663 Was that conduct the legal cause of
       Ms. Naugle's emphysema.  That's the question,
       or a big part of the questions that you'll have
       to answer on the verdict form in this part of
       the case.
             But anger and sympathy, those are really
       powerful emotions.  And as I was sitting over
       there, I actually started thinking about three
       weeks ago, the first time any of you were in
       the courtroom, the first time we got to know
       anything about you; and I was remembering the
       fact that several of you said, I want to be on
       this jury.  I want to be on the jury, and I
       want to be on the jury because I want to serve.
       I recognize the importance of jury service.
             And you expressed a great deal of
       confidence at that point that you could be
       dispassionate, that you could view the evidence
       objectively -- because we all knew this was
       going to be an emotional case -- but you were
       confident at that point that you would be able
       to put aside emotion, and that you would be
       able to focus on the facts, that you would be
       able to follow the Judge's instruction, that
       you would be able to hold the parties to their 3664 burdens of proof.  And I have no doubt that
       that's the case.
             So, let's get down to business.  What is
       this part of the trial about?
             Well, again, this part of the trial is
       about how Philip Morris' conduct, whatever that
       conduct may be, how did that impact Ms. Naugle.
       It's not Philip Morris' conduct in the air,
       it's how it affected Ms. Naugle.
             And this morning we haven't heard a
       lot -- we have throughout the course of the
       trial -- we haven't heard a lot this morning
       about the facts specific to Ms. Naugle.  We
       know --
             And I think Mr. Kelley misspoke this
       morning.  He said she started smoking when she
       was 18 years old.  Well, again, I'm sure he
       misspoke, because we all know the facts are
       that Ms. Naugle started smoking in 1968, and
       she was 20 years old.
             Now, I think throughout this case,
       sometimes it sounded like we were dealing with
       somebody who was a youngster -- we kept
       referring to "youth," I think sometimes the
       word "youngster" came up -- but we're talking 3665 about a woman who was 20 years old in 1968.
             She had moved out of her parents' house,
       she was living on her own, she had a full-time
       job in this courthouse, she was with a
       girlfriend in a bar, and they wanted to seem
       older, they wanted to appear more
       sophisticated, so they bought a pack of
       cigarettes and they smoked.  Again, that was
       1968.
             Michael, could you pull up 9?
             Now, we know -- and you've seen this over
       and over and over again, I realize -- but we
       know that in 1968, there was a warning on
       cigarette packages.  It had been there for two
       years.  And the warning was that cigarette
       smoking may be hazardous to your health.
             Now, Ms. Naugle told us that she was
       familiar with the warning.  And, in fact, I
       brought that testimony.  I think we looked at
       it a couple of days ago.  But if we could go to
       the next slide, she said, sure --
             Or the question was:  Sure.  In '68, you
       said you were aware there was a warning on the
       pack.  What is your recollection or
       understanding of what that warning said in '68? 3666 Answer:  May be -- I can't remember.
             Question:  May be what?
             Answer:  May be harmful to your health.
             And it's really no surprise that, in
       1968, Ms. Naugle would have been familiar with
       the warnings, and would have been generally
       aware of the health risks of cigarette smoking;
       because we know that for a decade or more, and,
       frankly, more, but definitely the decade
       preceding the 60's, the 50's, when Ms. Naugle
       was growing up, there was a lot of science
       being generated; and that science was finding
       its way into our newspapers, our magazines, and
       television.  The word was getting out.
             Now, Ms. Naugle didn't just tell us that
       she was aware of the '68 warning, but she also
       told us in her testimony that she knew when the
       warning changed in 1970.  It changed to:  The
       Surgeon General has determined that cigarette
       smoking is dangerous to your health.
             And Ms. Naugle said she was also aware
       when the warnings changed again in 1985.
       Surgeon General's warning:  Smoking causes lung
       cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may
       complicate pregnancy.  Quitting smoking now 3667 greatly reduces serious risks to your health.
             Now, as we were talking about, and I
       mentioned a moment ago, the 50's science led
       into, and culminated, really, in the 1964
       Surgeon General's report.  It got huge
       coverage.
             Here are a couple of examples from the
       Fort Lauderdale newspapers.  Now, keep in mind
       that at this point in time, Ms. Naugle is 16
       years old, and she's living in Fort Lauderdale.
       These are the newspapers that were landing on
       the front steps of her parents' home.  And we
       know the Surgeon General's report was also
       carried on the national news.
             You've seen these clips.  I'm not going
       to take the time to play them for you, but you
       saw Harry Reasoner, you saw Frank McGee from
       NBC, special evening reports, because the 1964
       Surgeon General's report was big news.
             And it was big news because the Surgeon
       General had concluded that cigarette smoking
       caused lung cancer.  And, as we know --
             Because we've talked about this evidence,
       basically, from day one, right?  Where we are
       now, we have had three weeks of trial; and what 3668 you're going to have to consider -- the
       evidence you'll have to consider for the
       verdict form this time around is that entire
       three weeks of evidence.  So, going all the way
       back.
             We saw huge coverage of the '64 Surgeon
       General's report, but that's not the end of the
       coverage, right?  Because we saw that the
       coverage continued in the newspapers after '64.
             I just pulled a few articles that
       Dr. Parssinen referred to in his testimony.
       And Dr. Parssinen explained to you that he had
       just pulled a few articles because he couldn't
       possibly spend the time to show you everything
       he came across in just the local newspapers.
             But the message was making its way to the
       newspapers on the front page, on Page 5,
       Page 9, in the advice columns, Dear Abby, Ann
       Landers, the medical columns.
             And it wasn't just information about the
       health risks of smoking, that smoking could be
       deadly and that it's dangerous, but also
       information about quitting and how to go about
       quitting.
             We know that information was carried 3669 through all kinds of people, as you saw clips
       from the local news, from the -- WGTV (sic) out
       of Miami.  You saw those during the course of
       the trial.
             We know it was carried in public service
       announcements.  The American Lung Association,
       the American Cancer Society, getting the word
       out that cigarette smoking was dangerous.
             And we know that the same information was
       finding its way into popular magazines,
       including women's magazines, Good Housekeeping,
       Mademoiselle, Vogue.
             Word was out, and had been out for a
       while -- and was getting out throughout the
       60's and 70's -- that cigarette smoking was
       dangerous, that it was difficult to quit, but
       that there were methods available if you wanted
       to quit, that it was possible to quit.
             And we've seen documents where --
       documents from Philip Morris, some showed to
       you this morning, referring to nicotine as a
       drug.
             Well, Mr. Quigley and I are splitting our
       time today, and he's going to actually address
       the fraud claim. 3670 I know Mr. Kelley spent his time, in his
       first part of his argument, completely on fraud
       and punitive damages; and Mr. Quigley is
       actually going to address those questions, but
       just a little preview.
             A lot of the information, the same things
       that were showing up in Philip Morris'
       documents were also showing up in the public
       arena, people referred to as "nicotine
       addicts," the fact that nicotine is a drug.
             Now, Mr. Kelley spent his time this
       morning on fraud and punitive damages.  I
       assume he will address the other claims when he
       gets back up, and I won't get a chance to
       respond at that point, but there are other
       claims in this case.  This case isn't just
       about fraud.  Two of --
             And if we could go to Slide Number 1,
       Michael.
             On the verdict form, these are the first
       two questions you're going to reach:  Was the
       negligence on the part of Philip Morris USA a
       legal cause of Lucinda Naugle's emphysema?
             Number 2:  Were the defective cigarettes,
       by reason of their design, manufactured by 3671 Philip Morris USA, a legal cause of Lucinda
       Naugle's emphysema?
             And it's as I was explaining earlier.
       This case, this verdict form, is about what
       impact -- what you've heard about in the last
       three weeks -- what impact did that have on
       Ms. Naugle.
             And you're going to be instructed by the
       Judge, much like you were in Phase 1, about
       legal cause, and the fact that legal cause,
       another way to look at it, is it's sometimes
       referred to as "but for" causation.
             And, so, the question that you're going
       to be answering here is, but for -- but for
       Philip Morris' negligence, but for the defect
       in cigarettes, would Ms. Naugle have gotten
       emphysema.  And that's where Ms. Naugle's
       evidence and Philip Morris' evidence intersect.
             The question is, you've got to look at
       every piece of evidence and say, how does this
       help me answer the question of whether Philip
       Morris' conduct had an impact or an effect on
       Ms. Naugle.
             And the reason we spent some time going
       through, just again, what Ms. Naugle -- what 3672 information was available to her, what she
       knew, is that if she already had the
       information, if she already knew that
       cigarettes were risky, if she already knew that
       they were difficult to quit, then any
       information that plaintiff's claim wasn't
       disclosed couldn't have had an impact on her.
             If you already know the information, then
       the fact that somebody else doesn't tell it to
       you doesn't have an impact on you.
             So, let's back up for a second and just
       deal with the first question, the negligence
       question.  Let's think about some of the
       evidence we heard about the product, about
       cigarettes during the course of the trial.
             We heard that there's no such thing as a
       safe cigarette.  There's no such thing as a
       safe cigarette because when you burn tobacco,
       just like when you burn any other organic
       material, when you burn tobacco, it generates
       thousands of chemicals, and many of those
       chemicals are dangerous, they cause disease.
             Now, that's going to be true whether you
       pull a leaf out of, for example, the curing
       barn that Dr. Werley showed you on one of his 3673 slides, you can pull one of those leaves down
       from the rafters, roll it up, smoke it, and it
       would have thousands of chemicals in it, many
       of which are dangerous.
             So, it doesn't matter if you roll it
       yourself, you grow the tobacco in your
       backyard, or if you buy a Benson & Hedges
       cigarette.
             We also know, based on the evidence, that
       cigarettes are addictive, and we know why
       cigarettes are addictive.  Cigarettes are
       addictive because they contain tobacco, and
       tobacco contains nicotine, and nicotine is
       addictive.
             And, again, that's true whether you're
       growing tobacco in your backyard and rolling it
       up and smoking it, or you're buying a Benson &
       Hedges cigarette.  There's tobacco there; and
       if there's tobacco, there's going to be
       nicotine.
             Now, Dr. Werley told you that the fact of
       the matter is, there's less nicotine in a
       manufactured cigarette like a Benson & Hedges
       by the end of the manufacturing process, than
       there would be if you rolled that same amount 3674 of tobacco up in a cigarette.
             And that wasn't news to you, because
       Dr. Cummings had told you that in the first
       part of the trial.  There's less nicotine in
       the finished product.
             So, there's no question, cigarettes are
       dangerous, they can be addictive; but that
       doesn't answer Questions 1 and 2, because
       Questions 1 and 2 are asking you whether
       there's something that Philip Morris did or
       didn't do in relation to their cigarettes that
       caused Ms. Naugle's emphysema.  Now, let's,
       again, stick with the first question for a
       minute.
             Could we go to the next slide?  The next
       one, actually.
             The Judge, this morning, is going to
       instruct you about negligence.  And I don't
       want to read the whole instruction, the Judge
       will do that for you, but I wanted to focus on
       the bold language.
             Negligence is the failure to use
       reasonable care.  Reasonable care is that
       degree of care which a reasonably prudent
       cigarette manufacturer would use under like 3675 circumstances.
             Did Philip Morris --
             Let me back up for a second.
             Did plaintiff prove to you that Philip
       Morris -- Philip Morris' failure to behave as a
       reasonably prudent cigarette manufacturer was
       the legal cause of Ms. Naugle's emphysema?  Was
       there any evidence of that presented to you,
       that it was Philip Morris' failure to behave
       like a reasonably prudent manufacturer, that
       that conduct caused Ms. Naugle's emphysema?
             You know, there was evidence presented
       that the cigarettes smoked by Ms. Naugle
       actually incorporated many reduction --
       tar-reduction techniques,
       tar-and-nicotine-reduction techniques.
             If you recall Dr. Werley's testimony, he
       told you about the -- could you go to the next
       slide, Michael? -- he told you about the
       National Cancer Institute's Tobacco Working
       Group.
             That was that federal group that pulled a
       bunch of scientists together, both from the
       government and from the industry, and they --
       their whole purpose was to try to figure out 3676 how to reduce the risks of smoking, because
       smoking is risky.
             And, so, what can we do as a
       manufacturer, what can we do as the public
       health community to reduce the risks of
       smoking, because cigarettes are a legal
       product, they're going to be sold, and people
       are going to smoke them.  So, what can we do to
       the cigarette to make it safer?
             And these were the techniques they came
       up with.  Filtration -- and you heard a lot
       about filtration -- ventilation, the vent holes
       that dilute the smoke; reconstituted tobacco,
       the tobacco sheet that's actually lower in
       nicotine and other constituents than the
       tobacco itself; expanded tobacco, that's that
       pop tobacco.
             Now, Dr. Werley explained the reason that
       makes a cigarette safer is it takes up space,
       because the more smoke you inhale, the more
       dangerous it is.  The less tobacco in a
       cigarette, the less smoke is generated, and
       that's why that helps reduce the risk of
       cigarette smoking.
             And permeable paper.  And he explained to 3677 you that's carbon monoxide and other gases
       passed through the paper, instead of down the
       rod to the cigarette smoker.
             And you heard Dr. Werley tell you that
       all of these design modifications, design
       improvements, were incorporated in Benson &
       Hedges cigarettes.
             So, whatever negligence on the part of
       Philip Morris was found in the prior class
       action trial, plaintiff has failed to connect
       that conduct to Ms. Naugle, to her illness, to
       the claims in this case.
             Now, the second question.  Plaintiff has
       not carried her burden of proof on the second
       question, either.  Were the defective
       cigarettes, by reason of their design,
       manufactured by Philip Morris USA, a legal
       cause of Lucinda Naugle's emphysema?  That's
       the second question.
             And if we go to -- can we go to the next
       slide?
             This is legal cause.  This is the legal
       cause instruction for the strict liability
       claim.  And I just want to focus on the end.
       So that it can reasonably be said that but for 3678 the defect, the injury would not have occurred.
             Plaintiff's burden of proof here in this
       case is to establish the defect in Benson &
       Hedges cigarettes, whatever that may be, caused
       Ms. Naugle's emphysema.  Not just the
       cigarette, not just cigarettes in general and
       her smoking in general, but the defect caused
       the disease.  I submit to you that plaintiff
       hasn't carried the burden of proof on that
       claim.
             Now, there's another question on the
       verdict form that I'm going to address with
       you, and that's the comparative fault question.
             Michael -- Thank you.
             This is the question we talked about a
       few days ago, the question with the blanks.
       Please state the percentage of any fault that
       was a legal cause of Lucinda Naugle's emphysema
       that you charge to, and then you'll fill in the
       blank; the percentage of fault attributable,
       based on your findings, to Philip Morris, the
       percentage of fault attributable to Ms. Naugle.
             Now, Mr. Kelley, and Mr. Falzone in his
       opening earlier this week, and I think through
       the trial, told you that Ms. Naugle accepts 3679 responsibility for her smoking, and that she
       accepts fault -- or some fault for her injuries
       in this case.  And, because of that --
             And the reason I'm telling you that is,
       you're actually going to get an instruction
       from the Judge this afternoon along those
       lines.
             If we could go to the next slide.
             In this case, Ms. Naugle has admitted
       that she was partially responsible for her own
       smoking-related injuries.  Specifically, she
       has admitted that she bears some measure of
       fault for choosing to smoke cigarettes, and,
       therefore, was a legal cause of her own
       injuries.  Accordingly, you must assign some
       percentage of fault to Ms. Naugle on your
       verdict form.
             And, again, given the time periods we've
       looked at, the fact that every cigarette
       Ms. Naugle ever pulled out of a cigarette pack
       and put in her mouth and lit came from a pack
       with a warning, it's not a surprise that
       Ms. Naugle takes responsibility, takes some
       fault for her injuries in this case.
             Now, I know Mr. Kelley wanted to know if 3680 Philip Morris would take responsibility, and
       I'm going to address that in a minute; but
       first I want to talk about just what fault it
       is that Ms. Naugle accepts.  We didn't hear
       anything about it from Mr. Kelley this morning.
       I suspect it will be addressed later.
             But based on what we've heard from
       Mr. Falzone at different points in the trial,
       it has appeared to me that the fault Ms. Naugle
       accepts is the fault for smoking that first
       cigarette, for taking that first cigarette out
       at that lounge and smoking it when she was 20
       years old.
             But that wasn't the only time Ms. Naugle
       made a choice or a decision about smoking.
       Ms. Naugle made a decision to smoke the second
       cigarette, and the third cigarette, and the
       cigarette after that, and the cigarette after
       that.
             And it's not that I don't appreciate the
       ruling that you made in Phase 1.  We are not
       disputing the finding that you rendered in
       Phase 1 that Ms. Naugle was addicted.  We're
       not disputing that in any way.  But what we do
       know is that even addicted smokers can quit 3681 smoking, even addicted smokers are in control
       of their smoking.
             Could you pull up the next slide, the
       Benowitz slide?  I've gotten out of order.
       Thank you.
             Now, I put a picture up here of
       Dr. Benowitz, hoping it would help jog your
       memory, because Dr. Benowitz was a witness that
       plaintiffs called, and they called him by
       video, and so we took a screen shot from the
       video.
             But this is -- or these are some of the
       points that Dr. Benowitz made when he
       testified.  He told you that anyone can quit
       smoking.
             And let's remember who Dr. Benowitz is.
       Dr. Cummings knows Dr. Benowitz, and he told
       everybody that Dr. Benowitz is one of the
       senior editors of the 1988 Surgeon General's
       report, and that's the report on nicotine
       addiction.
             And Dr. Benowitz has worked in the
       nicotine field for a long time.  And here are
       the things he told you.  Anyone can quit
       smoking.  And he's dealt with addicted smokers. 3682 In fact, he said, even heavily addicted
       smokers can quit smoking.  Ninety percent of
       those that quit smoking do so with no
       assistance whatsoever.  Even addicted smokers
       can quit.
             THE CLERK:  Five minutes, counsel.
             MS. BROWN:  Now, what evidence is there
       that Ms. Naugle was able to quit?  Because we
       have her testimony that she wasn't -- or we've
       heard some argument that she wasn't.
             Well, the best evidence that Ms. Naugle
       could quit is the fact that she did.  And I'm
       not just talking about 16 years ago, when she
       quit for good; I'm talking about the times
       before that, the times when she would quit
       smoking for two weeks on multiple occasions,
       the time she quit smoking for a month.
             And the fact that she was able to do it
       multiple times is a pretty good indication that
       Ms. Naugle was able to control her smoking and
       quit smoking when she really was motivated to
       do so.
             And Dr. Benowitz and Dr. Cummings told
       you -- and, again, these are both plaintiff's
       experts -- that nicotine is out of the body 3683 pretty quickly, I think within 72 hours, and
       that withdrawal symptoms, withdrawal symptoms
       like irritability and anxiety, things that
       Ms. Naugle told you that she experienced when
       she tried to quit smoking, that those symptoms
       are usually gone within two to three weeks, or,
       if they're not gone, they're significantly
       decreased.
             And even Ms. Naugle, herself,
       acknowledged that she didn't go back to smoking
       on those occasions when she quit for two weeks
       or a month or three weeks because she was
       anxious or irritable or couldn't sleep anymore.
       She said she went back because stress would
       occur, something would happen at work.
             Or, I think on the one-month occasion,
       because of her health issues, the doctor had
       recommended that she was going to have to go in
       for some tests, and that was stressful, and she
       picked up a cigarette.  But, ladies and
       gentleman, those weren't compelled by
       withdrawal symptoms, those were choices.
             Now, as for Philip Morris -- because
       Mr. Kelley will ask again -- what
       responsibility does Philip Morris take? 3684 Philip Morris takes responsibility for
       the fact that it manufactures a product that
       has serious health consequences.
             And when I say Philip Morris takes
       responsibility for that, I'm referring to
       Dr. Werley's testimony, and the efforts that
       Philip Morris has undertaken for years -- and
       continues to undertake -- to try to reduce the
       exposure people get from cigarette smoke, to
       try reduce the risks of smoking.
             But Question Number 5 doesn't say
       "responsibility," it says "fault."  Question
       Number 5 is asking you if Philip Morris'
       conduct caused -- was a legal cause of
       Ms. Naugle's emphysema.
             Again, there's no evidence that anything
       Philip Morris did or didn't do caused
       Ms. Naugle's emphysema.  Cigarettes are unsafe
       products.  People are aware of the risks.
       Ms. Naugle was aware of the risks.
             And Ms. Naugle told you, through her
       testimony, that she was also aware that
       cigarette smoking could be very difficult to
       quit, and that was true even in 1968.
             THE CLERK:  You have two minutes, 3685 counsel.
             MS. BROWN:  Now, we saw a lot of
       documents this morning, and the one thing that
       I want to revisit, that we talked about a
       couple of days ago, is the approach to
       documents; because Mr. Naugle -- or, I mean,
       Mr. Quigley is going to get up in a minute, and
       then Mr. Kelley will have one more chance, and
       we're not going to get to respond to what
       Mr. Kelley says at the end.  So, the caution I
       would re-urge about documents is to make sure
       you understand the context of those documents.
             And here's a perfect example:  Do you
       remember Dr. Cummings taking the stand this
       last -- in this last week?
             And Dr. Cummings told you he has a huge
       document collection that he's the custodian of.
       He said tens of millions of pages of internal
       tobacco company documents.
             Now, he only selected a few to bring here
       to show to you.  Well, let's consider the ones
       he selected.  And I don't have time to run
       through them all, my time is ticking away; but
       an example would be that 1953 handwritten note
       from a sales representative in Nashville, 3686 Tennessee.  Do you remember that?
             And it was a sales representative, who,
       in a handwritten note, was suggesting, hey,
       let's hand out chocolate cigarettes to kids.
       Shocking.  Dumb idea.  Did it happen?
             When Dr. Cummings was on direct, when he
       was being examined by plaintiff's counsel, he
       said that that document was part of the
       campaign to target young people.
             When he was questioned by Mr. Quigley,
       Dr. Cummings acknowledged that he had no idea
       if anyone had ever acted on that document.
       There's no evidence that Philip Morris ever
       handed out chocolate cigarettes to anyone.  And
       that's important, because if it didn't happen,
       it couldn't possibly have affected Ms. Naugle.
             There are lots of documents coming out of
       Philip Morris' files, and the question you have
       to ask is, do I understand how this document
       affected Ms. Naugle.  Do I understand whether
       it was company policy, whether it was ever
       acted upon.  Because you're going to see more
       company documents, and you have to ask those
       questions.
             Now, very quickly, and then I'm going to 3687 sit down, because I'm going to eat into
       Mr. Quigley's time, but I want to just talk for
       one minute about compensatory damages.
             Compensatory damages, there are two
       pieces to them.  One is economic damages --
       that's things like medical expenses -- and one
       piece is pain and suffering.  I just want to
       address medical expenses.
             And medical expenses break down to past
       and future.  I only want to talk about future
       medical expenses with you for a minute, but I
       want to talk about Dr. Coopersmith.
             Dr. Coopersmith came to tell you about
       his care plan for Ms. Naugle.  Now,
       Dr. Coopersmith acknowledged that he never met
       Ms. Naugle, he had never even laid eyes on
       Ms. Naugle until he took the stand in this
       courtroom.
             He didn't talk to Ms. Naugle, he didn't
       assess her current care and treatment, he
       didn't talk to any of her personal physicians.
       He had very little information about her.  He
       did very little homework, but he came up with a
       lengthy care plan of things that, in his
       opinion, she needs. 3688 Now, Dr. Singer came earlier in the day.
       And you remember Dr. Singer treated Ms. Naugle
       for ten years or more than ten years.
             And one of the things we asked Dr. Singer
       is, would you recommend an annual pulmonary
       function test?  And he said no, it wasn't
       necessary to her care and treatment.  In fact,
       he hasn't given her a pulmonary function test
       since 2004.
             Well, that was one of the recommendations
       of Dr. Coopersmith.  I raise that only to
       indicate that Dr. Coopersmith didn't do his
       homework, because the standard you're going to
       have to apply on compensatory damages on future
       expenses is, are they reasonably certain to be
       incurred.
             Well, you heard Dr. Singer's testimony.
       That line item is not reasonably certain to be
       incurred.
             Now, we also heard some testimony related
       to a recommendation for a lung transplant.  And
       Dr. Coopersmith said, based on what he knows
       about Ms. Naugle, he would recommend one.
             Dr. Singer took the stand and said he
       would recommend one, but Dr. Singer, 3689 Ms. Naugle's doctor, told you he's never talked
       to Ms. Naugle about that.  And they both told
       you there's a huge evaluation process that has
       to take place, and they haven't even referred
       her to the transplant team.
             My only point is that with every question
       on the verdict form, plaintiff's bear a burden
       of proof.  There's a standard under the law
       that should be applied, and we leave it to you
       to apply those standards.
             Now, I'm going to sit down and let
       Mr. Quigley wrap things up; but since this is
       my last chance to address you, I just wanted to
       thank you for your time and your attention.


             MR. QUIGLEY:  Good morning, counsel; good
       morning, Ms. Naugle.  Good morning, ladies and
       gentleman.
             Well, this is the last time that I will
       get to talk to you in this trial, and I do want
       to start off where Ms. Brown left off, which is
       to thank you again for your service on behalf
       of everyone.  We all very much do appreciate
       it.
             I've got two issues to address with you,
       and not a whole lot of time to do it.  The 3690 first issue is Ms. Naugle's claim for
       fraudulent concealment, and her related claim
       for conspiracy to commit fraudulent
       concealment, and also the claim for punitive
       damage, punitive damages that Mr. Kelley talked
       to you quite a bit about this morning.
             Now, let me address fraudulent
       concealment claims first, because that's sort
       of the predicate or the basis for punitive
       damages.
             Punitive damages are only recoverable if
       you find that Philip Morris fraudulently
       concealed or conspired to fraudulently conceal
       information from Ms. Naugle that she relied
       upon.  Let me look at some of the requirements
       of this claim.
             Did Philip Morris intentionally make
       statements that were seen or heard by
       Ms. Naugle that concealed or omitted material
       facts?
             Were such concealed or omitted material
       facts unknown to Ms. Naugle and not otherwise
       available to her?
             Did Ms. Naugle reasonably rely on such
       statements by Philip Morris that concealed or 3691 omitted material facts?
             And, ladies and gentleman, there is only
       one witness who testified in this case that can
       answer those questions.  Dr. Cummings cannot
       tell you whether or not Ms. Naugle reasonably
       relied on concealment or omitted facts by
       Philip Morris.
             Dr. Benowitz couldn't tell you,
       Dr. Singer couldn't tell you.  No one can tell
       you whether or not Ms. Naugle reasonably relied
       on concealed or omitted facts except Ms. Naugle
       herself.  She is the only person in this
       courtroom, the only person on this planet that
       can answer that question.
             Now, you heard that Ms. Naugle took --
       she took the witness stand in Phase 1, and you
       heard her testimony.  She did not take the
       witness stand in Phase 2.
             And you're probably wondering why.
       You're probably asking yourself, why didn't she
       come up and say, well, I relied on what -- you
       know, the statements from the Tobacco
       Institute, or statements that Dr. Cummings put
       in, I relied upon those to make my decisions
       about whether to smoke or whether to -- to not 3692 quit smoking or whether to keep smoking.  And
       you never heard that.  You never heard that.
             You know, I'm sure that many of you,
       probably, if not all of you, the first time
       that you've ever heard of the Tobacco Industry
       Research Committee, the Council for Tobacco
       Research, or the Tobacco Institute, was for the
       very first time, the first time you heard it,
       was here in this lawsuit.
             Well, you know what?  That's the same for
       Ms. Naugle.  She told us she never heard of any
       of these entities before this lawsuit.  This is
       her testimony.  It was in Phase 1.
             Ms. Naugle, prior to this lawsuit, you've
       never heard of an entity called the Tobacco
       Industry Research Committee, have you?
             Answer:  No.
             Prior to this lawsuit, you've never heard
       of the Council for Tobacco Research, have you?
             Answer.  No.
             Prior to this lawsuit, you've never heard
       of the Tobacco Institute, have you?
             No.
             I asked her some more questions.
             You've never spoken with any 3693 representative of any tobacco company?
             Answer:  No.
             You've never received any written
       materials from any tobacco company, have you?
             Answer:  No.
             Prior to this lawsuit, you've never seen
       a Frank Statement to cigarette smokers?
             Answer:  No.
             And I asked her specifically, tell me
       about Philip Morris.  Tell me, what did Philip
       Morris ever say to you --
             Did you rely on anything that Philip
       Morris ever said when you decided to start
       smoking or continue to smoke?
             And this is what she said.  The testimony
       is in the record.  You can have it read back if
       you would like.
             Now, Ms. Naugle, in response to one of
       Mr. Kelley's questions at the very beginning of
       your testimony, you said something about they
       said it was safe, and I need to ask you
       specifically, did Philip Morris or anyone from
       Philip Morris ever tell you that cigarette
       smoking was safe?
             Answer:  I don't know who it was.  I just 3694 know that I -- I've heard over the years, and
       even before I was smoking, that cigarette
       smoking -- it wasn't proven that there was --
       you know, there was anything wrong, that it --
       that it --
             Who said it, I don't know if it was
       Philip Morris, I don't remember that.  I just
       know over the years I heard they thought it was
       safe.
             They thought it was safe, not she thought
       it was safe, not Ms. Naugle thought it was
       safe.  She never says, you know, I relied on
       it, I relied --
             That is an essential element.  You'll see
       it on the verdict form.  Did Ms. Naugle
       reasonably rely to her detriment.  And the
       answer to that question is, no, she didn't.
       She didn't.
             I asked her again, by the way, about
       whether or not Philip Morris ever told you that
       cigarette smoking was addictive.
             No one from Philip Morris has ever said
       to you that cigarette smoking is not addictive,
       have they?
             Answer:  No. 3695 And you know what?  She couldn't get on
       the witness stand to say, you know what, yeah,
       they told me that; yeah, I relied.  That's not
       Ms. Naugle.  She couldn't do that.  She told
       you what she could tell you in Phase 1 of this
       trial.  And, you know, she --
             And the reason she couldn't tell you that
       she relied on anything, any statement, is
       because we know what she knew.  She told us
       that, as well.
             I'm not going to read the testimony,
       Ms. Brown went through some of it, but -- could
       you pull up the next slide? -- we know she told
       us in 1968, she knew there was a warning label
       on the pack, right?  She knew.
             I asked her again, by 1970 -- next -- did
       there come a time when you learned that smoking
       could hurt you?
             Yes.
             She said --
             In 1970, she's 22 years old, only smoking
       for two years.  She said, yeah, I knew it could
       hurt me.  That's when she made her first quit
       attempt, okay?
             That is not relying on a statement. 3696 That's not relying on something that she never
       saw, she never heard.  That's not relying on
       the Frank Statement.  That's not relying on
       something that somebody from the Tobacco
       Institute once said.
             And the same with, you know, cigarette
       smoking -- about addiction, right?
             She understood it could be a difficult
       habit to break.  She knew that in 1968, before
       she had her first cigarette.
             I would say yes.
             She knew -- she knew it was bad for her,
       and she knew that it could be a hard habit to
       break, regardless of whether you call it an
       addiction, a dependence, a habit, the
       definition is irrelevant.  The concept is
       what's important.
             And that's why Ms. Naugle did not get on
       the witness stand in Phase 2 and say, ladies
       and gentleman; I relied, I reasonably relied on
       what they said, all those statements that
       Mr. Kelley showed you.
             Now, the conspiracy claim, by the way,
       it's just that claim, but in combination with
       others, and I don't have time to talk about it 3697 right now; but I would submit to you, ladies
       and gentleman, that when you get to the
       questions on the verdict sheet about fraudulent
       concealment and conspiracy, you check "no,"
       because Ms. Naugle did not rely to her
       detriment on anything -- anything that was
       said.  Nothing was concealed.
             To be concealed, she -- she has to say, I
       didn't know the information, I didn't have it.
       She never said that, because she had the
       information; and I would submit to you, you
       should check "no" to those questions.  And, if
       you do, you don't have to go any further and
       consider the punitive damages claim.
             But let me talk about the punitive
       damages now.  Requirements --
             Here's a couple of basic requirements for
       punitive damages.  There are many.  First,
       Ms. Naugle must prove her claim by clear and
       convincing evidence.  Judge Streitfeld will
       instruct you what that means.  Not just the
       greater weight.
             This is very important.  Punitive damages
       can be awarded only on Ms. Naugle's claim for
       fraudulent concealment or conspiracy to 3698 commit -- excuse me -- fraudulent concealment.
             It can't be awarded on those findings
       that Judge Streitfeld had read to you and will
       read to you again.  Only if you find the
       concealment and the conspiracy that she relied
       upon can you even consider punitive damages.
             And also very important, punitive damages
       can be awarded only for harms inflicted upon
       Ms. Naugle and not for harms suffered by any
       person other than Ms. Naugle.
             When I first addressed you in Phase 1, I
       said this case is about Ms. Naugle, and it
       still is.  It still is.  No matter how hard
       they try to -- try to just say just look at,
       you know, statements that were made, just think
       of Philip Morris, this is not the class action
       that Judge Streitfeld told you about where
       those findings came to be.  This is not the
       class action.
             This is Ms. Naugle's individual case.
       It's her case to say how she was injured, how
       harm was inflicted upon her, not upon a class
       of people, but only on Ms. Naugle.  They have
       got to connect whatever --
             Whatever the harm they say that Philip 3699 Morris caused, they've got to connect that to
       Ms. Naugle.  And, ladies and gentleman, I
       submit to you they haven't done it.  There's no
       connection to Ms. Naugle.
             Now, Judge Streitfeld will give you the
       definition of "clear and convincing," but it's
       a higher burden.  It must be -- it must be
       strong evidence and just -- I ask you to just
       listen to all the instructions, listen to those
       instructions.
             And, as I said earlier, it's only on the
       fraud claim, only on the fraud.  You've got --
             She has got to have been defrauded.  You
       have got to conclude, to consider punitive
       damages, that Ms. Naugle was defrauded, that
       information was concealed, she -- she didn't
       know about it, so she acted differently, she
       acted to her detriment.
             And I've gone over that again, and I
       submit there is no evidence that there was any
       concealment with respect to Ms. Naugle, because
       she knew, she had the information from whatever
       source.
             And, third, again, only to Ms. Naugle,
       only harm to Ms. Naugle, you've got to find 3700 that connection.  And I submit it's not there.
             Now, what did they say that Philip Morris
       did wrong that would justify an award of
       punitive damages?  Two things.
             One, they say Philip Morris lied about
       whether cigarette smoking caused diseases; and,
       two, they lied about addiction.
             Again, well, she admits she knew that --
       that --
             Ms. Naugle admits that she knew that
       cigarette smoking was harmful; 1968, she knew
       the warning labels; 1970, she certainly knew it
       was harmful, and that's what prompted her to
       try to quit.
             But let me start where Mr. Kelley
       started, 1953, the Frank Statement, okay?
       Published --
             You know more about the Frank Statement
       than anyone.  I'm not going to show it to you
       again.  But, you know, 1953, the tobacco
       companies came out with this statement, one
       day, not shown in Fort Lauderdale; but the
       point is, Ms. Naugle was five years old, never
       saw it.
             And I asked Dr. Cummings -- I said, you 3701 know, you didn't read a line in the Frank
       Statement where the -- where the Frank
       Statement says that, you know, smoking has not
       been proven to be harmful; I said, you didn't
       read the heading which said "distinguished
       authorities point out."
             And, as you may remember from the two
       occasions, Dr. Cummings does not make an
       admission to me very easily, okay?  I have to
       work very hard to get Dr. Cummings to concede
       something.
             And this is what he said back then:  And
       by 1954, in fact, distinguished -- some
       distinguished authorities not associated with
       the tobacco industry had, in fact, pointed out
       that the connection between smoking and cancer
       might not have been proven; right?
             That's right.
             That's where it started.  Let me go to --
             You know, and then he talked quite a bit
       about CTR, TIRC, and so forth.  We had to go
       through it twice with him, once the first time
       and once in this phase.  They --
             TIRC and CTR gave a lot of money to a lot
       of places, including Roswell Park, including 3702 reports in the Surgeon General, and so forth.
             But what's more important, Ms. Naugle
       never knew these entities existed.  She never
       knew they were giving research money out, what
       they're doing.  It had no connection, no
       connection to Ms. Naugle.
             And that's the important point about CTR,
       TIRC, and TI.  You know, Mr. Kelley had, I
       thought --
             I didn't know what he was going to say,
       so I tried to get ready last night, but he may
       get up and say, you know, Philip Morris knew
       that there were carcinogens in cigarette smoke,
       right?  A 1961 document is what they --
       Dr. Cummings put in, right?  By 1961, Philip
       Morris --
             And he read off a list of things in
       tobacco smoke that cause cancer.  I pointed
       out, well, yeah, they all came from publicly
       available sources, research books.  A lot of
       people were studying it back then.
             And what did Philip Morris do with that
       information, right?  Did they keep it in their
       laboratories?
             I showed you this yesterday with 3703 Dr. Werley.
             No, they sent it to the Surgeon General.
       They made a submission, and the Surgeon General
       even acknowledged, in its '64 report, thanking
       Philip Morris.  They gave them the information.
             And, you know, did Ms. Naugle know that
       there was benzopyrene or polycyclic aromatic
       hydrocarbons in cigarette smoke?  Probably not.
       Probably not.  But when the Surgeon General --
             Or, sorry.  When Congress decided to
       require warning labels on cigarettes, they
       didn't say, put those kind of chemicals and
       constituents on the warning labels; they gave
       people the information they needed.
             And that information is, smoking may be
       hazardous to your health, smoking is dangerous;
       and, later on, smoking causes cancer, diseases
       like cancer and emphysema.  That's the public
       information.
             What's the second thing they said?  They
       said, well, Philip Morris lied about addiction,
       right?
             And, by the way, as Ms. Brown said,
       you've got to take the documents in context.
       One of the first things that Mr. Kelley showed 3704 you was a thing that said, who ain't for more
       money; right?
             If you read that document, what the
       author is saying is, we want more money for
       research.  Who ain't for more money to give me
       research money, so we can conduct research.
       That's what that document said.
             But they said, well, Philip Morris knew
       that nicotine is a drug, it has pharmacologic
       properties.  Well, so did everyone else.  So
       did all the other scientists, okay?  I --
             This was read into evidence, the 1988
       Surgeon General's report that Dr. Cummings
       talked about so much.
             In the very beginning, they talk about
       the history, right?  Pharmacologic actions of
       nicotine going back to the 1800's, okay,
       classic work by Langley and Dickinson, 1889, on
       nicotine's effects in autonomic ganglia -- let
       me just cut through it, because it's too many
       big words -- receptors on cells.  Nicotine
       receptors, 1889.  Early as 1920's,
       investigators were concluding that nicotine was
       responsible for the compulsive use.
             And lastly, Johnston -- it's a scientific 3705 article that I discussed with Dr.  Cummings,
       1942 -- concluded, quote, smoking tobacco is,
       essentially, a means of administering nicotine,
       just as smoking opium is a means of
       administering morphine.
             It was public knowledge in the scientific
       community.  And you know what?  Did it also
       make its way out into the public?  Of course,
       it did.
             Dr. Parssinen showed you these -- showed
       you these health textbooks that were in use in
       the Fort Lauderdale school system in the
       1950's, right?  First --
             These are in evidence.  1957, a number of
       drugs have been found in tobacco and its smoke.
       The most active of these is nicotine.  This is
       the drug for which tobacco is famous.  That's
       what school children were being told in 1957.
             The tobacco leaf contains a powerful
       chemical, nicotine.  That's -- I can't --
             I don't have time to show you all of the
       other references in the popular press.  You've
       heard so much about the definition of
       "addiction," right?
             Mr. Kelley talked about the 19 -- played 3706 for you the 1964 -- I'm sorry, the 1994
       testimony by the CEO's, okay?  1994, a full
       year after Ms. Naugle quit smoking.  It had no
       connection to Ms. Naugle, none whatsoever.  She
       didn't decide to continue to smoke based on
       that, she had quit a year earlier.  No
       connection, just designed to say -- to try to
       get you angry.
             And, again, I'm running out of time, but
       you've seen these -- the change in the
       definition.  You know that in 1964, the Surgeon
       General said there's -- for someone to be
       addicted there has to be intoxication, right?
       1988 changed the criteria, just took it out,
       changed the definition.
             By 1994, did those executives hold on to
       the --
             Six years after they changed the
       definition, they held on to the old definition
       for too long, absolutely; but the bottom line
       is, it had no effect on Ms. Naugle, none
       whatsoever.
             Now, a lot of other documents, I don't
       have time --
             Mr. Kelley referenced the motives and 3707 incentives speech, okay?  Again, a
       tongue-in-cheek speech by someone trying to
       sell a book, a published book on why people
       smoke, okay?  The testimony is there.
             He mentioned the Dow Nicorette gum, but
       when Dr. Cummings was on the stand, I read into
       the record what Dr. Cummings, himself, wrote in
       the 1989 Surgeon General's report about the
       success of that product.
             But what's the important point?
       Ms. Naugle never talked to her doctors about
       quitting.  She never mentioned it.  She
       never -- she never wanted to use the product
       even though it was -- it was available.
             Now, let me move on, because I have a
       little bit of time, I want to talk to you about
       the last part of punitive damages, punishment
       and deterrence.
             And I would submit to you, you do not
       need to deter a company like Philip Morris at
       this point.  We brought you Dr. Werley
       yesterday.  If you are angry by some of those
       old documents that you saw --
             You know, if you were to go to Philip
       Morris today, in Richmond, and go to the 3708 receptionist, say, I would like to talk to
       Howard Cullman, or I would like to talk to Joe
       Cullman, or I would like to talk to George
       Weissman, or I would like to talk to William
       Dunn, the receptionist would look at you and
       not have a clue who you were talking about,
       because those people are long gone.  I assume
       most of them are dead, although I don't know.
       Those people are long gone.
             If you went there, who would you find?
       You would find people like Mike Werley, people
       who have spent their careers and continue to
       spend their careers trying to make cigarettes
       as safe as possible.  Can't make it safe, can't
       do it.
             And he told you how, for 50 years, Philip
       Morris is trying to do that, both on its own
       and in cooperation with the government.  That's
       their mission, that's what they've been trying
       to do, and they've tried to do that in the
       public.
             THE CLERK:  You have seven minutes,
       counsel.
             MR. QUIGLEY:  Thank you.
             There was a lot of statements -- 3709 You've heard a lot of stupid statements
       made by -- I call them stupid -- by the Tobacco
       Institute over the years, and others; but I
       still come back to they had no effect on
       Ms. Naugle.
             But, also, for deterring future conduct,
       think about what Dr. Werley told you about the
       Philip Morris of today.  They've had a website
       for ten years where they say very clearly, we
       agree that cigarette smoking is addictive.
             They've had a website for ten years where
       they say, we agree cigarette smoking causes
       diseases like cancer and emphysema and other
       things.  That's the Philip Morris of today.
             And Dr. Werley also told you about the
       FDA legislation, right?  Philip Morris is the
       only tobacco company that supported that, even
       though it really, really restricts the way they
       do business, okay?
             Here's just a summary slide that we put
       up.  Regulatory authority restricts
       advertising, severely changes the labeling and
       warning requirements and all the costs are paid
       for by the companies.
             I don't have time to go through it again. 3710 You heard it yesterday.  He talked about the
       Master Settlement Agreement.  That's why -- why
       you haven't seen a billboard or an
       advertisement for cigarettes in the last ten
       years outdoors.  All gone.  It's a different
       world, a different environment.
             I wish that those executives from the
       1960's had never said what they said, I wish
       the Tobacco Institute didn't; but the bottom
       line is, that's not the Philip Morris of today.
       That's not the company of today.
             And you do not need, I submit to you, to
       send a message to deter Philip Morris.  They
       operate the way Dr. Werley told you that they
       operate yesterday.
             That is about all the time I have.  I
       would, again, in closing, just ask you to
       remember that this is Ms. Naugle's case against
       Philip Morris, and ask what the connection is
       to Ms. Naugle; and I would submit when you do
       that, you'll find that Ms. Naugle can't sustain
       her burden of proof that she was defrauded,
       that she didn't know, and, therefore, she acted
       differently because she didn't know.
             And I submit to you, ladies and 3711 gentleman, there is no basis to award punitive
       damages, there is no clear and convincing
       evidence to award punitive damages against
       Philip Morris and award those damages to
       Ms. Naugle.
             Thank you, ladies and gentleman.
