          MR. BASS:  Thank you, Your Honor.  May it
      please the court, counsel.  And good morning,
      members of the jury.
    (Jury responds, "Good morning.")
          MR. BASS:  We promised you we would bring
      you a mountain of evidence, and we brought you a 4155
      mountain of evidence.  You all got to see the
      personal diary of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
      and its co-conspirators for nearly the entire
      20th Century, the things that Juanita Thurston
      never got to see.
          But it's more than just how much evidence we
      brought you.  It's the source of the evidence;
      it's the power of evidence; it's the meaning of
      the evidence.  I think I said this in opening
      statement.  But one of the great things about
      being plaintiffs' lawyer in this case is we get
      to prove our case with their own words, not
      mine, not our witnesses, but theirs.
          These documents -- and you learned this from
      the evidence.  These documents that you saw were
      so powerful, so revealing, so convincing and so
      enlightening that the public health community
      now uses them as a source of information to
      write up Surgeon General's reports to try and
      get information to the public.  But, yet, R.J.
      Reynolds comes in here and says it's all
      Juanita Thurston's fault.  From this document,
      from these documents, from these documents you
      learned everything you need to know about this
      defendant, this industry, their intentions.  And 4156
      so now really the only question left is what are
      you going to do about it?  Are we going to stand
      for liars and companies that treat people like
      that just because they're a corporation in
      America, just in the name of capitalism?  That's
      going to be up for you to decide today.
          You see, a jury is a powerful thing.  And
      the courtroom, the courtroom is the great
      equalizer.  It's where a person like Gwen Odom
      can come into court and go toe to toe with a
      company and a corporation like R.J. Reynolds.
      She can put on her case.  She can call
      witnesses.  She can trust the members of the
      community to be fair and impartial, weigh the
      evidence, have a discussion, listen to the
      court's instructions and apply those facts to
      the law and render a verdict.
          On behalf of myself, Miss Barnes,
      Mr. Garcia, and Miss Odom, and on behalf of
      Juanita Thurston, we thank you all for the
      patience, the diligence, the attention, the note
      taking, everything you endured to get to this
      point, because this is Gwen Odom's day in court.
      This is her day in court for her mother.
          Now as the court, as His Honor just read 4157
      you, you know what this is is opening -- excuse
      me.  Let's not go back there.  -- closing
      arguments.  It's our chance to sum up what we
      think the evidence was and how it should be
      applied to the facts, to the law and the verdict
      form.  You all sat through all the evidence.
      I'm not going to rehash it all.  But as the
      court said, it's nice to have a roadmap or to
      know where you're going before we begin.  And
      you're almost there.  You're almost beginning
      what you were selected to do.  And that is,
      deliberate, decide the facts and apply it to the
      law.
          So one thing to think about as you navigate
      the verdict form is what is our burden of proof?
      Right.  That concept has been discussed with you
      all since jury selection and opening statement.
      You heard it in these instructions.  It's
      important to recall that it is simply, simply a
      preponderance of the evidence, an ever-so-slight
      tipping of the scale.  It's not beyond a
      reasonable doubt.  It's not some high attainable
      or unattainable, rather, over-the-moon standard.
      It's an ever-so-slight tipping of the scale.
          And we submit to you that based upon 4158
      everything that we brought you, their own words,
      the witnesses we brought you, the testimony we
      brought you, there can be no doubt that we met
      our burden of proof by ever so slightly tipping
      the scales.
          And so the first question, as the court
      said, as the court read to you, and you have the
      verdict form there, is class membership.  Was
      Juanita Thurston addicted to cigarettes
      containing nicotine?  And if so, was such
      addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and
      death?  And you can see on this slide everything
      else is bolded in black except for the word
      "addicted" and "a."  And I'm going to talk about
      why that is.  But before I do, I'm going to talk
      about the jury instructions and how we submit
      you should think about the case and what the
      evidence is in regards to help you answer these
      questions.
          But before I do, you all should know about
      this.  Whoops.  That's off.  That question, the
      first question -- and you'll notice there are
      different questions, right.  There are
      independent questions, okay.
          Class membership, the first question, it's 4159
      not about fault.  It's not about awareness.
      People can be aware or have heard of health
      hazards of smoking but still be addicted.  Of
      course, we know that.  Those two things
      aren't -- those two things, rather, are
      exclusive and they should be kept apart.  Class
      membership is not about fault.  It's not about
      awareness.  It's not about whether and when
      Juanita Thurston knew or thought that cigarettes
      might be harmful.  It's not whether or when
      Juanita Thurston thought she should start trying
      to quit or should quit.  It's not about whether
      she smoked after the warnings or whether her
      ex-son-in-law, Thad Hayes, when he handed her
      cigarettes told her, "You should quit."  It's
      about none of those things.
          Class membership is about was she addicted
      and was her addiction a legal cause.
          And so back in the class membership slide, I
      simply highlighted "a", the letter "a."  And
      that is because of this instruction.  And what
      you're going to find in the jury instructions,
      and they will be a nice resource for you all to
      have in the back, you'll find that regarding
      legal cause there's really two ways in which 4160
      plaintiff can meet the legal cause burden,
      right, two ways.
          One, in order to be regarded as a legal
      cause of lung cancer and death, an addiction to
      cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the
      only cause.  It can be addiction plus other
      things, right, so that's why we talk about it in
      terms of a legal cause.  It doesn't have to be
      the sole cause.  It can be, of course.  But it
      doesn't have to be.  So that's the first thing
      you should know about thinking about the
      evidence.  And that's why I mentioned that class
      membership isn't about the things that I talked
      about.
          Class membership is about addiction.
      Addiction is the linchpin of this case.  It's
      the thing you should think about and only think
      about during your deliberations on question one,
      because it can be a cause of her death among
      member other things.  So whatever Mr. Furr
      suggests to you should be the legal cause or
      causes, addiction can be addition -- in addition
      to whatever other causes Mr. Furr suggests.  So
      that's important to know.
          I believe that there are two ways.  Of 4161
      course, addiction can be the sole cause, right,
      it can be what we call the but for cause the
      loss would not have occurred, but it can also be
      a substantial contributing factor.
          So really at the end of the day you should
      ask yourselves in the back, ask yourselves if we
      were to take away her addiction, if we were to
      take that away, would she have smoked a pack and
      a half of cigarettes a day for 35 years?  And I
      think we all know the answer to that question,
      because nobody smokes 1 1/2 packs a day for 35
      years if they're not addicted to cigarettes.
      Nobody does that.  Because people smoke for
      nicotine, an addictive drug that the defendants
      obsessed over, obsessed over getting the
      delivery of their cigarettes just right.  And
      that's why it's fitting that the focus is on
      addiction, because, you know what?
          For the entire 20th Century we showed you
      evidence of the focus of R.J. Reynolds on
      nicotine and addiction.  So it's very fitting
      that for you all today the focus should remain
      on addiction.
          Nobody lights up a cigarette 30 times a day,
      takes 300 puffs without being addicted. 4162
          Remember how Dr. Burns explained legal
      cause?  Addiction is the critical piece in
      causation of lung cancer because without the
      addiction, the smoker does not smoke enough to
      cause the damage to the lungs that it takes to
      get lung cancer.  Lung cancer takes years to
      develop.  It takes millions upon millions upon
      millions of exposures to carcinogens, which can
      only happen if you're taking millions of puffs
      on a cigarette.  And nobody does that unless
      they're addicted.  And so addiction is the
      critical piece.  Addiction is the linchpin.
          I expect Mr. Furr will ask you to keep your
      eye on the ball.  And we want you to.  The ball
      in question, one, is addiction and nothing else.
      Some of us are visual learners.  Addiction
      causes repetitive smoking which over time causes
      changes in the lungs, which over time turns into
      lung cancer which ultimately leads to death.
      That's how addiction causes disease.
          So what is the evidence with respect to
      addiction?  Well, we start with the defendant's
      own words.  I'm not going to go through all of
      the documents.  I know you all were paying
      attention.  I know you were taking notes.  I 4163
      know you saw when we put up on the screen.
          But, for example, recall that in 1963
      they're writing internally, we are -- moreover,
      nicotine is addictive.  We are then in the
      business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug.
          Nicotine is a drug.  The defendants knew
      that.  The defendants intentionally engineered
      their cigarettes to deliver the optimum amount
      of nicotine.
          Now, the product itself might not matter to
      Dr. Samuel.  It might not matter to him.  And he
      might not know about it.  But guess what we
      know?  We know that's the most important thing,
      because you don't see nicotine patch addicts
      walking around.  You don't see nicotine gum
      addicts.  You see people addicted to nicotine in
      cigarettes.  Why?  Because it's been delivered
      to deliver nicotine in freebase form to your
      brain in 14 to 20 seconds maximum.  So the
      product does matter.
          And how do we know that?  Well, when you get
      into the back, just look at all the internal
      company documents that we brought to you.
          We also know that addiction is a brain
      disease.  Okay.  Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns 4164
      talked about when you're addicted, it's no
      longer a free choice.  It's a constrained
      choice.  Of course, the smoker has to walk over
      to the pack of cigarettes and pull it out and
      light it up.  But it's what is driving the
      smoker to do that.  It's the same thing that
      drives everyone every day, and that is right
      here, the brain.
          An addiction is a disease of the things that
      sends messages to people and tells them what to
      do.  And that's why a long time ago, the
      defendants recognized that addiction -- remember
      that document?  Addiction is the most powerful
      weapon a prosecuting attorney, a prosecuting
      attorney can have in a lung cancer case.  And
      that's what this is, because addiction is a
      disease, and you can't defend continued smoking
      as a matter of free choice if the smoker was
      addicted.
          Who did we bring you to talk about
      addiction?  Well, I told you in opening
      statement that we were going to bring you the
      best in public health.  And we brought you the
      best in public health.  Dr. David Burns, 35 plus
      years in nicotine addiction and disease.  You 4165
      remember Dr. Burns.  He was our first witness.
      Miss Baker put him on the witness stand.  He's
      published hundreds of peer-reviewed
      publications.  He's written chapters on nicotine
      addiction in the most popular medical textbooks,
      author, editor, senior reviewer of every U.S.
      Surgeon General report since 1975, author and
      editor of NCI, National Cancer Institute,
      tobacco control monographs.
          He's researched nicotine addiction;
      smoking-related diseases; tobacco companies
      marketing to children, history of tobacco use in
      this country and factors influencing smoking
      initiation and cessation.  He's reviewed
      prestigious journals and the Surgeon General's
      reports as well as consumer product as well as
      for the Consumer Product Safety Commission and
      the Environmental Protection Agency.  He's
      taught medical students and doctors on nicotine
      addiction and disease causation.  He's treated
      smoking-related diseases including lung cancer
      and heart disease, as well as nicotine
      addiction.  He's volunteered, local, state and
      national lung associations and cancer societies,
      the NCI.  He served on multiple state tobacco 4166
      boards, control programs, World Health
      Organizations.  And so he's been involved not
      only domestically in tobacco control issues but
      internationally as well.
          Those -- that's an example of the type of
      witness that we brought you, someone who is
      sought after, so sought after that he consults
      with international governments on their tobacco
      control issues.  He's testified for
      international groups, U.S. Congress, state
      legislatures, judges and juries in Florida,
      and -- and when he talks to you about the attack
      on public health, and he talks to you about how
      much was withheld from even the public health
      community about cigarette products, when he
      talks to you about the attacks on the Surgeon
      General's report, those things that you saw, the
      press conference where you saw Bill Dwyer in
      front of the bank of microphones, the press
      conference that called the Surgeon General, the
      number one health problem in the country, the
      things where they said the Surgeon General's
      misleading, he was a personal witness to that.
      He was a personal witness to that.  He was a
      personal witness to that.  So he knows what he's 4167
      talking about.
          Dr. Cummings, he testified this Monday for a
      couple days.  Very similar credentials and
      experience to Dr. Burns, except for Dr. Cummings
      isn't a medical doctor.  But he's a Ph.D.  And
      like Dr. Burns, 30 plus years in nicotine
      addiction and disease.  Published hundreds of
      peer-reviewed publications.  I think the number
      was 366 peer-reviewed publications, 95 percent
      dealing with the issues that we talked about in
      the courtroom.
          Award-winning addiction research, NCI, CDC,
      National Institute of Health.  Again, like
      Dr. Burns, reviewed for prestigious journals and
      Surgeon General's reports, contributed to
      Surgeon General's reports.
          And here's -- there's a few things about
      him.  But here's one that's very interesting.
      He's not a doctor; yet, he teaches medical
      students and doctors how to assess addiction.
      And so I expect one of the things you're going
      to hear is that only medical doctors can
      diagnose addiction.  Well, how, then, is it that
      Dr. Cummings is able to teach medical doctors
      about addiction?  See, as we said before, we 4168
      hope that you learned a lot about nicotine and
      what it does to a person.
          Now what it does to a person is very
      complex.  But determining whether somebody is
      addicted is pretty quite simple -- is rather
      simple.  And that's what Dr. Burns told you.
      And I think maybe those were his exact words
      when Miss Barnes asked him the question.  Well,
      how do you look at addiction, Dr. Burns?  Well,
      it's really quite simple.  I skipped over it.
      It's really quite simple.
          While there are different criteria that
      different folks use, right, you heard about the
      DSM -- and let's make sure there's no
      misunderstanding about the DSM-5, right, we
      brought in Dr. DiFranza, not to say that the
      DSM-5 isn't a way that somebody, a psychiatrist
      can analyze addiction.  That's not what the
      purpose of Dr. DiFranza's testimony was.  The
      purpose was to say that if it's going to be
      used, it's got to be used in the right way,
      especially in the forensic setting.  The book
      itself says and cautions that there's the
      potential for misuse in the forensic setting.
          And so the reason that I didn't ask 4169
      Dr. Samuel any questions is because we had
      Dr. DiFranza up next to say, well, here's --
      here's how you use and here's how the DSM-5
      should be used, okay.  So that was the purpose
      of Dr. DiFranza, not to say the DSM-5 is
      something that can never be used to assess
      whatever it's called in the DSM-5, tobacco use
      disorder, nicotine addiction, nicotine
      dependence, not that it can't be used, just you
      got to use it the right way.  Okay.
          But no one -- there was no definition of
      addiction in the instructions.  But we brought
      you the folks that write book chapters on
      nicotine addiction, Dr. Burns.  He's contributed
      book chapters in internal medicine textbooks.
      So he's teaching -- not only does he teach
      medical.  He's teaching every medical student in
      the country now for years about what nicotine
      addiction is.
          And Dr. Cummings, while he's not contributed
      book chapters on -- or while he's not written
      chapters in medical school textbooks, he's still
      teaching doctors, healthcare professionals how
      to assess it.  And how do they look at it?
      Well, very common sense, right.  The age at 4170
      which someone starts smoking matters.  It might
      not matter to Dr. Samuel.  But we know from
      using our common sense that the age at which
      someone starts introducing an addictive
      substance into their brain and body has an
      impact, especially when that person is a child
      and that person's brain is still developing.
          And the evidence is Juanita Thurston started
      smoking at age 14.  Now Mr. Furr is going to
      say, well, not so fast, not so fast.  Nobody
      actually saw Juanita Thurston smoke at that age.
      Recall her sister, Bobbie's, testimony.  Bobbie
      was emphatic that even though she can't remember
      now, however long it's been, I can't even do the
      math.  60, 60 plus years.  Even though she can't
      remember, she is certain because these were --
      this was her sister.  She was only two years
      younger.
          And then, remember, Juanita's older sister
      and Bobbie's older sister, Christine, two years
      older than Juanita, they smoked together.  Just
      because Bobbie didn't see them or doesn't have a
      recollection of it, she's certain in her
      testimony that she saw it, and she's certain
      that Juanita was smoking her father's Camel 4171
      cigarettes because he was a Camel cigarette
      smoker and he left his cigarettes around.  And
      we know that that is how kids start smoking.
          Opportunity and access.  But what they don't
      know when they start is that they're still going
      to be smoking 40, 50 years later.  What they
      don't know is that the cigarettes are
      intentionally designed to addict them, to make
      it easy for the presmoker and nonsmoker to
      inhale, to deliver, in defendant's own words, a
      moderate amount of nicotine for slower
      absorption, because as Dr. DiFranza explained
      yesterday, you can't smoke a pack of cigarettes
      the first time you smoke.  You might die.  So
      the age matters.  We know that she smoked first
      thing in the morning and regularly throughout
      the day.  The younger you start, the more likely
      you be become addicted.
          Now it doesn't matter to Dr. Samuel, but it
      defies common sense when you're using an
      addictive product, like nicotine and cigarettes,
      that how many cigarettes you smoke a day which
      directly correlates to how many hits of nicotine
      your brain gets matters.  Of course it does.  It
      defies common sense and logic that it doesn't 4172
      matter to Dr. Samuel.  How long you've been
      using an addictive product, that doesn't matter
      to Dr. Samuel.  That defies common sense.
      Because it really is logical.  Nicotine is
      addictive.  If you use an addictive substance a
      lot, there's a better chance you're going to
      become addicted to it.  And if you use it for a
      long time, there's more exposures, the more
      chances you're going to become addicted to it.
          And, of course, we talked about the
      cigarette.  All the cigarettes she smoked were
      between 1.19 and 1.45 milligrams of nicotine,
      smoked the Reynolds with menthol and filter
      vents to facilitate deeper inhalation, and we
      know that inhalation leads to addiction.  300
      hits of nicotine to the brain each day, three
      documented quit attempts, smoked compulsively
      despite harmful consequences.  And during quit
      attempts, she suffered classic withdrawal
      symptoms.
          THE CLERK:  Counselor, 30 minutes.
          MR. BASS:  Thank you.  And so we've been
      talking about our witnesses and Dr. Samuel
      because that was really the main witness the
      defense brought you.  And one instruction that I 4173
      urge you to go in the back and look at is the
      instruction on the expert witness as the court
      read to you.  You have heard opinion testimony
      from persons referred to as expert witnesses.
      You may accept such opinion testimony, reject
      it, or give it the weight you think it deserves
      considering the knowledge, skill, experience,
      training or education of the witness, the
      reasons given by the witness for the opinion
      expressed and all other evidence in the case.
          And so I urge you when considering the
      testimony to consider the source of the
      testimony and compare Dr. Burns, Dr. Cummings
      Dr. DiFranza, folks that the Surgeon General
      relies on to get accurate information to the
      public, compare those witnesses to what you
      heard and saw, and saw from Dr. Samuel.
          Right, Dr. Samuel, never taught nicotine
      addiction, never published, never researched,
      never been asked to do anything for public
      health or Surgeon General.  What we know about
      him, in addition to chairing seminars on
      surviving cross-examination, is that he's been
      paid $800,000 by R.J. Reynolds for his expert
      testimony since 2008. 4174
          What else do we know about him?  That it's
      his view that a woman who smoked upwards of 30
      cigarettes a day for 35 years, exposed her brain
      millions of time to nicotine is not addicted.
      The age at which someone starts smoking doesn't
      matter; how long; how many cigarettes a day; the
      product doesn't matter.
          We know that last year alone he made in
      between 350 and $375,000 for R.J. Reynolds which
      represents 70 percent last year of his forensic
      income for his forensic practice.  We also know
      that since 2012, the first time he testified in
      any of these cases, he's not testified in court
      or deposition for anybody else other than R.J.
      Reynolds.  And what did he come here and do?  He
      came here and really attempted to belittle
      nicotine addiction.
          He wants you all to think that it's the
      easiest thing in the world to overcome, that
      it's no big deal.  It's just nicotine.  It's a
      really weak behavioral reinforcer, things like
      that.  Remember some of those things he said?
          He comes in here and says, Juanita Thurston,
      even though she cried after she relapsed in
      1976, she didn't really want to quit smoking. 4175
      You know why she didn't want to quit?  Because
      quitting is just so easy, it's easy.  If she
      really wanted to quit, she could have at any
      time.  That's what he wants you to believe.
          But we know, we know that that's not what
      nicotine addiction is.  We know that most people
      would like to stop.  We know that from the
      defendant's own words.  We know that many aren't
      able to.  And we know that while people are
      different, while everyone's different, we know
      that for many people, quitting smoking is not
      like snapping your fingers.  It's not like
      waking up one morning and deciding that I'm
      going to have Cheerios instead of oatmeal today
      or I'm going to go and hit some golf balls today
      rather than going to hit some tennis balls.
      It's not like that.  They want you to think it
      is.  They want you to think it's like deciding
      between pizza and a hamburger.  Those are three
      choices, right.  Those are things that you wake
      up in the morning and your brain is able to make
      those decisions free of any constraints.
          But addiction, addiction is not like that.
      They want you to think that it is, but it's not.
          And so really at the end of the day, 4176
      according to Dr. Samuel, to be dependent or
      addicted under the DSM, you have to be a
      six-pack-a-day smoker who loses their job
      because of smoking; who has constant family
      fights because of smoking; who says, you know
      what, I'm not going to go to church anymore
      because I'm going to stay home and smoke rather
      than go to church.
          And, of course, like I said, we brought in
      Dr. DiFranza whose credentials are as impressive
      as the other witnesses, Burns and Cummings.  And
      his purpose was to say, look, if you're going to
      use the DSM-5, you got to use it right, for
      example, criteria four, craving, it tells you in
      the DSM-IV -- excuse me -- five, that craving,
      you find out if someone is craving by asking the
      patient what they're craving.  Well, guess what?
      He can't do that, right.  That doesn't mean that
      there are circumstances where the DSM-5 can't be
      used.  But to come into court and rely on it,
      he's got to have all the information.  That's
      what Dr. DiFranza was saying.
          He's also saying, well, you don't look at,
      you know, Dr. Samuels talked about, well,
      tolerance.  Well, to be tolerant, you got to be 4177
      continue progressing.  Once you get to that pack
      a day, after a while if that's not enough, you
      have to go up to a pack and a half.  And after a
      while, you go to two, two and a half, three.  I
      mean, where does -- where does it ever end?
          But we know, we know that tolerance to
      nicotine doesn't develop like that.  Our
      witnesses told us that tolerance develops in the
      early stages.  Tolerance develops when you're a
      presmoker and you smoke that first cigarette and
      you doesn't need another cigarette for a week.
      Then you smoke your second cigarette when you're
      12, 13, 14, right.  And then maybe you do that
      pattern for a month or two, and then you need
      two cigarettes a week and so on and so on until
      after a few years you become that pack,
      pack-and-a-half or two-pack-a-day smoker where
      you plateau and remain.
          That's why when you think about it and we
      use our common sense and experience is we know
      that when people describe maybe they had a
      parent who smoked or friends who smoked, well
      how much does your mom smoke; well, she's a
      two-pack-a-day smoker, we say that because we
      know that you plateau.  Once you get to that 4178
      amount that your body needs, you plateau.
      That's tolerance to nicotine.  You don't keep
      going up and up and up as Dr. Samuel wants to
      you believe.  So those are just some of things
      that we brought in Dr. DiFranza to discuss.
          We talked about how addiction causes
      disease.  And if you recall, I'm going to use
      the flip chart here.  I haven't got to use it
      yet.  I'm feeling kind of left out.  Let's see.
          Remember Miss Barnes had Dr. Burns do this
      analysis, right?  One pack a day, 39 years.
      That represents 284,700 cigarettes over her
      lifetime.  Pack and a half a day, which the
      medical records suggest Juanita was smoking for
      at least 35 years, 427,050 cigarettes in the
      lifetime.  Doses at eight puffs, we know from
      Dr. Samuels that the average could be ten.  We
      know from the witnesses that it's somewhere in
      between 8 and 12.  So let's just say ten is the
      average.  We conservatively used eight puffs.
      Two -- at one pack a day, 2,277,600 hits of
      nicotine, an addictive drug, on the smoker's
      brain.
          1 1/2 packs a day, 3,416,400 hits of
      nicotine on the smoker's brain every day.  When 4179
      you think about it, is there anything else you
      need to know than those numbers when thinking
      about whether Juanita Thurston was addicted to
      nicotine?
          We also brought you two of Juanita Thurston
      treating physicians, Dr. Winokur whose
      deposition was read.  He was the thoracic
      surgeon who treated Miss Thurston on her initial
      presentation which ultimately led to lung cancer
      diagnosis.  He also said, yep, you know, she had
      lung cancer, was caused by cigarettes and, yeah,
      I think she was addicted.  And the way I look at
      it is I don't use the DSM.  It's common sense to
      me, right.
          We brought you Dr. Koo, oncologist, who
      signed the death certificate.  He testified and
      he told you, yep, she had lung cancer caused by
      smoking.  Yep, I signed her death certificate.
      I treated her at the end of her life, and she
      died of metastatic cancer of the lungs.
      and Dr. Burns -- I can't remember if Dr. Koo
      explained it, but Dr. Burns certainly explained
      it, how that mechanism actually causes the
      person's death.
          And so, was Juanita Thurston addicted to 4180
      nicotine contained in R.J. Reynolds cigarettes?
      Dr. Koo, yes.  Dr. Winokur, yes.  Dr. Burns,
      yes.  Dr. Cummings, yes.  Gwen Odom, yes.  And
      even defense witness, Thaddeus Hayes.  Recall,
      Mr. Hayes when asked if Juanita Thurston was
      addicted said, yeah, I believe she was addicted.
      Recall Mr. Hayes, the defense witness, said,
      yeah, I've seen her light one cigarette from
      another often, right.  That's a witness they
      brought.  And, of course, Dr. Samuels, defense
      expert, says, no.  Was Juanita Thurston's lung
      cancer caused by smoking R.J. Reynolds
      cigarettes containing nicotine?  Dr. Koo, yes.
      Dr. Winokur, yes.  Dr. Burns, yes.  Defense
      expert, none.  No defense expert to challenge
      whether the cigarettes caused her lung cancer.
          And so was Juanita Thurston a class, an
      Engle class member?  Remember, that's the first
      question.  That's where we started.  Was she a
      class member?  Not what did she know and when
      did she know it?  Not whether she heard or
      didn't hear the tobacco company lies.  Not
      whether when she heard those lies whether she
      believed it or she didn't.  Not whether she
      smoked after the warnings, right.  Was she 4181
      addicted, and was her addiction a legal cause?
      And remember our burden of proof, an
      ever-so-slight tipping of the scales.
          And so if you find that Juanita Thurston was
      a class member and check, yes, then the Engle
      findings apply.  But if you don't find that
      she's a class member, if you don't find that she
      was addicted, the case is over.  The case is
      done.  That's it.  But if you do, the Engle
      findings apply.  Remember the Engle findings.
      Smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer.  Nicotine
      in cigarettes is addictive.  Defendant, R.J.
      Reynolds Tobacco Company, placed cigarettes on
      the market that were defective and unreasonably
      dangerous.  Defendant, R.J. Reynolds, concealed
      or omitted material information not otherwise
      known or available knowing that the material was
      false or misleading or failed to disclose a
      material fact concerning the health effects or
      addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both.
      Defendant, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, agreed
      with others to conceal or omit information
      regarding the health effects of cigarettes or
      their addictive nature with the intention that
      smokers and the public would rely on this 4182
      information to their detriment, and then it
      lists the other co-conspirators.  Defendant,
      R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, was negligent.
          And so you've heard that there were four
      claims in the case.  There's what we call a
      product defect claim, a negligence claim and
      then the two intentional tort claims.
          A finding of class membership and then the
      Engle findings kicking in means that plaintiff
      has prevailed on two of their claims, okay.  So
      that's why you see in the verdict form all four
      claims aren't spelled out.  Only the fraudulent
      concealment and the conspiracy claims, okay.
      Because if you find for class membership and the
      Engle findings kick in, then plaintiff prevails
      on two of the claims.
          And then -- hard to believe we've only been
      talking about question number one.  Question
      two, apportionment of fault.  State the
      percentage of responsibility for
      Juanita Thurston's injury and/or death that you
      charge to Juanita Thurston, R.J. Reynolds
      Tobacco Company.  Your answers must total 100
      percent.  Of course, we know that R.J. Reynolds
      believes that Juanita Thurston was a hundred 4183
      percent responsible for her own death.
          The court read you the instruction, though.
      And -- but even starting before that, okay, we
      came into court and we admitted some
      responsibility.  On behalf of her mother,
      Gwen Odom, from the start of the case has said,
      you know what, I think she bears some
      responsibility.  She's been open, upfront and
      honest, and she has owned that.  We owned that
      acknowledgment that there's some responsibility.
      But our admission is not an acknowledgment that
      she's 100 percent at fault.  Because if that's
      what it was, then we -- why would we be here?
      We acknowledge that Miss Thurston had some
      responsibility.  But it's a shared
      responsibility.  And hopefully after you've seen
      all of the conduct evidence that we brought you,
      you all understand that, that when R.J. Reynolds
      wants to put it all on her, you say, wait, wait
      a minute, wait a minute; you sure spent a lot of
      time talking about her, but you didn't once show
      us a document that says, wait a minute, what
      plaintiffs are saying here about your conduct
      isn't true.  You didn't once talk about
      yourself.  Why don't you want to talk about 4184
      yourselves?  Plaintiffs are doing it.
      Plaintiffs are owning their portion of it.  Ask
      yourselves why shouldn't they too?  Because, as
      you've seen, this isn't a simple straightforward
      black and white she smoked after the warning so
      she's all to blame.  This is a shared
      responsibility because of the things you saw
      from R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
          And the instruction is going to be, among
      other things, that when discussing comparative
      fault, you have heard evidence regarding the
      smoking history and conduct of Miss Thurston and
      conduct of the defendant.  And that's the
      analysis.  That's the analysis.  Right.  Was she
      acting like a reasonable person when, in 1948 as
      a 14-year old, she started smoking?
          Well, ask yourselves what was the smoking
      environment like back then?  Ask yourselves
      about the environment that she grew up into and
      how was that contributed to or created by the
      cigarette companies.  Ask yourselves how it is
      that kids start smoking.  Well, that's because
      R.J. Reynolds deliberately studied and profited
      from kids smoking.
          You heard, we started Dr. Cummings' 4185
      testimony walking through how in 1984 R.J.
      Reynolds is looking back over a 50-year time
      referring to young smokers as replacement
      smokers.  Then we started back in time with 1927
      and showed you letters sent from R.J. Reynolds
      to their salespeople to go -- to go to the
      summer schools and line up the customers in the
      high schools.  And then we showed you the
      systematic approach that R.J. Reynolds took in
      targeting youth, designing their cigarettes to
      attract youth, and getting youth to smoke, and
      also the importance of youth as replacement
      smokers.
          But also you learned that in 1927 when R.J.
      Reynolds is encouraging their salespeople to go
      out and boost up and sell their, get their
      products in use in high schools that a law went
      on the books.  And so I expect defense is going
      to get up here -- in opening statement they
      showed this, and they said, well, that means
      since it was illegal for minors to smoke, that
      means it's been known for a long time that
      smoking is something that shouldn't be done by
      kids or smoking is something that is bad.
          Well, if R.J. Reynolds wants you to treat 4186
      them like a person, 1927, this goes on the
      books.  And I think you saw evidence that shows
      they were directly or indirectly persuading,
      advising, counseling and compelling any child
      under age of majority to smoke.  So if it's good
      for Juanita Thurston, it's certainly good for
      R.J. Reynolds.
          They targeted -- teens were targeted to
      replace those dying and quitting.  Right.  We
      talked about replacement smokers.  And you all
      will remember the PT numbers.  You'll probably
      be hearing the letters "PT" in your sleep for
      the next year, but there are a lot of documents
      and evidence.  And I encourage you to look
      through them all.  Of course, of course, as
      Dr. Cummings said, there's about 60 million
      pages of documents available now.
          We showed you a demonstrative about how he
      received documents.  We -- obviously we just
      showed you the tip of the iceberg, but there's
      enough there that we brought you, we believe, to
      meet our burden of proof and for also to give
      you an idea of weighing responsibility.  Right.
          Besides targeting youth, we heard about the
      50-year conspiracy.  We heard about the dip in 4187
      sales.  We heard -- we heard about that there
      was some epidemiological studies coming out in
      the 1950s, right.  We heard about that.  That
      information led to the dip in cigarette sales
      for the first time, you'll recall, in a long
      time.  And then on December 10th, 1953 there's a
      newspaper article that talks about tobacco
      stocks hitting the low for the year.  And we
      know what happens after that point.
          So, really, if you know nothing else or
      thought nothing else or heard nothing else about
      why this conspiracy started, what prompted it,
      you could look no further than falling stocks,
      falling consumption.
          But here's the other thing I want you to
      think about.  What if they really would have put
      the public health above all else?  Cigarette
      consumption was declining in 1953.  What if they
      really would have not stood in the way of
      falling consumption?  Where would we be now?
      Well, I'll tell you where we wouldn't be.  20
      million people would not have died from
      cigarette smoking related illnesses since 1964.
      That's where we'd be.
          But what did they do?  What did they do? 4188
      When their stocks hit an all-time -- hit a
      yearly low, the Western Union telegraph goes
      out, and the history, the history of lung
      cancer, cigarette smoking and deaths is changed
      forever.
          Here at the Plaza Hotel, nice swanky hotel
      in Manhattan where in mid December and for the
      rest of December while folks like
      Juanita Thurston are getting ready for the
      holidays and Christmas and a new year, these
      CEOs and presidents of the companies are
      plotting what will ultimately lead to the death
      of 20 million Americans over a 50-year span.
          And we know, you saw the forwarding memo.
      They got together -- they hire a PR firm, PR
      firm called Knowlton, and they're all plotting
      and scheming together at the Plaza Hotel.  And
      we showed you some of the acknowledgments that
      the scientific director to some of the company
      made, 1953, "It's fortunate for us cigarettes
      are a habit they can't break.  Boy, wouldn't it
      be wonderful if our company was first to produce
      a cancer-free cigarette."
          And so think about that, right.  There was
      not a scientific consensus or medical consensus 4189
      at that time about the cause of lung cancer or
      the relationship between cigarette smoking and
      lung cancer.  And I know that as we sit here in
      2014 that's a hard concept to think about.  A
      time when there was actually confusion about
      whether cigarettes cause lung cancer, a time
      that there was actually confusion about lighting
      up a cigarette and smoking it in, inhaling it,
      okay.  But there was.  There was.
          And why was there?  Because at the turn of
      the century, 1900, the early 1900s, lung cancer
      was virtually unheard of.  That's hard to
      believe.  In fact, if I told you that out on the
      street, you would think I was nuts.  You would
      say, there's no way; I don't believe you.  But
      we brought you the evidence from those that have
      studied the history of cigarette consumption.
      And it was virtually unheard of.
          And so you know what lung cancer really is?
      It is a cigarette-manufacturer-made epidemic.
      We saw the cigarette consumption chart, and I
      think we're going to see it a little bit.  We
      see that the rise in cigarettes starts around
      1913 due to changes in the way the cigarettes
      are designed.  And I expect you're going to hear 4190
      possibly that there's nothing that cigarette
      manufacturers do to make cigarettes more
      addictive.  I think you saw evidence of that.  I
      think you saw plenty of evidence of that to know
      that the design changes, as basic as they were
      maybe in 1913, were far different than the
      roll-your-own cigarettes of the day.  And how do
      we know that?  Because smoking rates sky
      rocketed.
          And then what happens?  Because we know
      cancer doesn't happen overnight.  After smoking
      rates start to increase, 20, 25 years later,
      lung cancer starts to appear.  And then you see
      how lung cancer increase basically charts the
      growth of smoking consumption increase as the
      years go by.
          And so what if rather than the coming out
      and conspiring and putting out The Frank
      Statement, what if they said to the public, you
      know what, public, these epidemiological studies
      they might be up to something.
          THE CLERK:  Counsel, 16 minutes.
          MR. BASS:  Thank you.  What if they would
      have done that?  Ask yourselves what if they
      would have done that.  Ask yourselves about, 4191
      well, what else happened?  Filter fraud, right.
      Filters went from less than three percent of the
      market to over 90 percent of the market.  But we
      know that filters, filters don't do a thing.
      Billions of dollars spent in advertising by
      Reynolds during that time.  20,000 filter traps
      for that smoother taste.
          But internally there was no doubt or
      confusion that cigarettes caused cancer.
      Cigarettes are found in practically every class
      of compounds in smoke.  And then many many
      documents that talk about the fact that what
      they were doing worked, the message they were
      sending to people worked.  They were
      congratulating themselves.  1957, there was
      almost a thank you letter from one head of the
      company to the other saying we'd be in a
      deplorable position if it hadn't been for you.
      And then we know about all the other -- we know
      about the purpose was to create doubt, confusion
      and lie.  We know that it worked.  We know that
      they had -- you're going to have the videos in
      the back, but we know that they had every day
      from 19 -- from January 4th, 1954 until they
      finally came clean.  Every single day they had 4192
      an opportunity to tell the truth.
          So when you're weighing the conduct of
      Juanita Thurston and the company, think about
      those things.  Think about the attacks on the
      public health community.  Think about how even
      today Dr. Samuel won't even admit that the
      Surgeon General's report is authoritative.  And
      that's what -- that's the chart that you saw how
      smoking starts, and it rises 20 years later,
      lung cancer follows.  They had five decades of
      opportunities to tell the truth and save lives.
          Because we know when information as -- we
      know in 2014 we have advanced a long way since
      1953 or the early 1950s.  But if cigarette sales
      were dipping at that time based upon a few
      simple studies, imagine if rather than spending
      $250 billion advertising over that period of
      time that money would have been spent by
      R.J. Reynolds to inform the public.  That's when
      it's really a true choice, when there's one
      voice, when there's one voice.  And that's why
      on the R.J. Reynolds' website today, they say
      you should rely on the Surgeon General, right,
      because an unimpeded message does matter.  It
      helps people make informed choices. 4193
          Now we haven't had the chance yet to discuss
      what the evidence is on Juanita Thurston and her
      attempt to quit smoking, although I know you
      remember it well.  But one thing I want you to
      think about is Dr. Samuels talked about and gave
      the opinion that without ever meeting
      Juanita Thurston, by the way, well, you know
      what, she wasn't really all that motivated to
      quit.  And then he got down and he gave you that
      list, and he said, well, if someone is
      motivated, here's what they do.  They make a
      plan to quit; they announce they're going to
      quit; they seek support; and they do all these
      other things.
          And so really what he's saying is that if
      you don't do those things, you're not motivated?
      So a smoker can't wake up one morning, decide
      they really want to quit and not tell anybody,
      and that means they're not motivated?
          But under his definition of motivation,
      Juanita Thurston did those things, right.  1976,
      obviously she told Gwen, she announced that she
      was going to try, right.  She, Dr. Samuels says,
      well, you got to set a date.  Well, clearly she
      set a date because she tried, right.  She went 4194
      two weeks.  And then she was so upset when she
      relapsed that she started to cry.  If that's not
      somebody who's not motivated and who doesn't
      want to quit and who doesn't desire to quit and
      who doesn't -- and who wants to be a nonsmoker,
      then I don't know who is.
          Dr. Samuels also talked about, well, you
      need to seek out support.  Well, remember
      Charles Osborne.  We read in his deposition.  He
      talked about a group effort to quit.  One of the
      things that, according to Dr. Samuels' shows
      motivation.  All right.  The bottom line is
      this, and you heard it from Gwen,
      Juanita Thurston wanted to quit.  She battled.
      She struggled and, like so many, learned how to
      quit.  We don't know why it takes that many
      times to quit, but what the experts tell us is
      most people learn after repeated attempts how to
      quit.  There's no magic answer why on the
      eleventh time you're successful, on the tenth
      time you're not.  But we do know that you learn
      how to quit, and Juanita Thurston learned how to
      quit.  And just because she quit on that time
      and that day doesn't mean she didn't want to
      before. 4195
          And so what's the percentage of fault that
      we should put on the parties?  Well, that's up
      to you all.  I encourage you to, though, as the
      instruction says, compare Juanita Thurston to
      R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and the conduct
      you heard.  And I submit to you that if you do
      that, you should put no more than 25 percent of
      the responsibility on Juanita Thurston.  That's
      just a suggestion.  It's up to you all to
      deliberate and talk about those things.
          The other two claims in the case and the way
      we're going to do this is I'm going to talk only
      for a few more minutes, and then I'm going to
      pass the baton to Miss Barnes so she can talk
      about the damages aspect of the case.  And then
      we're going to be finished for the time being,
      the defense is going to go, and then Mr. Garcia
      is going to talk to you in rebuttal, if I leave
      any time left for those two, that is.
          So the other two claims are the intentional
      tort claims for concealment and the conspiracy
      to conceal.  And the analysis here is, well, let
      me back up.  We know under the Engle findings
      that these companies did those things.  Now even
      absent the Engle findings we brought you all the 4196
      evidence of that.  And so the question is for
      these, which are separate questions than
      addiction and comparative fault, okay.  This is
      a separate analysis, okay.  The question here is
      did the things that we concealed or omit from
      our public statement, did those things have an
      impact on Juanita Thurston.
          All right.  And so we've never come into
      court claiming that at some point in time
      Juanita Thurston knew -- strike that.
          We never came into court claiming that
      Juanita Thurston never knew that cigarettes
      weren't bad for her.  Okay.  Of course she did.
      Why else would she have tried to quit in 1976,
      right?  Okay.  We don't know what she thought
      about them.  We don't know what she believed.
      But there was a certain point in time that she
      thought, I shouldn't be smoking anymore.  She
      also thought, I don't want to be smoking
      anymore, and she tried to quit, but there was a
      point in time when she probably knew that
      cigarettes weren't good for her.
          But that's only one portion of the
      concealment or omission analysis, okay.  Because
      you're going to be instructed that it's a 4197
      concealment of the health effects or the
      addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both,
      okay.
          So the question becomes and really back to
      the linchpin of the case is, the concealment of
      the addictive qualities of the cigarette.  Okay.
      That's why we spent so much time talking with
      you about the defendants' manipulation of
      nicotine and pH to make them more addictive.  Do
      you think that Juanita Thurston had any idea
      that the cigarette companies were doing those
      things to the cigarettes to make it harder for
      her to quit?  We know now, right.  We know now.
      And why do we know now?  Because the public has
      access to the internal company documents.
      Juanita Thurston never had access to the
      internal company documents.  She never knew that
      nicotine was extracted during the manufacturing
      process and sprayed back in in uniform
      controlled amounts.  We take that for granted
      now because the information is out there.  But
      when -- Juanita Thurston couldn't have known the
      companies were doing that.  She couldn't have
      known that they were sending letters amongst
      themselves telling themselves that the levels of 4198
      nicotine aren't obtained by accident.  We can
      regulate fairly precisely the amount of
      nicotine.  She didn't know about smoke pH.  I
      don't even know what smoke pH is.  But the
      cigarette companies did and do.  And they know
      how to manipulate it just so you get the perfect
      amount of nicotine.  And they do it amongst
      different cigarettes.  It's not like all brand
      extension and line extensions are the same pH
      and deliver the same nicotine.  They're
      manipulating the nicotine levels and delivery
      levels amongst all their types of cigarettes.
      So ask yourselves could Juanita Thurston have
      known that?  Could she have known any of this
      information that came out that Reynolds
      manipulated nicotine and added chemicals such as
      ammonia to increase the conversion of nicotine
      to freebase nicotine in the cigarettes she
      smoked; that Reynolds genetically engineered
      tobacco to possess the exact amounts of nicotine
      to addict?  Could she have known about the
      physical design features and that they were
      intentionally engineered?  We submit not.
          And so when you're looking at in the
      analysis here on the concealment or omissions, 4199
      whether or not their conduct was a legal, a
      legal cause of her lung cancer and death, we
      submit that it was.  And so after you hear all
      of the evidence, we think that you're going to
      answer yes to question one.  You'll then assign
      a percentage of fault.  And then you'll answer
      yes to questions two and three.
          But, remember, but, remember, these are
      separate questions and the analysis is
      different.  When we're talking about addiction,
      the warning labels don't matter.  What she knew
      or didn't know doesn't matter.
          Now I'm going to pass the baton over to
      Miss Barnes who's going to talk to you about
      damages in the case thank you very much.


          MS. BAKER-BARNES:  May it please the court,
      members of the jury, good morning.
          JUROR GAMBLE:  Good morning.
          MS. BAKER-BARNES:  Justice.  Justice is what
      we're here for today.  Justice is achieved when
      you give people everyday people the power to
      right a wrong, to right a wrong.
          And, jury, members of the jury, like each
      and every one of you, make a difference in this
      country.  In this country we level the playing
      field.  We give everyday citizens from all walks
      of life the power to put a stop to wrongful
      conduct, to say, no, we're not going to stand
      for that kind of conduct.
          And, members of the jury, each and every one 4203
      of you has that power today.  Now you may have
      wondered three weeks ago why you were called to
      jury duty.  How did my number get selected?  How
      did I become one of the 266 people that were
      upstairs selected to decide this case?  And now
      you know.  Because today you have the right to
      use that awesome power that our government that
      our courts gave each and every one of you to
      stand up for intentional and wrongful conduct
      that affects human life.  And that's what we're
      talking about here today.  That's what this case
      is all about.  It's about a human life, a real
      person, not just a number, not at statistic, not
      a name on a piece of paper, but a real person,
      her mother who was taken away at the hands of
      the defendants in this case.  Not by an
      accident, not by something that happened by
      happenstance, but by their own intentional
      conduct that they told you about in their own
      words.
          And members of the jury, Juanita Thurston's
      death was a wrongful death.  You heard from
      Mr. Bass all the reasons why.  And you heard as
      a result of the defendant's own conduct, 20,000
      people -- 20 million people died at the hands of 4204
      the defendants, and Juanita Thurston was one of
      those people.
          Now you heard evidence in this case about
      the kind of person she was.  She was a good
      person.  She was a good mother.  You didn't hear
      any witness who took the witness stand or who
      testified by deposition in this case say
      anything bad about Juanita Thurston.  She was
      the kind of person that treated people with
      respect, with dignity and honor.  She was the
      kind of mother that supported her daughter
      through thick and thin, through the good times,
      through the bad times, through the rough
      patches.  Every step along the way she was
      there.
          She was the kind of grandmother that even
      years after her death, her grandson can't talk
      about her without breaking down in tears.
      That's what kind of person Juanita Thurston was.
          Now you're going to get, you've gotten the
      jury instructions in this case.  And so, Baron,
      can we put up the Elmo, please?
          What are we evaluating here?  What are we
      looking at?  And so you're looking at question
      number six, what is the total amount of damages 4205
      sustained by Gwen Odom for the loss of parental
      companionship, instruction, guidance, pain, and
      suffering as a result of her mother's death?
          And, remember, that Juanita Thurston was
      58-years old, 58-years old when she died.  She
      had 25 more years of good life ahead of her that
      was taken away by the defendants in this case,
      taken away from her daughter, taken away from
      her friend.  You know, one of the things we
      talked about upstairs is what is a mother?  What
      does it mean when a child, not a young child but
      when an adult child loses her mother?
          And what you heard in this case from every
      witness was that Juanita had Gwen when she was
      16-years-old.  And from the day that Gwen was
      born they had a bond that could not be broken.
      They had a bond that was more than just mother
      and daughter.  They were friends.  They had a
      bond that brought them through many rough times
      in life.  But every step of the way they were
      there for each other.  Juanita was there for
      Gwen.
          You heard Gwen say, who supported me when I
      had this rough marriage and I didn't know what
      to do?  My mother.  Who supported me when I 4206
      divorced my husband while I was pregnant because
      I had to get out of this bad relationship?  My
      mother.  Who supported me every step of the way
      in my life, through good times, through bad?  My
      mother.
          Her loss was a significant loss.  It wasn't
      just another name or another number on a piece
      of paper.  It was the loss of the most important
      person in her life.
          And so what is it worth when you're
      evaluating?  What is the total amount of damages
      sustained by Gwen for the loss of parental
      companionship, instruction, guidance, mental
      pain and suffering for her mother's death?  What
      is it worth?  To lose the person that means
      everything to you?  What is it worth to learn
      that that person after years and years of lies
      by the defendant now has lung cancer and is
      dying?  What is it worth to, despite everything
      that you have going on in life, to go to her
      house every day, to be there every night
      stroking her head, holding her hand and then
      leaving so you don't cry in front of her?
      Driving home by yourself crying all alone,
      because she knew deep down that her mother, her 4207
      support was dying.
          What is it worth to know that the cancer
      that ravaged her body ate through ribs two,
      three, four, five; spread to her legs; spread to
      her knees; spread to her femur; took over her
      heart and finally stopped it.  What is it worth
      to watch the one person that you could depend on
      in life slowly die?
          You know Dr. Koo had some medical records,
      and he told you that when he treats patients, he
      not only talks about his --
          Baron, can you help me out here?  I'm trying
      to get to the bottom.  There we go.
          -- that he not only talks about his physical
      examination and what he observes and what the
      findings were, but he also talks to the family.
      I was trying to discuss with the family that the
      patient has a terminal disease.  That family
      that he's talking about, that's Gwen, and that
      we should not code her anymore.
          You see, members of the jury, Dr. Koo was
      telling Gwen that she needed to let her mother
      go.  That was Gwen.
          That the family has unrealistic
      expectations.  And she wanted everything to be 4208
      done.  She, Gwen, wanted everything to be done.
      She wasn't ready to let her go, not then and not
      now.  Even now to this day she picks up the
      phone and realizes, I can't call mom anymore.
      She gets in the car and realizes, I can't go see
      mom anymore.  She experiences things in life
      that she wishes that she had mom here to share
      them.  This bond was a special bond.  Her loss
      was a significant loss.  And it was because of
      the conduct, the intentional conduct of the
      defendants.
          And so, members of the jury, when you're
      answering question six in this case, what is the
      total amount of damages sustained by Gwen Odom
      for the loss of her best friend, I submit that
      you award her $5 million, $5 million for the 25
      years, 25 years that they took away from her and
      her mother.
          Now I need to talk to you about punitive
      damages in this case.  And you got an
      instruction on that, too, so we're going to talk
      about that just for a moment.  And, Baron, I
      want to switch from the Elmo, if we could, to
      the slide that you have up there.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Video or slide? 4209
          MS. BAKER-BARNES:  The slide.  I want to do
      the slide first, punitive damages are warranted.
          Punitive damages are warranted as punishment
      of the defendants and as a deterrent to others.
      That is what you are going to decide today.
      That is what justice, righting a wrong, holding
      the defendants accountable and responsible for
      the things that they admitted to in their own
      documents, in their own words.
          Why does our system of justice, why does our
      country, why do we have punitive damages?  Well,
      for two reasons.  We have punitive damages for
      two reasons:  To stand up and say, no, we are
      not going to accept this kind of conduct.  It is
      not acceptable in the United States of America
      to lie and to cheat and to hide and to risk
      millions of lives, millions and millions of
      lives for money, for greed, for profits.
          Today is the day, members of the jury, that
      you have the power, the awesome power to say,
      no, in this courtroom in Palm Beach County today
      we say, no, to this kind of conduct.
          So should punitive damages be awarded
      against the defendants?  Yes.
          One of the things that you're going to 4210
      consider in this case when evaluating punitive
      damages is whether the defendants are guilty of
      intentional misconduct; whether they meant to do
      what they did; whether they intended to do what
      they did.  And you saw that in their own
      documents.
          How many times did you hear from the other
      side the word "choice," what somebody chose to
      do, what somebody had a choice to do.  How many
      times, how many documents did you see where the
      defendants chose to tell the truth, where they
      chose to be honest with the American public,
      when they chose to be honest with
      Juanita Thurston about the dangers of smoking,
      the health risks of smoking, the addictive
      nature of cigarettes; the fact that the filters
      that they were putting on these cigarettes were
      just illusions in their own words; the fact that
      every time you take a puff on one of these
      cigarettes you're risking your life?  How many
      times did they choose to be honest about what
      they knew?  Zero.  That's what you'll see in the
      evidence.  Zero.
          Was the conduct intentional?  Yes.
          Did they intend to do it?  Yes. 4211
          Was there a high probability that it would
      cause injury to Miss Thurston?  Yes.
          And did it?  Yes, it did.  She's not here
      today because of the conduct of the defendants.
          One piece of evidence that I think is
      telling in this case, and you'll have it back in
      the room, you'll be able to read the whole
      thing, you saw letters from children, from
      students to the defendants asking, why are you
      marketing your products to children?  And you
      saw them in their own words write back and lie,
      not just to adults but to children,
      fifth-graders about the dangers of smoking.
          Now I can't think of any other conduct, of
      any other actions, of any other intentional
      wrongful act that could be more serious than
      that.
          Is it clear and convincing evidence?  Yes,
      it is.  Punitive damages should be awarded in
      this case.  We talked at the beginning about
      power.  And each of you has that power today.
      You'll have the power to look at every piece of
      evidence back there in that jury room today.
      And you'll have the power to finally after the
      many many years give Gwen Odom and 4212
      Juanita Thurston the justice that is overdue,
      the justice that they've been waiting for.  You
      have the power today to level the playing field
      and to put a stop to this conduct, and we ask
      that you do.


          MR. GARCIA:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Good afternoon.  On behalf of Gwen Odom as
      the personal representative of the estate of her
      mother and on behalf of herself, I am honored to
      sum up her case for you.
          Three words, doubt, confusion and
      controversy.  Three words that you should keep
      in mind when you are analyzing everything that 4314
      you have heard in the trial of this case.
          You heard evidence that the corporate
      philosophy of the tobacco industry, including
      RJ Reynolds, was that "doubt is our product."
      They knew that they were manufacturing a
      dangerous product.  And they knew that the
      product was addictive and that it could cause
      lung cancer.  Rather than share that information
      with the public and get the information out in a
      proper manner, they engaged in a campaign of
      doubt, confusion and controversy.
          And in this case we have asked you to go
      back in time and try and distance yourself from
      what you know now, which is clear.  Now we know
      these things.  We're talking about what people
      knew back then and comparing it to what the
      defendant knew back then.  And the evidence is
      overwhelming that the defendant had better
      knowledge than the consumer.  And rather than
      share the information, they engaged in a
      campaign of doubt, confusion and controversy.
          And that was just plain wrong.  Any way you
      slice it, whatever your moral compass is,
      whether it's based on religion or what you have
      learned as an adult, or your own -- 4315
          MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. GARCIA:  -- measures of morality --
          MR. FURR:  May we approach, Your Honor?
          THE COURT:  Yeah, come on up.
          (The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
          THE COURT:  What's the objection?
          MR. FURR:  That's a completely improper
      argument.  That's essentially urging the jury to
      use a religious or a moral compass as opposed to
      the rule of law to evaluate the defendant's
      conduct.  Not only does that have to be
      stricken, I move for a mistrial.
          THE COURT:  Response.
          I don't know what you're objecting to.
          MR. FURR:  He's telling the jury to use a
      moral or religious compass not the instructions.
          THE COURT:  "Whatever your moral compass is,
      whether it's based" --
          Okay.  Response.
          MR. GARCIA:  I'm telling them that it's
      wrong.  What they did is wrong under any
      measure.
          THE COURT:  All right.  I'm going to ask you
      to leave religion out. 4316
          Motion for mistrial denied.  I can't even
      tell what you're objecting to.
          MR. FURR:  Can we have that struck, Your
      Honor?
          THE COURT:  Religion?
          MR. FURR:  Yes.
          THE COURT:  All right.  Any objection to
      striking the comment about religion?
          MR. GARCIA:  Sure, none.
          (Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the
following proceedings were held in open court:)
          THE COURT:  All right, ladies and gentlemen,
      you are to disregard the argument which concerns
      religion.  We don't get into that here.  That's
      a higher court.
          All right.  Let's go ahead.
          MR. GARCIA:  The suggestion that this is a
      simple case that should have taken a week to try
      is wrong.
          Do me a favor and flip to page 6 of your
      instructions, I'll show you why.
          And if you would, please, give me the Elmo
      so that I can explain this to the jury.
          The reason why we had to bring you all of
      the evidence that we had to bring to you in this 4317
      case is because this defendant denied each and
      every claim that we made.  You heard it as far
      back as jury selection when the defense elicited
      your commitment to hold us to our burden of
      proof.  And then you heard Mr. Bass on opening
      say, we accept it, we embrace it and we will
      bring you the evidence.
          Whether or not this case could have taken
      one week or the three weeks that we've been here
      was entirely in the control of the defendant in
      this case.  They could have easily admitted the
      claims.
          MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor --
          MR. GARCIA:  We would have --
          MR. FURR:  -- may we approach?
          THE COURT:  Yeah, come on up.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
          MR. GARCIA:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          The suggestion that we have done nothing but
      waste your time unnecessarily is just plain
      wrong.  We have the burden of proof.  And we had
      to bring the evidence to you to show what the
      defendant did in this case.
          You were told at the beginning of the case
      to keep your eye on the ball.  That was brought
      up again today in closing.  The evidence in this
      case has shown that the ball in this case was
      the body of information, the body of knowledge
      that was in the possession of the defendants and
      that they did everything in their power to hide
      the ball.  In fact, when the information started
      to come out that cigarettes were addictive, that
      they could cause cancer, what did they do?  They
      held onto that ball as tightly as they could.
      They didn't want anybody else to see it.
          It has been suggested that we wasted a lot
      of time to prove our case.  We had to do that.
      We have to bring these experts to you.  We have
      to spend the money to do it.  We have to bring
      you the defense's own documents in order to meet 4324
      our burden of proof.  The defense is not going
      to do that.  That's not how the system of
      justice works.
          There has been a suggestion that addiction
      in this case was created for purposes of this
      lawsuit.  And that is just plain wrong,
      especially when the body of evidence that we
      have brought to you has conclusively established
      that they knew their product was addictive and
      they knew that their product could cause lung
      cancer.  Any suggestion to the contrary is just
      plain wrong.
          Just a few moments ago you heard that we
      tried to trivialize addiction, trivialize
      addiction.  And then they get up here and they
      only show you a part of an interrogatory answer
      where Ms. Odom had to provide answers to written
      questions to them.  Rather than show you the
      whole answer where she says, "yes," to the
      question of addiction, they skip that and they
      try and turn it into something else.  That,
      ladies and gentlemen, is called hiding the ball.
      And it's just plain wrong.  It has no place in
      this courtroom.
          Ask yourself, and I remind you again of 4325
      those three words, doubt, confusion and
      controversy, which existed back then and whether
      it continues to exist today in addition with the
      evidence and the tactics that you have seen in
      this courtroom.
          They bring in an expert, Dr. Samuel, who
      tries to belittle the concept of addiction when
      they know that nicotine is addictive and they
      know that they're selling a product that their
      customers cannot do without.
          They try and belittle the plaintiff who
      comes in here admitting her mother's share of
      responsibility and all they want to do is
      belittle her.  That's wrong.
          They go further, they go on to, for whatever
      reason, use the analogy of a heroin addict.  Ask
      yourself this question:  If the evidence was
      that Juanita Thurston shot herself up with
      heroin 30 times a day, would there be any
      question about whether or not she was addicted?
      It's an improper analogy and it's just plain
      wrong in this case.
          Dr. Samuel, who under his standard of
      addiction would not be able to help a single
      soul because his bar is set so high, they want 4326
      you to believe that he's the kind of guy that's
      in the trenches.  And I think what we
      established is that the trenches, when it comes
      to Dr. Samuel, is the courtroom itself.  Under
      Dr. Samuel's definition no one who is addicted
      to cigarettes is going to get help.
          Dr. Samuels [sic] on the stand yesterday
      would not even admit that the Surgeon General's
      Report is authoritative.  He tried to create a
      controversy with regard to addiction.  Ask
      yourself, is that something new, or is that more
      of the same doubt, confusion and controversy?
      What he got up here to say was just plain wrong.
      And the reason it was is that he has an interest
      in the outcome of the case.  He came here and he
      provided you with his $50,000 opinion on behalf
      of the defendant.  And he has made a commitment
      to work on these cases and cooperate with the
      tobacco industry with his definition of
      addiction.
          You were shown a slide and asked a
      question -- "Why is Juanita Thurston different
      than the 40 million people who quit?" -- in an
      effort to trivialize and minimize her struggle
      with quitting.  The more appropriate question 4327
      should be:  How is Juanita Thurston different
      than the 20 million people who died as a result
      of the doubt, confusion, controversy,
      concealment and omission of material facts by
      the defendant?
          What they did is just plain wrong.
          They want to talk about the things that she
      could have done to quit.  Ask yourself this
      question.  Over this entire period of time that
      the conspiracy was occurring where was
      RJR Reynolds [sic] when she wanted to quit?
      What support were they providing to customers
      who wanted to quit?
          Had they come clean when they knew back in
      the early '50s perhaps people like Juanita
      Thurston could have had a chance.  Instead, the
      tobacco companies, RJR Reynolds [sic], made a
      choice, they made a choice to sabotage every
      opportunity that a smoker who wanted to quit
      would have if they wanted to do so.  And that is
      wrong.
          They suggest she didn't try hard enough.
      How hard would they have had to try to divulge
      the information that they knew to the public?
      How hard could it have been?  It would have been 4328
      very easy.  What they chose to do instead was
      wrong.  They went out of their way to make sure
      that information ever reached the public.
          You heard a lot of talk about motivation to
      quit.  What was their motivation to keep that
      information within?  It was money.  They were
      putting their dollars ahead of public safety.
      And that is wrong.
          There was a lot of discussion about the
      statute of repose, which obviously relates to
      these questions about what Juanita Thurston knew
      and when she knew it.  The questions number 3
      and number 4 on your verdict form have that May
      5, 1982 date.  Let me suggest to you that that
      date is a red herring.  That is a
      get-out-of-jail-free card for the defendant --
          MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor.  Could we
      approach?
          THE COURT:  Sure.
          (The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
          THE COURT:  Let me read at the transcript.
          MR. GARCIA:  Sure.
          THE COURT:  Okay, what's the objection?
          MR. FURR:  He's arguing jury nullification 4329
      right now.  He's urging this jury to ignore that
      date in the question.
          MR. GARCIA:  I haven't gotten to the
      argument yet, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  What's the argument?
          MR. GARCIA:  What's that?
          THE COURT:  What's the argument?
          MR. GARCIA:  The argument is what I'm
      getting ready to explain to them is that there
      was still information that they withheld that
      they did not divulge until after that date that
      they continued to perpetuate the conspiracy, the
      lies, et cetera.
          THE COURT:  What's wrong with that?
          MR. FURR:  Nothing's wrong with that, it's
      what he's already said that's problematic.  He
      urged them that that date is a red herring,
      that's --
          MR. GARCIA:  But I haven't had a chance to
      explain --
          MR. FURR:  I'm not finished yet, sir.
          That's equivalent -- well that doesn't
      matter.
          THE COURT:  We better end this case today,
      because you guys are getting really grumpy. 4330
          MR. FURR:  That's equivalent to urging them
      to disregard that date in the instructions and
      on the verdict form.
          THE COURT:  He gets to finish the argument.
          MR. FURR:  I know he can finish the
      argument, but I --
          THE COURT:  So let him finish the argument.
          So overruled.
          (Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the
following proceedings were held in open court:)
          MR. GARCIA:  Ask yourself this question.
      Did you learn something during the course of
      this trial about what the defendants knew that
      you did not know?
          As of 1982 you saw videos, you saw
      congressional testimony that even as far into
      the '90s representatives of the tobacco
      companies were going into Congress and taking an
      oath to tell not just the truth, not just the
      whole truth, but nothing but the truth, and they
      were still withholding information from the
      public.  They denied that nicotine was addictive
      and they were equivocal on whether or not
      cigarettes caused lung cancer.  And being
      equivocal is the same as denying.  They were 4331
      still concealing the information.  They were
      still concealing the information from Juanita
      Thurston after this May 5, 1982 date.
          And when they got up there and did that in
      front of Congress, in front of everybody in this
      country, it was plain wrong.
          Now, you heard a lot from the defense about
      the company documents that we had to bring to
      you, not the defense.  We didn't hear anything
      in their closing about their counterpropaganda
      machine and how it undermined the ability of
      smokers to quit.
          The testimony of Juanita Thurston through
      her daughter is, if I had known then what I know
      now, I would have quit.
          If she had known that smoking caused lung
      cancer, she would have quit sooner.  To suggest
      that knowing that smoking is bad or harmful in a
      general sense without knowing the specific
      effects, when they knew that it could cause lung
      cancer doesn't cut the mustard.
          You will have in evidence the following
      document.  It's a Federal Trade Commission
      Report dated May 1981 that gives you some sense
      of what the public knew.  It states that "Based 4332
      upon an analysis of all the data reviewed in its
      entirety, the FTC staff has concluded that there
      appear to be such a significant gap in consumer
      knowledge that a substantial portion of the
      population does not know how dangerous smoking
      is, or whether the dangers of smoking apply to
      them."
          You'll have that with you in your
      deliberation room, but there's more.  This is a
      summary of the data.  "Projections nationwide
      indicate that some Americans still do not even
      know that smoking is hazardous to your health.
      Given that there are approximately 54 million
      smokers in this country, this data suggests that
      millions of Americans who smoke still do not
      know that smoking is hazardous to your health."
          Ask yourself this question.  These documents
      are from the '80s.  What did RJR Reynolds [sic]
      know at that time that they were withholding
      from the public?
          You heard some discussion about the labels.
      And you'll have this document in evidence, which
      indicates that "The majority of people do not
      think smoking is addictive."
          With regard to the adequacy of the labels, 4333
      there was still a belief that the current
      warnings, the warnings even into the '80s, were
      ineffective.  "There are two major objective
      indicia of the ineffectiveness of the current
      warning discussed in detail below.
          "First, as the staff's investigation of
      consumer knowledge has demonstrated, a
      substantial portion of the public remains
      uninformed about the hazards of smoking.
          "Second, the tests conducted by the FTC
      indicate that the warning is neither noticed nor
      read by the vast majority of people."
          Did these guys tell the public what they
      knew?  You saw the video.  Did they do the right
      thing?
          Most of the people who smoked wanted to
      stop, but were unable to do so.  This is
      their -- the documents that you have in
      evidence.  Even into the '80s did the tobacco
      companies come clean?
          You saw a slide regarding awareness of
      events in Juanita Thurston's life and the many
      opportunities she had to learn of the
      information that the tobacco companies knew.
      You saw a slide that said that she had no doubt 4334
      and no confusion about what she knew.  How many
      awareness events were you provided with where
      RJR came clean and informed the public about
      what they knew?
          It's been argued to you that there's no
      evidence that she relied on any of their
      messages, and yet you know from the evidence
      that she smoked filtered cigarettes.  And you
      learned in the evidence in this case that
      filtered cigarettes was a fiction created by the
      tobacco companies as a reassurance product to
      let people know that it was still safe to smoke,
      as a way to intercept people who tried to quit.
          You heard the defense talk about the
      impeachment of witnesses.  And if you took notes
      and recall the testimony, you have to ask
      yourself this question:  Did the witnesses
      really testify inconsistently with their prior
      answers, or was this merely a courtroom tactic
      to generate a number of counts for the number of
      times a witness was shown a transcript?  Ask
      yourself --
          MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor.  Can we
      approach?
          THE COURT:  Sure, come on up. 4335
          (The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
          THE COURT:  What's the objection?
          MR. FURR:  Objection, it's improper
      argument.  It's no different than when Mr. Bass
      objected when I said a fast one was being pulled
      this morning.  This is claiming that I did
      something improper with a technique in
      impeaching the witnesses.  And I object to the
      attack on defense counsel who is defending the
      case.
          THE COURT:  What else you got?
          MR. FURR:  That's it.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          (Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the
following proceedings were held in open court:)
          THE COURT:  Objection overruled.
          MR. GARCIA:  Were the witnesses allowed to
      explain their answers fully, or were they
      intercepted at every turn?
          You heard about the grant process through
      the TIRC and how it did all of this good work to
      generate books and published works.  Ask
      yourself this question, was that grant process
      legitimate, or was it a front?  You will have 4336
      documents that confirm that from within they
      knew that this contra-propaganda machine was
      nothing more than a tool that was set up in
      order to conceal the truth from the public and
      to manipulate the data and the research that was
      getting out to them.
          You'll have this in evidence with regard to
      the scientists that were retained.  And you
      remember Dr. DiMarco and his belief that the
      scientists that were retained were nothing more
      than people that were hired to pay lip service
      to the industry and agree and act as a defensive
      front for the industry.
          You also heard reference, once again, to
      this less carcinogenic product called Premier
      that RJR spent a billion dollars to develop
      right at the same time as Juanita Thurston was
      trying to quit.  Ask yourself this question:
      What was RJR doing at the time that they were
      developing this less carcinogenic product?  Had
      they come clean with what they knew about
      cigarettes, or were they still withholding the
      information?
          And, lastly, who had to bring you that
      evidence?  We did. 4337
          I think you've heard a number of times the
      defense argue that with regard to the damages in
      this case that what we are asking you to do is
      to make Gwen Odom a very wealthy person.  And
      nothing could be more offensive to her.  What
      this process is designed to do is to even the
      score, level the playing field.  So far the
      defendant and the tobacco industry have a score
      of 1.  They took her mother from her.  Gwen
      Odom's score is zero.  And the purpose of this
      system is to even the score.  Even the score.
      And the way our justice system works is through
      a system of compensation.
          You've got the jury instructions before you.
      They tell you what is fair and reasonable, and
      that's what you should do in light of all of the
      evidence.  But that argument about making her a
      wealthy person is simply designed to inflame
      you.  It is not designed to allow you to fairly
      evaluate the case and it's just plain wrong.
      It's nothing more than a distraction.
          At the end of the day you have to ask
      yourself this question:  In light of the fact
      that we had to bring you all of this evidence,
      what did the defense bring to you?  Did they 4338
      bring evidence, or did they simply create more
      doubt, confusion --
          MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor.  Can we
      approach?
          MR. GARCIA:  -- and controversy?
          THE COURT:  You can approach.
          (The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
          THE COURT:  You need a bathroom break?
          MR. FURR:  My objection is it's --
          THE COURT:  Oh, it's an objection?
          MR. FURR:  Yeah, it's more of the same.
          THE COURT:  Why?
          MR. FURR:  I'm objecting to him claiming
      that the way we have defended this case is
      improper.
          THE COURT:  What else you got?
          MR. FURR:  That's it.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          (Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the
following proceedings were held in open court:)
          MR. GARCIA:  Shut the Elmo off, whoever has
      got it.
          You'll see the evidence consisting of all of
      the internal documents which we have brought to 4339
      you.  And you'll have a chance to weigh it
      against what the defense brought.
          This is a case for wrongful death.  What did
      the defense bring to you?  They brought you a
      $50,000 witness who was brought here to belittle
      the concept of addiction.  And they insisted
      that this object be put into evidence.  Her
      mother died from addiction to nicotine in
      cigarettes.  And what did they bring to you?  A
      picture of a skeleton smoking a cigarette.
          What does this have to do with the claims
      being asserted in this case?  This is wrong.
          Thank you.
