          MR. FURR:  Yes, sir.  Good morning, ladies
      and gentlemen, counsel, and perhaps most
      importantly, Robyn, are we ready?
          MS. HUGHES:  Yes.
          MR. FURR:  Only one possible place to start,
      and that's to thank you for your patience.  But
      you sure had to be patient in this case.  This
      case has taken a lot longer to try than it
      should have.  This case has taken about three
      weeks to try.  It probably should have taken
      about one week to try.
          The very first thing I suggested to you 4213
      during opening statement was that this is really
      a pretty simple case.  This is a case about one
      smoker and one smoker only, Juanita Thurston.
      This is not the class action trial.  That case
      has been tried.  That's over and done with.
      This is not a case about other smokers.  It's
      not a case about other smokers who have smoked
      over the years and developed smoking-related
      disease whom you know nothing about.  It's not a
      case about cigarettes in general.  It's not a
      case about company conduct in general.
          It's a case about one smoker and it's
      about -- really, it's Miss Odom's claim that she
      should be made -- we now know that she's
      requesting you to make her a very wealthy person
      because her mother smoked cigarettes, even
      though she knew that she was risking developing
      lung cancer while she did so and even though she
      had the ability to quit.  Well, she continued to
      do so because she enjoyed smoking and because
      she believed she had a right to make that
      choice, and she did.  And now Gwen is asking you
      to make her a very wealthy person.
          When you get to the verdict form again,
      you're going to see, and we'll look at this 4214
      today, every verdict form question except the
      very last one is about Juanita Thurston.  And we
      suggested to you at the start of the case that
      as you listen to the evidence, if it's not about
      Miss Thurston, it's not going to be very helpful
      to you in deciding the issues in this case.
      Yet, for most of the past two weeks, the
      plaintiffs have spent most of their time putting
      on evidence that had nothing to do with
      Juanita Thurston or the issues you have to
      decide.  They spent most of their time reproving
      the Engle findings.  They spent a lot of this
      case showing you evidence that they said
      demonstrated that the defendant, that defendant,
      R.J. Reynolds, concealed information about the
      dangers of smoking in the '50s, '60s, '70s.
          But when you see your verdict form, you're
      going to see that none of that matters
      whatsoever to the question before you.  The only
      question before you about concealment is whether
      Miss Odom died because she didn't know that
      smoking was dangerous or addictive because
      R.J. Reynolds concealed that information from
      her after May 5th, 1982.  That's the legal
      question before you.  And that's why you're darn 4215
      right I'm going to ask you to keep your eye on
      the ball, because we're here to decide specific
      legal questions using specific legal
      instructions.  It's not some type of general
      referendum on whether you like tobacco companies
      or like them whether you approve of their
      conduct or don't approve.  We're here to decide
      whether Miss Odom has met her burden of proof to
      prove specific legal claims that she's brought
      here.
          Very little of the evidence that you heard
      during most of the trial actually dealt with
      proving Miss Odom's case.  Frankly, most of it
      was designed to distract you and to make you
      angry so that your anger and emotion would cloud
      your judgment and keep you from focusing on the
      specific legal claims that you have to decide.
      That's why it's going to be important to read
      very carefully those instructions and the
      verdict form and not allow you to be distracted
      from the real issues.
          And that distraction was done because as we
      walk through the evidence, I submit that you
      will see that there's been a complete failure by
      the plaintiffs to actually prove the legal 4216
      claims in this case.
          However, they did make some serious claims,
      and they put a lot of evidence before you that I
      recognize could be distracting, so I'm going to
      spend a few minutes before I get started.  Even
      though this is what the case is about, ladies
      and gentlemen, I'm going to spend a few minutes
      before I get started talking to you about some
      of that conduct evidence in general and setting
      the record straight on what it was and what it
      wasn't and whether it had any relationship to
      Miss Odom so we can sort of clear the air and
      put that behind us and focus on the issues in
      this case.
          I'm sure most of you have heard the
      expression "red herring" and that you know what
      a red herring is.  It's a figure of speech
      that's used to refer to information that is a
      distraction and diverts your attention from the
      actual issue before you.  A red herring causes
      you to take your eye off the ball.  I would
      suggest to you there have been a number of red
      herrings put in this courtroom and I want to
      start right there.
          First, this whole issue of addiction design. 4217
      You've heard over and over, and you heard from
      Mr. Bass this morning that R.J. Reynolds has
      done something to make its cigarettes as
      addictive as possible.  But what has the actual
      evidence been?  Because what you saw throughout
      this trial is there would be allegations made,
      and then you would see on cross-examination
      those allegations actually meant nothing in the
      end.
          First, you know that cigarettes are
      dangerous and addictive by nature.  Dr. Cummings
      told you nicotine occurs natural.  It's in the
      plant as it grows.  If you pick a leaf from the
      field, dry it, cure it so you can smoke it,
      inhale it, it will be addictive.  Nicotine
      occurs naturally, not because tobacco companies
      put it in.
          In fact, you've heard that during the
      manufacturing process, R.J. Reynolds takes some
      of the nicotine out, so there's less nicotine in
      a cigarette than there would be in the same
      weight of tobacco.  This, though, the third
      point, I believe, ladies and gentlemen, actually
      answers all of the design allegations that you
      have heard during this case.  You've heard all 4218
      kinds of claims that R.J. Reynolds did this or
      failed to do that or added this or took this
      out, all kinds of claims that R.J. Reynolds had
      done something to make cigarettes more addictive
      and dangerous than they should be.
          On cross-examination Dr. Cummings admitted
      to you that his own studies showed that
      roll-your-own cigarettes are more dangerous and
      addictive than manufactured cigarettes.  If the
      addition of R.J. Reynolds of ammonia or a
      filter, vent holes or any of those things made
      cigarettes more dangerous, how could this be?
      How could it be that roll-your-own cigarettes
      are more dangerous and addictive than
      manufactured cigarettes?
          It's simple.  Because R.J. Reynolds has done
      nothing to make their cigarettes more dangerous
      and addictive.  The second thing I think we
      should talk about, another red herring, if you
      will, is this attempt to turn a behavioral
      issue, the addictive use of a substance into a
      brain disease.  It sounds ominous, it's designed
      to sound like that by the plaintiffs' witnesses
      in this case.  You've been told that actually
      it's nothing more than the way our brain works 4219
      in everything we do in life.  The way we
      experience life is through the release of
      neurotransmitters in our brains and everything
      we do changes our brains.  The witnesses even
      told you that by virtue of being here and
      meeting you all and testifying to you that their
      brains have been changed by this experience.
          What you know, though, is that nicotine
      addiction does not permanently change the
      brains.  Everybody agrees after three weeks, the
      receptors go back to normal, and perhaps more
      importantly for the real issues in this case,
      you know that it doesn't interfere with a
      smoker's ability to understand the dangers of
      smoking or to make the choice to quit smoking.
          And, finally, nicotine addiction does not
      prevent smokers from quitting permanently.
      Although sometimes we had to drag it out of them
      by impeaching them with their prior testimony,
      you now know that every witness in this case
      ultimately admitted to you that any smoker can
      quit smoking.
          Just like throughout the case, you heard a
      lot about youth marketing.  It's a red herring.
      This is a case about Juanita Thurston. 4220
          And, you know, Mr. Bass told you I was going
      to stand up here and say "not so fast," "not so
      fast."  You're darn right I'm going to say not
      so fast when someone tries to pull a fast one on
      you.
          MR. BASS:  Objection.  Improper argument.
          THE COURT:  Come on up.
SIDEBAR CONFERENCE:
    (The following proceedings were had before the
    Court outside the presence of the jury:)
          THE COURT:  Usually the comment "when
      someone tries to pull a fast one," "they're
      pulling a fast one" is not allowed.  Why are you
      using it?
          MR. FURR:  I thought it was -- the door was
      open to it by the -- by his argument.
          THE COURT:  No.
          MR. FURR:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  It's not.  And I'm going to have
      to tell the jury to disregard that.
          MR. FURR:  Okay.  I understand.
END OF SIDEBAR CONFERENCE
    (The following proceedings were had before the
    Court and jury:)
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, you are to 4221
      disregard the comment that somebody is pulling a
      fast one on somebody here.  That's improper
      argument.
          MR. FURR:  Let's talk about what we know
      about whether or not Juanita Thurston became a
      regular smoker as a youth.  You know that the
      plaintiffs' witnesses admitted to you that
      Juanita -- that the medical records indicate
      that Juanita started smoking somewhere around
      the age of 18 after she'd already had her
      daughter, Gwen, and moved in with John Stewart.
      You also know that the earliest that any witness
      actually saw her smoke was at age 23.  How could
      she have been a regular smoker using cigarettes
      every day if no one ever saw her smoke before
      age 23?
          You know you were told that Bobbie Newsome,
      her sister, said that she was certain that
      Juanita started at age 14.  But when she was
      asked to tell us what the basis was for her
      certainty, she told us actually, I never saw her
      smoke until after she moved out of the house;
      she never told me that she smoked before after
      she moved out of the house.  And, actually, I
      don't know what year she began smoking.  I don't 4222
      know why she began smoking.  I don't know how
      she began smoking.  You know when we asked
      Bobbie to explain to us for certain, that's what
      she told us.
          In the end what Dr. Burns told you is that
      based upon his review, this is their witness.
      Dr. Burns, based upon his review of all the
      evidence, he concluded that Juanita Thurston
      began being a regular daily smoker at around age
      23.  There's just zero proof that she became a
      regular daily smoker as an underage youth.
          Another issue that I want to talk about with
      respect to the plaintiffs' claim, evidence about
      the corporate conduct and cigarettes in this
      case.  Before we can get back to what we should
      be talking about is that I submit there are
      really three simple truths that respond to the
      whole misconduct claim that you've heard.
      First, you've heard lots of claims that the
      tobacco companies concealed that smoking was
      dangerous.  But plaintiffs' witnesses admitted
      to you that everybody knew that smoking was
      dangerous in the 1950s.
          You've heard lots of discussion about
      addiction, but the plaintiffs' witness's 4223
      admitted to you that anybody can quit.  And
      you've heard lots of discussions about cigarette
      design, but the plaintiffs' witnesses told you
      that cigarettes can not be made safe.
          Three simple truths:  Everybody knew;
      anybody can quit; and you can't make them safe.
      That's the context in which our country has
      dealt with the issue of smoking.  And our
      country determined that, in fact, the public
      policy of this country would be to allow the
      manufacture and sale and consumption of
      cigarettes to be legal.  And our Congress
      dictated what warnings would accompany those
      cigarettes.
          Back to where we should be, Miss Thurston.
      Now I want to begin by telling you that I think
      not only is it a simple case, there are five
      simple facts that really answer all the
      questions that you have to answer on your
      verdict form.  And we looked at those in opening
      statement.
          Robyn, could I have that first board?
      Thanks.  Thank you.  I wasn't sure how I was
      going to stand upside-down with this crutch.
      That would be quite the challenge. 4224
          Okay.  Here's what you know the evidence
      demonstrates unequivocally.  Juanita Thurston
      was consistently warned about the dangers of
      smoking from the time she was a child.
          It's clear that Juanita Thurston knew that
      smoking was dangerous and addictive before
      May 5th, 1982.  We suggested to you from the
      beginning of this case that you now see why when
      you heard the instructions read that May 5th,
      1982 is the measure stick that you are required
      to use under the rule of law in this case to
      assess whether or not information was concealed
      from Juanita that was a legal cause of her
      death.
          You know that she always had the ability to
      quit smoking and prevent her own death.
      Gwen Odom has admitted as much.  The evidence
      demonstrates as true.  We're going to walk
      through that, because you know that Gwen has
      admitted that Juanita is responsible for
      starting to smoke, continuing to smoke and not
      stopping sooner.  That doesn't leave much left,
      does it?
          Robyn, could we go to the verdict form
      question one, please? 4225
          MS. HUGHES:  Okay.
          MR. FURR:  Thank you.  Okay.  You've saw
      this before.  The way I'm going to structure the
      rest of my closing is I'm going to walk through
      the verdict form, because, again, this is not a
      general referendum about tobacco companies.
      It's not whether you like or dislike them.  It
      is not whether you're angry.  Respectfully, it's
      not whether you feel sympathy for Miss Odom.  We
      all do.  Of course we do.  We all lose our
      parents.  Everybody feels bad about it.  That's
      a natural human reaction, and there would be
      something wrong with us if we did not feel
      sympathy.  But that's not what the case is
      about.
          The first issue for you as a jury to decide
      is was Juanita Thurston addicted to cigarettes
      in containing nicotine and, if so, was such
      addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and
      death.
          There's more than one question embedded in
      that just like we talked about in opening
      statement.
          Okay.  Could I go back to the computer?
      Thank you, Cliff. 4226
          Okay.  As we talked about in opening
      statement, when you break that question down,
      there are really three things that plaintiff has
      to prove.  The plaintiff has the burden to prove
      to you, and as the court told you, and if they
      don't prove this to you, then your verdict has
      to be for the defendant, and the case is over.
      They have to prove to you that Juanita Thurston
      died from lung cancer caused by smoking.  You've
      heard the evidence.  I'm not going to waste
      anybody's time talking about that issue anymore.
          They also have to prove that
      Juanita Thurston was addicted to nicotine.  I am
      going to talk about that issue a lot.  And, yes,
      you've heard that they also have to prove that
      addiction was a legal cause of
      Juanita Thurston's death.
          The important thing to understand, ladies
      and gentlemen, is they have to prove all three
      of those things.  Two out of three is not good
      enough.  If they fail to prove any element of
      class membership, then you would be required to
      find that Miss Thurston is not a class member.
      And the case will be over.
          Let's go to the first one.  They have to 4227
      prove to you that Juanita Thurston was addicted
      to nicotine.  Most of the time when plaintiffs
      were discussing addiction to nicotine, there was
      an effort being made to turn it into a trivial
      unimportant check the box type issue, something
      that they suggested to you was just ministerial
      to go through, that it was easy, that you didn't
      have to know any medicine, you didn't have to
      know any science, you didn't have to know the
      DSM, it was just simple.  But that's not what
      the evidence has been.
          In fact, when we met, when we asked
      Miss Thurston about her opinion before this case
      started -- excuse me, Miss Odom.  I apologize.
      We served interrogatory on Miss Odom and asked
      her, "Do you contend the decedent was addicted
      to cigarettes that contained nicotine?"
          Her answer was, "Addiction is a medical
      diagnosis.  I'm not qualified to say whether the
      smoker was addicted or not."
          But then they come in here and Miss Odom
      testifies that she's addicted.
          MR. BASS:  Judge, I'm sorry.  That's not an
      accurate reflection of the interrogatory.  It's
      missing, "Yes, I do." 4228
          THE COURT:  Come on up here, and do not do
      any more speaking objection, you guys.  You know
      better than that.
          MR. BASS:  Sorry, Judge.
SIDEBAR CONFERENCE:
    (The following proceedings were had before the
    Court outside the presence of the jury:)
          THE COURT:  Okay.  What is your objection?
          MR. BASS:  So the objection is this is not a
      complete rendition --
          THE COURT REPORTER #1:  I can't hear you.
          MR. BASS:  Sorry.  This is not a complete
      rendition of the interrogatory.  The
      interrogatory response says, "Yes, I do,"
      period.  And then it goes on to say what it
      says.
          THE COURT:  I don't know what it says.
          MR. FURR:  That's correct.  But I don't have
      to put the entire document --
          THE COURT:  If you're going to quote it, you
      do.
          MR. FURR:  Okay.  I'll clear that up.  That
      was unintentional.
END OF SIDEBAR CONFERENCE
    (The following proceedings were had before the 4229
    Court and jury:)
          THE COURT:  The objection is sustained.
          MR. FURR:  The entire interrogatory read as
      follows:
          "Yes, I do."  Period.  "But then, "Addiction
      is a medical diagnosis.  I'm not qualified to
      say whether the smoker was addicted or not."
          In other words, yes, in this lawsuit
      Miss Odom was contending that her mother was
      addicted which she hoped to be proved with
      expert witnesses, but she was admitting that she
      was not qualified to provide to you an opinion
      regarding her medical diagnosis.
          So the question for you is:  Did Gwen Odom
      prove that Juanita Thurston was medically
      addicted?  You've heard over and over that no
      one is going to tell you what addiction means.
      It's an odd thing under the law, but no one is
      going to tell you what addiction means as you
      answer this question.  You get to decide what
      you think addiction means for purposes of this
      lawsuit when someone is asking you to award them
      $5 million because they were addicted.  So you
      get to decide what the standard should be.
          Here's what we know the evidence is.  It is 4230
      a medical diagnosis, and no medical record
      describes Juanita Thurston as being addicted.
      You have the medical records.  You simply won't
      see that in there.
          During her lifetime, she never received
      medical treatment for nicotine addiction.  And
      her treating doctors never diagnosed her as
      addicted while she was living.
          The fact of the matter is that the witnesses
      brought to you to tell you that they thought
      that she was addicted first diagnosed her as
      being addicted for purposes of this lawsuit.
      This wasn't a diagnosis she had during her life.
      It was created for purposes of this lawsuit more
      than 20 years after her death.  Those are just
      the facts.
          How did they try to prove to you that she
      was addicted?  Well, let me back up.  So we did
      ask Miss Odom this question.  We asked her now,
      "Even though your mother knew that cigarettes
      could be addictive --" and you remember that
      testimony "-- she never told you that she
      thought she was addicted; is that correct?"
          Answer, "She did not, no."
          Miss Thurston never believed she was 4231
      addicted.  Her doctors during her life never
      believed that she was addicted, and, yet, they
      bring a couple of her treating physicians in
      here almost 20 years later to tell you that she
      was addicted.
          Drs. Winokur and Koo -- Don't have a picture
      of Dr. Winokur.  He testified by deposition.
      Dr. Koo testified.  But here's what we know.
      They didn't really know anything about her
      smoking.  They didn't know when she became a
      regular smoker, how long she smoked, anything
      about her smoking habits.  They didn't know when
      she quit smoking.  And in the end, both admitted
      during their cross-examination that they weren't
      addiction experts.  They weren't addiction
      experts.  That's not an opinion that's very
      helpful to you in reaching your decision.
          Okay, Cliff.  What did I just do?  Thank
      you.  Cliff, save me.
          MR. GENTLE:  It's not working.
          MR. FURR:  Okay.  We need a backup.  Okay.
      Thank you.
          Okay.  So Dr. DiFranza came in here
      yesterday afternoon.  And the very last question
      and answer that he was asked in this trial 4232
      provided to you all the information that you
      need in evaluating whether or not the plaintiffs
      have proven that Juanita Thurston was addicted.
          Mr. Garcia -- this is small so we'll read it
      together.  Mr. Garcia asked him, "Tell the jury
      what it's like to be addicted.  And Dr. DiFranza
      painted for us a portrait of a tortured smoker.
      Here's what he said.
          "So when a person needs a cigarette, it's
      like you really have to go to the bathroom
      really bad and you can't concentrate on anything
      else 'til you are able to go.  And you need that
      relief.  And you just can't function, you can't
      concentrate, you can't do anything until you
      take care of that need.  And that's how smokers
      describe the need for a cigarette."
          As you evaluate the evidence about
      Miss Thurston's smoking behavior, use this
      standard, please.  It's a standard from their
      witness.  We agree it's a good test.  Ask
      yourself whether her smoking was so bad it's
      like she had to go to the bathroom all the time
      and couldn't concentrate on anything else and
      wasn't able to function and couldn't accomplish
      anything else until she took care of her 4233
      smoking.  We all know that there's absolutely no
      evidence that her cigarette smoking affected her
      in that way.
          Nonetheless, Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings came
      in here and talked about how tortured smokers
      are, how they become helplessly addicted, how
      they become locked in a cycle of addiction, how
      they dislike their smoking and want to quit but
      can't break out and when they try to break out,
      they have excruciating withdrawal that causes
      them to begin smoking again and how they try
      over and over and over.  Dr. DiFranza told you
      sometimes smokers try every year for 20 years in
      a row to try to quit, and they're still not able
      to.
          Who were they talking about?  Not Juanita
      Thurston.
          We brought you Dr. Samuel.  And just like
      during this trial, Dr. Samuel was attacked in
      this scenario.  So I'm going to spend some time
      talking about Dr. Samuel.  Dr. Samuel does not
      spend his time writing papers.  He does not
      spend his time lecturing to people.  He does not
      spend his time running around the country
      testifying.  What does he do? 4234
          You saw Dr. Samuel.  He's an intelligent
      compassionate man who spends his time taking
      care of people with serious psychiatric
      illnesses.  He's down in his office in Boca five
      days a week seeing patients who have serious
      illnesses, including serious substance abuse
      problems, and he uses the DSM to diagnose them
      so that he can recommend to them the appropriate
      ranges of treatment to try to help them overcome
      the agony that they're experiencing from their
      serious psychiatric illnesses.  That's who
      Dr. Samuel is.  And he gets attacked for that.
          I wasn't going to do this until I heard this
      attack this morning.  I'm sure you've heard the
      expression, People who live in glass houses
      shouldn't throw stones.  Dr. Samuel was attacked
      because he's testified in three trials and made
      $800,000.
          Let's think for just a moment about what the
      evidence was regarding Dr. Burns and
      Dr. Cummings.  Together they've been paid nearly
      $5 million for testifying in tobacco cases.
      Together they've testified by deposition or
      trial approximately 200 times.  Miss Odom's law
      firm, Searcy Denney, has paid them $700,000, 4235
      from one law firm.  They've testified together,
      if you add up both of their testimonies, over 40
      times at the request of Searcy Denney.  And they
      ask you to disregard Dr. Samuels' opinions
      because he's testified three times.
          What did Dr. Samuel do?  As you know, he is
      the only expert who used the standard diagnostic
      tool for medical addiction, and he found that
      Juanita Thurston was not addicted.  Let's think
      about what he told us.  He told us that the DSM
      indicates clear that 50 percent of daily smokers
      are addicted.  So that means the task for you is
      to try to decide which side of that 50 percent
      was Juanita Thurston in.
          He took about two hours to lay out for you
      the 11 criteria of the DSM, and he marshalled
      all the facts applied the criteria to those
      facts and gave you his analysis of whether or
      not she met each cry criteria.  No hiding the
      ball.  He put his analysis right out there for
      you to assess, and he also explained to you that
      in addition to those criteria, a smoker has to
      have significant clinical impairment by their
      smoking before they would be classified as
      medically addicted. 4236
          He explained to you that his assessment
      indicated that, in fact, Miss Thurston was able
      to control her smoking, and she would quit when
      she became determined to quit.  And that's a
      word Miss Odom used to explain why her mother
      quit in 1987 because she became more determined
      to do so.
          And as Mr. Bass correctly predicted, I am
      going to remind you that he was not asked a
      single question about the testimony he gave over
      two-hour period regarding the DSM, not one
      question.  Instead, during that
      cross-examination, he was ridiculed, he was
      mocked.  A chair was drug out so that they could
      sit down, ignore his testimony and suggest that
      you should disregard his testimony, the
      testimony of someone who is doing nothing more
      than coming here and explaining to you what he
      does all day every day.  When someone walks in
      that office with a problem, he assesses them
      under the DSM.  That's what he does.  And for
      that, he doesn't get cross-examined about his
      analysis.  He gets ridiculed and mocked
      disrespectfully.
          MR. BASS:  Objection.  Improper argument. 4237
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. FURR:  You saw the cross-examination.
      You saw how he was treated.  Reach your own
      judgments about whether the way he was treated
      was a search for the truth or not.
          How did they -- you were told this morning,
      oh, well, we didn't have to cross-examine him
      because we were bringing in Dr. DiFranza to
      rebut his testimony.  Really?  Dr. DiFranza.
      Let's think about what we know about
      Dr. DiFranza.  He was here to attack
      Dr. Samuel's use of the DSM.
          Well, what do we know?  He's not a
      psychiatrist, and he's never been trained in
      using the DSM.  He admitted it's used by juries
      to decide legal issues.  He admitted that
      addiction specialists all over the country use
      it every day.  But then I think this was the
      most important admission.  Dr. DiFranza admitted
      to you that he had never used the DSM to
      diagnose one of his patients.  It's all
      Dr. Samuels does all day long the past 30 years.
          And Dr. DiFranza comes in here and says, no,
      he's doing it all wrong.  Not that I've ever
      done it, but I have come into litigation before 4238
      and criticized the use of others and how they
      use them.  That's testimony -- you were told to
      evaluate the credibility of witness, expert
      witnesses and that you could accept or reject
      their testimony if you chose to.  That's
      testimony that should be rejected.
          Let's get back to the facts.  What do we
      really know about Miss Thurston's smoking
      behavior?  Gwen told us -- excuse me.  Miss Odom
      told us that other than in 1976 and 1983
      Juanita Thurston never tried to quit smoking,
      not even for one hour, not for one hour.
          Now the picture that has been painted for
      you is of somebody who was tortured by their
      smoking and tries over and over and over to
      quit.  That's someone else.  That's not
      Juanita Thurston.  In fact, not only has she
      never tried to quit other than those two
      occasions, she never said she was going to quit.
      She never said she was going to quit.  And we
      know why.  Mr. Hayes told us why, because
      Juanita wanted to keep smoking.  She didn't want
      to quit.  Well, what happened when she got
      determined?  Miss Odom told us that when her
      mother became determined in 1987 it was simple. 4239
      She told us that it was fair to say that her
      mother threw her Salem cigarettes away and never
      looked back.  Never looked back.
          And here's what Ahmad and Miss Odom told us
      about what that experience was like for
      Miss Thurston.  First Ahmad told us even though
      he's with his grandmother all the time that he
      didn't notice any behavior changes after she
      quit smoking, that she wasn't irritable or
      depressed at least as far as he could tell.  He
      said there was no difference.  She was the same
      person.  Miss Odom told us that there were no
      physical signs of withdrawal when she quit
      smoking and that she felt good physically after
      she quit smoking but that she'd never regretted
      smoking until she came down with lung cancer.
      Prior to that she never expressed any regret for
      smoking.
          And we were told about how difficult -- let
      me say it another way -- how strong Juanita was
      when she made up her mind to do something,
      because she quit smoking under circumstances
      that were about as difficult as it could
      possibly be to quit.
          Remember those circumstances?  Her partner, 4240
      Mr. Harden, lived in the same home and continued
      smoking her brand of cigarettes, Salem
      cigarettes in the home.  Gwen told us that
      Juanita never complained about his smoking,
      never to restrict his smoking.
          Imagine, if you will, whether a heroin
      addict would be able to successfully quit using
      heroin if they lived in a home with a partner
      who was also a heroin addict who continued using
      it right in their presence all day every day
      tempting them and providing them those cues
      about what it felt like and how the experience
      they would have if they just picked it back up
      again.  Despite all that, Miss Thurston was able
      to resist that temptation.
          Let's sum this up.  Of course smokers can be
      medically addicted.  No one is disputing that.
      50 percent of them are.  But they've just got
      the wrong smoker in this case.  Juanita Thurston
      was not the addict described by plaintiffs'
      experts.  She wasn't a tortured smoker who was
      compelled to smoke against her will.  She didn't
      struggle continuously to stop smoking.  She
      didn't suffer excruciating withdrawal symptoms.
      As Thaddeus Hayes told us, she wanted to smoke, 4241
      and now we know she quit when she made up her
      mind to quit.  Her withdrawal symptoms lasted
      about two and a half weeks, and then she felt
      good.  And perhaps most importantly, for your
      assessment in this case, you know that she does
      not meet the medical diagnostic criteria for
      addiction, which is the only real measuring
      stick that you have been given that makes any
      sense for the purposes of evaluating this claim.
          Could I have the Elmo, please?
          So on this first question, "Was
      Juanita Thurston addicted to cigarettes
      containing nicotine and, if so, was such
      addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and
      death?"  Because they have not proven she was
      mentally addicted, that question should be
      answered, no.  And then you will sign and date
      your verdict form and this case will be over.
          But even if they prove to you she was
      addicted, and obviously I have to go through the
      whole verdict form because I need to offer you a
      summary of what the evidence has shown on each
      question.  So even though the case should end
      right there, I've got to keep going.  Even if
      they prove that she was addicted, though, that 4242
      question is not over.  Because you know, back to
      the computer if I could, Cliff.  Thanks.
          You know they have a second hurdle they have
      to cross to prove class membership.  They have
      to prove that addiction was a legal cause of
      Juanita Thurston's death.  What does that mean?
      You've got instructions, but I'm going to
      suggest to you a simple common sense way to
      think about whether or not addiction has been
      proven to be a legal cause.  And that's this.
      Was Juanita Thurston so powerfully addicted that
      she was compelled to smoke, she was unable to
      quit and prevent her death?  If they've proven
      that, they've proven that addiction was a legal
      cause of her death.
          So let's back up for just a moment and ask
      ourselves what is the evidence with respect to
      whether smoking compels people to smoke and
      makes them unable to quit.
          Here's what we know.  47, approximately 47
      million -- there's a little overlap there so I
      can't be sure what the number is.  Approximately
      47 million people in the United States quit
      smoking while Juanita Thurston continued to
      smoke.  By the year after the Surgeon General's 4243
      report came out in 1965, 17.6 million people,
      including over 5 million women, had quit since
      the early 1950s.  Between the time the Surgeon
      General's report came out in 1964 and 1979,
      another 30 million people quit.  And the
      plaintiffs' witnesses explained to us on
      cross-examination what was going on.  They told
      you that among that 47 million that millions and
      millions were heavy smokers.  They believed that
      90 percent of them would have been addicted.
      But, nonetheless, 95 percent of those heavy --
      heavily addicted smokers quit on their own.
          This was the part that took a little work.
      You all remember the deal about having to go get
      transcripts to remind people what their prior
      testimony is?  That's called impeachment.  We
      had to do that on this issue as well as many
      other issues I'll talk about and talk about
      perhaps what the inference is that you should
      draw from us having to impeach them so many
      times.
          But, anyway, all three witnesses, Dr. Burns,
      Dr. Cummings on cross-examination and
      Dr. Samuel on direct, of course, told you the
      following:  Nicotine addiction does not 4244
      permanently change the brain; that the 40
      million plus smokers who quit all had
      smoking-related brain changes; and that the
      brain changes do not prevent quitting.  And
      perhaps, more importantly, any smoker can quit.
          Mr. Keehfus's cross-examination of
      Dr. Burns, question, "Just because someone is
      addicted to nicotine, does --" "-- does that
      mean they can not stop smoking, correct?"
      Excuse me.  "-- to nicotine does not mean they
      can not stop smoking, correct, sir?"
          Answer, "That is correct."
          Question, "Just because someone is addicted
      to nicotine doesn't mean they lose control of
      their behavior, correct, sir?"
          Answer, "That is correct."
          Here's what else they told you, addiction
      does not relieve smokers of responsibility.  It
      remains the smoker's responsibility to quit.  As
      Dr. Burns sort of colorfully put it, cigarettes
      don't light themselves and jump in your mouth.
      The smoker has to make a decision to stop
      picking up that package of cigarettes, lighting
      the cigarettes and putting the cigarette in
      their mouth.  And both of the plaintiffs' 4245
      witnesses admitted to you on cross-examination
      that all smokers, including addicted smokers,
      remain responsible for quitting.  Responsibility
      for quitting smoking always resides with the
      smoker.
          Dr. Cummings, although I had to, again, I
      had to get out his transcripts to remind him of
      what he said on his sworn testimony before,
      admitted that a smoker is fully responsible for
      making the choice to quit.  Not partially, not
      something less than 100 percent, 100 percent
      fully responsible for making the choice to quit.
          That's the plaintiffs' witness.
          Let's zero in now on what we know about
      Miss Thurston's smoking behavior and whether
      she's proven that she was -- that her death was
      caused -- that addiction to nicotine was the
      legal cause of her death.  Again, let's focus
      this question in a way that will be helpful to
      evaluating the evidence.
          Was Juanita Thurston so powerfully addicted
      that she was compelled to smoke so that she was
      unable to quit and prevent her death?  Or did
      she have the ability to quit and prevent her own
      death at any time she became determined to do 4246
      so?  You see, it's really an either/or question.
          Now as your instructions indicate, the law
      recognizes that there can be more than one
      factor that can be a causal role -- that can
      have a causal role in causing an injury.  The
      law anticipates that there could be
      circumstances under which that was the case.
      That doesn't mean there always is.  It's up to
      you to decide whether under the facts in this
      case there was more than one cause or whether
      there was only one cause, which was
      Miss Thurston's choice to continue smoking
      despite knowing the risk.  That's a factual
      question for you.  That instruction means
      nothing with respect to whether there were more
      than one cause in this case.
          What do we know?  As we discussed briefly
      before, Miss Odom told us she admitted, I should
      say, that her mother was a legal cause of her
      own death by starting to smoke, continuing to
      smoke, and not trying harder to quit.  She was
      very forthright, told me those things on
      cross-examination.  I didn't have to impeach
      her.  She admitted to all those things, too.  I
      didn't have to impeach her. 4247
          And, again, I submit to you, ladies and
      gentlemen what does that leave for us?  Just
      think about it.  You're allowed to draw
      inferences from the evidence.  You heard about
      that in your instructions.  Think about what
      this admission means.  Starting, continuing and
      not trying harder to quit.  I submit these are
      some inferences that you can draw from that.
      Admissions really mean if you take them all
      together, this admission that she chose to start
      smoking and no one put a gun to her head and
      made her start smoking, it's an admission that
      she knew that smoking was dangerous and
      continued to smoke because would you ever admit
      that your mother was a cause of her own death if
      she was doing something that she didn't know was
      dangerous?  Of course not.
          It means that she was not confused about the
      dangers or addictiveness of smoking, and it
      means that she was responsible for quitting.
      You would never admit that your mother was the
      cause of her own death if she had not been
      responsible for failing to quit.  It also means
      she was able to quit earlier and prevent her own
      death, because the plaintiffs would never admit 4248
      that Miss Thurston was a cause of her own death
      if she had been unable to quit and prevent her
      own death.
          The evidence demonstrates that Miss Thurston
      had the ability to quit smoking at a time that,
      in fact, would have prevented her death.  We
      know that 40 million plus Americans quit before
      1979 or by 1979.  What was different about them
      and their smoking than Miss Thurston's smoking?
      Let's look at the evidence.
          Were the cigarettes they smoked any more
      addictive than her cigarettes?  No.  There's no
      evidence of that.
          Was her brain affected differently than the
      smokers who quit?  No, no evidence of that.
          Was she exposed to advertising different
      than the smokers that quit?  No, no evidence of
      that.
          Did she smoke more or longer than the
      smokers who quit?  No evidence of that.
          The only difference -- excuse me.  Was she
      exposed to tobacco company statements different
      than the smokers who quit?  No, no evidence of
      that.  You know, there's no evidence that she
      ever heard a tobacco company's statement about 4249
      the dangers of smoking.  The only difference was
      those 40 million people made the decision to
      stop smoking and made the determined effort to
      quit smoking while she continued to smoke.
          What do we know about Miss Thurston?  Was
      she some type of weak addiction-prone individual
      who led an out-of-control life and was unable to
      control her own behavior?  Not any evidence of
      that whatsoever.
          Instead, what we know from Miss Odom and
      Mr. Hayes is that she was intelligent.  She was
      a curious woman.  She didn't have a lot of
      education, but that didn't hold her back.  She
      read.  She listened to the news.  She encouraged
      everyone around her to become more educated.
      She was informed.  She was also strong-willed
      and decisive.  And what we know that may be most
      important for this case is she simply enjoyed
      smoking her cigarettes.
          Remember Miss Odom went through all her
      pictures trying to find pictures of her mother
      smoking and this is what she found.  Here she is
      with George Harden and Mr. Osborne standing
      behind them smoking.  What the evidence has
      demonstrated to you is that she enjoyed smoking 4250
      with a beer, that she didn't want to stop.  She
      wanted to smoke.  That's what Mr. Hayes told us.
      And that she did not want to quit.  She liked
      smoking with a beer, with her coffee.  She
      enjoyed it.  And at that time in her life she
      didn't want to quit.
          Now I'll repeat this again.  Mr. Hayes told
      us she did not stop -- she did not want to stop
      smoking.  She wanted to smoke.  Ahmad came in
      and told us that his grandmother never said that
      she wanted to quit.  Mr. Hayes told us the same
      thing, and that's important.  That's important.
          As Dr. Burns told you, he was asked, "Well,
      to quit a person has to decide they want to
      quit, correct?"
          Answer, "Yeah, that's correct, sure."
          "And after someone decides they want to
      quit, they have to make an effort to quit, don't
      they?"
          "Yes, in general, that's correct."
          So, of course, a person has to make a choice
      to quit and take actions to quit.
          But, you know, that's not what she did.
      There are a lot of things that Miss Thurston
      could have done if she really wanted to quit 4251
      smoking.  She should -- she could have sought
      help with her family and friends.  That wasn't
      done.  She could have sought medical assistance.
      That wasn't done.  She -- I think that chart is
      wrong.  She did throw away her cigarettes.  That
      should say "yes" there because my recollection
      is that she did do that.  But she didn't throw
      away her ashtrays or lighters.  She didn't go to
      cessation smoking clinics, and she didn't go a
      single day without smoking.  I'm sorry.  That
      chart is correct.  I was misreading it.
          We're now looking at the first 20 years of
      her smoking.  The time prior to 1976 she had
      been smoking for about 20 years during this
      period of time when Mr. Hayes told us that she
      wanted to smoke, and she didn't do any of these
      things.  She did none of the things that someone
      would do for that 20-year period if they wanted
      to quit smoking.  She simply never made up her
      mind to quit smoking.
          Let's think about this.  The claim being
      made here is that she did not quit smoking and
      the smoking -- excuse me -- that nicotine,
      addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of her
      death because despite persistent efforts, she 4252
      was unable to quit and prevent her death.  Is
      that the evidence?  Can you imagine any other
      scenario where someone would claim they
      persistently tried to do something and when you
      asked them, well, tell me how often you tried to
      do it, they said, well, I tried to do it twice
      for two weeks over the past 30 years.  I tried
      to do it twice for two weeks.
          Miss Thurston told you that her mother --
      excuse me.
          Miss Odom told you that her mother never
      said she was going to stop smoking other than
      the three times she actually quit.  And when we
      asked her, when we gave her the floor to tell us
      why did your mother succeed in 1987 when she
      failed in 1976 and 1983, and here's what
      Miss Odom told us.
          Question, "Ma'am, isn't it true that based
      upon your personal observations of your mother
      that she was successful in '87 as opposed to the
      other two times because she was more determined
      in 1987?"
          Her answer was a simple, "Yes."
          The evidence is that Miss Thurston quit when
      she became determined to quit.  She quit cold 4253
      turkey, no cessation aids.  No one helped her.
      She didn't even ask anybody for help.  She put
      her cigarettes down and never looked back.  She
      never smoked another cigarette to anybody's
      knowledge even though she was sharing a home
      with a partner who smoked the exact cigarettes
      she had.  The only difference was she became
      more determined.
          Ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is
      overwhelming that it was Miss Thurston's choice
      to begin, to continue and not to quit sooner was
      the only legal cause of her death.
          But I want to go back to this portrait, this
      portrait of a tortured smoker for whom nicotine
      addiction was the legal cause of her death that
      Dr. DiFranza, Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns have
      painted for us, and I want to compare that to
      Miss Odom -- excuse me -- Miss Thurston.  On the
      left I call this a possible class member, and
      then we compare that to Miss Thurston.
          A possible class member would be somebody
      tortured by smoking.  Miss Thurston enjoyed her
      smoking.
          Would be somebody that hates smoking.
      Miss Thurston wanted to smoke. 4254
          It could be someone who smokes against her
      will.  Mr. Hayes told us that she smoked because
      she wanted to.
          Could have been someone who could not
      control her smoking.  You now know that she
      could control her smoking when she needed to.
          Could be somebody who claimed to be
      addicted.  You know Miss Thurston never claimed
      to be addicted.
          It could be someone who tried 10 or 20 or 30
      times over the decades to quit and just couldn't
      succeed.  Miss Thurston tried four weeks in 30
      years.  Less than one percent of that 30-year
      period was spent trying to quit smoking.
          An Engle class member could be somebody who
      tried every available technique to try to quit
      smoking.  The only thing we know Miss Thurston
      ever did was chew candy.
          Someone whom was addicted whom addiction was
      the legal cause of her disease could demonstrate
      physical withdrawal symptoms.  Miss Thurston
      didn't.
          You know, the plaintiffs witnesses talked to
      you on several occasions about people who
      developed a smoking-related disease and 4255
      continued smoking.  They colorfully said someone
      was smoking to their grave.  They talk about
      people developing lung cancer, COPD or heart
      disease but not quitting, continuing to smoke
      even after a serious disease.  That's not
      Miss Thurston.  She quit before she had any
      serious smoking-related disease of any type
      whatsoever.
          Could be somebody who simply was unable to
      quit despite their best efforts, despite
      accessing every way to quit couldn't do it.  Not
      Miss Thurston.  She quit when she made up her
      mind.  Could be somebody that continues to crave
      cigarettes.  You heard the witnesses tell you
      that some people say they crave cigarettes for
      years.  Years after they quit when they're
      around somebody smoking they smell it or see it
      or think about it.  They crave a cigarette.  Not
      Miss Thurston.  She felt good when she quit and
      never indicated that she wanted a cigarette
      again.
          Could be, this was really important I think
      in this case, an Engle class member would be
      somebody who needed to remove themselves from
      their environment.  The doctors told you that 4256
      one of the most successful things you can do to
      help yourself stop an addictive behavior is get
      out of that environment, go to a different
      environment, different friends, remove yourself
      from the locations and people that use that
      drug.  Not Miss Thurston.  She put them down and
      never looked back even though Mr. Harden was
      smoking every day.
          The bottom line, ladies and gentlemen, is in
      this Engle case you simply have the wrong smoker
      before you.  The plaintiff failed to prove that
      Juanita Thurston was addicted under medical
      diagnostic criteria.  In fact, they didn't even
      try to.
          I mean, one of the things I skipped over,
      remember Dr. DiFranza?  Despite coming in here
      and talking about the DSM, he never tried to
      apply the DSM to Miss Thurston.  And, in fact,
      he never mentioned her name.  Never mentioned
      her name.  Here was her opportunity to show us
      how Dr. Samuels got it wrong and how he applied
      the criteria wrong.  Instead, Dr. DiFranza comes
      in here and tries to say that Dr. Samuels
      doesn't know how to apply the DSM.  Even though
      he does it all day, Dr. DiFranza never does it. 4257
      But then Dr. DiFranza doesn't try to apply it to
      Miss Thurston and never mentioned her name.
      Search your memories.  Search your notes.  Their
      rebuttal witness never mentioned Miss Thurston's
      name.
          They simply failed to prove that addiction
      to nicotine was a legal cause of her death.
      Instead, they spent two weeks reproving the
      Engle findings, but they failed to prove that
      Miss Thurston was a class member.
          Could I have the Elmo again?  So, ladies and
      gentlemen, I submit that even if you found
      Miss Thurston was addicted, there is a second
      independent reason, the reason of legal
      causation as to why this first question should
      be answered no.  And you see below that if you
      answer this first question, "no," you sign and
      date your verdict form and this case is over.
          Your Honor, this would be a convenient
      breaking point if this works.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
          MR. FURR:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Please the Court.
          Counsel.
          Welcome back, ladies and gentlemen.  I hope
      you did not overindulge in your lengthy gourmet
      lunch.
          When we finished, we had just looked at 4265
      question number 1, class membership.  As you
      know, if the answer to that question is no, you
      go no further.
          I'm going to go through the whole verdict
      form with you.  I'm going to skip over question
      number 2 and I'm next going to talk about
      question 3 and question 4.  And we'll talk about
      those two questions together, because they ask
      you a very, very similar question for which the
      evidence and the answer to those questions is
      the same.
          Here is question 3.  "Did Juanita Thurston
      justifiably rely to her detriment on any
      statement of material fact made by the Defendant
      after May 5, 1982 that intentionally concealed
      or omitted material information concerning the
      health effects or addictive nature of smoking
      cigarettes, and, if so, was such reliance a
      legal cause of her lung cancer and death?"
          And if we flip over to 4, you'll see that 4
      is a very similar type question.  "Did Juanita
      Thurston justifiably rely to her detriment on
      any statement of material fact made by the
      Defendant or other tobacco companies after May
      5, 1982 in furtherance of an agreement to 4266
      intentionally conceal or omit
      information," et cetera, et cetera.
          In other words, 3 is the intentional
      concealment and 4 is an agreement to conceal.
      That's the only difference between those two.
          So I want to go back to 3 and let's look a
      little more closely at it and see if we can
      unpack this question a little bit, because
      there's a lot of legalese there, but there are
      some very important principles.
          Number one, you will see that it has to have
      been an act by the defendant after May 5, 1982.
      The concealment cannot be based upon acts by the
      defendant before May 5, 1982, as you can see.
          Secondly, you see that the information that
      was concealed had to be material.  I submit to
      you that in this case what would be material
      would be the following:  Is smoking dangerous?
      Can it cause serious diseases?  And is smoking
      addictive?  There's nothing in this question
      that suggests in any way that you're being asked
      about whether Juanita Thurston had information
      about exactly how cigarettes were designed,
      about exactly how much nicotine was put in
      cigarettes.  And the reason it's not there, of 4267
      course, is those things aren't material.  She
      would have made her decision, as anybody would,
      based on whether she knew that smoking was
      dangerous, could cause serious disease and
      whether it was addictive.
          These other questions that are being
      suggested to you simply would not have been
      material for her decision as to whether to take
      the risk of continuing to smoke.
          So, again, still a lot of legalese.  Let's
      try to unpack that a little bit and make it
      simple.
          Could I have this computer, please.
          Okay.  Plaintiff's concealment claim and
      agreement to conceal, questions 3 and 4, we'll
      talk about them together.  Between May 5, 1982
      and 1987.  Why do I stop at 1987?  Because
      that's when Ms. Thurston stopped smoking.  So,
      of course, no act after 1987 could have caused
      her to smoke while confused about the dangers of
      smoking.  So we have a five-year window here for
      which you need to examine the defendant's
      conduct and its effect on Ms. Thurston.
          Ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is very
      clear that the plaintiff has completely failed 4268
      to prove that any concealment between those
      years, or agreement to conceal between those
      years was the legal cause of Ms. Thurston's
      death.
          Why?  Remember the simple test you can
      apply.  You can't conceal something from
      somebody who already knows it.  If she already
      knows that it's dangerous, can cause serious
      disease and is addictive, then no act taken to
      conceal that information could have been a cause
      of her death.
          So let's apply that test as you look at the
      evidence.  But I'll back up and be even more
      general.  The first reasonable question for you
      to ask would be:  Were the dangers of smoking
      unknown to the public before May 5, 1982?
          So let's go through that evidence pretty
      quickly.
          You know that the dangers of smoking had
      been public knowledge for hundreds of years.  We
      had a little fun with the Van Gogh picture, but
      it's actually very relevant to this.  The
      Van Gogh picture and the discussion we had
      demonstrates that for centuries people have been
      talking about smoking being harmful and have 4269
      known that it can be difficult to quit.
          And Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings both told you
      that for at least 150 years people have talked
      about smoking being addictive and causing
      cancer.
          Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings told you that in
      the 1950s the information available to the
      public exploded.  There were human studies and
      animal studies and chemistry studies done by
      scientists, reported in the scientific
      literature, picked up by the lay media,
      published -- publicized to all the rest of us
      who aren't scientists on radio, TV, newspapers,
      magazines, word of mouth.
          And, of course, you've heard that schools
      and churches and all kinds of other institutions
      in our society became involved in spreading that
      information.
          How do we know the message was getting
      through?  We know because Dr. Burns told you
      that in the 1950s, as a result of media
      exposure, smokers began quitting in large
      numbers.  And we've seen those quitting
      statistics from the Surgeon General.  And we
      know that, in fact, millions of people would 4270
      have quit in the 1950s when this information was
      being publicized everywhere.
          Dr. Cummings made perhaps the single most
      important admission in this case on this issue.
      Now, admittedly, I had to impeach him to get him
      to admit this, but he admitted that he had
      previously told me in the Huish trial up in
      Gainesville when I asked him this exact
      question, he told me that by 1954 virtually
      everyone heard and knew that smoking could cause
      disease.  Not just heard, heard and knew, heard
      and knew.
          The evidence is unequivocal.  Everyone knew
      that smoking was dangerous at around the time,
      or perhaps even before the time that Juanita
      Thurston was a -- became a daily smoker.
          As we know, Dr. Burns concluded she became a
      daily smoker at age 23, born in '34, that would
      have been 1957 or so.  No one knows exactly
      whether it's '56 or '58 or '57.  But in any
      event, it was known in society before she became
      a daily smoker.
          Dr. Cummings said on a couple of occasions
      that when the tobacco company documents came out
      it was a revelation; finally people knew that 4271
      smoking was dangerous and finally people began
      quitting in large numbers.  But let's look at
      what the evidence is.
          Both Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings told you
      that Surgeon General Leroy Burney concluded in
      1957 that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer.
      That was 30-plus years before the internal
      tobacco companies' documents came out.  No one
      needed the company documents to know that
      smoking was dangerous.
          In 1957 there were congressional hearings
      where Surgeon General Burney and Dr. Heller from
      the National Cancer Institute both testified
      very similarly.  They both testified that in
      their roles as public health officials their
      conclusion was that the dangers of smoking
      had -- excuse me -- that the public had been
      effectively informed about the dangers of
      smoking through press, radio and TV.  Exact ways
      we've been talking about information being
      spread in society.
          What do we know about Ms. Thurston?  Was she
      someone who lived in a shell; who was not
      interested in the world around her; who didn't
      access information?  No.  We know she was the 4272
      opposite of that.
          What we know about Ms. Thurston is that she
      watched the nightly news, she read the local
      paper every day.  She read magazines.  She
      instilled love for reading in Gwen.  We know
      that she was intellectually curious.  And Gwen
      Odom told us that her mother wanted to know what
      was going on.  And Dr. Burns told you the same
      thing.
          Let's keep going forward.  Surgeon General
      in 1964.  We heard a lot about that.  It's a
      significant event because, again, we're not
      talking about smokers in general.  We're talking
      about this family.  The year 1964 is very
      significant because one thing is abundantly
      clear.  This family knew in 1964 that smoking
      was dangerous.  We're going to go through that.
      It's no coincidence this is the same time the
      Surgeon General's Report came out that concluded
      for the first time in a book like this that
      smoking causes lung cancer.
          You know that the next day and for days
      after that it was front-page news on the Palm
      Beach Post.  Smoking, Cancer Linked.  You know
      that the Florida Health Notes, the leading 4273
      public health publication by the state of
      Florida back around that time, concluded that
      "Nearly all Floridians have heard about the
      Surgeon General's Report on smoking and health
      which was released in 1964."
          Now, there was another specific question and
      answer that was asked of Dr. Burns that I think
      is very illuminating on this issue of whether
      people knew around this time.  And here it is.
      Mr. Keehfus asked Dr. Burns the following
      question:  "In fact, Mr. Hayes" -- of course
      that was Ms. Odom's husband -- "testified under
      oath that based on what he heard at the time, he
      thought it was common knowledge in Florida in
      1964 that smoking was harmful to health, right?
          "Answer:  I don't have a specific recall of
      what he thought was common knowledge from his
      deposition, but I would expect he would say
      something along those lines."
          He expected that someone reflecting on that
      era would say that because it was common
      knowledge at that time.
          Dr. Cummings told you the same thing.  He
      testified that there was a very high level of
      public awareness about the dangers of smoking in 4274
      1984 -- excuse me -- 1964.
          Let's remind ourselves, why am I trying to
      go on this very brief and very condensed history
      of information about the dangers of smoking?
      Because what we're doing is we're setting the
      stage for you to evaluate the claim that
      Ms. Thurston died because she did not know that
      smoking was dangerous and addictive between 1982
      and 1987.  So we're taking a look at the world
      she came through and what she was told so you
      can evaluate whether that claim could possibly
      be correct.
          We know that in 1966 the first warning label
      went on.  "Caution:  Cigarette smoking may be
      hazardous to your health," mandated by Congress,
      drafted by Congress.
          Dr. Daniel Horn, who was in charge of the
      United States Office of Smoking and Health, who
      was responsible for communicating the dangers of
      smoking to the public was quoted in 1968 as
      saying, "You could stand on a rooftop and shout
      'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs
      and you would not be telling anyone anything
      they did not already know."
          We know that there were public service 4275
      announcements about the warnings.  And in these
      public service announcements -- I'm going to
      play one of them again.  Please take a look at
      this.  And what you're going to do is you're
      going to see that the public health service
      announcements were equating paying attention to
      the warning label as a life or death matter.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  (Sounds heard.)  We receive many
      warnings in our life and sometimes they can save
      our life.
          (Sounds heard.)
          VOICE:  This message is brought to you by
      the American Cancer Society.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. FURR:  A clear, unequivocal, unambiguous
      message.  Paying attention to the label on the
      side of cigarette packages is something that can
      save your life.
          Did people pay attention?  Did they respond?
      Here's what Dr. Cummings told us:  Between 1966
      and 1970 13 million Americans quit smoking, the
      highest number of quitters in the United States
      history in any four-year period. 4276
          Remember we did the math with Dr. Cummings?
      That was about 5,000 smokers per day, 365 days a
      year for that four-year period after the
      warnings went on the side of the packages.  And
      yet Dr. Cummings tried to convince you that it
      was a revelation when the tobacco company
      documents came out in 1998 and all of a sudden
      smokers now had the information that they needed
      to make decisions about quitting.  The evidence
      is otherwise.
          The labels strengthened in 1970.  "Warning:
      The Surgeon General has determined that
      cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health."
          That label stayed on packages of cigarettes
      between 1970 and 1985.  Do a little quick math.
      If Ms. Odom -- excuse me -- Ms. Thurston was
      smoking a pack and a half a day of cigarettes
      every day for those 15 years, she would have
      picked up a package of cigarettes over 160,000
      times during that 15-year period with the
      warning on the side of the package.
          Am I suggesting she saw it every time?  Of
      course not.  That would be silly.  Is there any
      way she did not know about that warning and see
      it?  Of course not, that would also be silly. 4277
          Dr. Burns, by 1975, more Americans knew that
      cigarette smoking was dangerous than the name of
      the President of the United States.  Universal,
      common public knowledge about the dangers of
      smoking.
          And then we had another red herring during
      this trial where Dr. Cummings tried to make a
      distinction about the difference between hearing
      that smoking is dangerous, knowing that smoking
      is dangerous and internalizing that information
      to understand it to mean that smoking is
      dangerous for your health.
          What did Dr. Burns tell us?  He told us by
      1981 95 percent of people were thoroughly aware
      of the health dangers of smoking and 90 percent
      of them realized that their health could be
      affected, in other words, had internalized the
      message by 1981, obviously before our 1982 date.
          You also know that an additional set of
      rotating warnings went on the packages in 1985.
      Because I want to be clear.  Even though I am
      spending some time talking with you about what
      Ms. Odom -- excuse me -- Ms. Thurston knew
      before 1982, the burden that plaintiffs have
      assumed in this case is to prove to you the 4278
      concealment after 1982, but before 1987 was a
      legal cause of her disease.
          So we have two periods we're looking at for
      two different reasons.  The rotating warnings
      went on in 1985.
          How did all this information we've been
      looking at affect smokers?  It's pretty clear.
      Smokers heard the message and they made their
      choices whether to continue smoking or stop
      smoking.  And we know that millions of them
      quit.
          These flags are sort of the key awareness
      events we've just talked about.  You actually
      heard during this trial that the first tobacco
      lawsuits were filed 60 years ago in 1954,
      because there was enough information available
      to bring these types of cases and that everyone
      knew that smoking causes disease.
          Then we march forward.  The other
      information that came out, the warning labels,
      the quotes from Dr. Burns and Cummings,
      et cetera.
          And you see what happens as that information
      is coming out, millions and millions and
      millions of heavily addicted smokers are making 4279
      their choices about whether to stop lighting up
      those cigarettes and put them in their mouth or
      whether to quit.
          Now, there was another set of red herrings
      that I want to discuss.  Keep in mind that
      during this time frame Dr. Cummings told you
      that there was a campaign of doubt being
      conducted by the cigarette manufacturers.
      Obviously it wasn't successful.  40-plus million
      people quit at the same time.
          You were told that the way the cigarette was
      being designed, the modern American cigarette,
      kept people from quitting.  That started in
      1913.  Obviously people were able to quit
      smoking the modern American cigarette.
          Then finally you were told that advertising
      somehow undermined people's understandings of
      the dangers of smoking.  And yet all of these
      people -- Dr. Cummings admitted that all of
      these people who quit in this era would have
      been exposed to the same advertising campaigns.
          Went through that.
          Robyn, could I have the final instruction
      13?
          Thank you. 4280
          On final instruction 13, which you actually
      see on page 15 of the instructions you were
      given this morning, you'll see this with respect
      to the fraudulent concealment issue:  "On this
      claim the issue for your determination is
      whether Juanita Thurston justifiably relied on
      any statement of material fact made by the
      defendant after May 5, 1982 that intentionally
      concealed or omitted material information
      concerning the health effects or addictive
      nature of smoking cigarettes, and, if so,
      whether such reliance was a legal cause of
      Ms. Thurston's lung cancer and death."
          That's very, very similar to verdict form
      question 3 that takes that and turns it into a
      verdict form question for you.
          So how do you sort through all this?  It
      actually is -- back to the computer.
          It's pretty simple.  The real question
      you're being asked is to decide as a matter of
      fact whether Juanita Thurston died because the
      dangers of smoking were unknown to her between
      May 5, 1982 and 1987.
          So next I'm going to look at the evidence
      that you were presented with respect to what she 4281
      knew prior to this time period and during this
      time period.
          Robyn, could I have that second board.
          Let's scoot that up just a bit.
          There's no good place to put this where
      someone is not blocked.
          What we've done is sort of tried to create a
      board that demonstrates what Juanita Thurston's
      information environment was like.  And we start
      closest to her with her family members and we
      work our way around her.  So what we're going to
      do is take a look at what Ms. Odom knew and
      Mr. Hayes and Ahmad and her sisters, Christine
      Thurston and Bobbie Newsome and her friend and
      neighbor Mr. Osborne.  We're even going to go
      back and look at what her parents told her.
      That's sort of all within the context of what
      the public health authorities and schools and
      churches and the federal and state governments
      will say and everybody else was saying.
      Because, of course, that's how her family
      members were learning about this.
          What the evidence is going to demonstrate is
      that Ms. Thurston knew that smoking was
      dangerous and addictive in the 1960s, decades 4282
      before the 1982 date, which is the test in this
      case.
          So let's look at what some of that evidence
      was specifically.
          Ms. Newsome's testimony.  She was asked
      whether the parents allowed the children to
      smoke.  She told you, no, we would have gotten
      punished at home if we smoked.
          She was asked whether smoking was allowed in
      school.  She said no.  So this world, I know
      it's hard for us to take ourselves back to 1934
      when Ms. Thurston was born, but she was born
      into a family which already the -- smoking was
      treated as an adult custom that children weren't
      allowed to smoke.
          Let's look at what Mr. Hayes told us about
      his knowledge.  He told us that in 1964 in
      Delray in middle school he was taught the,
      quote, woes of smoking, about diseases being
      caused by smoking and why you shouldn't smoke.
      And he told you that he knew the dangers of
      smoking by 1964.
          Ms. Thurston's sister Bobbie Newsome told us
      in her deposition that was read to you that she
      knew that smoking was dangerous in 1964 and that 4283
      she warned her children about smoking starting
      when they were 10 years old in 1964 and that she
      told them, "Don't smoke because it can kill
      you."
          Now you heard that she was actually a sister
      who was very close to Ms. Thurston.
          During her cross-examination Ms. Odom told
      us this, that she knew that smoking was
      addictive in the early 1960s and that she
      learned that smoking was dangerous to your
      health in the 1960s.
          This family knew.  The dangers of smoking
      were common knowledge to Ms. Thurston and her
      family in the 1960s.  Her friends and family
      members knew.
          Here's what Mr. Hayes even told us, before
      the warnings went on the packages, Mr. Hayes
      told us, "Well, back then they hadn't started
      putting warnings on the cigarette packs, but
      everybody was saying cigarettes cause cancer."
      Cigarettes cause cancer.  Everyone in her circle
      of influence.  And you know that Ms. Thurston
      quit in the 1970s, quit in the 1970s.  Everyone
      in her circle of influence knew that smoking was
      dangerous.  And, as we're going to look in just 4284
      a moment, we also know that Juanita Thurston
      knew.
          Here's what Dr. Burns told us.  "Question:
      In fact, Ms. Odom would say, mom, you need to
      quit smoking, right?"
          Of course he's talking about Ms. Thurston
      talking to Juanita Thurston.
          Dr. Burns said, "Yes, there was substantial
      support from family members for her to quit
      smoking."
          Her family knew.
          Ms. Odom on cross-examination admitted that
      she knew that cigarettes were addictive -- that
      her mother knew -- Ms. Odom admitted that her
      mother, Juanita Thurston, knew that cigarettes
      were addictive for 20 to 30 years before she
      passed.  You know she passed in 1993, so that
      takes us back somewhere in the 1963 to 1973 time
      range.
          We asked Ms. Odom, "And in 197" -- this is
      cross-examination in this trial in front of you.
      "In 1976, she," referring to her mother, "knew
      that smoking wasn't healthy for her, correct?
          "Answer:  Correct."
          She was asked, "And, in fact, ma'am, from 4285
      that point on you and your mother had
      conversations about quitting smoking, in your
      words, all the time; isn't that correct?
          "Answer:  Pretty much."
          The message was being communicated to
      Ms. Thurston.
          One of the ways we know it is Mr. Hayes told
      us that what he would tell her, I bought your
      cigarettes, here they are, you know they're bad
      for you; she would call them cancer sticks.  In
      1974, Juanita Thurston was calling them cancer
      sticks.
          And Ms. Hayes [sic] told us that her mother
      knew that breathing cigarette smoke into her
      lungs might be dangerous to her health in the
      1970s, to her health.
          Mr. Hayes told us more.  He told us that
      when he heard her coughing he even warned her,
      that means you need to quit smoking.  And when
      he'd buy her cigarettes he'd say, "Here they
      are, you know these aren't good for you."  And
      Mr. Hayes told us that virtually every time they
      were together and her mother would light up a
      cigarette that Ms. Odom would tell her mother
      that she needed to quit smoking. 4286
          This family had the information; they knew
      what it meant and they were urging Ms. Thurston
      to act upon it.
          And Dr. Burns told us that Ms. Thurston
      understood that cigarette smoking wasn't good
      for her when Mr. Hayes told her that she needed
      to quit.  Notwithstanding that, and not only did
      she understand it, she expressed no confusion
      about the health risks of smoking when
      repeatedly warned by Thad Hayes.
          There's absolutely no evidence in this case
      whatsoever that any mixed message that Juanita
      Thurston was getting detracted or undermined in
      any way her understanding about the dangers of
      smoking.  There's no evidence of that.
          We've talked about a lot, about her quitting
      in 1976.  The important thing is that Ms. Odom
      told us that Ms. Thurston quit for two weeks in
      1976 because she knew, knew that smoking was bad
      for her health.
          Dr. Cummings has admitted, just like I just
      said, that there's no evidence, no evidence in
      this case that Juanita Thurston was ever aware
      that a tobacco company denied that smoking
      cigarettes is addictive or dangerous.  There is 4287
      no such evidence.
          So think about this.  We're looking at
      whether she died because she didn't know after
      1982.  I'm not going to go through all this
      again, but between the publicly available
      information from all kinds of different sources
      and between the things that her family was
      telling her, Ms. Thurston knew.
          I mean, the yellow boxes may be the key
      pieces of evidence for you.
          Ms. Odom told us that her mother knew that
      smoking was addictive between '63 and '73.  And
      Mr. Hayes told us that Ms. Thurston knew that
      smoking was bad for her health when he met her
      in 1968 when he started dating Ms. Odom.
          There's no question the message got through
      to her.  And you can't conceal information from
      somebody if they already know it.  It's a
      logical fallacy.
          The evidence is overwhelming that she knew
      before 1982.  But remember, the plaintiffs have
      assumed more of a burden.  The burden they've
      assumed is to prove to you that an act taken by
      the defendants -- excuse me -- by the defendant,
      RJ Reynolds, between 1982 and 1987 prevented 4288
      Ms. Thurston from knowing about the dangers and
      addictive properties of smoking and caused her
      death.  Well, you know she had no doubt and
      confusion about the dangers of smoking in this
      time frame for which they've tried to make this
      claim.  Not only did she know coming in, you've
      heard that magazines, the Surgeon General's
      Report, TV, local news, warnings, antismoking
      commercials, all types of information continued
      to come at her.
          Ms. Odom told us that she warned her mother
      about the dangers of smoking always, continually
      talking about it.  Thaddeus told us that their
      son, Thad and Gwen's son Ahmad began working --
      warning Ms. Odom [sic] about the dangers of
      smoking when he was very young.
          Interestingly, Charles Osborne was brought
      up, but you remember the evidence.  It wasn't
      Charles Osborne encouraging Juanita Thurston to
      quit, it was the other way around.  Charles was
      their close friend and neighbor.  He was the
      gentleman standing up in that picture we've
      shown you when she was smoking.  You were read
      part of Mr. Osborne's deposition in which he
      said Juanita Thurston encouraged him and George 4289
      to try to quit smoking.  And they all made a
      joint quit attempt and that she lasted the
      longest.  You were told that she tried to quit
      in 1983 because it was bad for her and, of
      course, she finally did quit in 1987.
          Questions 3 and 4 on your verdict form
      really aren't even close.  The evidence is
      overwhelming that she knew that smoking was
      dangerous and addictive even before this period,
      much less within this period.
          Now, what about this bit about their message
      having been undermined?  Let's remind ourself,
      lots of talk about CTR and TIRC and TI.  There's
      no evidence that she ever heard or relied on any
      statements from those entities.  There's no
      evidence that she ever heard or relied on The
      Frank Statement.  You know there's no evidence
      that she ever heard a statement by RJ Reynolds,
      or any other tobacco company, in making a
      decision about whether to smoke or not.
          We talked about advertisements for several
      hours, but you know there's no evidence in this
      case that she ever relied on advertisements
      either in making decisions about whether to
      smoke or not or in choosing a brand of 4290
      cigarettes.  There's none of that evidence.
          There's no evidence from anyone who actually
      knew Ms. Thurston about why she smoked or why
      she smoked certain brands.
          You know, there's been a lot of discussion
      of, well, but she followed the -- she followed
      the advertising campaigns from unfiltered to
      filtered to menthol, and, therefore, you can
      draw an inference that somehow she had a belief
      that that's what she should do and that
      prevented her from knowing the dangers.  First
      of all, that doesn't even make any sense.  Those
      are two completely unrelated things.  But let's
      look at what the evidence is.
          No one ever saw her smoke an unfiltered
      cigarette.  No one ever saw her smoke an
      unfiltered cigarette.
          There's no evidence she smoked filtered
      cigarettes because she thought that filters were
      safer or less addictive.  Nobody testified to
      that.
          There's no evidence she smoked menthol
      cigarettes because she believed they were safer.
      You know, she started smoking menthol cigarettes
      when she was living with George Harden, who also 4291
      smoked menthol cigarettes.
          There's no evidence that she ever made any
      decision based on cigarette advertising.
          Could I have the verdict form again, Robyn.
          I've got question 3.
          MS. HUGHES:  Okay.
          MR. FURR:  Before you leave, does anybody
      know where I'm at time-wise?
          THE COURT:  Yeah, she does.
          THE CLERK:  What is the question?
          THE COURT:  He wants to know how much more
      time he's got.
          THE CLERK:  He's used an hour and 34
      minutes.
          MR. FURR:  Okay.  Thank you.
          The easiest questions on the verdict form,
      ladies and gentlemen, are questions 3 and 4.
      There's simply no evidence that she was injured
      because of any concealment of information
      between 1982 and 1987.
          All right.  The next question --
          Cliff, could I have this again.
          The next question on this verdict form is
      question 2, "Please state the percentage of any
      fault for Juanita Thurston's lung cancer and 4292
      death that you charge to Juanita Thurston or to
      RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company."
          A couple of important legal principles to
      understand.  First of all, this is not some type
      of basic comparison of tobacco company conduct
      to Ms. Thurston's conduct.  It's a very specific
      question.  It's a very specific question.  It's
      a question about fault for lung cancer and
      death.  So the conduct that you will be
      comparing here is conduct by RJ Reynolds and
      Ms. Thurston that was a legal cause of her
      death.
          I mean, you may not have liked some things
      the tobacco companies did, but unless it's
      related causally through her lung cancer and
      death, that conduct is not relevant to this
      comparison, because this is a very narrow,
      carefully crafted question by the Court for you
      to focus on conduct that is causally related to
      her death; not conduct related to somebody
      else's death; not conduct unrelated to her
      death.
          Second, I'll remind you of the preliminary
      instruction.
          Robyn, could I have the preliminary 4293
      instruction which -- oh, I may have it on a
      slide.
          In the preliminary instruction, I can't
      remember, maybe it's number 3 in your stack.  I
      can't remember.  They'll tell me in a minute.
          Here you see this, "Gwen Odom admits that
      Juanita Thurston bears some measure of fault,
      but less than 100 percent of the applicable
      fault, for causing her smoking-related injury
      insofar as her acts or omissions relating to the
      frequency and duration of her efforts to quit
      smoking were a legal cause of her death."
          Another way of stating admission.  Now,
      obviously, that admission goes on to also allege
      that the defendants were also a cause of her
      death, but that's for you to decide, that's for
      you all to decide, whether there's any conduct
      of the defendants that were a legal cause of her
      death.  The point being that this admission has
      been made by the plaintiff.  RJ Reynolds denies
      that it was at fault for causing her death.
          It was preliminary instruction number 5.
          Thank you so much, Robyn.
          RJ Reynolds denies they were at fault.  The
      plaintiff has the burden to prove each and every 4294
      percentage point of Reynolds' fault.  And the
      reason I point this out is there's sort of a
      natural human tendency to say, okay, let's start
      at 50/50, weigh the evidence and see how it
      comes out.  That's not what this exercise is
      about.  RJ Reynolds' fault starts at zero.
      There is no fault for RJ Reynolds.  Plaintiff
      has admitted fault; they say it's less than 100
      percent.  But that's the only fault in the case.
      It starts at 100 percent for them and they are
      trying to transfer their fault over to
      RJ Reynolds.  So you don't start out at 50/50.
      They have to prove, they have to prove that it's
      1 percent or 2 percent or 3 percent and on up.
      They have to make that proof to you.
          This says Juanita Thurston's choices were
      the only cause of her death.  Now, I'm sure
      everybody can read that from where you're
      sitting, but what we're going to do is we're
      going to pull this out a little bit and think
      about all the things that you now know the
      evidence to demonstrate with respect to Juanita
      Thurston's fault.
          Number one, you know she chose to smoke even
      though her parents -- even though her parents, 4295
      church and school taught her not to smoke.
          You know she chose to smoke despite knowing
      that smoking is addictive somewhere between 1963
      and 1973.
          You know that she chose to ignore constant
      warnings from the media and public health
      community; that she would have ignored somewhere
      in the range of 230,000 warnings if you take her
      whole smoking -- the whole time she smoked.
          You know she ignored Mr. Hayes' constant
      warnings; that she continued smoking when her
      sister Christine quit.
          You know that she smoked for 20 years after
      she talked to Ms. Odom about the dangers; that
      she chose to smoke even though she was calling
      her own cigarettes cancer sticks; that she chose
      to smoke while millions and millions of smokers
      were quitting; that despite knowing the dangers
      she never asked anybody for help.
          Mr. Hayes told you, and this really sums up
      the whole case:  She wanted to smoke; she did
      not want to quit.
          You know that the plaintiff's witnesses on
      cross-examination have admitted to you the
      decision to quit was 100 percent in her control. 4296
      You know that Ms. Odom has admitted that her
      mother is responsible for starting to smoke,
      continuing to smoke and not trying harder to
      quit.  You know that Ms. Odom has admitted that
      her mother's actions were a legal cause of her
      own death.
          Let's remind ourselves what Dr. Cummings and
      Dr. Burns told us.
          Dr. Cummings.  In order to quit, smokers
      have to make up their mind to quit.  The choice
      to quit is 100 percent in control of the smoker.
      Smokers are fully responsible for making the
      choice to quit.
          Dr. Burns.  Addicted smokers are responsible
      for quitting.  Addicted smokers do not lose
      control of their smoking behavior.  And in order
      to quit, smokers have to stop lighting
      cigarettes and putting them in their mouth.
          Ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is
      overwhelming that Ms. Odom's choice to begin,
      continue smoking and not stop smoking sooner,
      despite all of the knowledge that she had
      throughout all the years prior to May 5, 1982,
      is the only legal cause of her death.
          So if you get to this question, I submit, 4297
      ladies and gentlemen, that this verdict form
      should be filled out as follows.
          The plaintiffs have not transferred any
      fault to RJ Reynolds.
          That's why I should have asked Robyn.
          Ms. Odom starts at 100 percent and remains
      at 100 percent at fault if you get to this
      question.
          Okay.  The next verdict form question I want
      to talk about is the damage question.  That's
      question 6.  I just want to say a couple things
      about damages.  First --
          We can take that down, Cliff.  Thank you.
          You will see in your instructions that any
      damages must be fair and just in light of the
      evidence, the evidence, not the rhetoric of the
      lawyers, not emotion, not sympathy, not what we
      all feel for someone who loses a parent, but the
      evidence that's been put before you.  That's
      what damages have to be based upon.
          And you know that Ms. Odom is not seeking
      damages related to lost wages or financial
      support or medical expenses.  And it's important
      to understand she's not seeking any damages
      related to Ms. Thurston's pain and suffering. 4298
      None of those are items that she is asking you
      for money for.  What she's asking you for money
      for is the following:  Her loss of companionship
      and protection, her pain and suffering from loss
      of her mother and funeral expenses.  And then
      you have to ask yourself whether the plaintiffs
      have proven to you that she's incurred the
      5 million dollars in damages that they're asking
      you for.  Because just like fault, the
      plaintiffs have the burden to prove to you each
      and every dollar of damages.  They can't just
      throw out large numbers and ask you to go there
      based on emotion and natural human sympathy.
      They have to prove the damages to you.
          Well, they failed to prove that she's
      entitled to any money because they failed to
      prove that the defendant is liable to her,
      because her mother smoked despite knowing the
      dangers.
          I do want to talk to you about one other
      part of the instruction while we're here.
          Could I have number 3, Robyn.
          By the way, Judge, she's told me don't get
      used to this, as soon as I get this knee fixed
      there's not going to be any more of this. 4299
          Believability of witnesses.  This is a
      critical function that you, the finders of fact,
      have in this case.  You have to evaluate which
      witnesses you believe in this case.
          You were given direction by the Court, "In
      evaluating the believability of any witness and
      the weight you will give that testimony, you may
      properly consider, among other things, the
      frankness or lack of frankness of the witness
      and whether the witness has any interest in the
      outcome of the case."
          Those are things that you are entitled to
      consider when evaluating the truthfulness of
      someone's testimony.
          I'm going to ask you a simple question.  As
      you consider that, let me ask you this.
          Could I have that.
          You're entitled to consider why Ms. Odom and
      her witnesses changed their testimony so much
      from their prior sworn testimony and evaluate
      how frankly you think they were testifying.
          You saw this process that the lawyers call
      impeachment.  It was where a witness says one
      thing here that is inconsistent with prior sworn
      testimony that they've given somewhere else. 4300
      And the reason that's important is, witnesses,
      they can change their testimony from case to
      case or from deposition to trial, but if they do
      it, if they change their testimony, they get
      confronted with the changes they made and they
      get a chance to explain why, and that didn't
      happen.  Instead, what you saw is they changed
      their testimony over and over.
          We counted them up.  Dr. Burns was shown his
      transcript 17 times during his examination, 24
      times for Dr. Cummings, and 11 times for
      Ms. Odom.
          And I'm going to talk about just a few of
      those things that I submit you should consider
      as you're evaluating their believability and
      their credibility in whether damages have been
      proven in this case.
          You've heard about Dr. Burns and
      Dr. Cummings and how they've been paid 5 million
      dollars and how often they testify for Searcy
      and how often they testify for tobacco.  They
      clearly have an interest in this case.  This is
      what they do.  I want to talk to you about one
      specific instance where Ms. Thurston [sic]
      changed her testimony.  And the only reason I'm 4301
      picking this out is this change in testimony has
      resulted in there being a significant gap in the
      proof in this case.
          You heard Ms. Odom during her testimony tell
      you that her mother smoked Lucky Strike Menthols
      during the 1970s.
          I asked her, "Are you certain it was
      menthol?"
          And she said, "Yes."
          The trouble is that you might remember when
      we got Dr. Cummings up here and got those
      Maxwell reports out that Dr. Cummings admitted
      that Lucky Strike Menthol filters were not even
      made during the 1970s.  So Ms. Odom testified
      that her mother smoked throughout the decade of
      the '70s a cigarette that did not exist, a
      cigarette that did not exist.  And this is an
      important inconsistency, because as a result of
      that inconsistency, we do not know what brand of
      cigarette that Ms. Thurston smoked in the '70s.
      We simply don't know that because the evidence
      before you was that she smoked a brand that
      didn't exist.
          I want to talk to you about another
      inconsistency that you were confronted with 4302
      during the testimony and that is a way in which
      Dr. Cummings changed his opinions.
          On direct examination in this case
      Dr. Cummings testified that African Americans
      metabolize nicotine faster than Caucasian
      smokers and that people who metabolize nicotine
      faster smoke more cigarettes.  I then showed him
      his prior testimony in which he admitted that he
      had previously testified that African Americans
      metabolize nicotine slower than Caucasian
      smokers.
          He also admitted that the data indicated
      that this is not a race issue, it's not a race
      issue.  African American women and Caucasian
      women quit smoking at the same rates.
      Dr. Cummings told you that there's no
      difference.
          I'm not going to say any more about this.  I
      will leave it to you to evaluate why you think
      he changes his testimony from one case to
      another.
          As you evaluate the evidence in this case,
      you know that Ms. Odom has additional family
      members.  She has a husband Randy Odom, who did
      not testify.  She has a sister Moranda -- 4303
          MR. BASS:  Judge, can we approach?
          THE COURT:  Sure.
          (The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
          MR. BASS:  Judge, you cannot comment on not
      calling a witness that was equally available to
      both parties.  Mr. Furr took all these
      depositions.  It's not a failure to call when
      the witness is available to both parties.
          MR. FURR:  And I didn't.  I'm not commenting
      on their failure.  I'm just saying there's gaps
      in proof.  There's no evidence in this case from
      these witnesses.
          THE COURT:  That's the same thing.
          MR. FURR:  I'll move on then.
          (Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the
following proceedings were held in open court:)
          THE COURT:  Objection sustained.
          MR. FURR:  Take that down.
          I'm not going to say anything more about
      damages.  If you get to that question, we simply
      leave it to your good judgment and common sense
      as to whether Ms. Odom should be made a very
      wealthy person at this stage of her life because
      her mother chose to smoke while knowing that 4304
      cigarettes were dangerous and addictive and
      failed to quit even though she had the ability
      to do so.  We leave that question to you.
          I want to go to the final verdict form
      question, number 7.
          How am I doing on time?
          THE CLERK:  Ten minutes left.
          MR. FURR:  Oh, thank you.
          Okay.  Question 7, "Please state below
      whether you find by clear and convincing
      evidence that punitive damages are warranted
      against Reynolds under the circumstances of this
      case."
          Let me be clear, first of all, you only get
      to this question, and you'll see the directions
      on your verdict form, you only get to this
      question if you answered "yes" to either
      question 3 or 4, that's the concealment claim
      and the conspiracy to conceal.  If you answer
      "no" to those questions, you never get to this
      question.
          "If you answered 'yes' to questions 3 and 4,
      please proceed to question 7.  If you did not
      answer 'yes' to 3 or 4, you should proceed no
      further except to sign and date your verdict 4305
      form."  A very important direction for you to
      follow so the Court can get a verdict in its
      proper form.
          So if you said "yes" to either 3 or 4, you
      would get to this question.
          Punitive damages.  What are they?  As your
      instructions tell you.  "Punitive damages are in
      addition to damages that would fully compensate
      Ms. Odom."  You're being asked both to
      compensate her and to award additional damages
      above and beyond any damages that she suffered.
          You'll see on your verdict form that they
      can only be awarded to Ms. Odom.  They can't be
      awarded to anybody else.  And, again, you'll see
      that they can only be awarded for concealment or
      agreement to conceal after May 5, 1982 that was
      a legal cause of Ms. Odom's death.  So it's a
      very narrow question.
          These three things are extremely important
      to keep these legal principles in mind when you
      get to this question.
          The burden of proof -- let me back up.
          Robyn, could I have number 19.  Thank you.
          THE COURT:  She's got them in her hand
      before you ask for them. 4306
          MR. FURR:  Thank you very much.
          Question number 19 -- thanks, Robyn --
      important to understand.  There's a completely
      separate and very different burden of proof for
      punitive damages.  And that's this, "Clear and
      convincing" -- see punitive damages burden of
      proof, "Clear and convincing evidence differs
      from the greater weight of the evidence in that
      it is more compelling and persuasive.  As I have
      already instructed you, 'greater weight of the
      evidence' means the more persuasive and
      convincing force and effect of the entire
      evidence in this case.  In contrast, 'clear and
      convincing evidence' is evidence that is
      precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of
      such weight that it produces a firm belief or
      conviction, without hesitation, about the matter
      at issue."
          When you get to this question, if you
      hesitate, based on the evidence, they haven't
      proven their case.
          You see in the very early instruction about
      the Engle findings, but the very last thing it
      tells you about the Engle findings is that the
      Engle findings themselves do not establish that 4307
      Juanita Thurston and Gwen Odom are entitled to
      punitive damages.  They have to do that through
      proof other than the Engle findings.
          Let's talk about a few of the things you
      heard about concealment and conspiracy to
      conceal.  I'm not taking those issues on.
      They're Engle findings.  I can't dispute them
      and I'm not going to try to dispute them, but
      you are entitled to consider the other side of
      the coin and things the tobacco companies did to
      try to get the message about the dangers of
      smoking to smokers.
          One of the things you know is how the
      tobacco companies funded, first, TIRC and then
      CTR, the Council for Tobacco Research.  The
      plaintiff's witnesses told you that the tobacco
      companies provided more than $500,000,000 in
      funds, $300,000,000 of which was used in cancer
      research.
          Remember the grant process where the SAB
      would give grants, just like other scientific
      granting processes, and provide money to
      investigators to do their research.  300 million
      in cancer research.  This funded research by the
      TIRC, CTR, which itself had no money, it was 4308
      simply using money provided by the tobacco
      companies, resulted in 6,000 publications,
      including over 600 that were cited by the
      Surgeon General of the United States in his
      reports.
          So the CTR funded research nationwide and
      funded 10 scientists who went on to become Nobel
      Prize winners later in their careers.  CTR did a
      lot of good work.
          Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings don't really
      dispute that.
          Dr. Burns.  "Question:  And you would agree
      that CTR funded research that was important to
      the issue of smoking and health?
          "Answer:  Yes."
          Dr. Cummings.  "And isn't it true, sir, that
      when scientists received grants from the CTR and
      conducted research they were given complete
      independence as to whether or not they published
      articles about the research?
          "Answer:  Yes."
          During Dr. Burns' examination you saw an
      article by a group of doctors, including
      Dr. Knapp, where you -- they published a paper
      funded -- about research funded by CTR in which 4309
      in 1963, with tobacco-company money provided to
      CTR, Dr. Knapp did research from which he
      published this in the American Journal of
      Psychiatry.  "Nicotine is an active agent; it
      appears to have certain addictive qualities.
      Heavy cigarette smokers thus appear to be true
      addicts.  Supported in part from grants from the
      CTR."
          Yes, we know that the tobacco companies
      provided their opinion to the public over time
      as to whether they believed that smoking had
      been proven to be dangerous and addictive.  But
      at the same time they were funding research that
      could be put out in the public domain that would
      allow other people to evaluate that research and
      reach their own conclusions.
          Larson, Haag and Silvette, "the green
      monster," funded through the Medical College of
      Virginia in 1961 by the CTR using
      tobacco-company moneys.  Thousands of articles
      were abstracted.  Dr. Cummings admitted they
      were abstracted perfectly accurately.  It was
      given to the Surgeon General.  The Surgeon
      General relied upon it for historical research
      and decided that smoking had been shown to be a 4310
      cause of lung cancer.
          What happened?  Did the tobacco companies
      close CTR down, take their money and go home?  I
      mean, this was not the result they hoped for;
      they hoped that the result would be different.
      Notwithstanding that, they continued funding the
      production of Larson, Haag and Silvette up
      through the mid 1970s, and you saw the red, blue
      and either gold or orange books.
          THE CLERK:  Counselor, you have two minutes
      left.
          MR. FURR:  Thank you.  May I have 5, Your
      Honor?
          THE COURT:  All right.  Both sides get an
      extra 3 minutes.
          MR. FURR:  Thank you.
          Okay.  Just a couple more things.
          As to whether defendants should be punished.
          Dr. Cummings told you that Dr. Rodgman, a
      scientist and chemist at Reynolds that he
      respected a great deal, did hundreds of
      experiments in the 1950s to try to reduce
      carcinogens.  He told you that in the 1980s
      Dr. DiMarco led a huge effort at Reynolds to
      develop a heat-but-not-burn, less-mutagenic, 4311
      less dangerous cigarette, that Reynolds spent
      over a billion dollars trying to do it.  And
      Dr. Cummings told you he thought it was safer
      and the right, responsible thing to do.
          Then during Dr. Samuel's cross-examination
      you were shown this, the Reynolds website from
      the day where Reynolds voluntarily, voluntarily
      tells smokers to rely upon the Surgeon General
      of the United States when you're making smoking
      decisions.  "RJ Reynolds believes that
      individuals should rely on the conclusion of the
      U.S. Surgeon General, the Centers for Disease
      Control and other public health and medical
      officials when making decisions regarding
      smoking."
          Could I have the verdict form, Robyn?
          If you get to question 7, for all those
      reasons, including the plaintiff's burden of
      proof and the abundant evidence that you have
      seen of Reynolds providing information to the
      public, the answer clearly should be "no" and
      the case will be over and we'll be done in this
      trial.  If you say "yes," we'll then come back
      for another phase early next week.
          One more thing.  I told you from the 4312
      beginning this is a simple case.  You can't make
      them safe, everybody knows and everybody can
      quit.  Against that background this country has
      formulated public policy since the 1950s to
      allow adults to make their own decisions about
      whether to smoke or not.  It's always been that
      way.  I can't say it any better than a couple of
      pieces of evidence that you saw during this
      case, including the early evidence from
      Dr. Hammond in 1955 on See It Now.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  In my opinion, people should be
      warned of the dangers and they are being warned.
      What they then want to do, whether they want to
      smoke or not, is their own business.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. FURR:  Maybe the only person that could
      say it better would be Harry Reasoner on CBS in
      1964.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  In this kind of a country it comes
      down to you, whether you like it or not.  No one
      is going to forbid an adult to smoke and it is 4313
      now quite clear that no one is going to tell him
      it's good for him either.  The decision is his,
      the decision and the health that may depend on
      it.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. FURR:  That's the way it's always been.
      That's the way it still is.
          Thank you very much for your time and
      attention.  I've enjoyed putting this case on
      before you and his Honorable Court.  Thank you
      very much.
