         MR. GEISE:  May it please the Court, 
     Ms. Shamp, Mr. Kalil, Mrs. Odum. Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.  
         THE JURORS:  Good morning.  
         MR. GEISE:  Once again it's the bottom of 
     an inning, and once again I want to start by 
     the way I started everything else, and that's 
     thanking you for your service.  
         As I said in voir dire and I said in 
     opening statement, we couldn't have a jury 
     trial without the aid of you so thank you.  
         Now, lawyers, we have to be here, we 
     choose to do this.  Mrs. Odum is here because 
     she chose to file a lawsuit.  But you didn't 
     choose this.  You all were drafted to be here.  
         And there are a range of ways that people 
     can serve this country.  Ms. Shamp mentioned 
     at the end of her closing that last week was 
     Memorial Day.  And Memorial Day we honor those 
     who have paid the ultimate sacrifice for this 
     country.  And while jury service doesn't rise 
     to that level, it's still pretty high and it's 
     I still very important and you by doing this 
     are contributing to that.  
         And so whatever you decide when you 
     deliberate today, whatever your verdict, you 
     can go back to your family, you can go back to your friends, you can go back to your 
     co-workers and you can tell them that you 
     contributed to making this country what it is 
     because you have.  
         And you have made a tremendous 
     contribution to it.  You have been on time, 
     you have been attentive, you have taken lots 
     of notes, and you have asked lots of 
     questions.  You have truly participated in 
     this process.  And for what you've done, 
     again, let me thank you on behalf of myself, 
     my team, and my clients.  Thank you.  
         When this case started two weeks ago I 
     told you that this isn't the case about other 
     smokers.  It's a case only about Ethelene 
     Hazouri.  
         And, in particular, this case has two 
     distinct issues.  Where did her cancer start 
     and what were her choices that she made when 
     it came to smoking?  And as this case comes to 
     a close now, it's still about those issues.  
         And two weeks ago I told you in opening 
     statement you're going to hear an avalanche of 
     testimony about things that have nothing to do 
     with Ethelene Hazouri or those issues.  And you sure did.  
         And you saw more of that today from Ms. 
     Shamp.  You saw things that Judge Mitchell has 
     instructed you a couple of times that don't 
     need to be resolved here.  Things about the 
     Engle findings.  Those findings are done.  
     That part was over.  Things that I told you in 
     my opening statement were not an issue.  And 
     the findings don't answer a single question on 
     that verdict form for you, not one.  
         Dr. Burns and Dr. Bagnoli, one came live, 
     one by video.  They spent a lot of time 
     telling you that smoking causes cancer.  Well, 
     you heard that from Judge Mitchell on day one 
     and me on day one.  It wasn't an issue then, 
     it's not an issue now.  
         Dr. Burns and Dr. Werner talked to you 
     a lot about cigarette smoking is addictive.  
     We heard that from Judge Mitchell, you heard 
     that from me on day one.  It wasn't an issue 
     then and it's not an issue now.  
         And another thing that this case isn't 
     about is whether cigarettes should be legal.  
     You heard a lot about advertising.  You'll be 
     instructed that cigarettes are legal to make, cigarettes are legal to advertise, cigarettes 
     are legal to sell, and cigarettes are legal to 
     smoke.  
         And in this case you heard that, yes, my 
     client manufacturers cigarettes.  And you 
     heard in this case that the Hazouri family's 
     own store sold cigarettes.  And you heard it 
     in this case that Mrs. Hazouri smoked 
     cigarettes.  
         All of those things are legal acts, all 
     of them.  None of them is a basis for 
     liability.  
         Now, Ms. Shamp talked for a while and I 
     have a lot to respond to.  And throughout my 
     closing argument I'm going to try to walk 
     through the evidence you heard, and I'm going 
     to show you a lot of the testimony you heard.  
         And I want to show you the testimony you 
     heard in this case because this is Ethelene 
     Hazouri's case, not somebody else's case.  So 
     I'm going to focus on that testimony.  
         And I'm also from time to time going to 
     revisit things that you heard in opening 
     statements from either Ms. Shamp or me, things 
     that we told you we thought the evidence would be, because I want you to see if the parties 
     kept their word on what the evidence was.  
         To start, I told you in opening statement 
     that the plaintiff would only tell you half 
     the story, and that you'd probably have to 
     wait for cross-examination or for our 
     witnesses to the bottom of the inning to hear 
     the whole story.  And the plaintiff did just 
     that.  
         Do you remember Dr. Proctor?  He was the 
     witness who was probably the best half story 
     teller in the trial.  He was the million 
     dollar witness that had that travel itinerary 
     and that calendar that had him in a different 
     courtroom almost every day in the month of 
     May.  
         And he came in here and he told you he 
     couldn't tell you anything about Ethelene 
     Hazouri, nothing.  He knew nothing about her 
     story.  Well, maybe no story is better than a 
     half story.  And how many times did I have to 
     show you the rest of the story with 
     Dr. Proctor?  
         He planted a nugget in your minds during 
     direct examination and let it sit there, let it fester until I've had a chance to get and 
     cross examined him to show you the other side 
     of the story, the side he didn't want to tell.  
         Remember you were shown a Winston ad used 
     the Flintstones.  Do you remember that?  
     Dr. Proctor put it up, played it for you and 
     said, Well, Reynolds' advertised on here, and 
     the implication is, we're targeting kids, 
     we're using cartoons.  
         But on cross you heard the rest of the 
     story.  You learned that the Flintstones were 
     originally an evening kind of, for adults, 
     modeled after the Honeymooners.  And it aired 
     in the evening and that's when Reynolds 
     advertised it; not Saturday mornings.  And you 
     learned that the Flintstones were also 
     sponsored by Alka Seltzer and One-a-Day 
     Vitamins.  Dr. Proctor didn't want to tell you 
     that.  And you learned that Reynolds never 
     advertised on the Flintstones after it moved 
     to mornings.  They didn't.  
         You learned that Mrs. Hazouri was 38 
     years old when the Flintstones debuted it.  
     And the last part of the story, the last part 
     that they didn't share is there is no evidence that Mrs. Hazouri ever watched the show.  
         Teague 53, you saw it again today.  
     Plaintiff told you and Dr. Proctor told you 
     that Dr. Teague did a research project and he 
     found all this information about cigarettes, 
     and that he didn't make his research memo 
     public.  
         But on cross you heard that all 78 
     articles cited by Dr. Teague he got from 
     public literature.  And on redirect, 
     Dr. Proctor said, Well, but some of them may 
     have been hard to find.  Do you remember that?  
     So are you going to punish Dr. Teague for 
     working a little harder to find them.  
         Another example of only telling you half 
     the story is this:  Internal company research 
     about nicotine and suggesting that research 
     was done to find the level to keep smokers 
     addicted.  
         On cross you heard the other side of the 
     story.  This research was done at the urging 
     of the public health community in conjunction 
     with the National Cancer Institute, Tobacco 
     Working Group.  Do you remember that 
     testimony?  At the instigation of the 1981 Surgeon General's Report.  
         And you also heard today about sine qua 
     non.  And that's something that Dr. Teague put 
     in an article.  And I don't know if you 
     remember when I took Dr. Proctor through that 
     document and I put up quote for quote next to 
     it to what Dr. Teague said in the 1970s, and 
     showed the same language from other articles 
     in the published literature in the 1930s and 
     the 1940s.  
         And you heard that this study of nicotine 
     was done by the National Cancer Institute as a 
     way to try to find a less hazardous cigarette.  
     That was the name of the program.  The idea 
     was, okay, let's get the tar down because tar 
     has the carcinogens that kill, but let's keep 
     the level of nicotine medium because people 
     smoke for nicotine.  
         Ms. Shamp likes to call it nicotine 
     manipulation.  The National Cancer Institute 
     called it progress, called it worked toward a 
     less hazardous cigarette.  
         Dr. Proctor didn't tell you any of that 
     on his direct.  But on cross this is what he 
     admitted about that research.  I asked him:  And you're aware of documents that throughout 
     the 1970s where public health groups and even 
     the United States Government were recommending 
     that the tar-to-nicotine ratios should be 
     altered in an effort to produce a less 
     hazardous cigarette.  
         And Dr. Proctor said:  Exactly.  I think 
     it's actually a great idea.  A great idea.  
         And Dr. Proctor also talks about at one 
     point this accusation that Dr. Maurice Seavers 
     who was at the tobacco industry plant on the 
     Surgeon General's committee because he was a 
     consultant for American Tobacco.  Do you 
     remember that testimony?  
         But on cross Dr. Proctor admitted that 
     Dr. Seavers was actually nominated by the 
     American Cancer Society, and that before he 
     accepted that nomination he told Surgeon 
     General Burney:  I want to make sure you know 
     this, that I have a consulting agreement with 
     American Tobacco.  Surgeon General Burney 
     said:  It's okay, we still want you.  
         And, you know, they put it up again and 
     maybe this will get played later for you, but 
     the 1994 Congressional testimony that Ms. Shamp has played a couple of times through 
     trial.  
         Just to point out the other side of the 
     story, it was after Ms. Hazouri had died.  And 
     maybe the most inflammatory half story of all 
     considering Ms. Shamp's argument about youth 
     marketing is Dr. Proctor's story about Joe 
     Camel.  He alleged that Joe Camel made young 
     people smoke.  Do you remember his testimony 
     on that?  
         Well, since he didn't know anything about 
     the facts of Mrs. Hazouri, he may not have 
     realized that she was in her 60s during the 
     time of Joe Camel.  But surely, surely he knew 
     that his allegation had been investigated by 
     the FTC and shot down.  
         You saw this with Dr. Proctor.  And this 
     is Exhibit AM2645.  And the FTC concluded:  
     Although it may seem intuitive to some that 
     the Joe Camel advertising campaign would lead 
     more children to smoke or lead children to 
     smoke more.  The evidence to support that 
     intuition is not there.  Again, Dr. Proctor 
     told you half the story.  
         Now, when I kept showing Dr. Proctor all these things he didn't tell you, what did he 
     say?  I said:  Now, you didn't tell the jury 
     any of those facts today, did you?  And 
     Dr. Proctor said:  No, there's a million facts 
     I didn't tell you.  
         Dr. Burns and Dr. Proctor showed you lots 
     of memos from bench level scientists and from 
     other Reynolds employees, but there was one 
     that they failed to show you.  One that I had 
     to show you with Dr. Proctor and I showed you 
     again with Dr. Figlar.  
         This is AS173.  And this is from the 
     President of Reynolds to the head of R and D 
     in 1968.  And what did it say?  It said:  In 
     cooperation with others, you should push the 
     work concerning tobacco and health, you should 
     prepare a plan to foster any relationship with 
     government personnel, and to quest a mutual 
     understanding of facts ultimately to gain the 
     cooperation and proper research of the 
     subject.  
         And then the President of Reynolds said:  
     If there is a safer cigarette, let's continue 
     and increase our efforts in this program.  
     Please prepare a plan to carry it out. And he uses the term "continue" because 
     it was already underway.  The work was already 
     underway.  And he says:  Increase our efforts.  
     And you heard from Dr. Figlar about the 
     efforts that Reynolds was undertaking.  
     Dr. Burns and Dr. Proctor knew about that 
     document but they didn't show it to you.  
         And why did we have to wait for 
     cross-examination before our witnesses to get 
     those full stories?  The side of the story the 
     plaintiff didn't tell you, why?  
         The answer is simple.  To get you mad.  
         Dr. Burns and Dr. Proctor did not offer a 
     single opinion about Mrs. Hazouri.  They were 
     here to get you mad so that you would decide 
     this case based on emotion instead of facts 
     about Mrs. Hazouri.  
         Because if you focused on Mrs. Hazouri, 
     unlike Dr. Proctor or Dr. Burns, the plaintiff 
     loses.  The plaintiff loses because she can't 
     meet her burden of proof of proving Mrs. 
     Hazouri's cancer started in her lung.  The 
     plaintiff loses because Mrs. Hazouri wasn't 
     addicted.  She maintained control over her 
     smoking choices and she smoked because she wanted to until she was ready to quit.  
         And the plaintiff loses because she can't 
     build that bridge I talked about to prove 
     reliance, to prove a link between anything 
     Reynolds said or did in any smoking decision 
     made by Mrs. Hazouri.  
         You might recall that I used this slide 
     in opening statement, and I showed you the 
     burdens that the plaintiff has to meet in this 
     case.  The plaintiff has to meet medical 
     causation, addiction, and addiction causation 
     first.  Medical causation, they have to prove 
     that Mrs. Hazouri's cancer started in her 
     lung.  For addiction they have to prove she 
     was addicted to nicotine.  And for addiction 
     causation, that addiction was a legal cause of 
     her death.  
         As I said in open statement plaintiff has 
     the burden of proof.  That was true then and 
     it's true now.  And the plaintiff has to prove 
     those three things.  
         Now, the three burdens are found in the 
     first question on the verdict form.  And I am 
     going to walk through the verdict form.  And 
     these three questions are found in the first question.  You can see you're going to be 
     asked:  Was Ethelene Hazouri addicted to 
     smoking cigarettes containing nicotine, and if 
     so, was such an addiction a legal cause of her 
     lung cancer?  
         So the Plaintiff has to prove that she 
     had primary lung cancer, that she was 
     addicted, and that addiction was a legal 
     cause.  
         Now, the plaintiff has to prove all three 
     of those to get a yes to the question, all 
     three.  If she fails on one, she fails on all.  
     One strike and she's out on this question.  
     And if she said -- and if the answer to this 
     question is a no, you proceed no further 
     except to sign and date the verdict form.  So 
     that's to cross all three of those hurdles on 
     that first question or this case is over.  
         I'm going to address all three of those 
     burdens.  Let's start with the first one.  
     Where did her cancer start?  To address the 
     question the plaintiff called Dr. Bagnoli.  
     And you heard that this is the second tobacco 
     trial that Dr. Bagnoli has been in, but the 
     first one he's been in as an expert.  In a prior case brought by Mr. Kalil's firm, 
     Dr. Bagnoli testified as the treating 
     physician, you know, the doctor who meets the 
     patient, conducts the test, know what happens, 
     made an independent diagnosis based on those 
     factors.  Here you didn't hear from any of 
     Mrs. Hazouri's treating physicians.  You got 
     Dr. Bagnoli.  
         Dr. Bagnoli, kind of like Ms. Shamp said, 
     this is an easy case.  It's an easy case.  And 
     no matter what I asked him on 
     cross-examination, he was not willing to 
     change his way, but he changed his story along 
     the way.  
         Do you recall how many times I had to get 
     out his deposition and point out to him that 
     he was saying something different on the stand 
     than he had said just a couple of months in 
     his deposition.  
         He said different things on whether at 
     the time he had records that relate to the 
     diagnosis or not; whether a workup was done to 
     distinguish a primary from a metastatic 
     cancer.  And there was this flip flop on the 
     stand, one page of art in the transcript.  I asked Dr. Bagnoli:  And you agree that 
     Mrs. Hazouri did quit smoking, correct?  And 
     he said:  No.  And then a page later I said:  
     Let me ask it again.  Do you agree that 
     Mrs. Hazouri actually quit smoking?  And then 
     he said:  Yes.  
         Aside from these ping-ponging stories 
     they're concerned is about how thorough 
     Dr. Bagnoli reviewed the records in this case.  
     Before his deposition you heard he said he 
     didn't see any medical records regarding her 
     smoking history, any.  So we showed him the 
     records of the deposition that do mention 
     smoking, and both of them mentioned that she 
     was a former smoker.  
         And what was his explanation for why he 
     didn't see those?  In a case where you hear 
     there's very few medical records, what was his 
     explanation?  He said:  Must have just missed 
     them, must have just missed them.  
         That seems like that's the theme of what 
     the plaintiffs are saying, there's medical 
     cases out there.  
         Dr. Bagnoli says:  He assumes the doctors 
     who actually treated Mrs. Hazouri did what they needed to do and did a complete workup.  
         Well, the problem ladies and gentlemen, 
     is the burden of proof is not met by 
     assumption, it's not.  And if Dr. Bagnoli had 
     taken a minute to call his partner -- he said, 
     I know these people, oh, yeah, that's my 
     partner.  If he had taken a minute to call 
     him, a minute he might have been able to 
     answer some of the questions and fill some of 
     the blanks.  If he's so sure, why not just 
     pick up the phone and confirm it?  
         And, you know, when I forced Dr. Bagnoli 
     to comment on the evidence he looked at, and 
     instead of telling us what his assumption is, 
     he had to admit that some of those assumptions 
     must be wrong.  He admitted that a diagnosis 
     of primary lung cancer can't be made from the 
     radiology.  
         I asked him this question:  And 
     Dr. Bagnoli, I think you said earlier the 
     diagnosis of primary lung cancer cannot be 
     made from the available radiology in this 
     case; correct.  
         And he said:  Well, you are correct.  You 
     can't make that diagnosis just from the x-rays that we have available to us.  So Dr. Bagnoli 
     said it.  
         And I told you in my opening statement, I 
     told you you would hear from an expert witness 
     hired to come in here and testify who would 
     say he could not make an independent diagnosis 
     of primary lung cancer based on the 
     information that's contained in the medical 
     records.  I told you that would be 
     Dr. Bagnoli.  
         And when I said that in opening 
     statement, Ms. Shamp objected.  And I said, 
     fine, you'll hear it from Dr. Bagnoli.  When 
     you heard from him, it was true.  I asked 
     Dr. Bagnoli:  Based on all of the information 
     that was contained in Ethelene Hazouri's 
     medical records, you agree that you cannot 
     make an independent diagnosis of primary lung 
     cancer; correct?  
         And he said:  I personally can't make the 
     diagnosis without seeing the pathology report, 
     reviewing records which are unavailable to me.  
         I have the same information you have, 
     Dr. Bagnoli said, he can't make a diagnosis of 
     primary cancer.  If the plaintiff's own expert can't make that independent diagnosis, then 
     the plaintiff can't meet her burden of proving 
     primary lung cancer to you.  
         And you know why Dr. Bagnoli had to admit 
     that?  You know.  You've now seen the 
     evidence.  And to paraphrase what Ms. Shamp 
     said, the evidence here -- she said the 
     evidence of primary lung cancer is enormous.  
     You've seen what the evidence is.  You know 
     there are no pathology, nothing from 
     Mrs. Hazouri's lung cancer for any doctor for 
     you to look at.  You know there is no 
     pathology report that describes anything about 
     Mrs. Hazouri's cancer.  You know there is no 
     record of any stains or any diagnostic tests 
     that were done on her cancer.  You know no 
     autopsy was performed, and you know there are 
     no chest x-rays, actual films to look at.  
         And Dr. Burns, in his testimony, went 
     through another laundry list of things that 
     you would do to distinguish a primary from a 
     metastatic cancer, things about the CT scans, 
     chemical tests, bone scans, brain scans, and 
     MRIs.  Those steps weren't done here either.  
         And just like a high school math class, the burden of proof demands that the plaintiff 
     show her work and prove how she came up with 
     the answer; not just an assumption, but proof.  
         And when you add everything up that's 
     missing, it doesn't equal proof of primary 
     lung cancer.  It doesn't add up.  There is no 
     pathology, there is no pathology reports, 
     there is no stains, there's no diagnostic 
     tests, no autopsy, no chest x-rays, no cancer 
     on the x-ray reports.  And we're going to talk 
     more about that.  No bone scan, no MRI.  It 
     adds up to no proof of primary lung cancer.  
         So we called Dr. Okun and you heard from 
     Dr. Okun.  He spent 33 years sitting on tumor 
     boards, and he told you that tumor boards are 
     where cancer specialists work together and 
     they discuss their difficult cases to 
     determine what kind of cancer the patient has, 
     where the cancer started, and what is the best 
     course of treatment.  
         And Dr. Okun said, looking at the records 
     here, you can't say it's a primary lung cancer 
     based on the missing evidence.  And he said, 
     you can't say it's a primary lung cancer based 
     on the evidence we have.  And let's look at some of the evidence you saw.  
         I'll start with the cytology report.  
         Mr. Quagmeyer (phonetic), if you could 
     just maybe bring it up a little bit slower, 
     that would be awesome.  You're ahead of me a 
     little bit.  
         Cytology report:  No tumor cells noted.  
     Dr. Okun told you that the fact that there are 
     no cancer cells on the cytology, it doesn't 
     tell us much, but it certainly doesn't prove 
     that Mrs. Hazouri had a primary lung cancer.  
     It just proves there were no cancer cells in 
     the cytology.  
         But an interesting point about that 
     cytology report is the date.  And let's look 
     at the destruction sheet.  You saw this sheet 
     with Dr. Bagnoli and Dr. Okun where there's 
     bronchial washings, bronchial brushings, 
     plural fluid or psychology done in the left 
     lung biopsy.  
         You'll notice these three tests were done 
     on November 26th, and you'll notice that the 
     cytology was done on November 30th, four days 
     later.  
         Now, if the biopsy was positive for lung cancer, or if the bronchial washings, or the 
     brushings were positive, then why would the 
     doctors go back for days later to do another 
     test to look for cancer?  Why?  
         And you've also seen the collection of 
     radiology reports from over two years leading 
     up to Mrs. Hazouri's cancer diagnosis.  All 
     seven of them.  I walked you through all seven 
     of them with Dr. Okun.  X-rays from August of 
     1991 to July of 1993.  Dr. Okun told you that 
     no radiology report ever mentions a tumor, a 
     mass, or anything that can be primary lung 
     cancer.  
         He told you that if someone has a primary 
     lung cancer that starts in their lung, it 
     would be growing, you would see a tumor in the 
     lung developing and getting bigger in the 
     years and months leading up to the diagnosis.  
         That wasn't the case in here.  There is 
     no x-ray report leading up to her diagnosis 
     that mentions a tumor in her lung, none.  In 
     the very last chest x-ray we have from July of 
     1993, it says:  No acute disease seen.  No 
     cancer, no tumor, no disease, no nothing.  No 
     proof that cancer started in her lung. Now, Dr. Bagnoli agrees.  I asked him:  
     So my question to you, Dr. Bagnoli, is the 
     same question you were asked in January, is 
     there a particular radiology report in the 
     available medical records that you believe 
     described what might by the primary tumor?  
     And he said there was no tumor, no mass 
     identified.  That's Dr. Bagnoli.  
         Now, in her closing argument, Ms. Shamp 
     talked to you about, there is something on the 
     x-rays, there is something there.  Well, you 
     saw on the x-ray report, there was something 
     there.  It was pneumonia.  Remember that?  The 
     one record said pneumonia.  
         And I asked Dr. Bagnoli and I asked 
     Dr. Cook, pneumonia comes and goes, doesn't 
     it?  And they said, yes.  So if there is 
     something there, it was pneumonia.  There is 
     no indication that it was a tumor, or a mass, 
     or cancer.  
         Now, the series of x-ray reports do not 
     prove that the cancer started in her lung.  
     And, in fact, they're more typical and more 
     consistent with the metastatic spread of 
     cancer from somewhere else into the lung.  And despite admitting that the diagnosis of 
     primary lung cancer can't be made on the 
     x-rays, and that no tumor or mass was ever 
     identified in the lung, Dr. Bagnoli said there 
     was nothing inconsistent with the x-rays and 
     the diagnosis of lung cancer.  Nothing 
     inconsistent?  Seven x-ray reports that don't 
     mention it?  His admission that you can't see 
     it on there and that's not inconsistent?  
         And you learned about Mrs. Hazouri's 
     specific cell type, adenocarcinoma.  And you 
     learned that it's the most common cell type in 
     nonsmokers.  And you learned that it's the 
     most common cell type of cancers that start 
     somewhere else and spread to the lung.  
         And Dr. Okun explained that there are 30 
     to 40 sites in the body that have that same 
     glandular structure, the glandular cells that 
     give rise to adenocarcinoma, 30 to 40 sites 
     that could be the source of a primary cancer.  
         And you might recall in my analogy for 
     opening statement where I said, you know, this 
     is kind of like, you know, a house that caught 
     on fire is you need to determine which room 
     the fire started.  And you might guess that it started in the kitchen from grease on the 
     stove, or you might guess it started in the 
     family room in a fireplace, or you might guess 
     it starts in the bedroom from a candle.  But 
     to go beyond a guess and to prove the answer, 
     you need facts and you need evidence.  
         And in this case, you know there are no 
     pictures of what was going on, but you have 
     seven eye witness accounts from the fire 
     marshal, seven.  Seven x-ray reports.  The 
     reports of what the radiologist saw when they 
     looked at her x-rays, and what they saw in the 
     years leading up to her diagnosis.  And in 
     every x-ray report the doctors make no mention 
     of cancer at all.  
         The pictures they looked at of her lung 
     or the kitchen, there is no report of a frying 
     pan, there is no report of a stove, there is 
     no report of grease, there is nothing at all.  
         Dr. Okun walked you through every one of 
     those, and no mention of a tumor, no mention 
     of cancer, no mention of a primary cell, 
     nothing.  And Dr. Bagnoli agreed with that.  
         Now, Ms. Shamp today said it was there, 
     they just didn't see it.  Now, before, she said, these doctors who treated her are great, 
     this is a great team.  And now she's saying, 
     it was there, they just didn't see it.  
         Well, first of all, they didn't see it 
     because there was nothing to see there, there 
     was nothing there.  And even so, if you want 
     to believe this that they didn't see it.  Not 
     seeing something isn't proof of it being 
     there.  
         She needs to bring the proof in here and 
     show it to you.  Where was the doctor that 
     said, you're right, we missed it.  You didn't 
     hear from anybody who said that.  
         And that's -- you know, that's kind of 
     what the plaintiff asked you to do here.  
     They've seen the x-ray reports, they know what 
     they don't have it.  And they say, well, let's 
     fill in the blanks.  Let's assume something 
     else.  Let's assume we can prove what we need 
     to prove.  They want you to guess, they want 
     you to speculate, they want you to assume.  
         The plaintiff can't meet her burden of 
     proof by suggesting that something once 
     existed that might helped her to meet it.  It 
     doesn't work that way.  She doesn't get to assume that tests were run when there is no 
     records that they were and certainly no record 
     of the results.  
         She doesn't get to have you assume that 
     the doctors you didn't hear from did something 
     that we have no record of them doing.  In a 
     lawsuit to recover money, the plaintiff has 
     the burden of proof.  The plaintiff doesn't 
     get a benefit of the doubt.  
         In the passing of time, and here I 
     understand it's 19 years, it doesn't give the 
     plaintiff a pass on her burden of proof.  It 
     doesn't.  The burden of proof remains the same 
     today as it would have been 19 years ago.  And 
     Mrs. Odum didn't prove that Mrs. Hazouri's 
     cancer started in the lung.  
         And so a couple of more points on this 
     medical question.  And one of them links to a 
     question to Dr. Okun that one of you asked 
     him.  And he actually said, it would have been 
     a great question for me to ask, and I wish I 
     had.  
         But you asked whether a cancer can go 
     from an unseen stage 1 to stage 4 in a matter 
     of months?  And Dr. Okun told you the primary cancer doesn't work that way.  He says it 
     takes years and years for a cancer to grow, 
     and it can take a long time before the patient 
     knows it's there before they know the have the 
     cancer is there.  
         And Dr. Burns told you the same thing.  
     He told you that lung cancer doesn't just pop 
     up overnight.  This is what he said.  He said:  
     People tend to think of cancer as if it were 
     being hit by a lightning bolt because that's 
     the way it's commonly experienced.  You come 
     in with a symptom, the doctor says you have 
     cancer.  But in reality, cancer is a series of 
     chronic changes that occur over a very long 
     period of time that lead to two important 
     changes in how the cell functions.  
         By the time Mrs. Hazouri presented with 
     metastatic cancer it was stage 4.  And 
     Dr. Okun told you that the cancer that gave 
     rise to her disease had to have started 
     somewhere in her body years before that; or as 
     Dr. Burns said, a very long period of time 
     before.  
         And we don't know where the primary site 
     was, but we know from the evidence in this case from the chest x-rays that it wasn't in 
     the lung.  
         Now, to try to counter over two years of 
     chest x-rays, negative cytology report, the 
     report from all seven radiology reports, the 
     plaintiff relies on three sheets of paper, a 
     handwritten note, a billing record, and the 
     death certificate.  
         And Dr. Prokes -- I think it's Prokes, 
     not Prokes.  I think it's Dr. Prokes, he does 
     mention lung cancer, no doubt about it.  But 
     you know that the word primary lung cancer 
     doesn't appear on a single record.  
         And I say the word "primary" for a 
     reason.  I thought it was interesting that 
     today, and with Dr. Okun Ms. Shamp asked if 
     that little line and a circle is like some 
     shorthand symbol for the word primary.  And 
     what Dr. Okun said was, I don't know, I don't 
     know what Dr. Prokes' thing is.  It could mean 
     primary, or it could be his primary assessment 
     because it was on the assessment form of the 
     thing, so I don't know.  
         But if it does mean what Ms. Shamp wants 
     it to mean, why didn't she ask Dr. Bagnoli about it?  Why didn't he come in here and tell 
     you that?  If it's his opinion that 
     Mrs. Hazouri had primary lung cancer, wouldn't 
     he have used that to support his opinion?  Of 
     course he would have.  Of course.  
         And if that's what Dr. Prokes meant back 
     in December of 1993, when you saw that 
     handwritten note, then why did Dr. Prokes 
     write metastatic lung cancer on the death 
     certificate in March of 1994?  
         Now, you've heard that Mrs. Hazouri had a 
     team, and Dr. Bagnoli knows Dr. Prokes and he 
     knows the team of doctors who actually treated 
     her.  But he didn't bother to call anyone from 
     that team to try to get more information.  
         And since you didn't hear from Dr. Prokes 
     or any other team member, you're stuck with 
     Dr. Bagnoli.  And since Dr. Prokes put 
     metastatic lung cancer on the death 
     certificate, I suggest that Dr. Bagnoli was 
     afraid of the answer he would have received if 
     he did call him.  And it's safer for 
     Dr. Bagnoli to just make an assumption instead 
     of making a phone call and being proven wrong.  
         And there's one other thing Dr. Burns told you about primary versus metastatic 
     cancer.  Dr. Burns was asked:  And when you 
     use terms like primary and metastatic, primary 
     means primary lung cancer would be cancer that 
     started in the lung; correct?  
         And he said:  Starts in the lung cancer 
     and spreads to other tissue.  
         And then he's asked:  And metastatic 
     cancer might be a cancer that starts outside 
     the lung and spreads and deposits tumors in 
     the lung; correct.  
         And Dr. Burns says:  That's correct.  
         He's their expert.  He's not my expert.  
         Now, if we could bring up that other 
     chart again.  If you look at this, you look at 
     all the medical evidence we have.  Nothing, 
     plus nothing, plus nothing, plus nothing, plus 
     nothing, plus nothing, plus nothing, plus 
     nothing, all adds up to equal no proof of 
     primary lung cancer.  
         And the greater weight of the evidence, 
     the weight of those two years of chest x-rays 
     prove that there is no primary lung cancer.  
     And combined with the lack of the other 
     evidence, the plaintiff failed to meet her burden of proof, and that failure decides this 
     case.  
         Because she didn't clear that first 
     hurdle, the answer to the first question on 
     the verdict form has to be no, and that ends 
     the case because the answer to that is no, you 
     sign it ends the case.  
         Now, I'm going to address the other 
     issues.  And if you get passed that first 
     hurdle, the next hurdle that the plaintiff has 
     to prove if Mrs. Hazouri was addicted?  And 
     when you get the instructions from the Court, 
     you're going to need to decide what addiction 
     means in this case.  The Court is not going to 
     define that term for you.  
         Now, if we want to take, as Ms. Shamp 
     says, we'll take Dr. Prokes' word for what he 
     put in his records.  If he put cancer, that 
     means cancer.  And I think she said Dr. Prokes 
     knows the patient, he did a nine-day workup of 
     the patient.  
         If we're going to do that, let's take 
     Dr. Prokes' word on addiction.  Because there 
     is not a single medical record that ever says 
     Mrs. Hazouri was addicted.  Nine days of workup and all the times that Dr. Prokes saw 
     Mrs. Hazouri, he never said she was addicted.  
     And there is no medical record at all from 
     Dr. Prokes or her other doctor that reveals 
     that.  
         Dr. Werner agreed.  I asked her -- 
     actually, Mr. Parrish asked her:  My question 
     was when reviewing Ms. Hazouri's records there 
     was nothing you ever found where a doctor gave 
     a diagnosis of nicotine dependence or 
     addiction; correct?  And she said:  Correct.  
         Now, Dr. Werner testified that addiction 
     is the loss of control over the use of a 
     substance.  The evidence in this case 
     demonstrated that Mrs. Hazouri had complete 
     control of her smoking.  
         Let's look at this example.  You heard 
     that she didn't smoke in her living room, she 
     didn't smoke while cooking, she didn't smoke 
     in her house, she didn't smoke in church, she 
     didn't smoke around people from church, she 
     didn't smoke around Mrs. Odum's friends, she 
     didn't smoke around her kids.  And there were 
     other long periods of time when she didn't 
     smoke.  You would hear she could go six or seven hours at a time if she was at one of her 
     grandson's sporting events where she didn't 
     have to have a cigarette.  
         Look at all of these places and the 
     situations in which Mrs. Hazouri did not 
     smoke.  That is not evidence of a loss of 
     control at all.  Mrs. Hazouri controlled when, 
     where, and around whom she smoked.  She 
     exercised control over her smoking; her 
     smoking did not control her.  And under that 
     definition, one of the ones offered from 
     Dr. Werner, Mrs. Hazouri wasn't addicted.  
         Now, an additional way that Mrs. Hazouri 
     controlled her smoking behavior was the amount 
     she smoked.  And Ms. Shamp told you in her 
     opening statement that Mrs. Hazouri smoked 
     every waking hour.  I don't know if you 
     remember that.  She said every waking hour.  
     And she told you today that no one disputes 
     that Mrs. Hazouri smoked 15 to 30 cigarettes 
     today.  She told you that just this morning.  
     15 to 30, no one disputes, every waking hour.  
     You've heard the evidence and you know that's 
     just not true.  
         Let's take a look at this slide.  Every waking hour.  You heard from Richard Odum, 
     Mrs. Odum's husband.  He said he new her for 
     about seven or eight years and that he saw her 
     smoke seven or eight cigarettes ever, ever.  
     That's but about once per year.  
         You heard from Robert Raulerson, Bobby 
     Raulerson, Mrs. Hazouri's grandson.  He spent 
     the summer days with her and she smoked four 
     to five cigarettes a day.  You heard from 
     Ernest Raulerson, Mrs. Odum's first husband 
     who knew Mrs. Hazouri from 1966 to 1986, and 
     he said she smoked less than Bill Hazouri.  
     And he said Bill Hazouri smoked five 
     cigarettes per day.  
         And then you also have Reverend Gore and 
     Nell Nelson.  They were around Mrs. Hazouri 
     for an awful lot of waking hours and never saw 
     her smoke in one of them.  
         And this is another interesting point.  
     If Mrs. Hazouri was smoking every waking hour, 
     where are the other people that saw her 
     smoking every waking hour?  Where was that 
     evidence?  You didn't hear that.  
         And in addition to those witnesses, you 
     heard from Mrs. Hazouri herself by way of her medical records.  And what did she say?  1993 
     she said, 15 cigarettes a day for 25 years, 
     quit in '11.  And then there is not a single 
     record that describes her as a current smoker, 
     none.  There is not one.  
         And the other thing is, Dr. Werner told 
     you that her definition of a heavy smoker is 
     someone who smokes more than one pack per day.  
     Do you remember that testimony?  And using her 
     definition, she admitted Mrs. Hazouri was not 
     a heavy smoker.  She was asked:  You don't 
     consider Ms. Hazouri a heavy smoker, correct?  
     And Dr. Werner said:  Correct.  
         You saw a lot of pictures of 
     Mrs. Hazouri.  She isn't holding a cigarette 
     or smoking a cigarette in any of those.  So 
     the evidence that you heard shows that she 
     certainly wasn't smoking every waking hour.  
     And as Dr. Werner told you, she wasn't a heavy 
     smoker.  She controlled the environment in 
     which she would smoke an she controlled the 
     amount she would smoke and she controlled the 
     amount she smoked.  
         She didn't have a loss of control over 
     that.  She wasn't an out-of-control smoker and she wasn't an addicted smoker.  And under 
     Dr. Werner's loss of control definition, 
     Mrs. Hazouri wasn't addicted, and the 
     plaintiff doesn't clear that burden either.  
         Now, Dr. Werner and Dr. Barnett both 
     talked about the DSM, and Dr. Werner told you 
     that you she agreed that qualified 
     psychiatrists can look at the same set of 
     facts under the DSM and reach different 
     opinions.  And that each psychiatrist has to 
     apply their own clinical judgment based on 
     their experience, their background, and their 
     training.  Dr. Barnett did just that and 
     reached a different conclusion than 
     Dr. Werner.  
         Now, Ms. Shamp in her cross-examination 
     of Dr. Barnett and today tries to belittle 
     her, tries to belittle her because she works 
     in a solo practice, tries to belittle her 
     because she's not writing papers or writing 
     books.  
         When you look at Dr. Barnett's experience 
     and her background, what did you hear about 
     it?  You heard that she is board certified as 
     an addiction psychiatrist.  Dr. Werner wasn't.  And you've heard that Dr. Barnett was the 
     chair of the addiction committee for the 
     Florida Psychiatric Association.  And she left 
     that post when?  When she became the president 
     of the Florida Psychiatric Association.  
         And you could put up a list of things 
     that Dr. Barnett has never done.  Well, you 
     know what else you can put on that list?  
     Dr. Barnett has never sent a letter to all the 
     lawyers in the State of Florida offering to 
     show up in court and testify for them.  But 
     Dr. Werner sent a letter like that.  
         So the attack on Dr. Barnett's 
     credentials as a board certified addiction 
     psychiatrist, as the former president of the 
     Florida Psychiatric Association, I think 
     that's a little off base.  
         Now, despite telling you that that DSM 
     can be used as a cookbook.  You might remember 
     Dr. Werner told you that.  Dr. Werner tried to 
     do just that, and Ms. Shamp tried to do it 
     again today with you when she put up a 
     checklist with all the boxes.  It can't be 
     used as a cookbook but we're going to use it 
     as a cookbook. And in trying to use the cookbook, 
     Dr. Werner missed that first step of the 
     recipe.  You saw it today.  When the DSM says, 
     the first thing you must do for substance 
     dependence is look for a maladaptive pattern 
     for substance abuse that leads to clinically 
     significant impairment or distress.  That's 
     the first thing in that criteria.  
         And Dr. Barnett told you that, that's the 
     threshold, that's the key one.  And if you 
     don't see that maladaptive pattern, or you 
     don't have that clinically significant 
     impairment, you stop.  That's the first thing 
     that a clinician does, and you didn't see that 
     here.  
         Mrs. Hazouri didn't have a maladaptive 
     pattern.  She wasn't clinically significantly 
     impaired or stressed.  You saw how she 
     functioned normally.  She functioned normally 
     in her house, she functioned normally in her 
     garden, she functioned normally with her 
     family, she functioned normally anywhere she 
     went, bowling, you name it.  
         Now, in addition, Ms. Shamp showed you 
     that top part from the DSM today and it was talking about some of the clauses in there, 
     but there is one part that she left out.  
     Where her ellipses went dot, dot, dot, you 
     know what that said for the criteria?  It said 
     you need to observe those within the same 
     12-month period.  
         Now, Dr. Werner didn't do that.  She 
     pulled information from the 1930s to try to 
     satisfy one criteria, she went over here in 
     the 1950s, picked another, 1970s, picked 
     another.  It has to be that same 12-month 
     period.  
         And finally in talking about how she 
     tried to apply this and what she looked at, 
     Dr. Werner really stretched in a few points.  
     Do you recall this testimony when she was 
     talking about Mrs. Hazouri's conversations 
     with her grandson about smoking?  She said 
     this:  And that was when Robert, her grandson, 
     was about ten years old; correct?  
         And she said:  I believe so, yes.  
         And those are the conversations that 
     Bobby testified about that she told him, don't 
     smoke, it causes cancer.  
         And then Dr. Werner was asked:  And that would be in the 1970s when that occurred; 
     correct?  
         And she says:  Correct.  
         But she couldn't stop there.  She 
     couldn't resist.  So she said:  Which is 
     around the same time of Reverend Gore's 
     testimony with regard to her talking to him 
     about the health effects; not in the '50s, it 
     was in '70s.  
         And you know that's not true, and we're 
     going to talk about Reverend Gore quite a bit.  
     Now, unprompted.  That's something that 
     Dr. Werner just throws in.  Something you know 
     isn't true.  
         You heard that Mrs. Hazouri was happy, 
     sunny, spiritual.  She wasn't significantly 
     impaired.  In choosing to do something that 
     you enjoy and then stopping it when you're 
     ready to quit is not a maladaptive pattern of 
     substance abuse.  
         And I told you during opening statement 
     you were going to learn some simple facts 
     about nicotine and nicotine addiction, and you 
     did.  
         Can we bring up that slide again.     It's:  Nicotine addiction does not 
     permanently change the brain -- I'm going to 
     go back to this one:  Nicotine leaves the 
     system in 48 hours.  It doesn't interfere with 
     the smoker's ability to understand warnings, 
     and it doesn't prevent smokers from quitting.  
         Let's look at that first, because one 
     thing might have gotten confusing during 
     Dr. Werner's testimony with regard to whether 
     the changes in the brain, the changes that 
     Ms. Shamp talked about today are permanent or 
     not.  Everything causes brain changes, and 
     smoking certainly does.  Everybody who smokes 
     is going to get a brain change, but it's not 
     permanent.   
         One of you asked Dr. Werner that 
     question.  I don't know which one it was, but 
     it was a good question.  And I'm not sure that 
     the answer she gave you on the jury was the 
     same answer she gave during cross-examination.  
     Because during cross-examination she made her 
     answer clear.  She made it absolutely clear.  
     Let's take a look.  
         She was asked:  So this change to the 
     brain you're talking about, that's not a permanent change, is it.  
         And she said:  It is absolutely not a 
     permanent change with regard to the receptors.  
     The brain is an amazing organ and it tries to 
     fix itself.  
         Absolutely not, is what she said on 
     cross.  She tried to say something different 
     to you.  And I don't know if that's part of 
     the things that Dr. Werner learns or she 
     teaches it.  You remember that addictionology 
     class that she teaches for other people going 
     to court and testifying like she does.  
         And Ms. Shamp said, The documents that 
     are going back are all important, she said.  
     Well, her addictionology slides are going back 
     with you, too.  Just take a look at ATS4777, 
     and see what Dr. Werner tells other folks that 
     are coming to testify.  See what she tells 
     them about how you look at the jury, how 
     you're supposed to act on the witness stand, 
     what you're supposed to do, and then ask 
     yourself if she tried that same stuff with 
     you.  And I think the answer is yes.  
         Now, as you learned, nicotine and 
     addiction don't prevent people from quitting.  And the plaintiffs' experts and everybody 
     admitted that.  And when Dr. Werner put up a 
     slide of the addiction cycle.  Do you remember 
     that?  It was right at the end of her 
     testimony on redirect she put up this slide.  
     And there was one thing she left off her 
     slide.  She had all these arrows everywhere, 
     but she never had an arrow for people who 
     quit.  
         And you know that millions and millions 
     and millions and millions of smokers have 
     quit.  Millions of addicted smokers have quit 
     and they've quit for good.  And Ethelene 
     Hazouri quit, too.  
         And speaking of Ethelene Hazouri 
     quitting, I don't think there is any dispute 
     in this case over whether she quit.  I don't 
     think there is.  But like many of the other 
     issues, there are two sides to the story about 
     when she quit.  And it fits, frankly, 
     Mrs. Odum and her husband against everybody 
     else.  
         This is the line up:  Did she quit before 
     her diagnosis or did she quit after her 
     diagnosis?  And under Mr. and Mrs. Odum's version of the story:  Mrs. Hazouri quit after 
     her cancer diagnosis when she came home.  At 
     some point she had oxygen in the house.  We 
     don't know if it was that very first day, it 
     seemed like it was months later.  But she quit 
     after the diagnosis.  She quit without 
     patches, she quit without Nicorette, she quit 
     without any assistance.  
         So even under their story it demonstrates 
     she had the ability to quit when that 
     diagnosis motivated her.  And even under their 
     side of the story, she wasn't a tortured 
     smoker who had to keep smoking after the 
     diagnosis.  But the other side of the story 
     demonstrates that she quit well before her 
     diagnosis.  
         And let's go down what we'll call, on 
     this side of the story.  Ms. Odum's own son, 
     Bobby Raulerson, testified:  "So you believe 
     that by 1986, your grandmother had quit 
     smoking?  
         "Yes, I do believe by 1986 she had quit 
     smoking.  
         "And after your observation that she had 
     quit smoking as of 1986, did you ever know her to smoke other cigarettes. 
         And he said:  Not that I'm aware of."  
         Now, Bobby Raulerson said he lived with 
     his grandmother for six months between 1991 
     and 1992, didn't see her smoke, didn't see or 
     smell any signs of smoking.  And he even told 
     us something else about this period in the 
     1980s.  He testified that Mrs. Odum told 
     Mrs. Hazouri that she was proud of her 
     quitting in the 1980s.  Mrs. Odum didn't tell 
     you that as part of her testimony.  
         Next up is Mrs. Odum's youngest son, 
     James Raulerson or Jimmy Raulerson.  He 
     testified that he remembered his grandmother 
     smoking when he was five or six, but last time 
     he saw her smoking was when he was 12 or 13, 
     in the early '80s, never saw her smoke again.  
     Never saw her smoke when he lived with her for 
     two years in the early '90s before her 
     diagnosis.  
         Let's look at his testimony.  And there 
     was a dispute over whether he was living with 
     her full-time or not.  He moved in in July of 
     '90 and moved out September '92:  "Talking 
     about September '90 to September '92, you lived there full-time?  
         "Yes.  
         "Okay.  Is it possible in your mind 
     during the length of time and the amount of 
     time that you spent in your grandmother's 
     house that your grandmother was smoking 
     cigarettes and you didn't know?  
         "No, she did not.  
         "And is it possible for her to do it -- 
     smoking without you detecting it during that 
     period of time?  
         "No, she did not smoke at all."  
         He lived there for over two years and he 
     said she did not smoke.  
         Now, interestingly, despite the fact that 
     Jimmy Raulerson lived with Mrs. Hazouri for 
     over two years, Mrs. Odum told you she wasn't 
     even sure that Jimmy ever lived with his 
     grandmother.  And he did for over two years.  
         Next we have Ernest Raulerson, 
     Mrs. Odum's ex-husband.  And he testified that 
     Ms. Hazouri quit sometime in the '80s:  "Best 
     of your recollection, he had a conversation 
     with her, she told you she had quit before 
     1990? "Yes, sir.  
         "And to the best of your recollection, 
     that conversation took place between 1986 and 
     1990?"  
         Now, those are three eye witnesses from 
     the 1980s who said she quit.  And you also saw 
     the testimony from Mrs. Hazouri herself and 
     her medical records.  The 1991 medical record 
     that refers to her as a previous smoker.  You 
     saw it.  And in the 1993 medical record it 
     says she smoked for 25 years, 15 cigarettes a 
     day and quit in '11.  
         Now, in opening statement I said, I don't 
     what the quitting leverage is.  But with some 
     of Mrs. Shamp's witnesses they said, oh, that 
     means she quit in November 1992.  I don't know 
     where we got that information.  I didn't hear 
     anybody take the stand and testify that that's 
     what it meant.  
         But whatever the answer to that, it's 
     evidence for sure that she quit and evidence 
     for sure that she quit long before her 
     diagnosis.  And Mrs. Hazouri was the source 
     for the information on her medical records.  
     In every record that mentions smoking, mentions that is she quit.  It mentions that 
     she quit before her diagnosis.  
         Now, on top of this evidence we've been 
     looking, there is one more witness who 
     supports the fact that Mrs. Hazouri quit in 
     the 1980s, and that's Nell Nelson.  And you 
     remember her.  She was probably the most 
     captivating witness who took the stand and 
     what did she say:  "Now, you testified that 
     Mrs. Hazouri was your very best friend.  
         "Yes, she was.  
         "And you never saw her smoke a cigarette?  
         "Never.  
         "And you said the only time you had heard 
     that she had smoked cigarettes was when she 
     told you after she was diagnosed?  
         "Right.  
         "So in any of the conversations you had 
     with your very good friend in the 1980s into 
     the 1990s, she never mentioned to you that she 
     was a cigarette smoker?"  
         And she said:  "No."  
         Mrs. Hazouri's very best friend never saw 
     her smoke, never saw her with a pack of 
     cigarettes, never saw a pack at her house, never saw an ashtray, and never smelled smoke 
     in the house.  
         And Ms. Nelson made it extremely clear 
     that she did not smell smoke in Mrs. Hazouri's 
     hair when she hugged her every time she saw 
     her.  Do you remember that testimony.  
         Now, Mr. Odum testified and made it a 
     point to tell you, I could smell the smoke in 
     her hair.  
         Now Ms. Shamp said you can question the 
     credibility of the witnesses.  I think you 
     should question the credibility of Richard 
     Odum's testimony.  And why?  Because you heard 
     on his deposition he said, he wasn't aware of 
     any conversations or discussions about smoking 
     with Mrs. Hazouri.  But on the stand he all of 
     a sudden, he recalled that he overheard some 
     things when he was in the den and something 
     was going on in the other room.  
         Well, with regard to smelling smoke, I 
     wonder if his sense of smell improved when he 
     took the witness stand as well.  And, 
     moreover, Nell Nelson told you she had no idea 
     that Ethel ever smoked, and while many other 
     people in the church came to her and asked her to pray for a number of things, including 
     smoking, her best friend, Mrs. Hazouri never 
     did.  
         Do you remember this testimony:  "And 
     Mrs. Hazouri never asked you to pray for her 
     or to help her stop smoking, correct?"  And 
     Nell said:  "No.  Others had, but she had 
     not."  
         Why?  Why didn't Mrs. Hazouri ask 
     Nell Nelson to pray for her?  Because she 
     didn't need to, because she had already 
     stopped smoking.  
         Now, go back to this chart.  This is the 
     evidence of when Mrs. Hazouri quit.  On one 
     side you have the disinterested factors, and 
     Mrs. Hazouri herself.  And on the other side 
     you have the person bringing the lawsuit and 
     her husband.  And I think it hurts the 
     plaintiff's theory in the case to say that the 
     person quit and they were motivated before a 
     diagnosis.  
         But you are the judges of the facts and 
     you're going to have to judge which facts to 
     believe.  And no matter what, we know that 
     Mrs. Hazouri had the ability to quit smoking.  Dr. Werner admitted that she had the ability 
     at any point in any decade.  
         Can we see that, please:  Anybody has the 
     ability, she had the ability the 1940s, the 
     1950s, the 1960s, 70s and 80s.  
         Because Mrs. Hazouri never experienced 
     the loss of control, never lost the ability to 
     quit, never had a maladaptive pattern of use, 
     and never was clinically impaired, she was not 
     addicted.  And because the plaintiff didn't 
     prove she was addicted, she didn't clear that 
     second hurdle either.  And for this additional 
     reason, the answer to the first question on 
     the verdict form has to be no.  
         Now, if you find otherwise, the third 
     hurdle to determine is to determine if 
     addiction was the legal cause of her lung 
     cancer.  And to be the legal cause the 
     addiction must be -- and you'll see it in the 
     instructions -- it must directly and in a 
     natural and continuous sequence caused her 
     death.  
         So, in other words, the addiction has to 
     be the but for the cause of her death, that's 
     but for the addiction, her death would not have occurred.  Well, addiction was not the 
     but for cause of her death.  
         Let's look at this slide I showed you in 
     opening:  Addiction did not directly and in a 
     natural and continuous sequence cause her 
     death.  Because what came in the way are these 
     choices, the choice to begin smoking, the 
     choice to smoke despite health warnings, to 
     smoke -- to choose the enjoyment she got out 
     of smoking over the risks, and the choice to 
     not quit until she was ready to quit.  
         Now, proving legal cause is kind of like 
     a highway.  It has to be a direct and natural 
     continuous sequence.  So for addiction to be 
     the legal cause of Mrs. Hazouri's disease, the 
     plaintiff has to prove that once she started 
     smoking, there was no way she could exit that 
     highway; that all of those off ramps were 
     blocked and she was destine to keep smoking 
     until it led to her disease.  A continuous 
     sequence, direct and unbroken.  And that's not 
     the case here.  
         Mrs. Hazouri had multiple exit ramps she 
     could have taken over the years, but instead 
     of taking them, she chose to stay on the highway.  And it was her choice to stay on the 
     highway that was the legal cause; not her 
     addiction.  
         Now, let me point out an issue about when 
     Mrs. Hazouri even got on the highway.  
     Plaintiff said that she started smoking when 
     she was about 13, and Dr. Werner said she got 
     addicted soon thereafter.  But there was no 
     evidence of her smoking a Reynolds' product 
     until the 1950s, at the earliest.  
         So if addiction during that first 20 
     years of smoking is a legal cause of her 
     death, that legal cause of her death can't be 
     linked to Reynolds.  Especially if you 
     consider Mrs. Hazouri said she only smoked for 
     25 years.  
         Now, we're going to talk in a minute 
     about Mrs. Hazouri's knowledge that smoking is 
     harmful.  But do you remember how Ms. Odum 
     testified every conversation about smoking was 
     with her mother.  Let's take a look at that:  
     "You told the jury earlier today that sometime 
     in the 1960s you recall telling her that you 
     wish she would quit smoking, try to quit 
     smoking. "Right.  Yes.  
         "And her response to you was, she asked 
     you to quit bugging her; right?  
         "Yes.  
         "And then she told you she would try to 
     quit when she was ready to quit.  
         "Yeah.  
         "And you talked about having 
     conversations with your mother throughout her 
     life about trying to quit smoking.  And each 
     time you had a conversation with her, it kind 
     of went the same way, didn't it?  
         "Yes, sir.  
         "She would tell you to quit bugging her.  
         "Yes, sir.  
         "And then she would tell you she would 
     try to quit when she was ready to quit.  
         "Yes, sir."  
         Mrs. Hazouri didn't want to be bugged.  
     She decided to pass up an exit, stay on the 
     highway, and that became the but for cause of 
     her death.  And she put off quitting because 
     she wasn't ready, she chose to stay on the 
     highway and became the but for cause of her 
     death. She could have exited the highway and  
     interrupted that direct and continuous 
     sequence, but she choose to continue.  And 
     why?  Why wasn't she ready to quit?  She 
     enjoyed smoking.  She told Mrs. Odum that she 
     enjoyed it and she liked it.  
         Reverend Gore said that Mrs. Hazouri, 
     when he asked her, why are your smoking?  She 
     told him it calmed her nerves.  She told him 
     it took her thoughts away from whatever issues 
     she faced on a daily basis.  And finally she 
     told him that she just enjoyed lighting a 
     cigarette and inhaling.  
         And during her opening statement 
     Ms. Shamp said personal choice is a factor in 
     this case, and it is.  And Mrs. Hazouri's 
     personal choice is the but for cause of her 
     smoking.  It's the but for cause of her 
     smoking because we know that when she made the 
     choice to quit, when she was ready to quit, 
     she did quit.  And no addiction got in the way 
     of that choice.  
         You saw what a couple of witnesses the 
     1986 Surgeon General's Report and how he 
     talked about smoking being a personal choice behavior.  And Dr. Burns agreed with that.  
     The Surgeon General Koop wrote:  Cigarette 
     smoking is an addictive behavior and the 
     individual smoker must decide whether or not 
     to continue that behavior.  
         "You agree with that, don't you?"  
         He said:  "Absolutely, sure."  
         And Dr. Werner agreed too, same 
     statement.  She said, "Yes.  That's the first 
     step making the decision of whether you're 
     going to stop is the first in having to quit."  
         Mrs. Hazouri was the one who made the 
     decision to continue that behavior.  And 
     Mrs. Odum testified that there were occasions 
     when her mother went without smoking for a 
     couple of days.  Do you remember that?  And 
     she said, she never encouraged her mom to try 
     to stick it out, to try to go another day.  
     Why didn't she do that?  Because she 
     recognized it was her mother's choice to smoke 
     or not.  
         Mrs. Hazouri and Mrs. Odum could have 
     exited that highway long before, but 
     Mrs. Hazouri made the choice to stay on it.  
         When her mother had pneumonia and Mrs. Odum saw her smoking, she didn't talk to 
     her about it.  Why?  Because she said it was 
     her choice whether she smoked or not.  So when 
     she had to describe why she didn't talk to her 
     mother about quitting, she said it was her 
     mother's choice.  
         And you heard from Reverend Gore, too.  
     He talked to Ethel about it and she agreed it 
     was a matter of choice, a matter of will.  He 
     told her, that's a choice, Ethel.  And she 
     agreed.  
         Now, in this lawsuit, to get money for 
     her mother's death and her mother's choices, 
     Mrs. Odum and her attorneys tell you that her 
     mother lost her control and she didn't have a 
     choice and that she smoked because of 
     addiction.  But during her life they said it 
     was because of her choice.  
         And you saw this from Dr. Cooper a couple 
     of different times.  He told you who was in 
     control.  He said:  "Ultimately, you are the 
     one who has control over your behavior.  That 
     cigarette is not going to jump into your 
     mouth, you're not going to go into a hypnotic 
     trance.  No matter how much you have smoked or how much you smoke, you the chose to light up 
     is always yours."   
         This is ANS9023:  "The choice to light up 
     is always yours."  
         And when Mrs. Hazouri made that choice, 
     she was the legal cause.  
         A couple of more things on this point.  
     We heard that Mrs. Hazouri said that making 
     the choice to quit smoking was easier said 
     than done.  Do you remember that testimony?  
     Let's look at it.  And of course it's easier 
     said than done.  It just makes sense.  But we 
     need to look at what she said and compare it 
     to what she did.  
         Ms. Hazouri told some people throughout 
     the course of her life that she wanted to quit 
     smoking, that she wished she could quit, and 
     that she wanted them to pray for her to quit.  
     That's what had she said.  But what did she 
     do?  If she started smoking when she was in 
     her teens in the 1930s and stopped in the 
     1980s, that means she smoked for about 50 
     years.  In those 50 years, almost five 
     decades, what did she do to try to stop 
     smoking?  You heard she tried hypnosis, she chewed regular gum, she prayed, and she quit 
     cold turkey.  
         Now, she also asked Reverend Gore for 
     counseling on one occasion or maybe a couple 
     of occasions.  And he told her, remove 
     yourself from people who smoke.  And Reverend 
     Gore said, I don't know if she ever took that 
     advice or not.  
         So we looked at her experience of 
     hypnosis in the 1950s.  We know she said it 
     didn't work, but we don't know what it was or 
     how long it lasted, we just know that she said 
     it wasn't working and she wanted to go back 
     into smoking.  She tried chewing gum.  No one 
     knows when and no one knows how many times.  
         And Dr. Werner told you that Mrs. Hazouri 
     stopped chewing gum because of her teeth.  She 
     didn't give up that attempt because of an 
     addiction compelled her to go back to smoking.  
     She quit it because of her teeth.  And if gum 
     wasn't a suitable method because of her teeth, 
     did she ever try something different to try to 
     quit?  No.
         And finally she prayed.  There is no 
     question that Mrs. Hazouri was prayerful.  And this is a sensitive subject to talk about.  As 
     I said in my opening, I do not dispute the 
     power of prayer.  
         But, in this case, what evidence was 
     there of anything Mrs. Hazouri did in 
     conjunction of those comments to try to stop 
     smoking?  She never threw out her cigarettes, 
     she never threw out her ashtrays, she never 
     tried nicotine gum, never tried the nicotine 
     patch.  
         MS. SHAMP:  Objection, Your Honor.  
         THE COURT:  Hold on.  
         MR. GEISE:  Your Honor, I'll move on.  
         MS. SHAMP:  Your Honor, I'd like an 
     instruction.  
         THE COURT:  Wait.  Wait.  Come to sidebar 
    now.
         (A sidebar conference was held outside 
the hearing of the jury as follows:)
         MS. SHAMP:  The nicotine patch was not 
     available and there has been no testimony that 
     the nicotine patch was available at that 
     time.  
         MR. GEISE:  Dr. Werner talked about it.  
         MS. SHAMP:  No, she didn't. MR. GEISE:  Mr. Parrish asked her about 
     it.  
         MS. SHAMP:  The nicotine patch didn't 
     become available until the '90s.  
         MR. GEISE:  '91.  I believe it was the 
    '91.  You said she smoked until '93.  
         MS. SHAMP:  No, I do not think that -- 
         MR. GEISE:  It's not -- 
         THE COURT:  What do you want to put on 
     the record?  
         MS. SHAMP:  Your Honor, I think there is 
     no evidence that the nicotine patch was 
     available for him to suggest that she didn't 
     utilize the nicotine patch I think it's 
     improper and I think you can instruct the jury 
     the nicotine patch was available.  
         MR. GEISE:  You had a witness who talked 
     about it.  
         MS. SHAMP:  She didn't say that it was 
    available.  
         MR. GEISE:  Then why was she talking 
    about in her diagnosis of Mrs. Hazouri?
         MS. SHAMP:  She did.
         MR. GEISE:  Your Honor, I'll move on.  
     I'll clear it up and say that the evidence, whether it was available or not, before she 
     died.  
         THE COURT:  All right.  Okay.  
         (Following the sidebar conference, the 
     following proceedings were had:)
         MR. GEISE:  I was running through the 
     things that there is no evidence she threw out 
     her cigarettes or her ashtrays, never tried 
     nicotine gum.  There was a question of when 
     the nicotine patch came out.  So you know 
     what?  Put it aside.  Forget about the 
     nicotine patch.  
         Another thing that there is no evidence 
     that Mrs. Hazouri ever did was ask Dr. Probes 
     for help in quitting or any other doctor.  You 
     didn't see that in any of the records.  
         Now, my son might ask me to pray that 
     he'll get an A on his history final.  But if 
     he isn't motivated to put in the work and to 
     study, it won't happen.  And we know what 
     Mrs. Hazouri said, but we also know what she 
     did, or more accurately, what she didn't do.  
         For many years she simply was not 
     motivated to quit.  She wasn't ready to quit.  
     Perhaps it was because she was married to another smoker, Bill Hazouri, and they enjoyed 
     smoking together.  And as long as he was 
     smoking, maybe she was never going to be ready 
     to quit.  Whatever that reason was, it wasn't 
     because of addiction.  And if she had primary 
     lung cancer, it was caused by that choice, her 
     choice to continue to smoke until she was 
     ready to quit.  
         That is the legal cause; not addiction.  
     Because she was the only person who could have 
     made the decision to exit the highway.  Her 
     choice whether to do that or not is the legal 
     cause, the but for cause of her disease.  And 
     whether we agree with it or not, we shouldn't 
     second guess it and we shouldn't award 
     Mrs. Odum with money for the choices her 
     mother made.  
         Now, if you get passed that first 
     question on the verdict form you'll continue 
     into the next two which are concealment and 
     conspiracy to conceal.  
         If we can bring those up.  You'll see 
     that they both ask about a concealment or 
     admission of a material fact about the health 
     effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both and legal cause.  
         And the one thing I want to point out is 
     when Mrs. Shamp was talking about these two, 
     she started talking about things in the public 
     and things all over the place.  But the 
     question that you have to answer, both of them 
     relate to Mrs. Hazouri.  These questions go to 
     Mrs. Hazouri and Mrs. Hazouri only.  
         And there are essentially two parts to 
     these questions.  First, you need to determine 
     if the information about the health risks and 
     addictive nature of cigarette smoking were 
     secret to Mrs. Hazouri?  And, if so, you'll 
     need to determine if she relied on any 
     statement to her detriment.  That's the legal 
     cause part of these two questions.  
         And here the information wasn't a secret 
     to Mrs. Hazouri and she did not rely on 
     anything any tobacco company said.  
         Let's look at the next one.  First, we 
     can't conceal information from somebody who 
     already knows the information.  So to be a 
     legal cause of Mrs. Hazouri's injury, the 
     concealed or omitted facts must have been 
     unknown to Mrs. Hazouri. So Ms. Shamp said I want to talk about 
     what was known.  I am.  I'm going to talk 
     about what was out there in the public and I'm 
     going to talk about what was known to 
     Mrs. Ethelene Hazouri.  
         Do you remember in opening statement 
     Mrs. Shamp said, the evidence would show the 
     public didn't know smoking was harmful?  And 
     Dr. Proctor took the stand and said relatively 
     very few people understood the harms in the 
     1950s.  
         Well, ladies and gentlemen, the other 
     side of the story showed just the opposite.  
     It showed that the public did know about the 
     risks of smoking and its addictive nature, and 
     more importantly, so did Mrs. Hazouri.  
         And we're going to need to start this 
     story before she was even born.  We're going 
     to start it with that 1906 Florida health 
     notes.  The State of Florida says:  Smoking is 
     the very worse form of tobacco addiction.  
         And Dr. Proctor told you about the 
     movement following alcohol prohibition.  
     Remember when he said, the crowds would chant, 
     nicotine next, nicotine next, nicotine next, because they were going to prohibit tobacco 
     and smoking?  And he said the reason they said 
     nicotine next is because nicotine was 
     synonymous with tobacco, because everybody 
     knew that that was the drug in tobacco that 
     made it hard to quit.  
         Ms. Shamp said I'm going to talk about 
     Reader's Digest.  I'll talk a few of them up, 
     why not.  You heard that Mrs. Hazouri read 
     Reader's Digest.  Let's look at a couple of 
     them.  1935, this is AIW130:  Of course it's 
     perfectly easy to give up smoking.  One would 
     not like to think that one has become such a 
     slave to tobacco.  
         Let's look at the next one, 1938:  
     Sometimes hap heartedly and sometimes 
     earnestly, he wrestles with his addiction.  
     Let him think.  
         Let's look at the last one.  Remember I 
     talked to Dr. Proctor about this for a while, 
     nicotine knockout and Gene Cunning?  All this 
     stuff was out there.  And these items helped 
     to demonstrate that the public was aware of 
     the information.  But boy, oh, boy, Reverend 
     Terry Gore's testimony proves that Mrs. Hazouri knew.  
         Let's talk about Reverend Gore.  In the 
     1950s, Mrs. Hazouri told him that she 
     understood that smoking could negatively 
     affect her health and she told him she had a 
     habit and was addicted.  Let's look at some of 
     his testimony:  "When did you meet her?  
         "At Central Baptist Church in the '50s.  
         "So back then she actually characterized 
     her smoking as an addiction?  
         "She did.  She referred to that often.  
         And the next line, please:  "So in the 
     1950s she asked you for assistance in 
     quitting, and one of the reasons was she knew 
     that smoking was affecting her health?  
         "She did, sir."  
         In the 1950s, Mrs. Hazouri knew the 
     material facts about the health effects and 
     addictive nature of smoking.  
         Now, during the 1950s, Reverend Gore said 
     he was also telling the youth ministry at 
     Central Baptist Church about the dangers of 
     smoking and telling the youth of the Central 
     Baptist Church to go home and tell their 
     parents what they learned.  And you heard that Reverend Gore remembers telling that to 
     Mrs. Odum.  And Mrs. Odum didn't remember 
     that, but Reverend Gore did.  
         Let's look at his testimony:  "And you 
     had a discussion with Mrs. Odum about her 
     mother smoking in the 1950; is that right?  
         "That's correct.  
         "And you discussed with her that smoking 
     was detrimental for her mother's health in the 
     1950s?  
         "I did." 
         Dr. Proctor said the consensus on  
     cigarette smoking and cancer developed in the 
     1950s.  Well, Mrs. Hazouri was right there at 
     that consensus.  She knew about the risk and 
     knew that her smoking behavior could be 
     addictive.  She described it as such.  And, 
     you know, other people possess the 
     information, too.  You saw this from 
     Dr. Heller and Dr. Burney.  
         Leroy Burney, the Surgeon General in '57:  
     Our position is that we have informed the 
     public through the excellent coverage of the 
     press, radio and TV.  And Dr. Heller said:  
     Newspapers, radio, TV, and other media have done an excellent job covering this problem 
     and a very objective job.  This is an 
     exceedingly valuable way of informing the 
     public.  
         Now, let's not forget that Surgeon 
     General Burney and Dr. Heller, they were 
     public health giants that lived and breathed 
     during this time in the 1950s.  They were 
     officials who had their boots on the ground at 
     the time and could give eye witness accounts, 
     and at the time they said the public knew.  
         Now, 60 or almost 70 years later 
     Dr. Proctor comes into this courtroom and 
     says, the Surgeon General and other health 
     officials were wrong.  Remember he said, he's 
     a seed to seam scientist?  They were just 
     beating their chests.  Do you remember that 
     testimony?  He said they have been beating 
     their chests.  
         Well, when Reverend Gore is talking to 
     Mrs. Hazouri and Mrs. Odum about the health 
     risk of smoking in the 1950s, was he beating 
     his chest, too?  
         Dr. Proctor tried to tell you that people 
     in the public were ignorant of the risks of smoking as late as 1964.  But not Ethelene 
     Hazouri.  You heard that she read the 
     newspaper, and the Jacksonville newspapers 
     covered the Surgeon General's Report when it 
     came out in '64.  And cigarette smoking was 
     held a grave hazard in health in the United 
     States.  
         You heard from Richard Odum that 
     Mrs. Odum told him that she told her mother 
     from the time she was an early teenager from 
     about the late '50s to early '60s that smoking 
     could affect her.  
         Let's talk about Reverend Gore.  In 1962, 
     he gave a sermon which Mrs. Hazouri attended 
     in which he preached about the detrimental 
     effects smoking had on health and how smoking 
     was an attack on the body's temple.  And after 
     the sermon Reverend Gore had a private 
     discussion with Mrs. Hazouri.  
         In that discussion, Mrs. Hazouri told him 
     that she agreed with what he said, and he told 
     her further about statistics on the health 
     risks of smoking from doctors at Johns 
     Hopkins, Duke University, and the Mayo Clinic.  
     And she told him that she agreed with those statistics.  
         Look at the testimony:  "And when you 
     told Mrs. Hazouri that again, she told you 
     that she agreed with that?  
         "She did.  
         "And I think as you told us before, she 
     said, Right on. 
         "She used that term to some degree, yeah.  
     She was trying to tell me that she agreed with 
     it and being emphatic about it.  
         "So she was emphatically agreeing with 
    it?  
         "She very definitely did.  She         
    emphatically agreed, "Right on, Reverend    
    Gore.  That's what she said."  
         Now, 1962, Ms. Shamp showed you a 
     document from Alan Rodgman.  You want to talk 
     about overwhelming evidence.  What 
     Dr. Reverend Gore told you, that is 
     overwhelming evidence of what Mrs. Hazouri 
     knew.  That Reverend Gore continued to preach 
     on about the dangers of smoking.  In 1967 and 
     1968, he talked about the Wednesday Bible 
     studies and the Sunday services where he again 
     warned about the dangers of smoking.  And again he had conversations with Mrs. Hazouri 
     after the sermon.  
         And this is what he said on this:  "And 
     in those conversations you told Mrs. Hazouri 
     that it was a proven fact that smoking was 
     detrimental to health?  
         "I told her that I believed that and that 
     was my opinion.  
         "And her response was she believed it, 
     too, correct?  
         "She said that they did, and she said 
     again, right on.  She said, yes.  Once again, 
     Right on, Reverend Gore.  She got the message.  
     She had the information."  
         And that was her response in 1962, in 
     1968, 1967.  She knew the risks and believed 
     they were proven facts.  
         You heard about in the '70s that 
     Mrs. Hazouri talked to her grandson about 
     cancer and Reverend Gore and her continued the 
     discussions, and the awareness continued.  
         Dr. Burns told you this in 1981, he 
     said -- "you told the group in 1981 that 95 
     percent of smokers were thoroughly aware of 
     the health risks and 90 thought it might affect their own health, correct?  
         "That's correct.  And I believe I said 
     that more smokers know that cigarette smoking 
     causes disease or cancer than know the name of 
     the president of the United States."  
         So on this first prong for questions two 
     and three, the plaintiff cannot prove that the 
     material information about the health effects 
     or the addictive nature were secrets to 
     Mrs. Hazouri.  They assured you they were not.  
         When you look at:  Did Mrs. Hazouri know 
     smoking was dangerous and addictive?  There is 
     only one answer to that question.  Yes.  
         Now, Ms. Shamp can look at a company 
     document or look at something else and say, 
     well, very few people know.  Well, you know 
     what?  This case isn't about all people.  It's 
     not about very few people.  It's about one 
     person.  It's about Ethelene Hazouri and 
     Ethelene Hazouri knew.  So for this reason 
     alone on questions two and three the answer 
     should be no.  
         Now, the second part of those two 
     questions.  The plaintiff has to build a 
     bridge between statements on one side of the river and Mrs. Hazouri on the other, that's 
     what she has to do.  And for purposes of that 
     verdict form, that bridge is the legal cause 
     and its reliance on these two questions, and 
     the plaintiff has the burden to prove it.  
         For these claims the plaintiff has to 
     prove that Reynolds' conduct caused 
     Mrs. Hazouri, not some other smoker, to take 
     some action, to rely on something that was or 
     wasn't said, and that get a disease caused by 
     smoking that she otherwise wouldn't have 
     gotten.  That's the burden.  And if the 
     plaintiff can't build that bridge, then she 
     failed to meet the burden.  
         The evidence that you heard in this trial 
     never let the plaintiff lay the first stone 
     down to build that bridge.  In this case there 
     is no evidence, none, that Mrs. Hazouri saw, 
     heard, read, or relied on anything Reynolds or 
     any other tobacco company said.  
         Let's look at this list.  All of the 
     witnesses you heard from that were asked:  Did 
     anyone say that she saw, heard, or read, or 
     relied on anything?  Frank Statement, there 
     was no evidence.  CTR, nope.  TIRC, huh-uh.  Tobacco Institute statements, nope.  Press 
     releases, nope.  White papers, no.  
     Interviews, no.  Statements, no.  No.  No.  
     No.  No evidence that she ever saw, heard, or 
     read any of these statements.  
         And if somebody else in the public did, 
     that's fine.  They can bring their own cases.  
     This is Mrs. Hazouri's case and there was no 
     evidence that she saw, heard, or read it.  
         Now, during voir dire I asked the entire 
     panel of people if anybody had heard of TIRC 
     or CTR or Frank Statement.  No one raised 
     their hand.  And if Mrs. Hazouri had been 
     sitting in that jury pool, she wouldn't have 
     raised her hand either because she had never 
     heard, read, saw, or relied on any of those 
     things.  
         And, you know, Dr. Proctor spent a long 
     time telling you about statements that 
     industry representatives made to the public.  
     Ms. Shamp showed you some this morning, she'll 
     probably show you some more this afternoon.  
     Statements that more research is needed.  No 
     proof of harm.  Still controversy.  Not proven 
     to be unsafe. Now, Dr. Proctor told you that those news 
     stories that were out there about the health 
     risks of smoking that sometimes contained a 
     brief response from the tobacco industry.  And 
     you remember Dr. Proctor called it the tail of 
     the kite?  Remember that testimony from 
     earlier in the trial?  Then ask yourselves, do 
     people ever look up in the sky and say, wow, 
     look at the tail on that kite?  People look at 
     the kite.  People notice the kite.  The public 
     noticed the kite and so did Mrs. Hazouri.  
         And no matter what Dr. Proctor said, he 
     wasn't here to prove reliance of Mrs. Hazouri.  
     Look at what he testified:  "You don't have 
     any information that Mrs. Hazouri believed 
     there was a controversy over the dangers of 
     smoking?  
         "That's right.  
         "And you don't know whether Mrs. Hazouri 
     relied on anything the tobacco company said or 
     did?  
         "That's right.  
         "And you don't know whether Ms. Hazouri 
     said or read any of the ads you showed?  
         "That's correct."
212-279-9424
Veritext Reporting Company
www.Veritext.com
212-490-3430
024f9a8a-1cf0-4a50-984e-5b360a641673
         Now, ladies and gentlemen, I agree that 
     some of those statements that you heard and 
     some of these statements that you saw are 
     stupid.  And some of those physicians, whether 
     they were based in science and people believed 
     them or not, they were brought to you for far 
     too long by representatives in the tobacco 
     company.  And in some other smoker's case they 
     may be relevant, but not in Mrs. Hazouri's 
     case because there is no evidence that she 
     ever saw or heard any of them.  
         Now, in addition to the lack of evidence 
     that she saw or heard, you did hear what she 
     said in her conversations.  When Mrs. Odum 
     asked her to quit, she said stop bugging me, 
     I'll try to quit when I'm ready.  
         And as I previewed in my opening 
     statement, that tells us a couple of things.  
     First, she wasn't ready to quit yet.  And it 
     tells us a lot of what she didn't say.  There 
     was no evidence that she ever told anybody, 
     including her daughter, that the risks weren't 
     proven.  There was not evidence that she told 
     her mother that smoking wasn't harmful.  There 
     was no evidence she didn't tell her ads that made her think smoking wasn't bad.  And she 
     didn't tell her she was waiting for some bit 
     of confirmation from somebody at R.J. Reynolds 
     that smoking was hazardous.
         Now, Ms. Shamp said that Jimmy Raulerson 
     doesn't agree, doesn't think that these things 
     were proven.  Well, this isn't Jimmy 
     Raulerson's case.  This is Ethelene Hazouri's 
     case.  
         And you heard from Reverend Gore that 
     Jimmy Raulerson even disagreed with this case.  
     And Reverend Gore pointed out the risk and the 
     scientific studies to Mrs. Hazouri over three 
     decades.  Did she ever tell him she doubted 
     the risks?  Did she ever tell him she needed 
     more information?  No.  She said she believed 
     it.  She believed it was a proven fact.  And 
     instead of expressing doubt, she expressed an 
     emphatic "Right on."  
         You may see it again this afternoon, you 
     saw it today, that doubt is our product sign.  
     Ladies and gentlemen, if doubt was a product, 
     it was never a product that Ethelene Hazouri 
     bought or used.  She had the material 
     information about the risk of smoking and its addictive nature.  In her words she knew it, 
     she accepted it, she believed it as a proven 
     fact.  
         Dr. Proctor talked about the meeting in 
     the Plaza Hotel in 1953 and then the Frank 
     Statement in 1954.  And then he said, that's 
     the start of this conspiracy.  But there's no 
     evidence that Mrs. Hazouri saw the Frank 
     Statement.  
         But interestingly at this very same time 
     in the 1950s, Mrs. Hazouri was having her own 
     meeting.  A private meeting with Reverend 
     Gore.  A meeting in which she told him she 
     wanted to quit her habit or addiction because 
     it was bad for her health and bad for her 
     testimony as a Christian.  That was her own 
     Frank Statement.  Her Frank Statement that she 
     knew and her Frank Statement that she didn't 
     rely on anything Reynolds or anyone else had 
     said.  
         Now there is one other point, when you 
     get the jury instructions that the question 
     three, the conspiracy claim is limited to 1953 
     and after.  And because of what Mrs. Hazouri 
     knew at that time, that conspiracy claim has to be rejected.  
         And for both of these claims, questions 
     two and three, the plaintiff has a build the 
     bridge between something Reynolds said or did 
     to Mrs. Hazouri, and she did not.  
         Let's look at this next slide.  So ask 
     yourself, for legal cause, for reliance, for 
     that bridge:  Did concealment of information 
     cause Mrs. Hazouri's death?  No.  
         This case is only about Mrs. Hazouri, and 
     there was no evidence that she heard or relied 
     on such statements.  And no matter what some 
     other smoker might have seen or what some 
     other smoker might have done, that's not 
     Mrs. Hazouri.  
         The plaintiff didn't prove this, ladies 
     and gentlemen.  There is no proof of reliance.  
     And the answers to questions two and three 
     have to be no.  
         Just a couple more minutes and I 
     appreciate your patience this morning.  
         Let me touch on ads for just a moment.  I 
     told you in opening you're going to see a lot 
     of ads from Dr. Proctor, and you did.  And I 
     told you they're probably going to try to upset you with allegations about youth 
     marketing, and casting stones about ads themes 
     were used by a variety of consumer goods, and 
     you did.  
         Dr. Proctor showed you ads from Lucky 
     Strike and Chesterfields, brands Mrs. Hazouri 
     never smoked.  You saw a Marlboro truck in 
     Superman II movie.  There is no evidence that 
     Mrs. Hazouri went to see Superman II, or 
     Superman I, for that matter.  
         Marlboro isn't made by my client and 
     Ms. Hazouri never smoked Marlboro.  They 
     showed you documents that contained statistics 
     from public information cites on statistics on 
     youth numbers in the 1970s and 1980s.  And 
     some of those numbers are in Reynolds' 
     documents.  
         Again, they showed you those documents to 
     tick you off.  These documents are in the 
     1970s and the 1980s.  Mrs. Hazouri was in her 
     50s or 60s at that time.  And they talked this 
     morning about a document for a new brand for 
     smokers.  Did that have any connection at all 
     with Mrs. Hazouri?  
         Dr. Proctor, remember he talked about the campaign for target youth?  And they took him 
     through those meet the TIRC ads and the candid 
     ads, and this old guy with finger jewelry of a 
     sweaty tank top.  And Dr. Proctor said, Oh, 
     yeah, that appeals to the youths, that appeals 
     to youth.  Everything does to Dr. Proctor.  
         They told you that Reynolds used to 
     sponsor Winston Cup Racing.  There is no 
     evidence that Mrs. Hazouri ever went to a race 
     or even watched one on TV.  You heard her 
     hobbies were bowling, gardening, and cooking 
     dumplings.  That's what you heard.  Not time 
     trials, trading paint, or asphalt bolders.  
     Why are they showed you that?  
         They showed you an ad with Joe Dimaggio.  
     Remember that one?  There is no evidence that 
     Mrs. Hazouri was a baseball fan.  And even 
     Dr. Proctor told you that when Ms. Shamp 
     picked that ad, he thought it was a curious 
     choice for this case.  
         Now, the only ad or jingle ever mentioned 
     was:  Winston tastes good like a cigarette 
     should.  Mrs. Odum is saying on direct and 
     saying it again on cross-examination.  But 
     look at her testimony and it reveals that that many ads has nothing to do with Mrs. Hazouri.  
         I asked her:  "And your mother didn't 
     tell you that that jingle was the reason she 
     smoked Winstons, did she?  
         "No, she did not.  
         "And you didn't have any discussion with 
     your mother of any other cigarette 
     advertisements, correct?  
         "Correct."
         And, you know, remembering a catchy 
     jingle proves nothing.  You can be a regular 
     McDonald's or your can be a vegetarian and you 
     probably remember the old Wendy's, Where's the 
     beef commercial.  And whatever insurance you 
     have, everyone can probably sing along:  Like 
     a good neighbor, State Farm is there.  
         It proves nothing.  The important facts 
     for this case are that no witness who knew 
     Mrs. Hazouri testified that she ever smoked a 
     brand of cigarette because of an ad, because 
     of a jingle or any other statement by 
     Reynolds.  
         Ms. Shamp mentioned filters.  There is 
     not a single witness who testified as to why 
     Mrs. Hazouri picked the brands she did.  Not Mrs. Odum, not Dr. Proctor, nobody.  
         Ms. Shamp spent a lot of time this 
     morning talking about the enormous amount of 
     advertising money that Reynolds spent.  And at 
     one point she said, you know, advertising and 
     promotion.  And I went over that with 
     Dr. Proctor how most of it is a promotion at 
     the store level in this case.  
         But with regard to advertising, you might 
     be surprised to hear this.  Judge Mitchell is 
     going to instruct you that R.J. Reynolds 
     cannot be held liable for merely 
     manufacturing, selling, or advertising 
     cigarettes.  It's going to be in the jury 
     instructions you get.  
         Plaintiff knew that.  And worse yet, they 
     knew that advertising had nothing to do with 
     Mrs. Hazouri, but they spent all that time 
     talking about it in hopes that that would 
     upset you.  
         Now, I'm going to move pretty quickly 
     through the last couple of things on the 
     verdict form.  If you get to question four, 
     the allocation of fault you'll have already 
     decided that Mrs. Hazouri had primary lung cancer, that she was addicted, that addiction 
     caused her cancer, and that Reynolds' conduct 
     was a legal cause of her lung cancer.  
         Now, I think you can understand 
     throughout the morning, I don't think you 
     should get to this point, but I'm going 
     address it.  And if you get that far, you'll 
     have to allocate fault between Reynolds and 
     Mrs. Hazouri.  
         And let's look at this slide, because the 
     allocation of fault is for Mrs. Hazouri's 
     death.  And I want you to keep a couple of 
     things in mind.  The assignment of the fault 
     relegates only to actions that were a legal 
     cause of Mrs. Hazouri's death.  So whatever 
     you're comparing, it has to have been the 
     legal cause of her death.  
         And Reynolds cannot be assigned fault for 
     actions that were not the legal cause of 
     Mrs. Hazouri's death.  
         So when you're asked to consider all the 
     evidence, for this question you have to 
     consider the evidence that goes to the legal 
     cause of her death.  
         And, again, I want to remind you of this 20-plus year history at the beginning of 
     Mrs. Hazouri's smoking history.  Her 30s, 40s, 
     and into the 50s where we don't know what she 
     smoked, and there is no evidence that it was a 
     Reynolds' product.  I suggest Reynolds should 
     not be assigned to any fault for that period 
     of smoking for sure.  
         Now, Ms. Shamp tried to play it cute by 
     saying, it's up to you to determine if 
     Mrs. Hazouri was responsible or not.  But they 
     never acknowledge or accept any responsibility 
     for Mrs. Hazouri's decision to start smoking, 
     and continue smoking until she made the choice 
     she was ready to quit and did.  
         And here I'll come back to the words of 
     the plaintiff's own experts:  Dr. Werner 
     agrees that the decision whether or not to try 
     to quit is 100 percent within the smoker's 
     control.  
         And Dr. Burns said this:  "You've said 
     many times that smokers are responsible for 
     their own smoking behavior, correct?  
         "That's correct.  
         "And even if they're addicted, smokers 
     are still responsible for their own smoking behavior, correct?  
         "That's correct.  The fact that someone 
     is addicted is a barrier to behavior change, 
     but it doesn't free them from responsibility 
     for their own behavior."  
         But Mrs. Odum doesn't think her mother is 
     responsible at all.  
         Look at how Mrs. Hazouri accepted 
     responsibility during her life.  Ms. Shamp 
     talked about whether she made adult decisions 
     when was she was a teenager.  When her mother 
     died, she left school and accepted the 
     responsibility of raising 12 brothers and 
     sisters.  That's a pretty responsible decision 
     to make.  
         She got married and divorced in that time 
     period.  I think those are pretty responsible 
     decisions.  With her second husband Billy, you 
     heard he was busy at work and she accepted 
     responsibility of raising Mrs. Odum.  
         And when she was dying of cancer, she 
     never placed the blame on Reynolds.  And if 
     Mrs. Hazouri had to assign responsibility or 
     fault, do you think she would accept it?  I 
     think she would. Because ultimately you're the one who has 
     control over your behavior.  And it's not 10 
     percent control or 50 percent control.  You 
     have 100 percent control.  Nobody made 
     Mrs. Hazouri's decisions for her.  Nobody 
     could decide for her to choose to smoke.  
     Nobody could choose for her to stop the 
     smoking.  Not Fred Flintstone, not Joe 
     DiMaggio, not Reverend Gore, and not 
     Mrs. Odum.  Only Mrs. Hazouri could make those 
     choices.  
         So when it comes down to fault and 
     responsibility, when you look at 
     Mrs. Hazouri's knowledge about the risks, when 
     you look at the power and the ability she had 
     over her smoking, and you look at the 
     responsibility she had to choose health over 
     smoking, I submit she's 100 percent at fault 
     because ultimately she was the one with 
     responsibility for and control over her 
     behavior.  And somebody who in her life took 
     responsibility for her actions, so too in this 
     courtroom, she should be held responsible for 
     her actions.  
         Now, if you find everything that I've said unpersuasive and decide to return a 
     verdict for Mrs. Hazouri, you'll have to 
     decide on the amount of damages for Mrs. Odum.  
         And this is -- I agree with Mrs. Shamp at 
     least on this one thing.  This is a hard thing 
     to talk about.  You can't put a value on a 
     human life.  Whenever anyone, any of us loses 
     a family member, but the loss is real.  And, 
     you know, we all feel compassion and we all 
     wish Ms. Odum the best, and anybody who loses 
     somebody.  But compassion and good wishes are 
     not reasons to exceed common sense and good 
     judgment.  
         And I would suggest that the evidence in 
     this case suggests that an award should be in 
     the thousands, not in the millions if there is 
     an award at all.  Certainly not six million.  
         It isn't a question of whether R.J. 
     Reynolds is a big company.  If you find 
     Reynolds' liable, it's a question of what 
     damages Mrs. Odum has as a result of her 
     mother's death.  
         And you heard that she was 47 when her 
     mother died.  She was 35 when her father died.  
     And I'm sure the loss of her father was a real loss as well.  And at the time that 
     Mrs. Hazouri died, she wasn't financially 
     supporting Mrs. Odum.  
         Mrs. Odum didn't incur any expenses 
     because of her mother's death.  The only thing 
     she can remember was maybe the cost of the 
     obituary.  And while she was understandably 
     saddened by the loss of her mother, she didn't 
     seek any counseling or need any medication.  
         And I thought this was an interesting 
     point.  She didn't call Reverend Gore for any 
     support in the 19 years following her mother's 
     death, but she did call him for support and 
     comfort about his lawsuit.  I think that's an 
     important fact.  
         So if you make an award and decide to 
     compensate her, please compensate her based on 
     the evidence in this case.  
         And finally, and this is a finally for me 
     because I don't get to speak again.  If you 
     get all the way through the verdict form you 
     have to decide whether punitive damages are 
     warranted.  And if we get that far, you'll 
     have already fully compensated Mrs. Odum for 
     her mother's death. And punitive damages are not about 
     compensation or making someone whole.  
     Punitive damages are about more money.  
         Look at the slide.  And the other thing 
     about it is punitive damages are damages in 
     addition to damages that fully compensate the 
     plaintiff.  
         Punitive damages can be awarded only for 
     conduct that was a legal cause of the harms 
     suffered by the plaintiff.  
         And importantly in this case if you get 
     to this point, and I don't think you should 
     but if you do, punitive damages cannot be 
     based on those findings, the findings that 
     Ms. Shamp showed to you.  
         Punitive damages are designed to punish 
     and deter, punish her conduct that is 
     tantamount to reckless disregard to human 
     life.  And to prove it, the plaintiff has got 
     to meet a higher level of proof, higher than 
     all the other hurdles, and it's called clear 
     and convincing evidence.  
         And you'll see in the jury instructions 
     that burden is more compelling and persuasive.  
     Clear and convince evidence is evidence that's precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of 
     such weight that it produces a firm belief or 
     conviction about the matter at issue.  
         So if you get to the point and you're 
     considering whether to punish Reynolds, I ask 
     you to consider the testimony from Dr. Figlar.  
     And what you heard about what he and others at 
     Reynolds have done to try to develop a product 
     that may reduce risk.  You heard, cigarettes, 
     it's an inherently risky product.  
         And one thing about Dr. Figlar, remember, 
     he doesn't get paid to come to court to 
     testify.  And Ms. Shamp asked him about his 
     yearly salary as a vice president of a company 
     with over 4,000 employees.  But his yearly 
     salary is about what Dr. Proctor gets paid for 
     three good months on the witness stand.  
         And Dr. Figlar told you that Reynolds 
     went to work in the 1950s identifying smoking 
     constituents.  He told you that Reynolds alone 
     identified between a third and a half of all 
     of it, including the carcinogens.  
         He talked about tar and nicotine levels 
     and where they are now.  You saw the chart, 
     and whether it fluctuates a little bit once it gets down to almost as low as they can get it.  
     You saw where it started in the '50s, and you 
     saw where those numbers are now.  There has 
     been a dramatic reduction in tar and nicotine.  
         In the 1960s, Reynolds provided 
     information to the Surgeon General's Report, 
     and that's when they joined the National 
     Cancer Institute of Tobacco Working Group.  
     They continued that work in the 1970s, and 
     they explored then with that group with those 
     suggestions the low tar and medium nicotine 
     cigarettes that the Surgeon General, NCI, and 
     Dr. Russell proposed.  
         The 1980 you saw their efforts continue 
     and focus on heat, not burn cigarettes, 
     Premier, Premier monograph.  You saw that 
     book.  That's an exhibit.  And later Eclipse.  
         And I've got to stop for a moment on this 
     Eclipse thing with the Labstat study.  Leave 
     aside whatever Labstat was trying to do when 
     Dr. Figlar was talked about that.  But the 
     comparison was between Eclipse, which had more 
     milligrams of tar to begin with versus 
     cigarettes that had less milligrams of tar.  
         And when they tested it they found that low and behold Eclipse had more milligrams of 
     tar than the cigarettes that had less 
     milligrams of tar.  Now, we can talk about all 
     these comparisons, but that's what they 
     started out with.  
         Let me -- I'm sorry.  I had to pause for 
     a moment.  The other thing you saw yesterday 
     was that 1985 document on Y1 that Ms. Shamp 
     brought up today.  Well, first of all, it was 
     one of only a couple of documents that 
     Ms. Shamp asked Dr. Figlar about yesterday.  
     And that was her opportunity to grill him 
     about anything.  
         And she asked him about Y1 and made it 
     sound like it was a sinister secret project in 
     the deep woods of North Carolina that nobody 
     knew about.  But you heard actually the idea 
     of a high nicotine strain of tobacco was the 
     idea that came from the U.S. Department of 
     Agriculture.  They came up with it.  Was B&W 
     then looking at it and called it Y1?  Yes.  
     But the idea of looking at this high nicotine 
     strength came from the United States 
     Government.  I mean that was just the last of 
     all those half stories you heard throughout this trial.  
         Speaking of farm, I guess, in North 
     Carolina.  You heard that Reynolds discovered 
     a way, a different way to cure tobacco that 
     lowered those tobacco specific interests and 
     Reynolds shared it with the world.  You saw 
     the results of Reynolds' efforts over the 
     years.  
         And no matter what Mrs. Shamp says now, 
     you've heard from Dr. Proctor, you heard from 
     Dr. Burns that the entire time that 
     Mrs. Hazouri was alive, the public health 
     community, including Dr. Burns, encouraged 
     Reynolds to try to develop and make a lower 
     tar and nicotine cigarette.  
         Dr. Figlar showed you Reynolds took out 
     dozens of patents and how many times and how 
     many authors the Surgeon General has cited 
     from Reynolds starting back in 1964 to 2010, 
     all those people.  
         And one thing about the 2010 SGR, you saw 
     where Dr. Figlar said on the Reynolds' web 
     site like, go ahead, rely on the 2010 SGR.  
     It's out there, the public can look at it.  
         You've heard about Dr. Rodgman's speech, the American Chemical Society where he 
     identified the constituents in smoke including 
     benzopryrene.  He even drew the diagram of it.  
     You saw Reynolds' published that huge book on 
     Premier, and a book called the Biology of 
     Nicotine with multiple chapters on nicotine 
     receptors.  In addition, you know, Reynolds is 
     focusing on Snus and then the nicotine 
     replacement therapies now.  And Dr. Figlar 
     told you why.  
         And the idea of trying to put out 
     products that have less risk to health is not 
     a reason to award punitive damages.  And the 
     record for 50 years with Reynolds is not a 
     record of wanton conduct or disregard for 
     human life.  It's a record of trying to lower 
     the risks of an inherently risky but always 
     legal product.  There were some successes and 
     some failures, but they tried.  
         And in trying to lower the risks of an 
     inherently risky but legal product, Reynolds 
     shouldn't be punished.  
         Ladies and gentlemen, in jury selection 
     each of you committed to holding plaintiff to 
     her burden of proof.  And you committed that if the evidence warranted it, you would have 
     the ability to enter a verdict in favor of my 
     client.  --
         For all the reasons I went through today 
     and all the reasons you saw during the trial, 
     the greater weight of the evidence in this 
     case, in Ethelene Hazouri's case, compels a 
     verdict for Reynolds or each and every 
     question.  
         Mrs. Hazouri lived her life the way she 
     wanted to.  I ask you not to award the 
     plaintiff by make her mother a victim for the 
     choices she made during her life.  
         And this is the only chance that I'll get 
     to speak with you, because the plaintiff has 
     the burden of proof here.  Ms. Shamp will get 
     a rebuttal.  And we'll probably go to lunch 
     and so she's going to have time to think of 
     what she wants to say in response to what I've 
     said.  
         And I can't predict what she's going to 
     say, and because I don't get a chance to 
     respond to her, I ask that one of you be my 
     advocate in the jury room.  You've seen time 
     and time again throughout this trial how we have responded to show you the other side of 
     the story and point out the full story.  So as 
     you deliberate, I asked you to keep the full 
     story in mind and answer Ms. Shamp as you 
     think I would if I had that one last 
     opportunity.  
         Ladies and gentlemen, it has been a great 
     pleasure to try this case in front of the 
     eight of you.  It's a cool thing that we as 
     lawyers get to do is to try cases in front of 
     jurors.  It's weird after three weeks we feel 
     like we kind of know each other but we don't 
     ever get a chance to talk.  
         I want to thank you again for letting us 
     do what we do by showing up and serving as a 
     juror.  Again, on behalf of myself and 
     Mr. Parrish, and the 4,000 men and women at 
     R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, thank you very 
     much.  
