         MS. SHAMP:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Good morning, ladies and gentlemen of the jury.
         THE JURY:  Good morning.
         MS. SHAMP:  First I want to thank you.  I know
    that there has been a lot of evidence that has been
    presented, a lot of documents, and a lot of
    testimony, and I know that you were paying
    attention.  I saw you taking notes.  And so I want
    to thank you for your attention throughout this
    process on behalf of myself and my client and my
    entire team.
         When we started this case two and-a-half weeks
    ago I told you that this story had two parts, if you
    will, two chapters.  The first is the way R.J. Reynolds acted, its conduct, what they knew, what
    they did(sic), and what they did.  And it's also the
    story about Ethel Hazouri, a good women who bought
    the defendant's cigarettes for decades, how she
    became addicted, and how eventually that product
    took her life, how she struggled with that
    addiction, as so many others have.
         But this is not two stories.  It's one story.
    It's the story of how one company's actions and
    decisions and choices have impacted the life of one
    woman, and the life of millions of Americans.  It's
    a story about their conduct that started in 1953 and
    continues up until today.
         So let me take you back again.  Ethel Hazouri
    was a good woman.  She was born in Alabama on a
    farm, she married a soldier, she followed him to
    Jacksonville, which was his home.  Together they had
    a child.  They worked hard to make a good life.  She
    was faithful to her church, she was faithful to her
    family, and she was a good cook.  And she smoked.
         We know she started smoking when she was a
    young girl, when she was 13 years old.  We know she
    smoked through the 40's, the 50's, the 60's, the
    70's, and 80's.  And she finally quit when she was
    diagnosed with lung cancer and was put on oxygen that she had to take home.
         We know she then suffered through a terrible
    illness.  You heard testimony about how awful the
    last days of her life were.  And we know that her
    daughter nursed her through that.
         This case is about Ethel Hazouri, but it's also
    about R.J. Reynolds.  It's about the company; what
    they knew, what they told people, and what they hid.
         It's the story of both.  How they are
    interchanged, how they are inextricably linked
    together.
         This is my closing statement.  It's my
    opportunity to talk to you about what the evidence
    that was put on proved.  I'm not going to rehash
    what all the evidence was over the last two
    and-a-half weeks because I know you were paying
    attention, but what I do want to do is talk about
    how that evidence that we have put on proves what we
    said on the first day of trial, and how it proves
    the things that you're going to be called upon to
    decide.
         So when I was thinking about how I would, you
    know, sort of summarize or put together all of this
    evidence and talk to you about it, and how to make
    it simple and easy for you to understand, I decided the easiest thing to do was to use the verdict form,
    because the judge is going to give you a verdict
    form at the end of this case which has questions on
    it that you're going to have to go through and
    answer.
         So what I want to do is talk about that verdict
    form and how the evidence in this case proves what
    you need to respond to on that verdict form.
         The first issue you're going to have to decide
    on the verdict form is whether Ethel Hazouri was a
    member of the Engle class.  And the judge will
    instruct you about that.
         And y'all will remember what the Engle class
    is.  The Engle class is the class action that we
    talked about in the very beginning of the case where
    this information was tried for a year, and documents
    and testimony was put on, and at the end of that
    case the jury decided certain things.
         And you remember what a class action is.  A
    class action is when a few people are able to pursue
    a claim on behalf of a large group.
         So the first question you have to decide is, is
    Ethel Hazouri part of the group?  Is she one of
    those people that the class action was pursued on
    behalf of? That's the first question that you have to
    decide.  And the judge is going to instruct you what
    class membership is.  Okay.  And this is what it is,
    and it's very simple really:  To prove Ethelene
    Hazouri was a member of the Engle class plaintiff
    must prove by the greater weight of the evidence
    that Ethelene Hazouri was addicted to smoking
    cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such
    addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer?
         That's the class membership question, and it
    will be the first question on the verdict form.
         If the plaintiff is a member of the Engle class
    then she's entitled to the benefits of the Engle
    findings.  Now, I'm not going to go through all of
    these right now.  We're going to through them later,
    but I wanted to remind you what the Engle findings
    were:  That cigarettes cause lung cancer; that the
    nicotine in cigarettes is addictive; that R.J.
    Reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were
    defective and unreasonably dangerous.
         You remember what the judge instructed you
    about those findings.  And, in fact, those will be
    in the instructions that he hands back to you.  The
    six Engle findings will actually be in that paper so
    that you will have them to look at. So the verdict form that you have, Question 1:
    Was Ethelene Hazouri addicted to cigarettes
    containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a
    legal cause of her cancer?
         Now I want to talk for a minute about the
    burden of proof, because the burden of proof is what
    the judge instructed you at the beginning, he'll
    instruct you again, means the greater weight of the
    evidence.  So when the judge says the plaintiff has
    to prove by the greater weight of the evidence, that
    means simply if you take all of the evidence that
    was put in during this trial and put that on one
    side of the scale, and the evidence to the other
    contrary position on the other side of the scale,
    which one is heavier, which side has the greater
    weight of the evidence?
         So when I talk about the issues that you're
    going to be called upon to decide what I'm going to
    try to do throughout this process is talk to you
    about what the evidence is that proves the things
    that you're going to be called upon to decide.
         Now, one important thing is, that everything
    that you have been told is evidence from the stand,
    and all of the documents that you will have back
    there are evidence.  If the judge let it in, if the judge allowed the witness to talk about it, and if
    the documents come back, then you are entitled to
    consider that as evidence.
         And you're going to have basically three
    categories of evidence in this case.  You're going
    to have a lot of internal R.J. Reynolds documents.
    They're important, and we'll talk about later some
    of the reasons, some of the things that are in there
    that are important.
         But those things are evidence which you can
    utilize in order to decide whether plaintiff has
    proven by the greater weight of the evidence the
    things that she's called upon to decide.
         Second, governmental documents and other
    documents.  You will have -- I know you've seen me
    many, many times throughout the trial look at this
    document, which is the Surgeon General's report from
    2010.  This is evidence.  All right.  And you can
    look when you go back there at the number of
    scientists who are on the front pages of it, the
    number of the people who contributed to putting this
    together.  And the judge has let it back because it
    is evidence for you to consider.  And it's a
    governmental publication.
         Not all documents get to go back, but documents that have weight of the kind that these documents
    do, this kind of evidence, is allowed to go back in
    court.
         You'll also have more Surgeon General's
    reports.  You'll have monographs.  You'll have
    important monographs which talk about things like
    advertising, talk about things like marketing
    towards youth.  And all of that is evidence which
    you are entitled to consider when rendering your
    opinion in this case, rendering your decision.
         And then finally, you have the testimony from
    the stand.  And those three things make up what the
    evidence is that you are to consider when looking at
    the verdict form.
         All right.  So now let's talk about what
    Question 1 one asks, because it actually has three
    parts that I need to talk about.
         All right.  The first part:  Was Ethelene
    Hazouri addicted to cigarettes containing
    cigarettes?  That's Part 1.  The second is:  Was
    such addiction a legal cause -- that's Part 2 -- of
    her lung cancer?  That's Part 3.
         So I want to talk about what the evidence is
    with respect to each of those three things.  I think
    the first one is fairly simple, and you've heard a lot of testimony about that.  So let's talk about
    some of the testimony that you heard.
         First, you heard a lot of testimony, and you'll
    have back with you a lot of documents which talk
    about the nature of nicotine and the nature of
    addiction in general.  And you heard a lot about
    that.
         The first thing, and nobody disputes that
    nicotine is a drug, and it's a potent drug, and
    everybody agreed with that.  Nicotine is addictive.
    Nobody disagreed with that.  That's undisputed.  It
    is a drug and it is addictive.
         Nicotine changes the brain.  Everybody talked
    about that.  It is an actual change in the brain
    structure.  You'll remember the PET scan that Dr.
    Werner talked to you about, how the actual nicotine
    receptors in the brain change when the brain is
    exposed to nicotine.
         You also know that 40 to 45 percent of smokers
    try to quit every year.  That was the testimony from
    the stand, and it was also the testimony in the
    Surgeon General's report, that 40 to 45 percent of
    smokers try to quit every year, and less than 5
    percent are successful.
         The very first witness in this case was Dr. Burns.  That was a long time ago, but he was the
    doctor, you remember, that we put on by videotape,
    and he was the one who had written some of the
    Surgeon General's reports, and he talked about what
    the Surgeon General had done when they investigated
    this, and the number of studies that go into this,
    that 45 percent of the people who smoke try to quit
    every year, but only 5 percent are successful.  The
    relapses rates are discussed in there.
         How many times -- you'll remember Dr. Werner
    said that it typically takes between five and seven
    attempts before somebody is able to quit.
         5.  The longer you smoke, the more you smoke,
    the greater your likelihood is that you're addicted.
    Everybody agreed to that.  Even Dr. Barnett, when I
    put her on the -- when I cross-examined her agreed
    to that, that the longer you smoke and the more you
    smoke the greater your likelihood is that you will
    be addicted.
         And finally:  Beginning smoking in the early
    teens increases the likelihood of addiction.  Now,
    that's not only discussed by both of the witnesses
    on the stand -- and you'll remember, Dr. Barnett
    admitted that as well from the stand -- but it's
    also discussed in detail in the Surgeon General's report, that early initiation changes the brain.
         You will have this document back with you as
    well, which is a picture of the brain in early
    adolescence, and how it is not fully formed, and the
    fact that they're studying and knowing is, is that
    when you change the brain while it's still
    developing, that the strength of those changes is
    greater, and the risk of addiction is greater.
         So what do we know about Ethelene Hazouri's
    smoking?  What is the evidence with respect to
    whether she was addicted?
         What we know about addiction is part of that
    evidence, but also we look at what her smoking
    history was.  The evidence is that she smoked
    between 15 and 30 cigarettes a day for 48 years.
         Now, you heard the testimony about that, and
    nobody has disputed that testimony, that it was
    between 15 and 30.  You remember the medical record
    I showed many times that says she reported 15
    cigarettes day.  Then her daughter's testimony that
    she bought a carton a week continually throughout
    her life.  15 to 13 -- 30 cigarettes a day for more
    than 48 years.
         And the reason I used 48 years, that was if we
    start at 13 and stop in 1983.  The evidence was she smoked all the way to 1993.  But even if you give
    the earliest quit date that somebody testified to,
    48 years of smoking.
         Second, we know she began when she was 13 years
    old.  She was in that period of early adolescence
    which makes stronger brain changes.  That's part of
    the evidence that you have, and she was one of those
    whose brain was changed early and stronger.
         And the Surgeon General's reports, and you
    heard Dr. Werner talk about from the stand, their
    relapse rates are greater, their difficulty in
    quitting is greater if they start in early
    adolescence and continue to smoke.
         We know that she was unable after multiple
    attempts to quit, that she tried, that she was
    consistently telling people she wanted to quit and
    she was trying to quit.
         You heard Reverend Gore, you'll remember his
    testimony from the stand, who counseled her.  You'll
    remember that she tried hypnosis over time, that she
    tried prayer, that she used gum, that she was
    continually trying and battling and losing.
    Battling and losing.
         Now, importantly the question of addiction is
    not about whether you think she tried hard enough, whether you think that she should have, you know,
    thrown away her ashtray, whether you think -- that's
    not the question of addiction.
         Because you remember I asked everybody, the
    ability to quit has really nothing to do with
    addiction, but it's everyone who is addicted,
    everyone who is addicted to anything has the ability
    to quit.
         So the question on addiction is not whether you
    think she tried hard enough.  You can think about
    that and deliberate about that later on in the jury
    select- -- in the verdict form when it comes to
    comparative fault, when it comes to when you have to
    say what was her fault versus what -- then that's
    when you can look at that, not here, because the
    issue is whether she was physically addicted.
    That's it.  That's the only question.
         You remember I asked Dr. Barnett that.  I said,
    not a question of whether she could have quit.
    That's not part of addiction.  Not the question of
    whether she wanted to quit or how bad.  The question
    is whether she was addicted, whether she was
    physically addicted.  Remember I asked Dr. Barnett,
    when I was asking her questions, I had an uncle who
    never wanted to quit, but he was addicted to alcohol.
         So the question you have to decide is whether
    she was physically addicted, and that's a simple
    question in this case.  That is not a hard question
    in this case.  The evidence is clear that she was
    physically addicted.  The evidence is clear and
    undisputed.
         Remember I asked Dr. Barnett -- I was surprised
    she did volunteer this.  I said, was Ethelene
    Hazouri's brain changed?  She said yes.  She said,
    yes, her brain was changed.  Her brain was changed,
    and it was changed in adolescence, and there is no
    real question but that Ethelene Hazouri was addicted
    to cigarettes containing nicotine.
         Now, you have the testimony from Dr. Werner.
    And you'll remember Dr. Werner from the stand.  Dr.
    Werner is a professor at the University of Florida.
    She's vice-chairman of the department of psychiatry
    at the University of Florida.  She is assistant
    professor and director of the forensic psychiatric
    division at the University of Florida.  She runs the
    forensic -- along with a codirector she runs the
    forensic psychiatric division at the University of
    Florida.  She is a highly-credentialed psychiatrist.
    She's at the Spring Hill Health Center at the University of Florida in Gainesville.
         You remember me asking her if she has published
    articles in journals.  Remember me asking her if she
    teaches.  And she does.  She teaches addiction.  You
    remember she talked about she has fellows who are
    studying addiction who shadow her while she's
    treating, because she's instructing at the
    University of Florida future psychiatrists doing
    what they do.
         She's actually authored a chapter in a textbook
    on drugs, alcohol and disorders, in a textbook.
    She's written a book that's published, and they use
    that textbook in order to teach.  And you'll recall
    she testified that just right before she came to
    testify she had been appointed by the governor to go
    out and interview an inmate to decide if he was
    mentally competent to face execution.
         Dr. Werner is a highly-qualified psychiatrist
    who came in to talk to you about addiction and about
    what we know about addiction.
         And what she told you was, is that Ethel
    Hazouri met the DSM-IV for addiction.  And she
    talked to you about the strength of the association
    and how -- she talked to you about how the fact that
    she was addicted for -- I mean, how the fact that she used nicotine for so long, how that impacted
    addiction.  And she talked about the changes in the
    brain, and she told you that Ethel Hazouri, based
    upon her medical judgment, was addicted to the
    nicotine in cigarettes.  And she talked to you about
    those things, and that was her opinion.
         Now, the defendants brought in -- oh, I do want
    to mention.  She also talked about three ways that
    she looked at in order to make her determination.
    She talked about the Fagerstrom and the CAGE test.
    And you'll remember her talking about that.  And I
    think there was a juror question about the
    Fagerstrom.
         And both witnesses, even Dr. Barnett, said that
    the Fagerstrom is a screening instrument, not a
    diagnosing instrument.  And because somebody was not
    in front of her she couldn't answer all the
    questions on the screening instrument.
         But when she looked at the DSM-IV categories,
    she met them.  Right.  And you'll remember what the
    DSM-IV categories were.  Tolerance.  And we talked
    about that, and I showed Dr. Barnett tolerance, and
    how the DSM-IV actually talks about nicotine
    tolerance.  And what that means is that you don't
    throw up, you don't have that noxious reaction which you would have if you tried to smoke 15 cigarettes
    the very first time you smoked.  That's tolerance to
    nicotine.  And she met that.
         Whether she had withdrawal symptoms.  And she
    talked about what those withdrawal symptoms are:
    Anxiety, restlessness, a feeling of agitation, and
    that if you smoke then you feel calm, that you feel
    relaxed, that it takes the edge off.
         And that's not a -- in some ways it's a
    subjective thing, but it's actually a physical thing
    that's going on in the body.  And you'll remember
    Dr. Werner talked about that physical thing that's
    going.  What's happening is those receptors are
    empty and they need to get filled by Dopamine, and
    so the body is saying fill them.  And it's very
    basic to limbic system of the brain.
         She also said that persons use larger amounts
    over time than intended, and that has to do with
    whether she was trying to quit and couldn't.  Trying
    to quit and couldn't.
         A persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to
    cut down or control use.  Important social,
    occupational, recreational activities given up.  And
    use is continued despite knowledge of physical or
    psychological problems caused or exacerbated by the substance.
         Now, what did the defendants put up?  They put
    up Dr. Barnett.  That's the witness that they
    brought to you to talk -- to say that Dr. Werner is
    wrong, that Dr. Werner is incorrect that she's
    addicted.
         Now, what are the qualifications of Dr.
    Barnett?  She's a sole practitioner.
         I'm sorry?
         (Off the record.)
         THE COURT:  I'm sorry.  I hit the button by
    mistake and he couldn't get in.
         MS. SHAMP:  All right.  What did the defendants
    put up in contrast to Dr. Werner?  They brought you
    Dr. Deborah Barnett.
         You'll remember Dr. Barnett is a sole
    practitioner.  She works in a little office in
    Tampa.  She's never taught anywhere, she's never
    written anything for publication, she's never taught
    anybody else, she's never even worked with anybody
    else.  She's never taught, she's never lectured,
    she's never written.  She's a little solo shop.  And
    that's who they brought in to tell people that
    Ethelene Hazouri was not addicted.
         And the judge is going to instruct you about the believability of witnesses.  And I think you're
    entitled to consider the testimony from the stand
    with respect to whether what Dr. Barnett said is
    believable, whether she's credible.
         And you'll remember my cross-examination of her
    and how she put up the slides about Dopamine, and
    how she testified that the Dopamine in cocaine was
    so much higher.  But then when we asked her about
    the dosage levels of those she said those were
    dosage levels that would kill a person.
         And then we asked her questions that I found to
    be incredible answers.  Like for example, if someone
    is addicted to crack cocaine does that influence
    their choice to use it?  No.  If someone is addicted
    to nicotine does that influ- -- no.
         Very interesting what Dr. Barnett said.  And I
    think we have to consider what -- the -- the -- the
    sort of implication of what her testimony is.
    Because you remember what she talked about a lot was
    that Ethel Hazouri could quit.  Ethel Hazouri could
    quit, right, and therefore she wasn't addicted.  But
    when I pressed her on that she agreed that every
    single person can quit, and certainly she has to
    agree based on statistics that there are people who
    are addicted. But this is what the implication of her
    testimony is.  Well, if she can quit -- if she had
    quit back in the 60's or 50's then she wasn't
    addicted, right, because she quit.  But if she
    didn't quit, if she didn't quit, well, then she just
    wanted to.  Right.  She just wanted to keep smoking.
         Think about it.  Under Dr. Barnett's theory
    nobody would be addicted, that nobody is addicted.
    And in fact, you heard Dr. Barnett say of the 19
    time she's been asked by the tobacco companies she
    can't remember a one where she said the person was
    addicted.
         She talked a lot about the maladaptive pattern,
    but she refused to read the words that are written
    in English and how this is supposed to be said.  The
    words written in English say:  The maladaptive
    pattern of substance use leading to clinically
    significant impairment or distress as manifested by
    three or more of the following.
         Remember we talked about what the word
    manifested by -- that means that you have to look at
    the criteria.  You don't just look at this in a
    vacuum and say, well, did she have clinically
    significant?  Clinically significant means that she
    has three or more of the following criteria. She refused to read that sentence as it's
    written in English.  But if you remember what she
    said, in her mind -- the only example she gave you
    of somebody who would be addicted, remember the only
    example she gave you was somebody who needed
    medicine, and instead bought their cigarettes
    instead of buying medicine.
         That's it?  That's the only person in America
    who is addicted to nicotine in cigarettes?  Not
    believable.
         It's estimated that 80 to 90 percent of regular
    smokers have nicotine dependence.  80 to 90 percent
    have nicotine dependence.  That's what the
    statistics show.  80 to 90 percent of regular
    smokers have nicotine dependence, and in fact, up to
    25 percent of the United States population have
    nicotine dependence.
         But we don't just have Dr. Werner and Dr.
    Barnett.  We also have the company's own internal
    documents in addition to the scientific stuff.  We
    have their own documents that tell you that nicotine
    is a potent drug.
         They know more about nicotine than anybody.
    They know it is a potent drug.  Their own internal
    confidential documents say that the tobacco industry may be thought of as being a specialized, highly
    ritualized, and stylized segment of the
    pharmaceutical industry.  They're a drug company.
    Tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver
    nicotine, a potent drug.  This is Exhibit 302, which
    you'll have back with you, where they talk about
    what they know about nicotine.
         They also talk about it being the sine qua non.
    Remember that testimony?  Sine qua non is Latin for
    without which it's nothing.  That's the Latin,
    without which it's nothing.  And nicotine in a
    cigarette, without that the cigarette is nothing.
    Nicotine is the sine qua non of smoking.  It's the
    reason people smoke.  That's undisputed in their own
    documents.
         You'll also have back with you this NIDA
    document which talks about, very interesting, how
    what we know about addiction has changed over time,
    that it's a fundamental change in the brain.  As
    result of scientific research we know that addiction
    is a disease that affects both brain and behavior.
    Both brain and behavior.
         You have all of these things back there which
    go to the question of whether Ethel Hazouri was
    addicted.  Put all of that together, put all of that evidence over here that Ethel Hazouri was addicted.
    And like I said, remember, this question is not
    about whether she could have quit, how hard she
    tried, whether she chose to smoke, none of that.
    It's simply a question of was she addicted, was she
    addicted to the substance?  The all of the evidence
    supports that decision.
         The next question that you have to say is, was
    her addiction a legal cause of cancer?  The Surgeon
    General has told us that nicotine addiction is the
    fundamental reason that individuals persist in using
    tobacco products.  This comes from Exhibit 487.
    Now, it won't look like this back there because we
    had to copy it for you, but you'll have 487 back
    with you.  And this is the 2010 Surgeon General's
    report.  This is the fourth chapter, which talks
    about nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason
    that people persist in smoking tobacco.
         But we know even more than that.  We know that
    the tobacco company itself knows that addiction is
    the reason people smoke.  In a 1980 document they
    say:  We can't defend continued smoking as free
    choice if the person was addicted.
         That's important.  Their own document knows
    that.  They cannot say this is free choice.  And I expect Steve Geise to get up and talk about this
    being a choice, this was her choice.  They cannot
    defend it as free choice if the person was addicted.
         Remember, this part is not about whether she
    chose to smoke, whether she could have quit earlier.
    This is about whether she was addicted, and whether
    that addiction compelled her to smoke.
         Now, importantly the jury -- the judge is going
    to instruct you in the charges you will have back,
    in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death
    addiction to smoking cigarettes need not be the only
    cause.  Need not be the only cause.
         Now, I suspect the defendants will put on
    evidence that said that in addition to addiction
    that she might have smoked because -- I don't know
    why -- she chose to, she wanted to.  That doesn't
    matter.
         We don't have to prove that addiction is the
    only cause, just that it was a cause.  Just that it
    was a cause.  If it operated in conjunction with
    other causes it's still a cause, still a cause of
    cancer, the addiction.  Right.  And we believe based
    upon the Surgeon General's report, which I don't
    believe they have any evidence to dispute, nicotine
    addiction is the primary reason, the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco
    products.
         Addiction is, as discussed, a need over and
    over.  It is a huge problem.  It's the addiction
    that is the problem.  Far worse than the lung
    cancer, addiction is the continued use of this
    product.
         And finally the last question is about -- for
    Question 1 -- is lung cancer.  I'll talk about this
    briefly, ladies and gentlemen, because I think the
    evidence on this is undisputed that she had lung
    cancer.  I think the defense will try to tell you
    that there is no proof or evidence that she had lung
    cancer.  The evidence of lung cancer is enormous in
    this case.  Everything points to this being primary
    lung cancer.
         First we have the physician's attestation from
    the physician who was taking care of her at the time
    she was hospitalized who says this was primary lung
    cancer.
         You also have the medical records.  You have
    the medical records from Dr. Prokes, who diagnoses
    it as primary lung cancer, adenocarcinoma of the
    lung.
         You have the death certificate, a certification from the State of Florida that says that it was
    primary lung cancer.
         And you also have Dr. Stephen Bagnoli, a local
    pulmonologist who practices in this community, who
    looked at all the evidence that was given to him
    with respect to all the medical records from her
    primary practice doctor, all the chest x-rays,
    everything, and said -- he said, I don't have any
    doubt, there is no question this was a primary lung
    cancer.
         The attestation is in ES -- not ES -- this is
    Exhibit 4.  This is a page of Exhibit 4 that you'll
    have back, P4.  Primary lung cancer.  Three places
    in Exhibit 4, the medical records of Dr. Prokes.
    Diagnosis of lung cancer is one.  The patient has
    poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of the lung.
    3.  1 with a little 0, which means primary.  You can
    put a 2 with a little 0 means secondary.  3 with a
    little 0 means tertiary.
         1 with a little 0 means primary.
         MR. GEISE:  Objection, Your Honor.  There's
    been no testimony on that.
         THE COURT:  I think the jury can make that
    determination, whether or not -- okay.
         MS. SHAMP:  You'll remember that Dr. Okun said from the stand that a 1 with a little circle next to
    it means primary.  Remember his testimony.
         MR. GEISE:  Same objection.
         THE COURT:  All right.  I'll overrule the
    objection.
         MS. SHAMP:  Thank you.
         You'll also have the death certificate.  That's
    Plaintiff's Exhibit 1, the death certificate which
    says metastatic lung carcinoma.  And that means that
    it was lung carcinoma that spread, spread throughout
    her body, and that's why she died.  Lung carcinoma
    that spread.
         Now, Dr. Okun came in and said -- y'all
    remember Dr. Okun.  He was the defendant's expert
    who came in and said, I just can't tell.  I just --
    I can't tell.  It's very important to say what he
    didn't say.  He didn't say it wasn't lung cancer.
    He did not say this is not lung cancer.  He did not
    say I disagree with Dr. Prokes.
         I asked him that specific question.  I said, do
    you disagree, and he said, if somebody else made
    that diagnosis decades ago with information I don't
    have, I can't disagree with that.  That's what he
    said.  He didn't have the same information that Dr.
    Prokes had. Now, remember he fought me on that.  He fought
    me on whether Dr. Prokes had the patient and he
    didn't.  And you know that Dr. Prokes had the
    patient, to do an examination of the patient, and
    Dr. Prokes diagnosed lung cancer.  He had a
    long-term relationship with the patient.  This
    wasn't somebody he just saw in the hospital.  Dr.
    Prokes was Ethel Hazouri's doctor.  And you'll have
    the medical records where he was the one who had
    been doing her primary care, who did her Pap smear
    for her, sent her to get her mammograms, who did her
    checkups, who did her physicals.  He's the guy.
    He's had a long-term relationship with her.
         We also know he had a biopsy of the lung, of
    the left lung.
         And you'll remember Dr. Okun saying, I can't
    dispute that it was an adenocarcinoma, because there
    was a biopsy done.  He said, I don't dispute that
    she had cancer and that it was an adenocarcinoma.
    He said, I can't dispute that, because there was a
    biopsy that was done.
         But importantly she also she had a nine-day
    workup.  Remember, she wasn't just somebody who went
    in the hospital and came back out.  She was in there
    for nine days getting tests done, getting a workup done, and when she was finally discharged she had
    the diagnosis of lung cancer.  No question about it.
    Not we're not sure.  In fact, not only a diagnosis
    of lung cancer, but a prognosis that she only had
    six months to live.
         And she had a team working with her.  That's
    what the evidence is.  This was not Dr. Prokes
    working alone.  Dr. Prokes had a team.  And Dr. Okun
    said that's how it should be done.  That's how it
    was done.  She had a team.  She had a board
    certified pulmonologist working with her and a board
    certified oncologist that worked with Dr. Prokes as
    a team and diagnosed lung cancer.  Ladies and
    gentlemen, that's what Dr. Prokes had.
         The chest x-rays.  Now, I guess I have to
    address this because I think the defendants will
    about the chest x-ray, and the fact that the last
    chest x-ray did not show acute changes, though it
    shows chronic changes.  And you'll have all the
    chest x-rays back there, and you can look for
    yourself, and you will see that for months going
    back that there were problems in the left lung, that
    they're noting something going on in the left lung.
    They're not diagnosing it as a mass, but they go
    back and say something is there in the left lung. And this is very important.  You'll remember
    the testimony from Dr. Burns, which I found really
    interesting, that how cancer is caused in the lungs,
    that when the substance goes into the lung it
    actually paralyzes the cilia, the little things that
    clean your lung, they keep your lung clean, and when
    it's paralyzed then carcinogens are able to deposit
    onto the cells, and instead of being cleaned out,
    because they've been paralyzed the bad stuff lays
    there, and when it lays there it causes changes in
    the cells, eventually the cells become precancerous,
    and then they become cancerous, and then they break
    off.  They get into the bloodstream and that's how
    they start to spread.  And that's a cancerous
    invasion.
         And the reason I put up these slides again and
    talked to you about it was is because it's
    indisputable that cancer grows.  Cancer grows.  Dr.
    Okun said that.  Everybody said cancer grows.
         All right.  So assuming that you feel like
    you're not sure whether it was primary lung cancer,
    then this is what their theory has to be, is that
    there was a cancer somewhere else in her body,
    somewhere else in her body, and that it was growing,
    and a piece of it broke off.  Those pieces are microscopic, teeny tiny tiny tiny, because they
    travel through the blood system.  He put up that
    exhibit.  They travel through the blood system.
    Then this theory would be it traveled through the
    blood system and landed in her lung, and then it
    started growing in her lung.
         Okay.  So it had to be somewhere else first,
    break off, travel somewhere else, land in her lung,
    and then grow that big in her lung.  Grow so big in
    the lung that it was inoperable, that she had six
    months to live.
         It's not possible that it could be somewhere
    else and nobody see it, because it's the same cell
    type.  It will grow at the same rate.  So if it was
    in her colon it would be as big as it would be in
    her lung.  Bigger, because it started there first.
    If it was in her stomach, if it was in somewhere
    else it would be bigger; within her breast, it would
    be bigger.  It was nowhere else.  It was only in her
    lung.
         That's important.  That throws their theory out
    of the water that it could have been somewhere.
    Besides the theory, nobody even testified it was
    somewhere else.
         The evidence is undisputed with respect to that.  It was there in the left lung earlier, they
    just missed it.  They didn't see it.  It was there.
    It had to be there.  They just didn't see it.
         It's not possible that it could have been
    somewhere else, come up there, land there, and just
    appeared.  It had to grow.  Right.  So it was there
    three months earlier, and the x-ray is going to show
    you it was there.  They just didn't see it.
         Question 1.  Was Ethelene Hazouri addicted to
    cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such
    addiction a legal cause of her cancer?  It has three
    parts, and the evidence, the evidence, when you put
    it all over here, stack it all up, overwhelming and
    clear she's a member of the Engle class.  Those
    three things, the evidence is clear, she's a member
    of the Engle class.
         Knowing she's a member of the Engle class, then
    she's entitled to the findings of Engle class.  And
    now let's talk about what they are.
         Cigarettes cause lung cancer.  That's Finding
    1.  She is entitled to that finding.
         Nicotine in cigarettes is addictive.
         R.J. Reynolds placed cigarettes on the market
    that were defective and unreasonably dangerous.
         Dr. Proctor talked to you a lot about this. The fact that makes them defective is that they can
    be inhaled.  That's a new thing.  Not true of pipes.
         MR. GEISE:  Your Honor, I object.  This is with
    regard to what the findings --
         THE COURT:  Let's come to the sidebar.
         (Sidebar outside the hearing of the jury.)
         MR. GEISE:  First of all, I apologize, I don't
    mean to interrupt, but when she says -- puts up the
    finding and starts saying what the defect is, I
    believe it's reproving the findings or talking about
    the findings, and there is no burden of proof what
    the defect is or an issue in this case to say Dr.
    Proctor said the defect is inhalability.
         MS. SHAMP:  He did talk about what the defect
    was, Your Honor.
         MR. GEISE:  No.  We came to sidebar.
         MS. SHAMP:  We did talk about what the defect
    is in cigarettes.
         MR. GEISE:  I objected and we came to sidebar,
    and talked about this is starting to reprove the
    findings.
         MS. SHAMP:  Your Honor, I'll move on.
         THE COURT:  I think his objection is relating
    the findings to the evidence in this case.  Okay.
         MR. GEISE:  Thank you, Your Honor. (Following the sidebar the following further
    proceedings were had before the jury.)
         MS. SHAMP:  The third finding, product defect.
    R.J. Reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that
    were defective and unreasonably dangerous.
         Fraud.  We all know what the word fraud means.
    Fraud by concealment.  R.J. Reynolds concealed or
    omitted material information not otherwise known or
    available, knowing that the material was false and
    misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact
    concerning the health effects or addictive nature of
    smoking cigarettes, or both.
         Finding 5.  Conspiracy.  R.J. Reynolds agreed
    with other tobacco companies to conceal or omit
    information regarding the health effects of
    cigarettes or their addictive nature with the
    intention that smokers and the public would rely on
    this information to their detriment.
         6.  That R.J. Reynolds was negligent.
         The judge will instruct you that the findings
    may not be denied or questioned, that they must
    carry the same weight they would have if you had
    determined them yourself.
         If she is a member of the class the defendants
    cannot deny it and they cannot question it.  It is proven, and it carries the same weight as if you had
    found it yourself.
         So let's turn to what the next question is on
    the jury form -- the verdict form, and this is an
    important one.
         State whether R.J. Reynolds' concealment or
    omission of a material fact about the health effects
    or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both,
    were a legal cause of Ethelene Hazouri's death.
         Now, the two next questions go together.  Okay.
    We're going to talk about Question 3.  Question 4 --
    I mean, Question 2 is fraudulent concealment, did
    they conceal, and 3, conspiracy to conceal.
         Okay.  State whether R.J. Reynolds' agreement
    to conceal or omit a material fact regarding the
    health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive
    nature was a legal cause of Ethelene Hazouri's
    death.
         Now, this is a very important finding, and I
    expect the defendants to talk a lot about this one.
    And I call their defense the it-doesn't-matter
    defense.  It doesn't matter.  What I expect them to
    come up and talk about and say is that it doesn't
    matter what we said, it doesn't matter that we lied,
    because it didn't hurt Ethelene Hazouri.  It didn't impact her in particular, so it doesn't matter what
    we said.  It doesn't matter.
         Now, I think this is important because you,
    when thinking about Question 2, have the benefit of
    Finding 4.
         Now, they are going to debate heatedly whether
    what they did made any difference.  They're going to
    talk about whether Ethel Hazouri already knew, or
    everybody knew.  But the finding you have is
    binding, and that is that Reynolds' concealed or
    omitted material information that was not otherwise
    known.
         Now, think about that when they put up all the
    Reader's Digest articles, and Newsweek, and all the
    other things which they say everybody knew.  You're
    bound by this though, which said that they hid stuff
    that was not otherwise known.
         That's important, because I think Reynolds'
    defense is going to be everybody knew.  Everybody
    knew that smoking caused cancer, that it was
    dangerous, that it was hazardous, and that Ethel
    Hazouri knew.
         So let's talk about what the evidence is, about
    what it was they knew, okay, because it's not just
    the question of is it bad for you, you know, is it -- is it harmful.  That's not the question.  There
    are a lot of things that are bad for you, that are
    harmful.  Right.  It's bad for you to eat that extra
    piece of cake, or not get you exercise, or, you
    know, have a glass of whiskey at night.  You know,
    that's not -- we know that's proof for it, that it's
    bad.  This is very different from what they knew.
         They knew that smoking their product caused
    cancer.  They knew it in 1953.  The Teague survey:
    Tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and
    prolonged tobacco smoking and cancer of the lung.
    They knew it in 1953.  They knew that in their smoke
    were carcinogens, cancer-causing agents.  Cancer-
    causing agents in their smoke.
         In 1962, this is their own internal scientist
    wrote:  Obviously, obviously the amount of evidence
    accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health
    hazard is overwhelming, the evidence challenging
    this indictment is scant.
         I will point out, these are internal documents,
    not documents that were shared with the public.
    This is an internal document on what they said.  Not
    just about health effects, but the addictive nature
    of their product.
         This is in 1953:  It's fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they can't break.
         They knew that.  They knew that.  Fortunate for
    us.  And you'll have this document back with you.
    This is Document 168 called the Forwarding
    Memorandum.
         They also knew, 1963:  Moreover, nicotine is
    addictive.  We are then in the business of selling
    nicotine, an addictive drug.
         This is what they knew.  And I used this just
    recently:  We cannot ever be comfortable selling a
    product which most of our customers would stop using
    if they could.
         These are the things they knew.  What did they
    say?  They issued The Frank Statement:  There is no
    proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes of
    cancer.
         This is what they were telling people after the
    Teague memorandum:  We believe the products we make
    are not injurious to health.
         You remember what the circulation was of the
    Frank Statement.  It was in every single newspaper
    that had more than 50,000 people.  Every single
    newspaper with a circulation of more than 50,000,
    this was in.  Millions of copies.
         They engaged in a campaign of doubt and denial. We showed all of these during the case at one point
    or another, and you'll remember all of them
    testifying.  These are representatives and what they
    say:  Howard Cullman saying, we're just not sure,
    and if there is anything injurious, if we ever find
    it, we'll take it out.  After they knew there were
    carcinogens.
         Bill Dwyer, Ed Horrigan, Joseph Cullman, Robert
    Heimann.  I'm going to play one of them.
         (The video clip was played for the jury, and
    was interpreted and transcribed to the best of the
    Reporter's ability as follows.)
         Now throughout your tenure at American, and it
    was not only American's position, but your position,
    that cigarettes weren't injurious to health.  Is
    that accurate?
         Through my tenure?
         Yes.
         Yes, that is so.
         That is something American Tobacco led the
    public to believe; is that correct?
         Yes.
         It's a statement that American Tobacco puts
    great reliance on.
         We issued that statement, yes, and we believe. As far as you're concerned a person is
    justified in relying on that statement?
         Yes.
         (At the conclusion the following video clip was
    played for the jury, and was interpreted and
    transcribed to the best of the reporter's ability as
    follows.)
         (Inaudible)American disagrees with the warning,
    doesn't it?
         We certainly do.
         You don't think it harms smokers or (inaudible)
    do you?
         We believe our product is not injurious to
    health.
         As far as you're concerned is the Surgeon
    General simply wrong in concluding that cigarette
    smoking causes lung cancer?
         I would use the term misguided.
         Misguided.  Then I take it that your opinion is
    he's wrong.
         I'm simply trying to be polite about it.
         Okay.  But not being polite about it, in your
    opinion he's wrong; correct?
         Dead wrong.
         Congress is wrong requiring these warnings; correct?
         We do not think they're justified.
         So they're wrong?
         They're wrong.
         (The video clips concluded.)
         MS. SHAMP:  This is what they said.  And then
    you remember they testified in front of congress.
    All seven heads of the major tobacco companies
    raised their hand up in front of congress under oath
    and said that their products were not addictive,
    that cigarettes are not addictive.
         This is what they were putting out in press
    releases to the American public:  Some governmental
    officials maintain -- and you've seen what they
    maintain -- that cigarette smoking is the number one
    public health problem.
         Still is.
         We believe the number one problem is the extent
    to which these officials knowingly mislead the
    American public.
         That's what they were saying about the
    government officials who were trying to get the word
    out.  In addition they're putting out these
    documents.  And these are important, ladies and
    gentlemen.  You'll have all of these back there. The Scientific Perspective of the Cigarette
    Controversy.  Smoking and Health, The Continuing
    Controversy.
         They're creating a false controversy that
    doesn't exist in 1984.  And where are they sending
    these?  To doctors.  To doctors.
         Remember in 1960, 50 percent of doctors in
    America smoked cigarettes.  50 percent.  Doctors are
    the place where people -- you heard Dr. Barnett say
    on the stand that's one place where people can have
    a difference in smoking cessation.
         It's not an accident they were focussed on
    doctors.  It's not an accident that they were
    sending these to doctors, not because they wanted to
    keep those, you know, small percentage of doctors
    smoking.  It's because the enormous impact doctors
    have on peoples' knowledge about their health.  And
    they put that campaign out to peoples' doctors.  And
    the campaign up until -- why more research is
    needed.
         And it worked.  It worked.  This is the
    distribution of that document.  You'll have this out
    which says where that went.  The Scientific
    Perspective on The Cigarette Controversy was
    released.  205,000 copies were printed.  It was sent to 176,000 doctors across the country.  It went to
    press releases, to newspapers.  Everywhere they were
    getting out this scientific controversy that didn't
    exist.
         This is what their theme was.  This is what
    they were trying to do.  They're trying to create
    doubt.
         Now, at this time people are hearing it might
    be hazardous, it might be a problem, but they're
    also hearing the other message, which is nobody has
    proven it.  And you know what?  Keep smoking,
    because -- and you'll see these document.  Remember
    I showed you.  Keep smoking, because if we find
    something hazardous we will just pull it on out.
    You'll be find.  They knew they couldn't pull it
    out.  They knew they couldn't.  But keep smoking.
    Keep smoking.
         And people who are addicted want that, they
    want that crutch, that -- that reason to -- to --
    you know, it's not been proven, it's still a
    controversy, it's open, they don't know for sure.
    They marketed while they were doing that.
         Now remember the enormous budget spent on
    advertising, on making it look attractive and
    normal, happy and fun.  Right.  Enormous amounts of money.  Enormous amounts of money making it look
    harmless.  Harmless.
         Cigarette advertising reaches virtually all
    Americans who can either read or understand the
    spoken word.
         And we put a lot of documents in -- I'm not
    going to go through all of them -- about the amount
    of money that they spent on advertising.  We put in
    a lot of the advertisements themselves.  You'll have
    those back with you.  Enormous amounts of money on
    marketing and advertising, on bombarding the
    American public.
         Cigarettes are the -- the most heavily
    advertising product in America.  It's been estimated
    that the six major cigarette companies spent a
    billion dollars in 1980 to sell their product.
    Enormous amounts spent.
         Now, in 1967 the warning labels go on.  And you
    will remember about -- this testimony about that.
    The warning label has not succeeded in overcoming
    the prevalent attitude towards cigarette smoking
    created and maintained by the cigarette companies
    through their advertising, particularly the barrage
    of commercials on television which portray smoking
    as harmless, enjoyable activity which is not habit forming, and involves no hazards to health.
         This is what they were putting out to the
    American public, and this is from the FTC, Document
    269.  You'll have this back with you.
         This is what they're saying, we can't compete.
    You'll remember, I don't think I put it up here,
    but --
         THE COURT:  Excuse me.  Go ahead and finish
    that.
         MS. SHAMP:  I can stop, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  All right.  I think we need to take
    a break, a restroom break.
         MS. SHAMP:  Okay.
         THE COURT:  Step back in the jury room, please.
         (The jury withdrew to the jury room.)
         THE COURT:  Ms. Shamp, I'm sorry to interrupt
    you, but Mr. Dean indicated that one of the jurors
    signaled for a break.
         MS. SHAMP:  Sure.  That's fine.
         THE COURT:  We'll take a quick break ourselves.
         (Short break.)
         THE COURT:  All right.  Are you ready to
    proceed now that Mr. Kalil is back, Ms. Shamp?
         See if they're ready.  If they are, bring them
    in, please. THE BAILIFF:  Jurors entering.
         (The jury returned to the courtroom, was seated
    in the jury box, and the following further
    proceedings were had.)
         THE COURT:  All right.  Ms. Shamp, you may
    proceed.
         MS. SHAMP:  Thank you.
         The FTC report, as I was discussing, talks
    about whether the warnings were working.  But we
    also have, and you will have back there whether the
    public was confused, whether it was working.  Not
    only Dr. Proctor's testimony about that, but you
    will also have documents that say the data indicates
    that substantial numbers of consumers seriously
    misunderstand and underestimate the risk of
    suffering these health problems as a result of
    smoking.
         That's Exhibit P367 that you'll have back with
    you.
         This is a document from their own internal
    files dated 1978, that says:  Very few consumers are
    aware -- in 1978, very few consumers are aware of
    the effects of nicotine, i.e., its addictive nature
    and that nicotine is a poison.
         This is their own internal document saying what very few people are aware of.  This is their public
    relations effort.
         You'll remember that they hired that company,
    Hill & Knowlton, to do the public relations
    campaign.
         The first big scare continues on the wane.
    Meaning that it's going down, that the effects are
    going down.
         But there's also important things that they put
    out, the evidence that they were putting out.
    You'll remember the True article.  I just have to
    talk to you about it, because the True article was
    written by one of their own people, an internal
    person that says:  To smoke or not to smoke, that is
    still the question.  Are cigarettes really hazardous
    to your health like the package says?  Nobody knows.
    In any case, Americans are smoking more than ever
    and curiously worrying less.
         You'll remember what Dr. Proctor said, that
    Stanley Frank, the person who wrote it, was paid by
    the tobacco companies to write this, and how many
    millions it was.
         Now, I expect this to be a big point for the
    defense, that they want to hold the line right here,
    because this is really critical.  They want you to check no, that this wasn't a cause of Ethel
    Hazouri's death.  What they want you to say is it
    didn't matter.  What we did, the lies we told, all
    these advertisements, it didn't matter, because
    everybody knew.  Everybody knew.  They really want
    to hold the line on there.
         This is a difficult one for us, because our
    client is dead, so she can't come -- she can't come
    in here and testify about what she relied upon and
    what you heard.  This is why I put up this jury
    instruction that you will have back there, okay,
    because it's important.
         And the judge will instruct you, right after
    you hear the claims about concealment and fraudulent
    concealment that we have been talking about:  As to
    each of the plaintiff's claims of concealment and
    conspiracy to conceal I hereby instruct you that you
    may consider all of the evidence in this case in
    determining whether plaintiff has satisfied the
    reliance requirement of those.
         All right.  So you are allowed to use your
    common sense.  And this is another instruction you
    will have:  You may draw reasonable inferences from
    the evidence.
         Now, what the defendants are going to say I expect is that there is no evidence that she heard
    any of these statements, there is no evidence that
    those scientific papers had any impact on her.
    They're going to say that nothing we said, all the
    lies we told, all -- all the advertisements we did
    when we knew that didn't make a difference because
    they can't prove it caused her to smoke one more
    cigarette.
         But you're entitled to consider all of the
    evidence and to draw the reasonable inferences.  And
    the reasonable inferences are that she was a part of
    the American public, that she was watching
    television, reading the newspaper.  You heard
    evidence about that.  You even heard evidence that
    she was singing a Winston jingle:  Winston tastes
    good like a cigarette should.
         You will hear -- you have heard that evidence,
    and you're entitled to infer from that that just
    like the majority of the American public she was
    confused or in doubt, or it just caused her to smoke
    a little bit longer.
         You know, a very important little piece of
    evidence that came in today, that came in during the
    testimony, came from the reading.  You remember when
    Jimmy, her grandson, was read?  Do you remember what he said?  2013.  It hasn't been proven that
    cigarettes cause lung cancer.  It hasn't been
    proven.
         Their campaign has worked.  This is a member of
    her own family.  It hasn't been proved, not a
    hundred percent.
         This is a very important piece of the case,
    ladies and gentlemen.  Number 3 and 4.  They're
    going to try and say that everybody knew, everybody
    knew, when what they were selling was doubt.  And
    they were spending a lot of money to say that.
         Doubt is our product.
         Whether R.J. Reynolds' concealment or omission
    of a material fact about the health effects or
    addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both,
    were a legal cause of Ethelene Hazouri's death.
         They want to hold the line on that one.  Ladies
    and gentlemen, the evidence is that she was a part
    of the American public during this period of time.
         Now, what they're going to try and talk about
    is that not only did everybody know, but that Ethel
    Hazouri knew.  And I expect them to talk about it
    like they did in opening, maybe even put up their
    chart, that in 1957 she had a conversation with her
    minister, Reverend Gore, and that Reverend Gore said it's not good for you, and that subsequently other
    people in her life said -- and I think she said
    right on after one of his sermons in 1962.  Right
    on.
         But, ladies and gentlemen, does that prove that
    she knew that there were carcinogens in smoke?  Is
    what their defense really going to be that the AMA,
    the American Medical Association -- remember them
    saying they didn't come out with a position on it,
    that the National Cancer Institute didn't come out
    with a position on it, and Finding 4 four, that
    their concealing material information about the
    addictive nature of their cigarettes.  But that
    Terry Gore knew.  That because Terry Gore, a
    minister, that he knew everything, and so she was
    fully informed.
         Take a moment to think about it for just one
    minute.  This is their product.  Not Terry Gore's
    product.  This is their responsibility to tell
    people what's in their product, what they knew.
         They're literally going to stand up you here
    and say that they have no obligation to be truthful
    to the American public because if Reverend Gore told
    her that's good enough.  She knew, she well knew.
         The facts just don't support that.  The facts and the evidence that you have.  And that's what you
    have to decide by the greater weight of the evidence
    the facts and the evidence show, and not just about
    the health risks.
         A lot -- you know, when we start these cases
    out sometimes we think they're about the health
    risks, lung cancer, but as the cases go on you
    really begin to see that they are a lot more about
    addiction, about the way in which the products are
    designed to stimulate addiction.
         And you remember there was a lot of testimony
    about that.  And fraudulent concealment is not just
    that they concealed the health effects, but the
    addictive nature, that they concealed the way they
    design their cigarettes.
         Remember the addition of the ammonia.  There
    were a lot of documents about how they added ammonia
    so that it can freebase and get the higher hit of
    nicotine.  The fact that you inhale the substance
    makes it far more addictive.
         Remember Dr. Werner talked about the difference
    between powder cocaine and crack cocaine, and how
    much more addictive crack is because you inhale it
    so you get the hit quickly, and got more repeated
    and repeated doses. This is all information that they knew and used
    in order to create and sustain addiction.
         But their formulation begs the question.  The
    question is not whether everybody knew this was
    harmful, or whether Ethel Hazouri -- the question is
    whether their actions -- what they said or didn't
    say kept her smoking even a little bit longer.
         There is one more really important piece of
    evidence about that.  What did she do in the 1960's?
    She switched to filters.  Remember, she switched to
    filters.  And they were putting out evidence -- they
    were putting out advertising, a campaign that
    filters were safer, when they knew that they
    weren't.  And you'll have the evidence back there
    that they knew they weren't, because people
    compensate.
         And you'll remember the testimony about
    compensation, and that is that they draw harder on a
    cigarette in order to get the nicotine hit that they
    need.  And they knew that.  They knew that.
         And she switched to filters.  And the American
    public was mislead into believing that filters were
    safer, that they were a less hazardous product.  And
    they knew they were not.
         Remember I read that with Dr. Figlar from the Surgeon General's report, that the industry knew and
    misled the American public, and misled public health
    community, how they had designed their cigarettes
    specifically to trick the smoking machine.  The
    smoking machine said there would be less tar, but
    they knew that the way that they were smoked it did
    not deliver less tar.
         Ladies and gentlemen, I think this is probably
    the most important question that you have to answer,
    because if you check no here, if you check no, then
    they get away with it.  If you check no here then
    that means it didn't matter, it doesn't matter all
    those lies we told, because it didn't cause her
    cancer, or the 12 million deaths that it's caused
    since 1964 in this country.
         This is important, the fraudulent concealment.
    The evidence is that it does matter, and what they
    said did matter.
         The one thing I want to ask you, when you hear
    Mr. Geise stand up and talk about the Reader's
    Digest and what Reader's Digest was saying, what
    Newsweek was saying about cancer, while all of that
    was being said what were they saying?  Ask yourself
    that.  When all that was being said, what were they
    saying?  Because it's their product, not Reader's Digest product.
         Whether R.J. Reynolds' agreement to conceal or
    omit a material fact regarding the health effects of
    cigarette smoking or addictive nature of cigarette
    smoking was a legal cause of Ethelene Hazouri's
    death.
         One other piece -- I'll put it back -- I didn't
    talk about it.  The plaintiff doesn't have to prove
    that it was the only cause.  I have to go way back.
    I'm sorry.  Just that it was a cause.  That's
    important.  Sorry I had to go all the way back to
    find it.  It's important.
         We don't have to prove that what they did was
    the only cause.  But all you have to say is that was
    a cause, a contributing factor.  And if you believe
    it was a contributing factor then you can check yes.
         Go back to where we were.
         Now, I talked -- I told you that I would get
    here, and this is the comparative fault.  And we
    talked about that in the beginning of this trial,
    about it's not all or nothing.  And remember when
    they talk about choice, or whether she chose, or
    whether she tried hard enough to quit, that doesn't
    go to the addiction issue, it just goes to this
    area, whether there is comparative fault here. And the operative word here is compare.  And I
    bet some of you might be wondering if the Engle
    findings apply why did she spend all that time
    putting on all this evidence about their conduct?
    Why do we have those boxes of exhibits.
         If the findings bind us that they did
    fraudulently conceal, why do we have to put on all
    this?  And it's for this piece.  Because you have to
    compare their conduct to Ethel Hazouri.
         So let's talk about what the evidence is with
    respect to comparing their conduct.  And the word
    that I like to say, is which conduct is more
    culpable.  And that's a fancy word for saying
    blameworthy.  Whose conduct is more blameworthy?
         I want to talk about some of the things they
    did that I think are particularly blameworthy, that
    you will have evidence of.  In addition to what we
    already talked about, what they knew and what they
    hid, now it's this one, what they did.  They
    marketed their product to kids.
         Manufacturers have studied the 14- to 20-year-
    old market.  Creating a fad in this market may be a
    great bonanza.
         I won't show you all the youth marketing
    documents.  You've seen them all before.  They are overwhelming.
         Current youth jargon in high school American
    history books might be a good start at finding a
    good brand name, an imaging theme for us.
         This is in a R.J. Reynolds confidential
    memorandum.  Let's get in there to the high school
    kids.  This is 309.  309.  Really important
    document.  This is Page 3 of it, and you'll have
    this back there.
         This is where Claude Teague talks about how do
    we get that vulnerable teenager to want to smoke
    cigarettes.  He literally talks about it.
         We need to make sure we appeal to his self
    image.  We need to make sure he keeps smoking even
    if he finds it unpleasant, because he will find it
    unpleasant.  The -- and then this part I've
    underlined, which is on Page 3.  The expected or
    derived psychological effects are largely
    responsible for influencing the presmoker to try
    smoking, and provide sufficient motivation during
    the learning period to keep the learner going
    despite the physical unpleasantness and awkwardness
    of the period.
         This is also in the same document.  This is
    their own words.  This is when the labels were being put on.
         Finally, if the older establishment is
    preaching against smoking, the antiestablishment
    sentiment discussed above would cause the young to
    want to be defiant and smoke.  Thus, a new brand
    aimed at the young group should not be in any way
    promoted as a health brand, and perhaps should carry
    some implied risk.  In this sense the warning on the
    label might be a plus for us.
         They are marketing their products to our
    children.  Might be a plus for us.
         And, second, what they did.  Nicotine
    manipulation.  We discussed in detail that they knew
    that this was a delivery mechanism to deliver
    nicotine, a potent drug, and that their cigarette
    smokers had a certain necessary requirement of
    nicotine, a dosage.  And you'll see documents in
    there where they talk about what is our target dose,
    what is the amount of nicotine we have to get to
    them.
         And then you remember the FDA document, the
    patent document that I discussed with Dr. Figlar
    about all those patent documents, about how we put
    additional nicotine into the product.
         This document that you'll have back there, which talks about the manipulation of the nicotine
    levels in order to get the target dose and keep
    people addicted.  This document you'll have back,
    240:  Certainly the nicotine level of B&W, Brown &
    Williamson, cigarettes given in the above table was
    not obtained by accident.
         They have a certain amount of nicotine that
    they put in order to create and sustain addiction.
    The way they use additives, the way they use paper
    in order to create and sustain addiction.  This is
    critical for them.
         So let's talk about what R.J. Reynolds knew.
    Let's compare the fault.  R.J. Reynolds concealed or
    omitted with the intention that smokers would rely.
    I didn't make that up.  That's from the finding.
    That's from the finding, is that they did it with
    the intention to rely, the intention that smokers
    would rely on it.
         Now, two things I'm going back to.  I'm going
    back to reliance.  You remember the video clip we
    just watched.  Do you want smokers to rely upon it?
    Yes, we expected them to rely.  The finding.  Did
    you do it with the intention that they would rely on
    it?  Yes, we did it with the intention that they
    would rely to their detriment. And they manipulated the level of nicotine to
    keep people smoking.  And all the other things.  I
    didn't have enough room to put all the other things
    on the R.J. Reynolds comparative fault side.
         But then compare it to what Ethelene Hazouri
    did.  She didn't quit soon enough.  That's right,
    she didn't.  She tried.  She started smoking when
    she was a kid, when her brain was not fully formed.
         She tried to quit.  The statistics are that
    every year 40 to 45 percent of smokers try to quit.
    Less than 5 percent are successful.  She didn't make
    is.  She wasn't one of the 5 percent.
         And you wonder when you look at that statistic,
    5 percent, how long have they been smoking.  Are
    those the ones that started when they were 13?  What
    if we looked at the statistics for the ones who were
    13 who had been smoking for 20, 30 years, how
    successful are they in being able to quit?
         That's her bad conduct.  She didn't make it.
    Compare that to what you know R.J. Reynolds did.
         You have to put on the form what percentage of
    fault that you find was a legal cause of Ethelene's
    Hazouri's death.  And you're given a blank for R.J.
    Reynolds Tobacco Company and a blank for Ethel
    Hazouri.  We don't believe that when you compare those faults that her fault is any.
         But if -- if you believe that it should be
    attributed we'll accept your determination and your
    collective consciences as you're required to do in
    your deliberations.  But we think that number has
    got to be small when you compare.
         And that's what you have to do.  Don't look at
    her conduct in isolation.  That's not permissible.
    It's a comparison of her conduct to their conduct.
         And when you compare intentional conduct to
    what she did when she was addicted by a substance
    that they knew, we think that number has to be small
    on her and large on them.
         The next question that you have to address on
    the verdict form -- there are six questions.  This
    is Number 5.  This is damages.
         What is the amount of damages, if any, which
    Sharon Odum sustain for her mental pain and
    suffering as a result of her mother's injuries and
    death?
         Now, I've talked a little bit about what the
    evidence will show, how she was a good woman, how
    she loved her daughter, loved her family, and her
    daughter loved her, that they were very close.
         You remember Mr. Kalil reading you the death tables, the mortality tables.  And the judge will
    tell you that you are to consider, you may consider
    those death tables in considering the length of time
    that Ethel Hazouri would have lived.  12 more years.
    You remember that.  Y'all probably wrote it down.
    12 more years that she would have had with her
    mother.  That would have been the normal life
    expectancy.  12 more Christmases, holiday dinners,
    parties, 12 more years of her cooking, 12 more years
    of their society and friendship.  12 more years.
         Now, there's two blanks on this form, and I
    want to talk about each one of them individually.
    The first one is her mental pain and suffering as
    the result of her mother's injury and death.  And
    you had evidence about that.
         You had evidence about how she watched her
    mother die and how awful that period of time was.
    You heard testimony not only from her, but from
    Bobby.  You remember what he said.  He said, I'll
    never forget that picture.  It's the worst thing I
    ever saw.  You also heard from Nell Nelson.
    Remember, she's the one that carried her in the car,
    and how she was picking up Kleenexes and sticking
    them in different places.  How she was in enormous
    pain, had to take morphine.  The loss of dignity in the final days, not knowing where she was, and
    suffering.  The enormous suffering that Sharon had
    to watch her mother go through during that period of
    time.
         This first blank is that sort of suffering that
    Sharon Odum observed with respect to watching her
    mother die and the pain she had as a result of her
    mother's death, the loss and the pain that she felt.
         Then the second blank is the loss of her
    mother's companionship, instruction, and guidance
    for next 12 years.
         Now, always when I have to talk about something
    like this it's very difficult.  How do you talk
    about what that's worth?  How do you put a number on
    that?  You can't.  I mean, it's very difficult to
    talk about it.
         But we do those kind of things all the time.
    We put numbers on things that are difficult to put
    numbers on.  Right.  We do that all the time, and
    the jury is required to do that.
         So there are some things I try and think about
    when I say, well, how do I assess whether this is a
    serious harm or a small harm?  Obviously the loss of
    your mother, an only child, has got to fall in a
    category of a serious harm.  It's a real long- lasting continuous loss.  12 years of normal life
    expectancy loss.
         So when I try to think about how to put a
    number on this it's very difficult, but I think you
    have to be able to pick a number that says to the
    defendant this is serious loss.  The loss of life in
    someone --
         MR. GEISE:  Your Honor, I object with regard
    to --
         THE COURT:  Wait a minute.
         (Sidebar outside the hearing of the jury.)
         MR. GEISE:  Your Honor, argument and statements
    with regard to damages for pain and suffering have
    nothing to do with sending a message to a defendant
    and telling the defendant that this is serious.
    That is not the purpose of these damages.  It's
    absolutely improper.
         Punitive damages punish and deter, but you
    can't say --
         MS. SHAMP:  No.
         MR. GEISE:  That's what you just said.
         MS. SHAMP:  I know.  I can say that the damage
    number ought to say to send a message that this is
    serious and real harm to her.  Not send a message
    about this conduct, not send a message -- send a message that this harm is real.  That's what it is.
    This harm is real.  This is a serious harm, and the
    number has to say that.  It has to say that.
         MR. GEISE:  She said send a message to the
    defendant.
         MS. SHAMP:  To the defendant.
         MR. GEISE:  It's appropriate for these damages.
    It's grounds for a mistrial, and I'm moving for one.
         THE COURT:  I'll deny your motion.
         MR. GEISE:  Okay.
         THE COURT:  I'd be very careful where you go
    with that, because that -- you know, if you connect
    it directly to the defendant, you know, you may have
    a problem with that on compensatory damages.
         MR. MICHAEL KALIL:  Just for record purposes,
    Your Honor, I think that Mr. -- that the sentence
    was interrupted at the time of his objection, so the
    full context wasn't even being realized to be able
    to pars out on any particular issue later on.  The
    issue I think is difficult because the sentence was
    interrupted.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  So what you're saying is if
    it's done it's already done and there is no way to
    correct it.
         MR. MICHAEL KALIL:  Well, I think the sentence can potentially be taken out of context because the
    objection was at the time that it was done.
         MR. GEISE:  The objection was immediately.
         THE COURT:  What does that matter, is what I'm
    saying?  Okay.
         MS. SHAMP:  He's pointing out for the record
    that it wasn't a complete sentence whereas it might
    appear on the record that it was.  That's what he's
    pointing out.
         THE COURT:  I understand.  I think the record
    would be clear.  We know you didn't finish the
    sentence.
         MS. SHAMP:  If defendants want a curative
    instruction they ought to request a curative
    instruction.
         MR. GEISE:  I've made my motion for mistrial.
         THE COURT:  Okay.
         (Following the sidebar.)
         THE COURT:  Okay.  Ms. Shamp.
         MS. SHAMP:  The number that you put in these
    lines needs to say that this is a real and
    significant problem, that she is not a statistic,
    she's a person that had a family, that had loved
    ones, and that this loss is a real and serious loss
    to that family.  And the number you need to put -- you put there needs to say that.  It needs to
    reflect the seriousness and the realness of it.
         The judge will instruct you that your
    collective conscience as a jury should come up with
    that number.  There is not a chart we can go to.
    There is not a table that you look for.  The
    12 years is in a table, but this number is one that
    you collectively come up with.
         I'm going to suggest that a fair number would
    be to put $3 million on the first line and
    $3 million on the second line.  That's a total of
    $6 million, which is a total of $1 million for every
    two years of life that was lost.
         We think that is a fair number to reflect the
    seriousness of the harm.  We think that's the number
    of the range in which you as a jury ought to
    collectively decide.
         That's obviously a picture of Sharon and her
    mother.  And you are to consider the relationship
    between them and what was lost when you come up with
    that number.
         Now I want to turn finally to the last question
    on the verdict form, and that is punitive damages.
    And this is probably the most important question on
    the verdict form. Now, the question is:  Whether under the
    circumstances of the case state whether by clear and
    convincing evidence punitive damages are warranted
    against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.  And the
    judge will instruct you what kind of conduct merits
    the award of punitive damages.
         Punitive damages are warranted if you find by
    clear and convincing evidence that the conduct
    causing loss to the plaintiff was so gross and
    flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human
    life or of the safety of persons exposed to the
    effects of such conduct, or the conduct showed an
    entire lack of care that R.J. Reynolds must have
    been consciously indifferent to the consequences of
    what they were doing, or the conduct showed an
    entire lack of care that R.J. Reynolds must have
    wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and
    welfare of the public; the conduct showed such
    reckless indifference to the rights of others as to
    be equivalent to an intentional violation of those
    rights.
         Now, all you have to decide in this part of the
    trial is whether plaintiff is entitled to punitive
    damages, not the amount.  As you can see the last
    question is yes or no. Under the circumstances of the case are -- is
    plaintiff entitled to punitive damages?  And the
    judge will instruct you that if you check yes then
    there will be a very short phase where you will have
    more information about punitive damages in order to
    reach the second part, and that will be a very short
    process.  And we still expect and anticipate that
    you will get out of here within the three weeks that
    you've been told that you will.  But this is a very
    important part of this case.  Very important
    question.
         Now, this is the reason why you heard so much
    testimony about what R.J. Reynolds did, about their
    conduct, because you are going to be asked to decide
    whether their conduct satisfies the requirements for
    punitive damages.  Really the evidence is an
    unprecedented amount of lies and deception.  And the
    scale of it is unprecedented.  And the harm that was
    caused by it.
         And you're going to have back there the Surgeon
    General's report, and I encourage you to read them,
    because they talk about the scale of this deception,
    and they talk about the harm that the deception
    caused.  And not just small amounts of harm, but
    enormous harm in human life. And so I could stand up here and talk for
    another three days about why we believe that
    punitive damages are warranted, but I'm not going to
    do that.  I'm going to limit it to three things,
    three things that I think show that their conduct is
    reprehensible, and that the impact of their conduct
    is staggering.
         You heard yesterday that the Surgeon General's
    report said that over 12 million lives have been
    lost since the 1964 Surgeon General's report came
    out, and no witness they put on has disputed those
    numbers.  Remember, I asked every one of their
    witnesses how many deaths have been caused in the
    United States.  443,000 a year.  443000 a year.
    Staggering, the amount.  But also that was
    intentional.
         So there are three things that I think based on
    the evidence that require you checking yes to the
    punitive damages.  The first, that they marketed to
    kids.  That conduct is reprehensible.  And you as a
    jury have to decide if that conduct is
    reprehensible.  And I suggest just read Exhibit 309
    to decide whether that conduct in your opinion is
    reprehensible.  They intentionally marketed to kids.
         2.  Oh, I wanted to show you some of the testimony that you will have in the Surgeon
    General's report, the major conclusions that are
    listed.  This is a report that's called Preventing
    Tobacco Use Among Young People.  Page 5 of this
    report, the major conclusion, and you'll have this
    report back there:  Most adolescent smokers are
    addicted to nicotine, and report that they want to
    quit, but are unable to do so.  They experience
    relapse rates and withdrawal symptoms similar to
    those reported by adults.
         You're also going to have the Surgeon General's
    report.  And I ask you to look on Page 10 of that
    report with what they talk about with respect to
    kids.  They talk about in here -- just a minute.
         Oh, I'm in the wrong thing.  I apologize for
    that.
         Conclusion 1 in the 2012 Surgeon General's
    report.  In 2008 tobacco companies spent
    $9.94 billion on marketing of cigarettes and 547
    million on marketing smokeless tobacco.  Spending on
    cigarette marketing is 48 percent higher now in 2012
    than it was in 1998, the year of the master
    settlement agreement.  Expenditures for marketing
    smokeless tobacco are 277 percent higher.  Tobacco
    company expenditures have become increasingly concentrated on marketing efforts.  The evidence is
    sufficient to conclude that there is a causal
    relationship between advertising and promotional
    efforts of tobacco companies and the initiation and
    progression of tobacco use among.
         Their marketing efforts are making young people
    start smoking.  That's what the evidence shows that
    you have.  The money that they are spending,
    millions and billions, is making our kids smoke and
    continuing to make our kids smoke.  And they know it
    and they're doing it on purpose.
         MR. GEISE:  Your Honor, I object.  This is --
         (Sidebar outside the hearing of the jury.)
         MR. GEISE:  Your Honor, I object to this line
    of argument talking about advertising and youth
    advertising as a basis for punitive damages.  It
    violates not only State Farm and Williams, but also
    violates the instructions that you're going to
    provide where you say you may not seek to punish
    Reynolds for any harm suffered by any person other
    than plaintiff as a result of Ethelene Hazouri's
    death, and you're to punish Reynolds only for those
    harms suffered by plaintiff.
         Youth marketing in '98 and 2003 is completely
    irrelevant to those harms suffered by the plaintiff. MS. SHAMP:  Your Honor, the language before the
    ones he's quoting is what I'm referring to.  Right
    before where he quoted says that the jury may
    consider the harm that is inflicted upon everyone
    else.
         MR. GEISE:  You can consider similar harms.
    Youth marketing is not a similar harm.  If she wants
    to talk lung cancer or addiction, or something like
    that, youth marketing --
         MS. SHAMP:  The harm --
         THE COURT:  I'm going to deny your --
         MR. GEISE:  Again I would move for mistrial.
         THE COURT:  I'll overrule objection.
         Wait a minute.  He's moved for a mistrial.
         MR. GEISE:  And just for the record --
         THE COURT:  I'm denying your motion for
    mistrial.
         MR. GEISE:  Thank you.
         (Following sidebar.)
         MS. SHAMP:  Ladies and gentlemen, it is an
    epidemic that won't go away.  The reason that they
    market to children and the reason that they try and
    keep people smoking is very clear from the records
    and the documents, and they know they have to get
    replacement smokers.  For the ones who die or the ones who quit they've got to fill up.  And that's
    what the documents will show.
         Look at the documents.  We have to get
    replacement smokers.
         And where are they going to get them from?
    Young people and people who are trying to quit.
         Point 2.  In addition to marketing towards kids
    they manipulate the level of nicotine in their
    product in order to keep people addicted, in order
    to keep people who want to quit from quitting.
         The use of ammonia in their product so it
    freebases the nicotine, where you saw just a minute
    ago that the level of nicotine in their products is
    not by accident, that they manipulate and keep the
    nicotine in their products in order to keep people
    smoking who want to quit, to keep people smoking who
    don't want to use their product any longer.
         And third, migration.  The third reason that
    you should award punitive damages, migration.  What
    they talked about.  And you remember Dr. Figlar
    getting up and saying, we're a new company now, we
    produce all of these products that have less risk.
         Migration.  What they're trying to do is keep
    people smoking who want to quit.  Change into a
    different cigarette, move down the line, get the Snus, keep people smoking who want to quit.
         The epidemic will not abate.  They know that
    the products they're selling are not safer, that
    there is not a safer cigarette.
         When I cross examined Dr. Figlar about that,
    from the Surgeon General's report, there is no proof
    that any of their products are safer.
         Think about it.  All those charts that he put
    up.  I kept saying in the back of my mind, so what
    you're saying is you have a little less cancer-
    causing agent in your product?  Has anyone proven
    that slightly less carcinogens in your lungs is
    going to reduce the chance that you're going to get
    lung cancer?  It's a carcinogen.
         In fact, Eclipse had more carbon dioxide in it
    than any other product.  It's a carcinogen in your
    product that you're encouraging youth to smoke.
         The 2010 report.  I was shocked that he didn't
    know about the study that I read to him from the
    2010 report that said a thousand people were
    surveyed and after they were told about the Eclipse
    product the people who were interested in quitting
    were less interested in quitting.  People who were
    interested in quitting were less interested in
    quitting.  That's their marketing product. The reprehensibility of what they have done.
    It's all about profit.  All about profit.
         Intentionally marketing to our kids.
    Intentionally keeping people smoking who want to
    quit.  And then migration.
         You know, you've heard a lot of things in
    trial, but one thing was said in Mr. Geise's opening
    that almost made me throw up.  When he said that
    Ethel Hazouri, when she was 13 was making adult
    choices.  Remember him saying that?  I almost threw
    up.
         That's what they're doing.  They're calling
    those kids adults.  They're saying to them, come on,
    make an adult choice.  Come on, smoke our product.
    You're an adult.  You're making big-boy decisions.
    It's reprehensible.  It merits you saying punitive
    damages for that.
         But it hasn't stopped the lying.  The lying
    hasn't stopped.  Yesterday on the stand Dr. Figlar
    told you three lies.  On the stand.  2013.  One,
    that Eclipse was a safer product.  Remember?
    Remember all the slides he put up and how this was
    safer?  And then I cross-examined him by showing the
    reports from LabStat, which you'll have back there
    as an exhibit. LabStat is their lab.  Remember when I asked
    him that?  That's a lab you use.  Remember all those
    purple bars?  That was Eclipse that showed more
    benzopyrene, that showed more NMK, that showed more
    carbon monoxide.  Not safer.
         Remember I said we disagree with the Surgeon
    General's report, 1964 all the way up.
         2.  I was shocked.  He put up a chart there
    that shows tars and nicotine going down over time.
    I guess he thought we couldn't read; that he stopped
    his chart in 1998.  I was literally shocked.  Why
    did you in 2013 stop your chart in 1998?  Because he
    knew what I showed him, which the study show that
    the nicotine content has increased over the last ten
    years.
         He stopped his chart in 1998, but you will have
    back the trends article which I showed him that says
    actually the nicotine contents increasing over time.
         And, third, we talked about Y1, the high-
    content nicotine tobacco, and I asked him about
    that.  And you remember on redirect when it was put
    back up and he said that was developed by the
    agriculture department.  Do you remember that?  You
    have this document, 122 -- I mean 693.  You have it.
    Look at it.  Y1 is a high-nicotine strain developed at B&W's experimental farm in North Carolina.
         Three lies in 2013.  Reprehensible.
         Ladies and gentlemen, we believe that the
    evidence strongly says this conduct deserves
    punishment.
         You know, I love that this case took place over
    Memorial Day, one of my favorite holidays, because
    what Memorial Day celebrates is the service of our
    armed services who gave their lives to protect our
    country and to protect this process.
         This is an extremely important process.  Mr.
    Geise talked about that.  This process, beautiful.
    It's a chance for the peers, for people to sit in
    that box and say what we find to be acceptable
    conduct and what we don't.
         When you walk in this room every single day we
    stand up, when you leave we stand up, because you
    are the judges under our system.  Memorial Day.
    Those people died to protect at least partly this
    system, for you to be able to come in and say it's
    not okay, that conduct is not okay.
         Conversely, ladies and gentlemen, if you
    check no to punitive damages you're saying that it
    is.  You're saying that it is okay.
         We contend the evidence strongly says you should check yes.
         I'll have an opportunity to talk again after
    Mr. Geise gets a chance to talk, and then I'll try
    to rebut some of the things.  But let me thank you
    for your attention throughout the trial and for your
    attention this morning.


          MS. SHAMP:  Good afternoon, Ladies and Gentlemen.
          THE JURY:  Good afternoon.
          MS. SHAMP:  I did take some time over the break to go through my notes, and I'm not going to talk for very
    long.  There are a few points I think it's important for
    me to make and a couple of overall points that I wanted
    to address.
          The first was I was very troubled by Mr. Geise's
    analogy at the beginning of this, about his remarks
    about this being a game, about this being the bottom of
    the inning.  And then the last thing he said was this is
    a cool thing we get to do.  I don't think it's a cool
    thing.  I think it's a very serious thing.  I think the
    allegations that have been made are very serious.  I
    don't think it's cool at all.
          I want you to recognize one thing about
    Mr. Geise's presentation.  He didn't put up a single
    R. J. Reynolds document, not one about all this talk and
    all the testimony.  Nothing from the company.
          And remember what he said?  He said there are some
    documents that say some stupid things.  They're not
    stupid things.  They are very, very smart.  They are
    intentional things.  They are aimed at specific markets.
    They're not stupid at all.  They're very smart.
          As is the whole argument where they try and do,
    again and again, to say that their conduct doesn't
    matter.  What they did doesn't matter.  Remember what he
    said?  This is not a -- this is a case only about Ethelene Hazouri, not a case about R. J. Reynolds at
    all.  It is a case about R. J. Reynolds.  Not just a
    case about Ethelene Hazouri.
          I'm struck every time that Mr. -- Dr. Figlar said
    it, and he said that:  We admit nicotine is addictive.
    We admit nicotine is addictive, but nobody is addicted.
    Right?  We admit nicotine is addictive but nobody is
    addicted.
          Listen to the way in which they talk about it.  If
    you can quit, you're not addicted.  If you're choosing
    to smoke, you're not addicted.  If you're enjoying it,
    you're not addicted.  Even though they admit that, they
    continue to say that she's not addicted and that
    nobody's addicted.
          He talked a lot about whether she had the ability
    to quit, whether she could control where she smoked.
    That's not the issue.  Nobody disputes that people who
    are addicted can quit.  But why does he keep talking
    about it?  Why does he keep shifting the -- the question
    from whether she was addicted, whether her brain had
    changed, whether there were strives and desire?  Because
    he wants to say that nobody is addicted.
          He also talked a lot about the quit dates.  Ask
    yourself:  Why is that relevant?  Why is it relevant
    whether she quit in 1983 or whether she quit in 1986 or whether she quit in 1990 as one record says or 1992 as
    another record says or 1993 as another record says?
    That has nothing to do with whether she was addicted.
    Whether she quit in the 1980s or she quit in 1990 has to
    do with whether she quit.
          The testimony is -- and the judge will instruct
    you that you bring to the jury pool -- you bring to the
    deliberations your common sense.  And your common sense,
    as well as the testimony, told you that people report
    quit dates and then start smoking again; that people
    change quit dates; that people hide their smoking.
    That's very common.
          But regardless of whether that happened or not,
    it's not relevant to what you have to decide.  You have
    to decide whether she was addicted.  And whether she
    should could quit and whether she smoked in church and
    whether she told her grandchildren she quit, it's not
    relevant to the question of whether she was addicted,
    which is what you have to decide, whether her brain had
    changed.
          They talked a lot about whether certain people saw
    her smoking.  There's dispute in this case that she was
    a smoker.  Ask yourself:  Is there any dispute as to
    whether or not she was a smoker?  There's no dispute.
          And look at -- when he talks about how much she smoked, he's talking about when a grandchild saw her
    smoke five cigarettes when he saw her 40 years ago.
    That's what he recalls with his limited observation.
          The two son-in-laws, the ex-son-in-law and the
    current son-in-law, who said they saw her about an hour,
    maybe two, every other week, and that usually, sometimes
    they would see her outside and smoke during that time.
          Does the evidence that she didn't smoke in church
    have anything to do with the evidence of whether she was
    addicted?  No.
          Again, if this -- Mr. Geise said that she
    couldn't -- she didn't smoke in church or she didn't
    smoke while she was in the car or in front of her
    grandchildren.  If that's the standard, imagine, there
    will be nobody addicted in the United States right now
    because nobody can smoke at work any more.  Everybody
    has to go outside of the buildings that they work in.
    Everybody has to not smoke on public transit.  Everybody
    has to do that.  And yet, and yet, the evidence is that
    80 to 90 percent of the smokers in the United States are
    addicted.  All right?
          Mr. Geise will say, yes, nicotine is addictive but
    nobody's quitting.  Nobody's quitting.
          One question he put up about whether the brain
    change was permanent.  Do you remember that?  What was the testimony about whether that brain change was
    permanent?
          Remember, Dr. Werner said that there's new studies
    that are coming out now that show that exposure to
    nicotine in early adolescence may make permanent changes
    to the brain.  May make permanent changes to the brain.
          But also, what you will have with you is the 2010
    Surgeon General's Report, and it's interesting because
    Mr. Geise said it again today, and that is that they
    point people to the 2010 Surgeon General's Report.  They
    tell people to rely upon it.
          So I ask you:  Rely upon it.  Look at it.  Just
    like R. J. Reynolds says.
          This is the 2010 Surgeon General's Report, and it
    talks about relapse:  The risk of relapse, however, does
    not end six to 12 months after the attempt at smoking
    cessation.  Findings in studies of long-term outcome
    suggests that relapse ultimately claims 30 to 40 percent
    of smokers who stop smoking for over a year.
          So even if they stop smoking for over a year, that
    addiction retakes 30 or 40 percent.  That's what the
    Surgeon General says.
          In addition, the Surgeon General says there's a
    genetic basis.  They believe that there's a genetic
    basis to addiction.  And that's important, Ladies and Gentlemen.
          I think Mr. Geise said something about him not
    being sure whether she was sent home on oxygen.  The
    only testimony in this case is that in 1993 she was sent
    home on oxygen from the hospital.
          Remember what the Surgeon General's report says.
    I put it up three or four times in this case.  It's that
    2010 Surgeon General's Report; you will have it:  The
    fundamental reason that people persist in smoking is
    nicotine addiction.
          R. J. Reynolds says that.  They say -- and R. J.
    Reynolds points you to the 2010 Surgeon General's
    Report.  That's in the 2010 Surgeon General's Report.
          There is little question in this case, Ladies and
    Gentlemen, that she was addicted.
          They haven't really even given you any other
    reason why she continued to smoke other than that change
    in her brain, because one thing he said was she might
    have smoked because she enjoyed it.  But remember what
    their own expert said about that.  That the subjective
    experience of enjoyment is about the nicotine.  You
    enjoy it because of the nicotine hit.
          So even if they say it's enjoyment that made her
    smoke, it's addiction that made her smoke, Ladies and
    Gentlemen.       I'm surprised that they keep putting up that
    Surgeon General Koop which said something about the
    cigarette won't jump into your mouth.
          Surgeon General Koop was one of the most strongest
    advocates against smoking and its impact on the public
    health.  And what he says in there, he talks about what
    an awful addiction it is and how very difficult it is to
    quit in that very same paper.  He said it is a terrible
    addiction that's caused a tremendous toll on the public
    health of the United States.
          She is a member of the class.  Now, I loathe to
    talk for very long about it, but the defendants are
    again trying to create -- and it came to me, this
    phrase, when I was out there prepping -- the false
    controversy about the lung cancer.  Again, the false
    controversy.  There is no controversy in this case that
    she had lung cancer.  None.
          Now let's talk about what the evidence is.
          Now, you are allowed -- remember what we said at
    the beginning?  Evidence is what comes in.  If the judge
    has said it comes in, you get to take it back.  It's
    evidence, right?  So what we do is we weigh the greater
    weight of the evidence.  So stack it up.
          Now, Mr. Geise wants to say that Dr. Prokes'
    record evidence is in evidence, or that the death certificate is.  It comes in.  You will have it.  It is
    evidence.  Okay?
          So let's stack it up.  You have the physician's
    attestation which said primary lung cancer.  I've shown
    it to you four or five times.  You will have Dr. Prokes'
    records where three times he writes down lung cancer,
    adenocarcinoma of the lung, primary cancer of the
    lung -- three times in his record.
          You have the death certificate.  The death
    certificate, an official record of the State of Florida.
    That's evidence that you have, the official record of
    the State of Florida.
          You have all the negative screening tests.
    Remember we went through this with Dr. Bagnoli.
          Because she had a sigmoidoscopy that was normal.
          Horowitz checked her colon.
          She had a mammogram which was normal; no cancer
    there.
          She had blood tests that showed no problems with
    her kidney.
          She had a pap smear, which ruled out cervical
    cancer.
          She had a hysterectomy, which means she couldn't
    have had uterine cancer.
          All of those negative screening tests is evidence that she didn't have cancer anywhere else.
          Negative blood work.  You'll have the blood work.
          No sign of cancer anywhere else.  No symptoms of
    cancer at any other site.  You have evidence of that.
          She had doctors' records for years.  No symptoms
    of cancer at any other site.  That is evidence.  No
    diagnosis of cancer at any other site.  That is
    evidence.
          She had a team of doctors who looked at her, who
    had a nine-day hospitalization when they diagnosed her
    with lung cancer.
          What is on the other side?  Where is their
    evidence that the cancer came from somewhere else?  What
    piece of evidence do they even have over here?  None.
          Now, this whole thing about the chest x-rays -- it
    just makes me upset, but the whole thing about the chest
    x-ray is -- is -- is false, because there's no doubt she
    had a tumor in her chest.  They biopsied it.  And you
    have the record where they took a biopsy.  There was a
    cancer there.  Not microscopic.  A cancer they could
    biopsy, and, thus we know, as everyone said, it had been
    growing there for a long time.
          So the negative chest x-ray, it was there.  It had
    to be there.  Whether it's metastatic or a primary lung,
    no matter what, it was there.  So the negative chest x-rays, they had to have missed it because it was there.
    It didn't spring there overnight.  And that's not
    evidence one way or another of whether it was lung
    cancer.  It was there and they missed it.
          He gave the example of the fire investigator that
    you can't tell where it was in the house, right?  What
    we have is the report from the fire investigator, right?
    That's what we have.  We have the report who said, Yeah,
    I investigated the fire and this is where it started.
    That's what we have.  This is not a situation where we
    don't know where it came from.  We have the fire
    investigator's report.
          Now, what they're saying is that, because 20 years
    later we don't have the fiber sample, you know, where he
    took fiber samples at every different place and found
    where the accelerant was, that we can't prove it.  We
    have the fire investigator's report.  It's a false
    controversy, Ladies and Gentlemen.
          Where is the greater weight of the evidence?
    That's what you have to decide.  And the greater weight
    of the evidence is that she had lung cancer.
          Now, let me turn our attention quickly to -- turn
    our attention to what he's saying about everybody knew
    and Gore knew.  It flies in the face of the finding.  If
    they said that Dr. Gore knew -- I mean, Reverend Gore knew, when the finding that you have to apply says --
          MR. GUISE:  Your Honor, I object to this.
          THE COURT:  Well, wait a minute.  Okay.
          (Sidebar was held outside the hearing of the
jury:)
          MR. GUISE:  When she puts up the findings and she
    said this is Reverend Gore -- no, she cannot take the
    finding and apply it to people and say this means
    Reverand Gore didn't know, this means he didn't know the
    finding is what it is.  The jury instructions in this
    case are specific to Ethelene Hazouri, so I think this
    argument is inappropriate for putting the findings up
    and saying that it means this as to Reverand Gore.  It
    doesn't mean that.  That's why we have instructions in
    these trials because they have to prove what legal cause
    and everything else with regard to the.
          MS. SHAMP:  We have to prove -- I'm entitled to
    the benefit of the findings, and the findings say they
    concealed material information that was not otherwise
    known.  I'm entitled to rely on that.
          THE COURT:  Well, you can tell them -- you can
    tell them that.
          MR. GUISE:  But you can't say Reverend Gore didn't
    know.
          MS. SHAMP:  What it means is that they can't -- they can't impose the fact that this was material
    information that was not otherwise known.
          MR. GUISE:  That's the -- that's the problem.  We
    don't know what that information is.
          THE COURT:  You understand?
          MS. SHAMP:  I think I'm right, but I'll move on
    because I don't want to disturb this jury any longer.
          MR. GUISE:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          (Sidebar was concluded and the following further
proceedings were held:)
          MS. SHAMP:  The judge will -- I'm sorry.  I knew
    I'd get going.
          The judge will instruct you that you're required
    to accept the findings as true.  All right?
          And interestingly, what they said -- and I was
    surprised by it -- but that in 1957 that there was a
    scientific consensus where Wynder -- remember Ernst
    Wynder and Graham at Sloan-Kettering Memorial
    Hospital -- and Mrs. Hazouri was right there with them.
          Mrs. Hazouri has an eighth grade education.  The
    National Cancer Institute had not yet come out and
    said -- according to them, the AMA -- that Mrs. Hazouri
    was right there with Ernst and Graham.  It's not very
    reasonable, according to them, for them to assert that
    Mrs. Hazouri, with an 8th grade education, knew there were carcinogens in the smoke because her minister spoke
    to her about the Godliness of the Temple of God and
    putting cigarettes in it.
          One thing that's been consistent throughout
    everybody's testimony is the one place nobody ever
    smoked was in church.  That's the one place nobody was
    smoking, was in church.
          And that's not because people knew it was a health
    risk; not because people said, oh, it causes cancer, you
    can't smoke in church, but because people have always
    thought that smoking and drinking were a vice, a naughty
    thing, a not Godly thing.  And because her minister
    spoke to her about that is not evidence that
    Mrs. Hazouri understood what the tobacco companies were
    hiding.
          In fact, during that same period of time that
    Mr. Geise says that Mrs. Hazouri was right there, right
    on, 60 percent of the doctors in America were smoking
    cigarettes.
          Mr. Geise talked about that Proctor said, that
    those two public health officials that he put up the
    pictures of, that they were wrong.  That's not what
    Proctor said.  What he said is that the message the
    public health community was trying to get out, the
    Surgeon General's message couldn't compete with the allure of cigarette advertising, with the allure and the
    doubt that the -- that the cigarette advertisers were
    trying to create.
          And the public health community was up against an
    extremely large foe and still is.  You remember the
    document that we put up from the FTC which said that the
    tobacco company spent more in one day than the public
    health community spent on public health advertising in a
    year?  In one day.
          Ladies and Gentlemen, the argument that Mr. Geise
    made throughout his statements to you is the same one:
    It doesn't matter what we did.  It doesn't matter what
    we did.  It doesn't matter what we did.  It doesn't
    matter what we did because she wasn't addicted.  It
    doesn't matter what we did because she doesn't have lung
    cancer.  It doesn't matter what we did because she never
    heard anything the Tobacco Institute said.
          Just thinking about that, and I was remembering
    what he said where, remember, he asked the question of
    the whole jury pool and nobody raised their hand?  But I
    wonder, if we ask that question, if anybody who read the
    "True" magazine article would have raised their hand to
    say that they had known that was something from TI, from
    the Tobacco Institute -- think about that.
          If you had read this, right, which said:  We don't know whether smoking causes any illness.  Right?  We
    don't know the jury is still out.  We -- now if you were
    asked:  Have you read anything the tobacco company said,
    you would say no.
          You read this, which was paid for by the tobacco
    companies.  Look at what their marketing and promotions
    were; what they were going to do.  And that's in the
    Tide Rock document that they were going to do
    editorials, that they were going to publish things in
    magazines, that they were going to get to the
    newspapers, that they were going to make sure their
    position was in every article.  And there it was.  Out
    there.
          And you -- the judge is going to tell you that you
    can infer from all of that that it impacted Ethelene
    Hazouri.  You can infer that.  You are permitted, based
    on all the evidence, to say that this was a cause of her
    continuing to smoke, switching to filters, maybe even
    the idea -- we talked about it before -- of her thinking
    that's heavy smokers, right?  That's not me.  That's
    heavy smokers, right?
          Remember that people say that they thought it was
    heavy smokers?  She smoked 15 cigarettes, maybe 10
    cigarettes -- I'm not a heavy smoker; doesn't apply to
    me -- because they got that message out.  This might be harmful to some people.  You remember, that's what
    Mr. Cullman said.  It might be harmful to some people.
    Not to me.  I don't fit in that category.  Right?
          If they're public relations campaign might have
    made her say maybe not me, if it made her continue to
    smoke at all, then you can infer on that part.
          Common sense, Ladies and Gentlemen.  Common sense.
          If they're marketing and advertising and campaigns
    of doubt didn't work, nobody including Ethelene Hazouri,
    wasn't impacted, would they have spent the billions of
    dollars that they spent doing it?
          Common sense.  They spent billions of dollars
    because it worked.  And you can infer that from the
    evidence that you have.
          This case is not just about Ethelene Hazouri; it's
    about R. J. Reynolds.  And despite the fact that they
    didn't put up a single document from R. J. Reynolds'
    files, it is about their conduct.
          And I want to put one last thing up.  The jury
    instruction that you'll be getting -- and you might be
    asking yourself:  Well, Ms. Shamp, you did talk a lot
    about stuff they did after 1994.  That's when she died.
          But the judge will instruct you:  In determining
    whether punitive damages are warranted, you may consider
    similar harms suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit.
          You'll have this back with you.  Look at it.  You
    may consider similar harms suffered by other persons not
    parties to this lawsuit in assessing the
    reprehensibility or the wrongfulness of the R. J.
    Reynolds acts proven in this case.  Similar harms.
          And the last thing I'll leave you with, just a
    statement about those similar harms:  12 million people
    since 1964.  An epidemic.
          Now, Mr. Geise asked you for one of you to be his
    advocate.  Let me ask you, for all of you, to be the
    advocate for the public health, to be the advocate for
    truth in that jury room.
          The word verdict means to speak the truth.
    Veritas, V-E-R, comes from the word truth.  Verily I say
    on to you.  You've probably heard that.  Veritas means
    truth and dic means Dictaphone:  Speak.  So verdict
    means speak the truth.
          Ladies and Gentlemen, I ask you for a verdict that
    says Ethelene Hazouri is a member of the case.  That
    says what the defendant did made a difference and says
    that plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages based
    upon their conduct.
          Again, I appreciate your attention on behalf of my
    team.  I appreciate your service.  Thank you.       THE COURT:  If you're finished, do you mind
    turning off the -- okay.  Thank you.
          Ladies and Gentlemen, we're going to depart from
    one of my instructions at this point.  I'm going to ask
    that you not take notes while I read the instructions to
    you.  The reason simply is I'm going to send everything
    that I read back in the jury room with you.  And you've
    paid close attention to all of the evidence and to the
    arguments by the attorneys, so I want you to pay close
    attention while I read the instructions.
          And again they'll go back in the jury room with
    you.  Okay.
          Members of the jury, you have now heard and
    received all the evidence in the case.  I am going to
    tell you about the rules of law that you must use in
    reaching your verdict.
          In reaching your verdict, you should consider and
    weigh the evidence, decide the disputed issues of fact,
    and apply the law on which I shall instruct you to the
    facts as you find them from the evidence.
          The evidence in this case consists of the sworn
    testimony of all the witnesses, all exhibits received in
    evidence, and all facts that may be admitted -- admitted
    or agreed to by the parties.
          The plaintiff -- the claims of the plaintiff Sharon Odum are as follows:
          The plaintiff Sharon Odum claims that the
    defendant R. J. Reynolds was, one, negligent; two,
    manufactured and distributed a product that was
    defective and unreasonably dangerous; three, concealed
    material health information about cigarettes; and four,
    conspired with others to conceal such health
    information, all of which caused Ethelene Hazouri's lung
    cancer and death.
          The plaintiff must prove her claims by the greater
    weight of the evidence.  The greater weight of the
    evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force
    and effect of the entire evidence in the case.
          In determining the believability of any witness
    and the weight to be given the testimony of any witness,
    you may properly consider the demeanor of the witness
    while testifying, the frankness or lack of frankness of
    the witness, the intelligence of the witness, any
    interest the witness may have in the outcome of the
    case -- excuse me -- the means and opportunity the
    witness had to know the facts about which the witness
    testified, the ability of the witness to remember the
    matters about which the witness testified, and the
    reasonableness of the testimony of the witness
    considered in the light of all the evidence in the case and in the light of your own experience and common
    sense.
          You have heard opinion testimony on certain
    technical subjects from persons referred to as expert
    witnesses.  You may accept such opinion testimony,
    reject it, or give it the weight you think it deserves,
    considering the knowledge, skill, experience, training,
    or education of the witness, the reasons given by the
    witness for the opinion expressed, and all the other
    evidence in the case.
          During the trial, the sworn testimony of certain
    witnesses was given before the trial -- excuse me.
          During the trial, the sworn testimony of certain
    witnesses given before the trial has been presented to
    you.  You are to consider and weigh this testimony as
    you would any other evidence in the case.
          R. J. Reynolds is a corporation.  You may not
    discriminate between corporations and natural
    individuals.  Both are persons in the eyes of the law
    and both are entitled to the same fair and impartial
    consideration by the same legal standard.
          Excuse me.
          The Court instructs you that the parties have
    stipulated, one, pursuant to Florida statute Chapter 47,
    venue is proper in Jacksonville, Duval County, Florida; two, the decedent Ethelyne Hazouri was a resident of
    Florida for purposes of the Engle class membership; and
    three, Mrs. Hazouri died on March 15th, 1994; four,
    Camel and Winston cigarettes manufactured and sold in
    the United States were manufactured and sold by R. J.
    Reynolds Tobacco Company and its predecessors in
    interest.
          This action arises out of a case known as the
    Engle class action.  You must determine whether Ethelene
    Hazouri was a member of the Engle class.  To prove
    Ethelene Hazouri was a member of the Engle class --
    excuse me -- plaintiff must prove by the greater weight
    of the evidence that Ethelene Hazouri was addicted to
    smoking cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was
    such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer.
          If the greater weight of the evidence does not
    support plaintiff's claim that Ethelene Hazouri was a
    member of the Engle class, your verdict should be for
    the defendant on that issue; however, if the greater
    weight of the evidence does support plaintiff's claim
    that Ethelene Hazouri was a member of the Engle class,
    your verdict should be for plaintiff on that issue.
          If you find that Ethelene Hazouri was a member of
    the Engle class, certain findings from that action are
    binding upon you, the Court, and the parties.  The findings may not be denied or questioned, and they must
    carry the same weight they would have -- they would have
    if you had determined them yourselves.
          The findings that are binding on you are:
          Finding 1 is that cigarettes cause lung cancer.
          Finding 2 is that nicotine in cigarettes is
    addictive.
          Finding 3, that R. J. Reynolds placed cigarettes
    on the market that were defective and unreasonably
    dangerous.
          Excuse me.
          Finding 4 is that R. J. Reynolds concealed or
    omitted material information not otherwise known or
    available, knowing the material was false or misleading,
    or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the
    health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes
    or both.
          Finding 5 is that R. J. Reynolds agreed with other
    tobacco companies to conceal or omit information
    regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their
    addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the
    public would rely on this information to their
    detriment.
          Finding 6 is that R. J. Reynolds was negligent.
          However, notwithstanding the foregoing, these facts will not be applicable to plaintiff's claim
    against R. J. Reynolds if you find by the greater weight
    of evidence that Ethelene Hazouri was not a member of
    the Engle class.
          Notwithstanding the above findings which are
    binding on you and the court, the liability of R. J.
    Reynolds to the plaintiff must be proven by the
    plaintiff in accordance with the instructions I will
    give you hereafter on specific claims.
          Addiction to smoking cigarettes containing
    nicotine is a legal cause of Ethelene Hazouri's death if
    it directly and in natural and continuous sequence
    produced or contributed substantially to producing
    Ethelene Hazouri's death so that it can reasonably be
    said that, but for the addiction, her death would not
    have occurred.
          In order to be regarded as a legal cause of death,
    addiction to smoking cigarettes need not be the only
    cause.
          Addiction to smoking R. J. Reynolds cigarettes may
    be a legal cause of death even though it operates in
    combination with the act of another or some other cause
    if such other cause occurs at the same time as the
    addiction and the addiction contributes substantially to
    producing such death.       If the greater weight of the evidence does not
    support the claims of plaintiff being presented, then
    your verdict should be for the defendant.  However, if
    the greater weight of the evidence does support the
    claims of plaintiff, then you shall determine and write
    on the verdict form what percentage of the total --
    excuse me.  I got that out of sequence.  Sorry.
          R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is successor
    corporation to American Tobacco Company and Brown &
    Williamson Tobacco Corporation.  Accordingly, R. J.
    Reynolds Tobacco Company is legally responsible for the
    conduct of both American Tobacco Company and Brown &
    Williamson Tobacco Corporation for any harm caused by
    cigarettes manufactured by American Tobacco Company
    and/or Brown & Williamson Tobacco Company --
    Corporation.
          The next issue for your determination is whether
    the concealment or omission of material information
    concerning the health risks or addictive nature of
    cigarettes smoking by R. J. Reynolds was a legal cause
    of the death of Ethelene Hazouri.
          Ethelene Hazouri's reliance on such statements to
    her detriment is a legal cause of loss, injury, or
    damage if it directly and in natural and continuous
    sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing her loss, injury, or damage so that it can
    reasonably be said but for Ethelene Hazouri's reliance,
    her loss, injury, or damage would not have occurred.
          Material information is information that is of
    such importance that Ethelene Hazouri would have
    considered it significant in her decision-making
    process.
          The next issue for your determination is whether
    the conspiracy to withhold health information or
    information regarding addiction and acts proven in
    furtherance of that conspiracy was a legal cause of the
    death of Ethelene Hazouri -- Ethelene Hazouri.
          In order to be a legal cause of the death,
    plaintiff must show that Ethelene Hazouri relied on
    statements by R. J. Reynolds or any of the other
    companies involved in the conspiracy that omitted
    material information concerning the health effects of
    cigarettes or the addictive nature or both at any time
    during or after December 1953.
          I hereby instruct you that the plaintiff has made
    no claim for conspiracy to conceal information regarding
    the smoke -- smoking and health addiction before
    December 1953.
          As to each of plaintiff's claims of concealment
    and conspiracy to conceal, I hereby instruct you that you may consider all the evidence in the case in
    determining whether or not plaintiff has satisfied the
    reliance requirement of those claims.
          If the greater weight of the evidence supports --
    does not support the claims of plaintiff against the
    defendant, then your verdict should be for the
    defendant.  However, if the greater weight of the
    evidence does support the claims of the plaintiff, then
    you shall determine and write on your verdict form what
    percentage of total fault of each party is chargeable to
    each.
          As to plaintiff's claims, the conduct of R. J.
    Reynolds need not be the only cause.  The conduct of
    R. J. Reynolds may be a legal cause of death, even
    though it operates in combination with the act of
    another or some other cause, if such cause occurs at the
    same time as the conduct and the conduct contributes
    substantially to producing such death.
          I instruct you that after 1969 the warning labels
    placed on cigarette packs by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco
    Company and the other Engle defendants complied with the
    federal law, and that R. J. Reynolds and the other Engle
    defendants had no legal obligation to make any
    additional warnings.
          Plaintiff has made no claim for failure to warn after 1969.
          Manufacturing, selling, and advertising cigarettes
    is a -- is lawful activity.  Therefore, I instruct you
    that R. J. Reynolds cannot be held liable merely for
    manufacturing, selling, or advertising cigarettes.
          If your verdict is for R. J. Reynolds on all
    claims, you will not consider the matter of damages.
    But if your verdict is for one or more -- if your
    verdict is for plaintiff on one or more of the claims
    against R. J. Reynolds, you should determine and write
    on the verdict form in dollars the total amount of
    damages which the greater weight of the evidence shows
    that Sharon Odum, as Ethelene Hazouri's survivor,
    sustained as a result of Ethelene Hazouri's death,
    including any such damages that she is reasonably
    certain to incur or experience in the future.
          In that regard, you should consider Sharon Odum's
    loss of Ethelene Hazouri's companionship, instruction,
    and guidance, and her mental pain and suffering as a
    result of Ethelene Hazouri's injury and death.
          There is no exact standard for fixing the
    compensation to be awarded.  Any such award should be
    fair and just in the light of the evidence.
          In determining the duration of any future loss,
    you may consider the joint life expectancy of Sharon Odum and Ethelene Hazouri, together with the other
    evidence in the case.
          The mortality tables you received in evidence may
    be considered, together with other evidence in the case,
    bearing on the health, age, and physical condition --
    excuse me -- physical condition of each in determining
    how long each may be or may have been expected to live.
          In determining the total amount of damages to
    award Mrs. Sharon Odum, you should not make any
    reduction because of the responsibility you charge to
    Ethelene Hazouri.  The Court will enter judgment based
    on your verdict and reduce the total amount of damages,
    if legally appropriate, by the percentage of
    responsibility you charge to Ethelene Hazouri.
          If you find for the plaintiff against R. J.
    Reynolds, you should consider whether, in addition to
    compensatory damages, punitive damages are warranted in
    the circumstances of this case as punishment and as a
    deterrent to others.
          Punitive damages may be warranted against R. J.
    Reynolds based on your findings that R. J. Reynolds was
    liable to plaintiff for fraudulent concealment or
    conspiracy to fraudulent conceal as described below.
          You may not find that punitive damages awarded
    against R. J. Reynolds based upon plaintiff's claim for negligence or strict liability.
          Punitive damages are warranted if you find, by
    clear and convincing evidence, one, the conduct causing
    the loss to plaintiff was so gross and flagrant as to
    show reckless disregard of human life, or of the safety
    of persons exposed to the effects of such conduct; or
    two, the conduct showed such an entire lack of care that
    R. J. Reynolds must have been consciously indifferent to
    the consequences; or, three, the conduct showed such an
    entire lack of care that R. J. Reynolds must have
    wantonly and recklessly disregarded the safety and
    welfare of the public; or, four, the conduct showed such
    reckless indifference to the rights of others as to be
    equivalent to an intentional violation of those rights.
          Clear and convincing evidence differs from the
    greater weight of the evidence in that it is more
    compelling than persuasive.
          Greater weight of the evidence means the more
    persuasive force and effect of the entire evidence in
    the case.
          In contrast, clear and convincing evidence is
    evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in
    confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm
    belief or conviction about the matter at issue.
          For purposes of determining whether the plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages, and if so, what amount,
    you may not consider in any way the findings regarding
    R. J. Reynolds' conduct from the prior Engle lawsuit
    that I described to you earlier.  The only evidence you
    may consider on this issue is the evidence presented to
    you in this trial.
          When considering whether to award punitive
    damages, you may consider any harm R. J. Reynolds'
    conduct caused to the plaintiff as a result of Ethelene
    Hazouri's death.
          In determining whether punitive damages are
    awarded, you may consider similar harms suffered by
    other persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing
    the reprehensibility or wrongfulness of the R. J.
    Reynolds acts as proven in this -- in this case.
          You may not seek to punish R. J. Reynolds for harm
    suffered by other persons other than the plaintiff as a
    result of Ethelene Hazouri's death, and you may punish
    R. J. Reynolds only for those harms suffered by
    plaintiff as a result of Ethelene Hazouri's death which
    were caused by R. J. Reynolds' punishable conduct.
          If you decide that punitive damages are warranted,
    we will proceed to the second part of the issue in the
    amount of punitive damages, if any, during which the
    parties may present additional evidence and arguments on the issue of punitive damages.
          I will give you additional instructions, after
    which you will decide whether, in your discretion,
    punitive damages will be assessed, and if so, what
    amount.
          In deciding this case, it is your duty as jurors
    to answer certain questions I ask you to answer on a
    special form called a verdict form.  You must come to an
    agreement about what your answers will be.
          Your agreed-upon answers to my questions are
    called your jury verdict.
          The evidence in this case consists of the sworn
    testimony of witnesses, all exhibits received in
    evidence, and all the facts that may be admitted to or
    agreed to by the parties.
          In reaching your verdict, you -- you must think
    about and weigh the testimony of any documents,
    photographs, or other material that has been received in
    evidence.  You may also consider the facts that were
    agreed -- admitted or agreed to by the lawyers.
          Your job is to determine the facts.  You may use
    reason and common sense to reach conclusions.  You may
    draw reasonable inferences from the evidence.  But you
    should not guess about things that were not covered
    here, and you must always apply the law as I've explained it to you.
          Now, members of the jury, you have now heard all
    the evidence, my instructions on the law that you must
    apply in reaching your verdict, and the closing
    arguments of the attorneys.  You will shortly retire to
    the jury room to decide this case.  Before you do so,
    let me have a few last instructions to you.
          During deliberations, jurors must communicate
    about the case only with one another and only when all
    jurors are present in the jury room.
          You will have in the jury room all of the evidence
    that was received during the trial.  In reaching your
    verdict, do not do any research on your own or as a
    group.  Do not use dictionaries, the Internet, or any
    referral materials.
          Do not investigate the case or conduct any
    experiments.  Do not visit or view the scene of any
    event involved in this case or look at maps or pictures
    on the Internet.  If you happen to have -- well, if you
    happen to pass it, do not investigate.
          All jurors must see or hear the same evidence at
    the same time.  Do not read, listen to, or watch any
    news account of this trial.
          You are not to communicate with any person outside
    the jury in this case.  Until you have reached a verdict, you must not talk about this case in person or
    through the telephone, writing, or electronic
    communication such as a blog, Twitter, e-mail, text
    message, or any other means.
          Do not contact anyone to assist, you such as a
    family accountant, doctor or lawyer.  These
    communication rules apply until I discharge you at the
    end of the case.
          If you become aware of any violations of these
    instructions or any other instruction I have given you
    in this case, you must tell me by giving a note to the
    bailiff.
          Any notes you have taken during the trial may be
    taken to the jury room for your use during discussions.
          Your notes are simply to aid your own memory, and
    neither your notes nor those of any other juror are
    binding or conclusive.
          Your notes are not a substitute for your own
    memory or that of the other jurors; instead, your
    verdict must result from the collective memory and
    judgment of all the jurors based on the evidence and
    testimony presented during the trial.
          At the conclusion of the trial, the bailiff will
    collect all of your notes and immediately destroy them.
    No one will ever read your notes.       In reaching your verdict, do not let bias,
    sympathy, prejudice, public opinion, or any other
    sentiment for or against any party to influence your
    decision.
          Your verdict must be based on the evidence that
    has been received and on the law on which I have
    instructed you.
          Reaching your verdict is exclusively your job.  I
    cannot participate in that decision in any way, and you
    should not guess what I think your verdict should be
    from something I may have said or done.  You should not
    think that I prefer one verdict over another; therefore,
    in reaching your verdict, you should not consider
    anything that I may have said or done except for my
    specific instructions to you.
          Pay careful attention to all instructions that I
    gave you, for that is the law that you must follow.  You
    will have a copy of the instructions with you when you
    go to the jury room to deliberate.  All the instructions
    are important, and you must consider them altogether.
    There are no other laws that apply to this case, and
    even if you do not agree with these laws, you must use
    them in reaching your decision in this case.
          After you have decided what the facts are, you may
    find that some instructions do not apply.  In that case, follow the instructions that do apply and use them
    together with the facts to reach your verdict.
          When you go to the jury room, the first thing you
    should do is choose a presiding juror to act as
    foreperson during your deliberations.  The foreperson
    should see to it that your discussions are orderly and
    that everyone has a fair chance to be heard.
          It is your duty to talk with one another in the
    jury room and to consider the views of all the jurors.
    Each of you must decide the case for yourself, but only
    after you have considered the evidence with the other
    members of the jury.  Feel free to change your mind if
    you are convinced that your position should be
    different.
          You should all try to agree, but do not give up
    your honest belief just because the others think
    differently.  Keep an open mind so that you and your
    fellow jurors can easily share ideas about the case.
          I will give you a verdict form with questions you
    must answer.  I've already instructed you on the law
    that you are to follow in answering the -- answering
    these questions.  You must follow my instructions and
    the form carefully.  You must consider each question
    separately.  Please answer the questions in the order
    that they appear.       After you answer a question, the form tells you
    what to do next.  I'm going to have Mr. Schaefer pass
    out the verdict forms, and then I'm going to read the
    verdict to you while you're looking at it.  And when I'm
    finished reading, I'm going to have him pick those forms
    back up, those copies.  And this verdict form that I'm
    holding will go back to you in the jury room.
          Okay.  As all of you can see on the first page, it
    says in the Circuit Court of the Fourth Judicial
    Circuit, Duval County, Florida, Civil Division, which is
    just where we are, and the heading of the case, and then
    is says Verdict Form:  We the jury return the following
    verdict.
          Question 1:  Was Ethelene Hazouri addicted to
    smoking cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was
    such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer?
          And you must answer that question either yes or
    no.
          If your answer to Question 1 is yes, please
    proceed to Question 2.  If your answer to Question 1 is
    no, please proceed no further except to sign and date
    this verdict form and return it to the courtroom.
          Okay.
          And if you answer Question 2, it says:  Fraudulent
    concealment.  State whether R. J. Reynolds' concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects
    or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both were a
    legal cause of Ethelene Hazouri's death.
          And if you answer Question 2, you are obviously
    going to answer it yes or no.  And then it says to
    proceed to Question 3.
          Question 3:  Civil conspiracy to fraudulently
    conceal.  State whether R. J. Reynolds' agreement to
    conceal or omit a material fact regarding the health
    effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of
    smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of Ethelene
    Hazouri's death.
          And if you answer Question 3, you are to answer it
    yes or no.  Then please proceed to Question 4.
          Question 4:  Comparative fault.  State for each
    party the percentage of fault that was a legal cause of
    Ethelene Hazouri's death that you charge to:
          R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, individually and
    as successor to Brown & Williamson Tobacco Company and
    American Tobacco Company.
          And if you answer Question 4, you are to put a
    percentage of fault that you charge to R. J. Reynolds in
    that first column.
          And then Ethelene Hazouri, and if you answer
    Question 4, you are to put a percentage of fault that you charge to Ethelene Hazouri.
          The total must be 100 percent.
          And then it says proceed to Question 5.
          And if you answer Question 5, it says:  Damages.
    What is the amount of any damages that Sharon Odum
    sustained for, A, her mental health -- mental pain and
    suffering as a result of her mother's injury and death.
          And if you answer Question 5A, you are to put a
    dollar figure there.
          And, B, the loss of her mother's companionship,
    instruction, and guidance.
          So if you answer Question 5, put a dollar figure
    there.
          In determining the total amount of any damages,
    you should not make any reduction because of the fault
    you've charged to Ethelene Hazouri.  The Court will
    enter a judgment based on your verdict and will reduce
    the total amount of damages, if legally appropriate, by
    the percentage of fault which you charge to Ethelene
    Hazouri.
          So if your answer to Question 2 or 3 was yes,
    please proceed to Question 6.
          If your answers to Questions 2 or 3 were no,
    please proceed no further except to sign and date this
    verdict form and return it to the courtroom.       Question 6:  Punitive damages.  If you answer
    Question 6, it says under the circumstances of this
    case, state whether by clear and convincing evidence
    punitive damages are warranted against R. J. Reynolds
    Tobacco Company individually and as successor to Brown &
    Williamson Tobacco Company and to American Tobacco
    Company -- American Tobacco Company.
          And if you are answer Question 6, you are to
    answer it yes or no.
          And it says:  Please sign and date the verdict
    form.  It says:  So say we all this blank day of June
    2013, foreperson, and the foreperson's name, printed.
          Would you take them back up, please.
          You can just hold on to them right there.
          Your verdict must be unanimous; that is, your
    verdict must be agreed to by each of you.  When you
    have -- when you have finished filling out the form,
    your foreperson must write the date and sign it at the
    bottom and return it -- return the verdict to the
    bailiff.
          If any of you need to communicate with me for any
    reason, write me a note and give it to the bailiff.  In
    your note do not disclose any vote or split or the
    reason for the communication.
          You may now -- excuse me just a minute. Mrs. Whistle and Mr. Williamson, do you have anything in
    the jury room?
