MR. PERSONS: Your Honor, may it please the Court. And may it please you, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. We've been together now into our third week, and coming into the home stretch.
I'd be remiss if I did not say to you at the outset how much we appreciate your service. We understand that it's been no small sacrifice on your part performing this civic duty, performing as a juror in this case. And we thank you on behalf of everyone, not just Reynolds, but everybody in the courthouse, we thank you very much.
Jury service is akin to military service or any service that provides the fundamental underpinnings of our government. Couldn't function, our court system couldn't function without juries, so we thank you.
This case, the plaintiff does have the burden of proof. The plaintiff has to prove by the greater weight of the evidence a number of things, as we talked about in opening, and then I'm going to bring some of those things back now that we're in closing argument.
I'm going to not only talk about the evidence, but I'm going to show you evidence, evidence that we've seen during the course of this trial. And our position is that the plaintiff has not carried the burden of proof, the plaintiff has not proven the case by the greater weight of the evidence.
And I'll show you, I'll show you why.
things you wrote down here," including emphysema, "they would have been contributing causes of death, wouldn't they?"
He didn't say yes. No, he didn't. In fact, he said, "Let me give you an example. I have bad coronary arteries, say, and somebody shoots me. I die of a gunshot wound. If I die of a gunshot wound, could it contribute to one heartbeat less because my heart can't take the same stress? Yes,
I died with that disease. I would put it on the death certificate," way down in those boxes like he showed you, "but my cause of death is gunshot wound."
Mr. Ojeda may have died with emphysema, but he did not die because of emphysema.
Now, how much does the plaintiff really know about his father's illnesses? He said in 1991,
1992, Mr. Ojeda couldn't walk to his car without getting shortness of breath. But Dr. Hernandez said that in 1996, Mr. Ojeda walks into his office and says he's short of breath only when dancing and during sex.
Plaintiff testified from this seat right here that Mr. Ojeda was bedridden six months after his surgery. Mr. Ojeda was alive for three months
after his surgery.
And in April 1996, Mr. Ojeda reported shortness of breath, when he goes to that emergency room, the chief complaint is not I've been bedridden for six months, the chief complaint is shortness of breath for three days.
Mr. Ojeda had been on oxygen since 1991, that's what the plaintiff says. Dr. Hernandez says Mr. Ojeda did not start using oxygen until after his surgery for the tumor.
Makes you wonder. Where was the plaintiff when his father was sick?
Miss Bekec was Mr. Ojeda's primary caregiver, not the plaintiff. Miss Bekec took Mr. Ojeda to doctors' appointments, not the plaintiff. And he said that he went to one doctor's appointment with his dad and he sat in the car.
Now, there was some argument, I believe, that Julio and the plaintiff and Susan are the only people who are alive. Miss Bekec is still alive.
Who knows the most about Mr. Ojeda's smoking, quitting, illness, and death?
Dr. Hernandez remembers a lot about Mr. Ojeda despite the fact he doesn't have a single record in his possession, he remembers a lot about
Mr. Ojeda's treatment.
"And other than your" -- this is my question to him. "Other than your conversation with Mr. Acosta, have you discussed this case with anybody, any other treating physicians, family members of Mr. Ojeda?"
Answer: "No. As a matter of fact, I don't know who they are. Mr. Acosta told me that the plaintiff" -And I said the plaintiff, you're right, because he wasn't sure of the phrase.
"The plaintiff was the son of him, but I didn't know that he had any other family than his wife and himself.
"Okay.
"You know.
"So you had not met the son?
"Never.
"Who is the plaintiff?
"Never."
Plaintiff brought this lawsuit to seek money for the loss of companionship after his father's death. His father's treating physician, during all the care and consideration that was going in, especially in April of 1996, has no memory.
Thank you. Thank you for your attention.
