MR. BASS: Thank you. May it please the Court, counsel.
And good morning, members of the jury.
It's been a while since I spoke to you. Again, my name is Hardee Bass.
January 2014, Surgeon General, Major Conclusion Number 1: The century-long epidemic of cigarette smoking has caused an enormous avoidable public health tragedy. Since the first Surgeon General's report in 1964, more than 20 million premature deaths can be attributed to cigarette smoking.
Twenty million premature deaths attributable to cigarette smoking; 480,000 cigarette-smoking related deaths a year.
But Nick Perrotto wasn't one of them.
But Nick Perrotto wasn't one of them, according to the defense witness, Dr. Ganz.
Surgeon General 2014, Major Conclusion Number 2: The tobacco epidemic was initiated and has been sustained by the aggressive strategies of the tobacco industry, which has deliberately misled the public on the risks of cigarette smoking.
But it's all Nick's fault. Nick is the only one to blame for what happened to him in this case. That's the defense. That's the defense.
But after hearing all the evidence, you know -- you know that while Debbie Perrotto does acknowledge some fault, does accept some fault on behalf of her husband, Nick, you know, after hearing all the evidence, that the defendants definitely share in some of that blame.
And you know that because you got the whole story. You got to see the personal diary, the 50-year personal diary of these defendants. The things that Nick Perrotto never got to see. "A treasure," that's what Dr. Proctor called the documents.
"Important," "startling," "striking," that's how Dr. Hurt -Remember Dr. Hurt? He was our first witness. It seems like a long time ago. Well, it was a long time ago. Interest -"important," "startling," "striking," that's how he called the documents.
Information so revealing, so convincing and so enlightening, that the Surgeon General, in these books that you're going to have in evidence, now relies on the cigarette company documents. That's how enlightening they are.
You see, in a court case, regardless of the type of case it is, it's not every day that a jury gets to see and hear the words of a defendant. But you all did.
And, of course, you heard there's 85 million pages now publicly available, right?
We brought you just the tip of the iceberg.
I'm sure it felt like a long trial, right? But imagine 85 million pages.
MR. WEAVER: Objection, Your Honor; improper argument.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BASS: We brought you the tip of the iceberg.
MR. WEAVER: Objection, Your Honor; improper argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BASS: But we showed you enough for you to know exactly what you need to know about these defendants and about what really mattered most to them.
And so now, really, the only question is, after hearing all this, what are you all going to do about it?
Are we going to stand for lying and
liars, and companies that treat people the way Nick Perrotto and millions of others were treated just because -MR. MAGUIRE: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. BASS: -- they're a corporation?
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BASS: Are we going to stand for that just because they're a corporation, and just because this is a capitalistic society?
That's for you all to decide. You see, a jury is a powerful thing, and the courtroom is the great equalizer. It's a place where someone like Debbie Perrotto can come in and challenge and go toe to toe with major companies. It's the great equalizer. And you all, you all are the ones that will do the equalizing.
She can put on her case, she can call witnesses, and she can trust that you all, who sat through jury selection, who listened to the questions that the lawyers asked, trying to figure out in the short amount of time that we had, whether we could find six, eight -- now six folks -- to be fair and impartial.
And so a jury is a powerful thing. We've
heard quotes -On the first day, three weeks ago, Her Honor stood up and quoted from the Constitution. You've heard other lawyers in the courtroom invoke historical figures, talking about the power of a jury trial. You heard Her Honor, in the very first instruction she read today, using words like "democracy," and those kinds of things.
A jury is a powerful thing. But guess what is also powerful? The truth. The truth is a powerful thing. It's powerful because the truth should always matter.
And when a company sells a product used by millions, they should tell the truth. It really is as simple as that. But when you choose greed over the truth, that leads to 20 million deaths, including Nick Perrotto, there has to be consequences.
There needs to be consequences for companies that engineer products for addiction, target children and teens in order to hook them and try and make them customers for life.
There needs to be consequences for companies that conceal from and lie to the
public when they know about dangers in their products.
There needs to be consequences for companies that deceitfully offer up false illusions of safety in a deadly product. When a company acts like that, there must be consequences.
And so on behalf of myself and our entire team, and Debbie Perrotto, and her son Michael, and Nick Perrotto, thank you very much for listening to the case, for listening to our case, for listening to our evidence.
Thank you very much for the patience that you all have most certainly displayed. We're almost to the point that you all are going to do what you were selected to do. We're almost there.
You see, just like you all, we believe in responsibility and accountability. And now it's time to hold the defendants accountable for their share of responsibility in this case for the choices that they made.
"Choice," that's a word that was used quite frequently. In fact, it was used a lot from the very first day of this case in jury
selection. And that's the word that the defendants want you to use when you go in the back.
They want you to only think about Nick Perrotto, and they want you to say, when you go back there, well, you know, we live in America, it's a free country, people have choices and they need to be responsible for their choices.
We agree.
Corporations have choices, too, and responsibilities, too. That's why -- that's why this case is a shared responsibility, and that's why Nick's not 100 percent to blame for what happened to him. You know that. You know that.
You all have everything you need to render a fair verdict. You have three weeks worth of evidence, a lot of evidence on different topics. You now have the jury instructions. You now have the verdict form.
And you have fairness in your hearts and minds. And that's all you need to do what you all know is the right thing to do.
And so, of course, though, even though from our perspective you all have everything
that you need to render a verdict, of course, as Her Honor said, this is closing arguments, this is our chance to sum up what we think the evidence was with respect to the different verdict form questions that you have, and we're going to walk through that. There's some time -And what's going to happen, to let you know, is I'm going to talk for a little while about some of the issues, and then Mr. Hammer, who you recall put Debbie and Michael on the witness stand, he's going to talk to you all a little bit about the damages aspect of the case.
And the defendants are going to go, and then plaintiffs are going to have some -- we're going to have some -- are going to have some rebuttal. So that's -At least for the initial portion, you're going to hear from me and Mr. Hammer. Okay?
A couple of things that Her Honor read to you that we encourage you to think about as you consider the evidence and consider the jury questions.
One, expert witnesses. This is the
expert witness instruction, and it talks about the things that you may consider when considering the testimony.
You heard from a lot of expert witnesses. So, when deliberating, we urge you to think about who you heard from regarding expert witnesses in this case.
Who did we bring you? Well, we brought you the best. Dr. Richard Hurt from the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota. Dr. Proctor, 30-year cigarette historian from Stanford.
And then, with respect to Nick's medical care, we brought you the doctors that knew him best, his treating doctors, the ones that -- as Mr. Gdanski was talking to them about -actually got to know Nick. They put their hands on Nick, diagnosed him, tried to save his life.
Those are the witnesses -- expert witnesses that we brought. So we urge you, when thinking about this, think about the qualifications of the witnesses that we brought you.
Also, think about our burden of proof, right?
Greater weight of the evidence simply means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case.
It's not beyond a reasonable doubt; it's not some high, unattainable, over-the-moon standard, right?
Did we persuade you? Did we tip the scales in our favor with everything you heard over the last three weeks?
A couple of other things. You can use common sense in deciding the facts.
Now, the defendants don't want you to use any common sense.
MR. COFER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BASS: You can use common sense, and we want you to use your common sense.
So if you keep some of those things in mind during your deliberations and your discussions, you'll come to the right verdict, a verdict you can feel good about, a verdict that, if the Judge polls you at the end of the case, each one of you, and says, is this your verdict, you can say, "yes, this is my verdict."
The first question on the verdict form, the class membership question. You know, we talked in jury selection about, you know, this was an Engle progeny case, class membership, those kinds of things, you know, you need to prove that class membership before the Engle findings apply. This is what we're talking about, right? The first question.
And the first question is: Was Nicholas Perrotto addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was his addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer -- and I think it should be "or COPD." Typo. My mistake.
And if you think about the course the evidence took over three weeks, and what you heard and what you learned, we submit that this should really be an easy question to answer. You know, starting with the lung cancer and the COPD first, right? We're going to talk about addiction.
There's no dispute, you heard in the stipulated facts, there's no dispute that Nick Perrotto had lung cancer, medically caused by smoking cigarettes. We'll talk about the -that distinction between medically caused and
legal caused -- legally caused in a moment.
But, in any event, no dispute, Nick, lung cancer caused by cigarettes. Nick, COPD caused by cigarettes.
And so really with respect to class membership, with that out of the way, the focus, and only focus, is on addiction. And addiction, for the reasons I'll explain, is the focus on the class membership question.
Class membership is not about fault.
Class membership is not about awareness. It's not about what Nick may or may not have known. It's not about what Nick may or may not have thought about hazards of smoking. It's not about smoking after the warnings. It's not about smoking after the Surgeon Generals' reports. It's about none of those things.
It's about addiction and whether the addiction was a legal cause.
And what does that mean to be a legal cause?
So you have the jury instructions, and the legal cause instruction is going to come into play in each of the plaintiff's claims, okay?
And in some of these slides, you know, the whole instruction is not included; but you all have the instructions, and the first one is Final Instruction 5.
And so what it means to be a legal cause is, with respect to addiction, addiction need not be the only cause, okay? That's important, okay?
And so while we are focusing on addiction to decide this question, right, we're focusing on addiction to decide this question, addiction can be one of many causes that ultimately leads to Nick's lung cancer.
And so if Mr. Cofer and his colleagues get up here and suggest, well, you know, it was Nick's decision to smoke, or the fact that, you know, maybe Nick -- you know, Nick liked to smoke, or couldn't quit, that was really the legal cause, well, those are just other potential causes.
And, of course, I don't know what he's going to say, right, he hasn't gone yet; but I'm just saying, if they talk about potential other causes, well, okay, fine.
This instruction tells you that addiction
need not be the only cause. And it also tells us, for this question, that, no matter what, no matter what, we keep the focus on addiction.
And it may be a legal cause of the lung cancer or COPD even though it operates in combination with some other natural cause or some other cause -- some natural cause or some other cause, if such other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction and if the addiction contributes substantially to producing such lung cancer or COPD.
So addiction is the linchpin of class membership. It's the only thing we submit you should think about and focus on during your deliberations of Question Number 1.
And what did we learn about how addiction is a substantial contributing cause of lung cancer?
You saw this in the evidence, Dr. Hurt talked about this. This is a scientific, schematic-looking thing from Surgeon Generals' reports. And what it is is the scheme linking -- linking nicotine addiction and lung cancer via tobacco smoke carcinogens and their induction of multiple mutations in critical
genes.
And what it really talks about, more scientifically, is we start with nicotine addiction, right, which causes the cigarette smoking, which causes exposure to other, you know, carcinogens, which does something, you know, in the body, and it causes these things in the body, and it causes cancerous growths, gets into the DNA, and then it causes the DNA to change and mutate into cancer and pass that along, and you ultimately end up, after 30, 40 years of addicted smoking, two to three packs a day, like Nick Perrotto, with lung cancer.
That's how addiction is a legal cause of lung cancer, because it starts the chain of events that ultimately leads to lung cancer.
And that's what Dr. Hurt told us. And you remember Dr. Hurt, 25-plus years in nicotine addiction. He was our first witness, a member of the public health community from the Mayo Clinic.
He's a board-certified internal medicine physician. He's certified by the American Society of Addiction Medicine. He's the founder and director of the Mayo Clinic's
Nicotine Dependence Center. He's trained thousands nationally and internationally regarding nicotine addiction. The Nicotine Dependence Center has treated over 50,000 patients.
Dr. Hurt, 180 peer-reviewed publications, he's written book chapters on nicotine addiction, awards for work in nicotine and nicotine addiction, grants to study nicotine addiction, including from NIH, the National Institutes of Health, the NCI, the National Cancer Institute, NIDA.
He did earlier research on the nicotine patch in the 1980s. He became chair of a group that Surgeon General Koop was the chair of. He's testified before governmental agencies, legislative bodies, juries. And he was one of the first to have access to the previously secret internal -- internal company documents. And so we brought you the best to talk about addiction and how addiction causes lung cancer.
And this is just my schematic based upon the other one I was just showing. Addiction causes smoking, smoking causes lung cancer. That's the chain, right?
And Dr. Hurt, he talked about it, using that scientific thing. But Mr. Gdanski asked him: And so what's the relationship between nicotine dependence that you're treating them for as patients and the lung cancer they have?
Well, they're tied together because no one has become a smoker, smoking cigarettes, that do not contain nicotine.
So nicotine is the driving force behind the addiction, and the reinforcement of the hit of nicotine from cigarettes is what keeps the person smoking. And it just happens to be incorporated into a product that has 7,000 chemicals, over 60 known carcinogens.
So nicotine is the driving force, but the product is what ends up killing people from lung cancer and other cancers, as well.
So that's -- that's how and why addiction is a legal cause of lung cancer, and that's how Nick Perrotto's addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer which has been stipulated that he has.
For good measure, of course, the Surgeon General, talking about the fundamental reason people smoke. This is in evidence.
Nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products. And this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases described in this report.
And so it's fitting, right, it's fitting and appropriate that the first question for your all's attention is whether Nick Perrotto was addicted; right?
Because addiction has been the key to these defendants, that have been driving them for a hundred years. And so it's very fitting that you all will get to address that question first.
And what did we learn about nicotine?
Well, let's start with the defendants' own words, right? You all saw the documents, you had the documents. What are some of the things that -- that the defendants acknowledge about nicotine?
Well, they know it's a drug. Without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse, and Philip Morris would collapse and we'd all lose our jobs and our consulting fees.
However, we cannot ever be comfortable
selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. That is to say, if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight.
And, you know, all these documents are enlightening, and sometimes it's hard to pick and choose which ones we want to show in closing; right? They all say it so much better than I ever could.
And what you see here, though, and what you know, this "we could be out of business almost overnight," that's unacceptable to them.
Then, during Nick Perrotto's life, that's unacceptable to them. And you know -- you know that during the manufacturing process -You know, one of the great tragedies of this whole story is that nicotine -- nicotine is actually taken out of the cigarette during the manufacturing process. You all heard about that, right?
The tragedy is, is that they could keep it out if they wanted to. They could keep it out if they wanted to.
Guess what would happen? People wouldn't
smoke and people wouldn't die, right? The cigarette market would collapse. But guess what? People, Americans, Nick Perrotto, would live.
That is the choice they started making a long time ago, even before Nick Perrotto was born. That is a choice they made every single day of Nick Perrotto's life.
And nicotine can and is taken out, and it can stay out, and they wouldn't make any money.
They're in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. You remember that document where they went on to say, which causes some unattractive side effects like lung cancer?
Nicotine is a potent drug. The industry is based upon the design, manufacture and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine. We provide a product that is an essential commodity, an habitual act. No one's ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine. Very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine; i.e., its addictive nature and that nicotine is a poison; right?
No one has ever become a cigarette smoker by
smoking cigarettes without nicotine.
They can keep it out. That says it all right there. They choose not to. And now they have to face the consequences.
But rather than taking it out, keeping it out, they put it back in, in controlled, specific, studied, and perfect amounts to hook people and sustain the addiction.
You remember this, this video? I'm not going to play it, but it was shown to you that -- you know, the manufacturing and -There's no narration, so Dr. Hurt narrated and talked about the things that happen and the things that are added; right?
Because not only do they put the nicotine back in, in perfect amounts, right? -- not only do they do that, they add other things, right? They add other things to manipulate and increase the freebase of nicotine.
You see the documents where they're writing to themselves that the level of nicotine in -- this is Brown & Williamson -cigarettes were not obtained by accident.
We can regulate, fairly precisely, the nicotine to any desired level management
requires. All evidence indicates that the relative high smoke pH shown by Marlboro is deliberate and controlled.
So I included that one because, in opening statement -- maybe you recall, maybe you don't -- Mr. Cofer said to you -He said, I would like for you all to ask yourselves a question. Ask yourselves, as you listen to the evidence, what does any of this got to do with Nick Perrotto?
And so the question I want you to ask yourselves is -- you heard Dr. Proctor testify for three days, and then you heard other aspects through Dr. Hurt, Debbie, brother Santo, other things -- I want you to ask yourselves, what aspect of anything that you heard doesn't have to do with Nick Perrotto?
Because if it doesn't, these things don't have to do with Nick Perrotto, then they don't have to do with anyone who smoked during the conspiracy, right?
The conspiracy is not about one person; it's about millions of people who were all doing the same things, who were doing the things that the industry told them they should
be doing, all the while not knowing that Marlboro, the brand Nick Perrotto smoked -- a brand Nick Perrotto smoked, what's happening to the cigarette is they're manipulating it and controlling it, right, to increase the smoke pH and the nicotine kick. And they use ammonia compounds.
Nick Perrotto was smoking the cigarettes that Philip Morris was manipulating with pH to increase the free nicotine. Does that not have anything to do with Nick Perrotto?
You learned about what ammonia does. It liberates free nicotine. You learned about the soul of Marlboro. The soul of Marlboro is the reconstituted brand sheet which has the ammonia and those things. The soul of Marlboro is the ability to take an addictive drug, nicotine, and make it more powerfully addicting.
And Nick Perrotto smoked Marlboro, yet nothing we showed you has anything to do with Nick Perrotto.
THE CLERK: You're 30 minutes in,
Mr. Gdanski (sic).
MR. BASS: Thank you.
THE CLERK: Oh, I'm sorry, Hardee.
THE COURT: Mr. Bass.
MR. BASS: That's okay.
THE COURT: That's okay.
MR. BASS: Another -- another mention of -Another document you saw about Marlboro, the brand of cigarettes Mr. Perrotto smokes, containing more free nicotine than other comparable brands; hence, would be expected to show more instantaneous nicotine kick than other brands.
And what's the impact of free nicotine?
Dr. Hurt told us that. If nicotine is absorbed -Mr. Gdanski asked him: If nicotine is absorbed in such a way that it's freebased, does that impact the addictive properties, the speed with which the nicotine hits the brain?
That's correct. So the higher the fraction of free nicotine, the more rapid the absorption takes place.
And speaking of impact on Mr. Perrotto, right, Mr. Gdanski asked Dr. Hurt about menthol cigarettes. We know from the evidence that Mr. Perrotto smoked menthol cigarettes.
What did Dr. Hurt tell you about menthol cigarettes? The state-of-the-art science is people who are menthol smokers are generally more addicted and have a much harder time quitting.
What has the FDA concluded as to the impact and effect that menthol has on the cigarette? That it makes them more addictive, it makes it harder for people to stop smoking, and increases the chance of a young person starting.
That's what Nick Perrotto was smoking.
Yet nothing -- nothing they did had any impact at all on Nick Perrotto. It's like the industry never even existed. But we know that's not true. We know that's not true.
We heard from Dr. Hurt, we went through his qualifications, and he talked to us about addiction. And the starting point for analysis of addiction is the design of the cigarette, the product -- the product, itself.
He called it the most efficient delivery device for nicotine, better than IV. And he talks about when a person smokes a cigarette, it takes five heartbeats to get from mouth to
brain. And that happens each time.
And he taught you about what happens in the brain on each puff of cigarette, right?
The nicotine binds to the nicotinic receptors, which produces a cascade of neurotransmitters, dopamine is released, and a whole host of other things, and that has an effect on the human body. But what it also does is -Nicotine is unique in nature, right?
It's unique in biology. It causes this upregulation of nicotinic receptors in the brain. So it's actually causing changes in the brain.
And that upregulation means that folks need to smoke more, because when you have more of these receptors and you're not giving the brain nicotine, that's when the cravings, the little withdrawals start, and then you light up again, you give the brain what it needs, and that's the addictive cycle; right?
And then what makes it really powerfully addicting is it -- Dr. Hurt talked about it -it sensitizes these receptors; right? And we know that nicotine addiction is a brain disease, right?
It's a brain disease, and it sensitizes these receptors in the brain such that the brain doesn't forget. That's why folks experience cravings months, years after, because the brain doesn't forget.
And, of course, Dr. Hurt, an international leader in nicotine addiction, he reviewed all the evidence in the case, looked at the entire evidence in the case, depositions, applied his knowledge to the case, and classified and opined that Nick was, in Dr. Hurt's words, heavily addicted.
He told you why. He talked about something called the Heaviness of Smoking Index, you know, something he uses, you know, on patients, and in this case -- and the Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence; and he really told you the things that he looked at in this case, which were really the two most reliable and predictive things from this Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence, was how much do you smoke, and time to first cigarette. Okay?
And we know that that's important, right?
If you think about how much someone uses an
addictive drug, it's fairly logical; right?
I mean, if they're using an addictive drug, like Nick Perrotto did, you heard the evidence, heavy smoker, two to three packs a day, smoked for 40 years, that's anywhere between 14,600 and 21,900 cigarettes a year -you do the math -- he's anywhere between 5.8 and 8.7 million lifetime exposures of his brain to nicotine.
I mean, really, do we need to know more than that, that this addictive substance is delivered to the brain within five, ten, 12 seconds on every puff, ten puffs a cigarette, a million times -- you know, millions of times over a lifetime?
Do we need to know more than that to consider whether Nick Perrotto's addicted?
But, of course, there is more than that.
Dr. Hurt talked about other aspects of the case, including Nick Perrotto starting young, right? That matters. How much he smoked matters.
Smoked first thing in the morning when he woke up. You heard Debbie talk about -- about that, as well. He kept his cigarettes on his
nightstand next to his bed. Smoked first thing in the morning. If he got up in the middle of the night, he would smoke. You heard about his quit attempts. Hypnotism, tried to quit smoking.
You know, there was some cross-examination by Mr. Cofer about how often -- and I expect he's going to talk about it -- you know, how often, really, did Nick Perrotto try and quit?
And he's going to say, well, you know, I crossed -- remember, folks, I cross-examined -I cross-examined Debbie and we impeached her with her deposition, right, the 800-page deposition where she was asked multiple different times, you know, similar questions, right?
So, yeah, we went to Page 500, Page 498, we impeached her, where she said, you know, I didn't see any concrete actions from 1982 to 1985, when Michael went to nursery school, 1985 to -But we know he tried to quit because Debbie looked you all in the eye -And Mr. Hammer said: Did he try and
quit?
Yes.
Did he try and quit a lot?
Yes.
We heard from Santo, Nick's brother.
Santo said, yeah, he tried to quit. He threw his cigarettes away. I talked to Nicky -- he called him "Nicky" -- I talked to Nick about quitting smoking in 1986, when he had the heart problems. And, yeah, I -- I know that Nick tried to quit, threw his cigarettes away when he was in New Jersey.
Well, he was in New Jersey -- he left New Jersey in 1977. So we know -- we know that Nick Perrotto tried to quit smoking. We heard about a quit attempt when he was 50 years old, okay?
So Nick Perrotto tried to quit smoking.
And when he did, down here, he exhibited the typical withdrawal symptoms; right? He left movie theaters to smoke, left church to smoke.
And so was Nick Perrotto addicted? Every witness who was asked the question in the case said "yes." Even, we heard -- not directly from Nick Perrotto, but Santo:
Did Nick ever say he was addicted?
Well, you know, he didn't use those words, but he said, I'm hooked.
Debbie Perrotto said it, Dr. Rothschild,
Dr. Alley, Dr. Hurt. The greater weight of the evidence supports that Nick was addicted. And, really, nobody in the case suggested otherwise.
And so, really, at the end of the day, ask yourselves, would somebody smoke two to three packs, 40, 60 cigarettes a day, sometimes more when he switched to lights, over that course of time, if they were not addicted?
And what do we know from the Surgeon General? We know that millions are caught in this web of deceit that is addiction, just like Nick Perrotto.
From the Surgeon General's report,
Page 5: Cigarette smoking remains the chief preventable killer in America, with more than 40 million Americans caught in a web of tobacco dependence.
Nick Perrotto was addicted.
We know that addiction is a disease, and it's not a free choice when somebody's addicted. The NIDA definition: "Addiction" is
defined as a chronic, relapsing brain disease.
Dr. Hurt talked about, when someone's addicted, it's not a free choice; it's a constrained choice.
But we don't have to just listen to Dr. Hurt. We can listen to the defendant's own words, right? We can't defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted.
Remember that document that, before that line -- and it's in evidence, it's from 1980 -it says: The lawyers remind us -The lawyers remind us that addiction is the most powerful weapon a prosecuting attorney -- a prosecuting attorney -- can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case, which is what this is; right?
Why? Because we can't defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted.
And so was it a legal cause if he was addicted, and we know he had lung cancer, and we know that addiction can be one cause of many, as long as it's a substantial contributing cause?
Then, yes, addiction is a legal cause.
We talked about the fact that there's no dispute Nick Perrotto had primary lung cancer caused by smoking.
The flip side, or, I guess, the companion to how many hits of nicotine you get in your lifetime, is the fact that, with every puff, there's like 69 or 70 known carcinogens.
And so when you think about nicotine being a legal cause and the driving force, you smoke for nicotine, and along for the ride comes, with each puff, 60 -- exposure to 69 known carcinogens. So multiply that number by 69, the millions of hits, and that's the exposures, you know, to the body and to the lungs.
And so after hearing all the evidence, can there really be any dispute that -- that Nick Perrotto was a class member, that he was addicted to nicotine, and that his addiction was a legal cause?
We submit to you that, no, based upon the evidence you heard and the things you learned and saw, there -- there really can't be.
But if you check "no," if you check "no,"
that's it, case done, case over. But we submit to you that we have more than met our burden, right? We have more than met our burden in proving that Nick was addicted and that his addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer or COPD.
Again, I apologize.
And if you check "yes," we go on -you'll go on the verdict form -- I mean, you'll continue on the verdict form. And there are other things to consider. Of course, we talked about -And, you know, you've heard the Engle findings a lot. I'm not going to read these again. They're in the instructions. We took this right from the instruction, Final Instruction 7, but these kick in if and when you find Nick Perrotto a member of the Engle class. Okay?
And you know what's interesting about these Engle findings is, is that, you know -You saw all this evidence, though, too, right? So, to the extent that anyone's concerned about -- wondering, well, gosh, you know, what's this, we brought you plenty of
evidence to show you these things.
All right. I spent quite a while talking about Question 1, because, like I said, it's the door; right? It's the door to the rest of the verdict form. "Yes," the door is open and you go on to the rest of the verdict form.
"No," the door is shut, case over, go home, that's it.
All right. The next question, it says, and it asks: Was lung cancer a legal cause of Mr. Perrotto's death?
And I should say that, based upon the evidence, we're confident that we've met our burden that Nick Perrotto is a member of the Engle class and that you all will find that way, as well.
And so we go on, right, to the next question: Was lung cancer a legal cause of Mr. Perrotto's death?
And I entitled it "Wrongful Death or Survival Action" here at the top because, at this point, you're considering, by answering this question, whether there's going to be wrongful death damages, which the Court talked about in Instruction -- one of the
instructions -- yep, Instruction 8.
So it talked about the fact that this question is -- decides whether it's wrongful death damages, whether you're going to consider the pain and suffering of Debbie and Michael due to the loss of Nick, or whether it's what we call a survival action, whether you're going to consider Nick's pain and suffering during the time -- from the time he was diagnosed with lung cancer up until the time he died.
And that analysis hinges on the answer to this question. If "yes," then it's a wrongful death case. If "no," then it's a survival case.
But you should know, although a lot of time was spent with the medical witnesses in the case, and we believe that we met our burden of proof, you know, there are issues that you guys are going to have to decide under this question, of course, but you should know that, either way you decide it, the case isn't over.
You can check "no," the case isn't over; you just go to a different part of the verdict form.
And the verdict form has directions. Her
Honor read those directions after each -- after each one.
It says: Question 1, if you answer "yes," go to Question 2; if you answer "no," sign and date. Go to Question 2. If you answer "yes" to this, you go on to Question 3.
If you answer "no," you go on to Question 8.
So it has those directions on the verdict form. Like I said, everything you need to know to decide the case, you already have, right? The evidence, the jury instructions, and the verdict form. And so if you have a question, just look to those.
And so in talking about the medical case, right, let me -- from our perspective, let's talk about and try and identify, really, what, after hearing all the medical evidence and wading through it, what's the issue? What's the dispute between the parties, right?
Well, there's no dispute that Nick had primary lung cancer caused by cigarettes,
July 1992, or thereabouts. You heard about that. And then there's no dispute that Nick had a sigmoid volvulus, late August 1996, that led --
The volvulus, itself, you know, led to things like perforation of the bowel, bowel contents leaking into the abdomen, infection, peritonitis, sepsis, septic shock, Nick dies.
And so the question really, to visualize for your dispute, comes in between 1 and 2. Right? It comes in between 1 and 2. For you to decide -- skip ahead, right? -- oh, there we go -- for you to decide on this question: Was the tumor in his brain metastatic from his lung, right?
That's, from plaintiff's perspective, one thing to decide, because that is a part of the legal chain -- legal cause chain that helps you answer the question "yes" or "no." And then, you know, what caused or led to that sigmoid volvulus.
Because the parties are pretty much in agreement that once the sigmoid volvulus was discovered, those consequences of that is what led to his death, right?
And so to help answer that, who did we bring you?
And I started talking about the expert witnesses because -- as something to urge you
to consider as you go through, because we brought you -- not only to talk about some of the other issues like addiction and the conspiracy -- we'll talk about Dr. Proctor in a little bit when we get down to this question -but we brought you Nick's treating doctors, right?
The ones from right here in Palm Beach County, who take care of patients in the community and work at hospitals in the community, who saw and treated Nick right down the road from here, probably less than a mile, at Good Sam.
We brought you the doctors who put their hands on him, who talked to him, who treated him. Doctors who remembered him, who wrote the medical records at the time they treated him, who, when they were treating him, looked at other medical records from other doctors that saw him. Right?
Doctors who called each other in for consultations. The doctors who called in other specialists for consultations, and vice versa, copied each other on the medical records.
Doctors who tried to save his life with
treatment, medications, surgeries. Doctors who helped him deal with the pain of lung cancer, the surgery, and his treatment, who tried to -who diagnosed him with metastatic brain cancer, and who did an operation to try and save his life. Right?
And, most importantly, doctors who, in 1996, when all this was going on, all agreed about what happened to Nick Perrotto. Right?
And then we have Dr. Ganz on the other side, who, really, if you strip away his testimony -- we'll talk about that in a moment -- if you strip it away, what's he saying?
He's saying every single doctor, every single one whose name appears in the medical records, is wrong. Every single last one of those Palm Beach County doctors is wrong. That's what he's saying. Not just the ones that testified here in court, but every single doctor whose name appears in that record.
Well, you guys are going to have to resolve that, because what you heard was plaintiff's position, right?
Lung cancer caused metastatic brain
cancer, caused surgery, the craniotomy, led to, you know, the anesthesia, and the combination of the anesthesia and the pain narcotics and medications and the bedrest lead to a situation -- and the constipation, all kind of converge and lead to a situation ripe for a sigmoid volvulus, which is what happens. And that's what leads to his death, right?
On the other side, the exact opposite almost, right? Even though Nick had lung cancer, right, even though he had these things -The volvulus. You know, he had had these -- what was the word? -- "sputtering," "partial blockages" or "volvuluses" along the way, right, which made him more susceptible and ripe for a complete twisting and -- and volvulus, and that's -- that's what did it, it was just -- you know, it didn't untwist and that's what led to his death.
So really you're thinking about two completely different, obviously, theories, and you guys are going to have to resolve that dispute.
And when you do that, in talking about
it, we urge you to think about the witnesses we brought you and what they said and who they were in the case, and the medical records, versus Dr. Ganz; right?
Dr. Ganz, 20 hours review in the case.
Dr. Rothschild, four years with Nick Perrotto.
Dr. Alley, four years with Nick Perrotto.
Dr. Neimark, involved in the end-stage surgeries and treatment; right? And for good measure -You know, and think about the other things, too. We urge you to, right?
Dr. Ganz's opinion rests heavily on the three radiology reports and some hospital admissions that he says this -- gosh, this is evidence of, in August of 1995, partial blockage, got to be, right? January 1996, partial blockage, got to be.
Gosh, he even came into the hospital when he had a seizure from what turned out to be brain -- he even came in with a partial blockage, right?
And let me show you what I support my opinion with. Well, here, look at this August 1995 radiology report. There --
You know, what is it? -- I forget -nonspecific bowel gas patterns, right?
But what I think was highlighted this morning is, is that there were radiology films available, right, which Dr. Ganz knew before he testified and gave a deposition. He didn't look at them.
You know, what's interesting about Dr. Ganz is he -- in his practice, he looks at radiology films, right, but he chose not to in this case.
And so, for good measure, we brought you someone, Dr. Kleinman, who did. He said, look -You know, he was here this morning, showing you. He said there's no -- there's no partial blockages here. We would see it. I do this every day, all day. You would see it.
None here. No evidence of it, no residual evidence of it. Same thing in January 1996.
And so when you're considering Dr. Ganz's opinion, right, and testimony, please consider that. Please consider that we then, in rebuttal, brought you a witness who did look at the radiology reports. Not to mention the fact
that -- excuse me, the radiology films. The films, the films.
Not to mention that the radiology reports that Dr. Ganz was relying on, the first one he showed you with Mr. Cofer, he didn't show you above the impression that said "nonspecific gas patterns"; Mr. Gdanski did on cross. Right above it, a few lines, it says, no evidence of obstruction or ileus.
That's a record that Dr. Ganz used to say, no, I think there was a partial obstruction, when five or six lines above it, it says, per the radiologist who read the film, no evidence of obstruction.
So when you're asking yourselves these questions about what happened, what happened to get to the sigmoid volvulus, think about the witnesses we brought you, and what they said, and the medical records, versus what Dr. Ganz had to say.
The first thing -- we know this was -And so consider the evidence that you heard, all the records in August of '96, metastatic lung cancer, all the different treaters. They even told Nick he had
metastatic lung cancer.
The volvulus, even though Dr. Ganz says otherwise, the testimony is from the medical records and the treating physicians that we brought you, no volvulus until after surgery.
And Mr. Gdanski says: Well, Dr. Ganz, is it just coincidence that three or four days after this major surgery, Dr. -- Nick Perrotto has a -- has a volvulus?
Yeah, it's just coincidence.
And remember the -- talking about the other witnesses that agreed, right?
This is the infectious disease report.
It talks about this -- basically, the chain of events that we're telling you occurred and is the legal cause, right, adenocarcinoma of the lung, poorly differentiated, metastasis to the brain, multiple perforations of the sigmoid colon, abdominal abscess, sepsis, shock;
Dr. Rothschild, lung cancer, metastatic, volvulus of the intestine, perforation to the intestine, septic shock; and then, of course, you have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Dr. Rothschild signed the death certificate.
And then we showed you this in opening
statement, right? While lung cancer is a legal cause -Because the instruction says that that's what our burden is. Was it a legal cause of death?
Take away the lung cancer and would he have died when he did? Without the primary lung cancer, there is no metastatic cancer in the brain, no brain surgery, no gastrointestinal complications, no volvulus, no tissue death, no perforation, no leakage, no infection, no sepsis, no septic shock, no death.
Was lung cancer a legal cause of Mr. Perrotto's death? We submit to you that it was.
The next question talks about the brands of cigarettes smoked being a legal cause.
Well, you heard the brand testimony. We know that Nick smoked Camel unfiltered, made by Reynolds; Philip Morris, Marlboro; Newport from Lorillard, some Salem; and then on to Merit, to Merit Ultra Lights. And so that's the reason -Now, he didn't smoke any Liggett brands,
we talked about that. Liggett is here because of their -- they joined the conspiracy. That's the only claim against Liggett, the conspiracy claim. But the reason the other three defendants are here are because Nick smoked their brands.
And Mr. Gdanski asked Dr. Hurt: Did -did all the cigarettes he smoked contribute to his addiction?
Absolutely.
Did all the cigarettes he smoked contribute substantially to causing his lung cancer?
Absolutely.
And then he went through each one.
Camel, did it substantially and independently cause or contribute?
Yes, it contributed.
Merits, Marlboros, they were contributors. Newport, it was a contributor.
And so all of those are -- all of those combined or contributed to causing Nick Perrotto's lung cancer.
THE CLERK: You're an hour in, Mr. Bass.
MR. BASS: Thank you.
All right. The next claims are fraud and conspiracy. And so this question focuses on whether the fraud and the conspiracy, which we know happened -- if you're to the verdict form on this point, of course, we proved those, besides the Engle findings -- but you know from the Engle findings, those things happened, so that the focus here is on whether, after May 5th, 1982 -- and that -- that date's in there for legal reasons -- May 5th, 1982, whether there was reliance by Nick Perrotto to his detriment on statements made by the defendants, or reliance to his detriment on acts made in furtherance of the conspiracy from May 19 -- after May 1982.
Well, we know, after May 1982, Nick Perrotto is smoking Merit Ultra Light cigarettes. And we know the reason for that. We know the reason for that. Because, as the advertisements suggested, these were low in tar, and Nick felt like they were safer.
He didn't think they were safe, right?
Safer. But we know that they weren't, okay?
And so that, in and of itself, we submit, is enough evidence to suggest there's reliance
post-1982. But to understand this question, we need to think about stuff that occurred from the beginning, right? And we heard from -Because what's going to happen, as I said, this is where Mr. Cofer's probably going to stand up and say, gosh, you know, there was information out there about the dangers of smoking, mouse skin painting, Surgeon General's warnings, those things, nothing we did had any impact on Nick Perrotto, right?
That's what they're going to talk about, this, probably, that's what they're going to say. Nothing we did, you know, had any impact. But we brought you the witnesses and the evidence to show that it did.
Remember, if this -- if the conspiracy didn't impact Nick Perrotto, then who did it impact? Right?
Who did we bring you? Dr. Proctor. You remember Dr. Proctor. He teaches Tobacco and Health in World History, and the History of Ignorance, two very important things that go together with respect to cigarette smoking.
We know about the reason why the conspiracy and the fraud began. The Forwarding
Memo, Hill & Knowlton, December 1953: Suppose everybody smoked just one cigarette less a day. That would be maybe 40 billion a year. They were interested in keeping people smoking.
Roper Proposal, 1972: For nearly 20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself. It talks about how it was brilliantly conceived.
Never been intended for -- a vehicle for victory. It's always been a holding strategy.
Right? A holding strategy to keep people like Nick Perrotto smoking.
Nick Perrotto started as a young smoker.
And we know the importance of young smokers to these defendants, right?
They studied the 14- to 20-year-old market, because discovering the secret of that would create a fad and a great bonanza.
Fourteen to 24, that age group represents tomorrow's cigarette business.
And how old was Nick Perrotto when he started smoking? The evidence is 13 or 14 years old, right? And he became a customer for over the next 25 years, right?
And so what they did before 1982, and
after 1982, had a direct impact and it applies to Nick Perrotto. And these are all the youth marketing documents. They -You know, think about this. Because one of the things that we're going to talk about later on is whether punitive damages are warranted, right?
And so we talk about 20 million deaths, 480,000 deaths a year, and the instructions are that in considering whether to award -- whether punitive damages are -- whether we're entitled to punitive damages, you can consider harm to others.
MR. COFER: Objection, Your Honor. Williams/State Farm; misstates the law.
THE COURT: Sustained.
Rephrase.
Just reference the jury instruction, maybe.
MR. BASS: We'll get to -- we'll get to the jury instruction.
The point is, though, in considering entitlement to punitive damages, think about things like this document here. We need to induce a pre-smoker or nonsmoker to become an
habituated smoker.
They're talking about kids here, by the way. So what they want to do, what they want to do is take someone who doesn't smoke and might not have any interest in smoking, and get them smoking and turn them into an addicted smoker. Those are things you can think about when you're considering whether punitive damages are warranted. And we urge you to. That type of -- that type of mentality and goal.
Nick Perrotto grew up and was born in 1939, right here, as cigarettes, year after year after year after year, continued to increase; right?
So when we're thinking about whether what they did impacted him, think about the era that he was born in.
Remember this video? Nick Perrotto smoked Marlboro. We already talked about, you know, how Marlboro -- the soul of Marlboro, the secret ingredient, the ammonia, and those things.
But remember this video? This video was an internal video talking about the history of
Marlboro. And it touts Marlboros and Philip Morris' aggressive advertising, where, at one point in time, maybe in the early 1950s, gosh, only about six billion Marlboros were smoked; but through a change in the ad campaign, the Marlboro Man, early 1960s -- and you heard Santo reference it in his deposition, right, the Marlboro Man -- through this re-branding, and then the Marlboro Red, the red roof, which has become one of the most recognized, if not the most recognized logo in all of the world, right, it was through this aggressive marketing campaign and new direction that Marlboro, over the decade of the '60s, by early 1972, became the worldwide leader that it still is, right?
And guess who -- in the 1960s, as Philip Morris is aggressively advertising, selling more and more, guess who starts smoking Marlboro? Nick Perrotto.
So this -- this is a case about Nick Perrotto. We showed plenty of evidence that has to do with Nick Perrotto and the impact that the tobacco conduct had on Nick Perrotto. But, at the same time, they are aggressively advertising Marlboro and filters. They know
that filters don't do anything, right?
1976: In most cases, however, the smoker of a filtered cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar as they would have gotten from a regular cigarette.
We say here, 1963, in our triple or quadruple or quintuple filter capable of removing whatever constituents of smoke is currently suspected. But they couldn't do that, but yet they told people they could because they knew that folks would feel safer.
That's the message. That's what people think of when they hear "filter," right? The name alone is enough to make someone feel like they're not getting as much bad stuff. That's the psychological crutch that was used to undermine prevention.
Surgeon General, by the 21st Century, it was apparent that five decades of evolving cigarette design had not reduced overall disease risk, and the new designs were used by the tobacco industry as a tool to undermine prevention and cessation efforts.
The illusion of filtration -That's 2010.
1966, what's Philip Morris saying? The illusion of filtration is important of the -as the fact of filtration, right?
Whether it's filtered or not didn't matter to them; it's what people believed. And it's what Nick believed, according to Santo.
And if you -- if you want to think about whether or not this case has any direct -- that the tobacco company conduct has any direct impact on Nick Perrotto, remember the type of cancer Nick Perrotto had. Adenocarcinoma.
What did Dr. Hurt -- or maybe it was Dr. Proctor -- I think Dr. Hurt -- what is adenocarcinoma referred to as? What's the other name for adenocarcinoma? Filter cancer.
What kind of cigarettes did Nick Perrotto smoke? Filtered cigarettes. So did he rely to his detriment on the tobacco company conduct, both before and after 1982?
MR. WEAVER: Objection, Your Honor; misstates the law.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Oh, no, no, no. Sustained. I'm sorry. Sustained.
Rephrase.
MR. BASS: Our burden is to show that he relied post-1982, all right?
But to get there, we submit to you that he was relying on what they were saying well before 1982, as well. And that's what the evidence shows, right?
He smoked Camel in the 1950s, when Camel was number one. He smoked Marlboro in the 1960s, when everyone was changing to filters and smokers were smoking Marlboros, right?
He's smoking as people -- as people are continuing to smoke. He's no different than the folks that are continuing to smoke 600 billion cigarettes a year. Right?
Even after the Surgeon General's report comes out, remember Dr. Proctor says, that's when, really, most of the conspiracy got going. And that makes sense, right? Because up until then, some people weren't sure -The industry was sure, of course, but some people in the public health weren't sure; some scientists said, maybe, maybe not.
1964 Surgeon General's report comes out, says it causes lung cancer in men, right?
And so what happens? It makes sense --
and you saw the memo -- they -The Philip Morris guys say, we've got to give folks a psychological crutch to continue smoking. That's two weeks after Surgeon General's reports. It makes sense that they would have to up their efforts after that came out. And that's what they did, right? We know -This is going back to 1940, this first expenditure; but over the '40s to 2004,
$250 billion spent on advertising. That's so big -- that number is so big, it's unfathomable how big it is. It's actually probably numbing how big it is.
But here's a really good example of what that means per year. The tobacco industry spent more on advertising cigarettes in one day than the then National Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health, the government's primary agency working in this area, spent in one year.
There was information out there about risks of smoking, but it was swallowed up and overwhelmed by the industry message just sheerly on the amount of money they spent alone.
And so we know -- we talked about how menthol smokers are more addicted. You know, asking yourselves, what impact did we have on Nick Perrotto here, talking about reliance.
Well, the Merit cigarette -- this is from 1976. But just like Marlboro, the Merit cigarettes he smoked, they were messing with the pH there, too.
Merit smoke shows a Marlboro-type signature with high levels of ammonia. Comparing Merit to Winston, you got calculated free nicotine delivery of Merit at 5.5 and Winston at 3.1.
And so we know the cigarettes that he smoked, Marlboro, Merit, they were monkeying with the pH, they were messing with it, okay? They were doing the things to manipulate it, such that it could provide a better kick. We know that -We saw advertising, and you heard about the story that Debbie says. She said, you know, she tried -- she tried to get Nick to quit. She said, gosh, Nick, you got to quit, you got to quit; but if you can't, look -- look at these Merit, Merit Ultra Lights.
And she even ripped out the advertisement or she had the advertisement -- I don't know if she ripped -I forget if she ripped it out of the magazine or newspaper and she put it on the refrigerator, right?
And you saw these, the advertisements, you know, 12-year effort ends with unprecedented flavor in low-tar smoke. And next thing you know, the advertisement's gone, Nick is smoking Merit Ultra Light.
And just think about the name. And he continued to smoke them after 1982. Just think about the name. What type of message does the name alone suggest? Right?
Well, it suggests this, as Philip Morris recognized, June 1987: The type of -- the image of the Merit smoker, a health-conscious individual. Nick Perrotto.
Nick Perrotto, the evidence is, smoked Merit Ultra Light because, both, according to Santo and his wife, Debbie, thought they were safer.
And remember -- this, I thought, was -You know, sometimes, we don't videotape
every deposition. You saw some were videotaped and played and some were read. But sometimes -And this is why you get an instruction from the Court, I would suggest, about talking about witnesses. You can consider the demeanor of the witness, right, in talking about the credibility.
Remember Santo, towards the end of his deposition, right, he was getting asked questions about, well, Santo -- you know,
Mr. Perrotto, why -- why did you smoke Marlboro? You know, why did you smoke Merit? Why did you smoke Merit Ultra Light?
He was getting visibly frustrated with the questions because the answers are so obvious. The answers are so obvious.
I think one of the last things he said was, it's common sense. Why do you think we smoked them?
That right there is the answer. Nick Perrotto believed that the ultra lights -- the lights, the ultra lights, were safer for him.
But we know -- we know that they were not.
THE CLERK: You're an hour and 15 minutes
in, Mr. Bass.
MR. BASS: Thank you. Thank you, Stephanie.
We know they were not any safer for him, but that's what he believed. And he got the type of cancer that's associated with the filter, the ventilated filters, the adenocarcinoma. That is reliance to your detriment. Can there be any more detriment than what happened to Nick and him dying because of cigarette smoking?
So ask yourselves, please ask yourselves, we beg you to ask yourselves, did the conduct you see, including conduct after 1982, did it impact Nick Perrotto? Have we met our burden in tying these things back to Nick Perrotto? I would suggest that we have.
Now, I'm almost done. Stephanie's been giving me warnings. And just so you all know, I'm going up to an hour and a half. And I know -You know, I can't say it enough. The Court stressed it early on, and continued to.
We didn't really get to address you other than saying "good morning," and those kinds of
things; right? Now we get to talk to you.
We appreciate your patience. And, you know, it seems like I've been going longer than an hour and 15 minutes, but I do appreciate your patience.
Mr. Hammer, when I'm done, is going to get up and talk about damages, like I said; but there's one more thing that when you're thinking about the case -You know, we've put on a lot of conduct evidence, right? We believe everything we showed, for the most part, impacts Nick Perrotto; right?
But there's other big-picture things to consider, too. And that's where punitive damages comes in, because this case is about Nick Perrotto, but it's about so much more.
This is telling you that you're going to be asked to consider whether punitive damages are warranted. The Court read when they're warranted, right?
And, by the way, we do have a higher burden with respect to this question, clear and convincing evidence, but we would submit that whatever the burden, whatever the burden, even
if it was beyond a reasonable doubt, even if it was beyond that -- it's not -- but even if it was, even if it was, you all know that the conduct that you heard warrants punitive damages, because if there's ever been any conduct that warrants punitive damages, ever, it's the conduct that you heard about in here.
MR. COFER: Objection; wrong standard.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BASS: Clear and convincing evidence differs from greater weight of the evidence in that it is more -MR. COFER: Objection, Your Honor.
Can you take that down and can we approach, please?
THE COURT: Sure. Counsel, sidebar.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. COFER: You've ruled that the caption that -THE COURT: I just want to wait for all counsel. I'm sorry.
MR. COFER: Sure.
You've ruled that the caption they just showed was inappropriate and shouldn't be on.
Mr. Gdanski said he would take it off. And they didn't take it off, and it misstates the law and they just put it in front of the jury.
THE COURT: I assume that was innocent, the caption on the -MR. GDANSKI: Yeah, it is. That was -THE COURT: Take it off.
MR. BASS: I won't even show it.
THE COURT: Let's fix it. Take it off and fix it, that's fine.
MR. BASS: I'll just read it.
THE COURT: Take it off. He won't show the demonstrative.
MR. COFER: They've already shown it. So I want a -Would you please instruct the jury that the last caption -- the last -MR. GDANSKI: Nobody saw it.
MR. COFER: The jury just -- let me finish. The jury did see it.
Would you please instruct the jury that the last slide that plaintiffs displayed misstates the law and they're to disregard it? MR. GDANSKI: No.
THE COURT: That's not correct.
MR. GDANSKI: I would -- if Your Honor's
in -The law on it was a hundred percent correct. The law on it was a hundred percent correct. It had a caption at the top which was inadvertent.
MR. COFER: It wasn't inadvertent. I raised it, she ruled on it, you said you would change it, and you didn't.
THE COURT: I'm going to -I'll grant Mr. Cofer's request and just -MR. COFER: And instruct -THE COURT: Okay.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, we took down the last demonstrative. The last demonstrative misstates the law, okay? And Mr. Bass is going to read it straight from the jury instructions.
There we go. The jury instruction.
MR. BASS: Okay. Thank you.
We were talking about the higher burden for punitive damages. Clear and convincing
evidence differs from greater weight in that it's more compelling and persuasive.
A couple things to think about in Phase II, right? And that's why I was talking about your patience, right? I meant to finish that thought.
Two things: One, you know, you all have been patient with us and we appreciate it. When you all get the case, it's our turn to be patient with you, right?
And deliberate for as long as you need to, okay? So that's number one, all right? We'll be here as long as it takes, okay?
Number 2: If there's a Phase II, right, if you find that we're entitled to punitive damages, we go on to a Phase II. The Court instructed that. It's very short. It's typically very short, okay?
So, again, that's why I was thanking you for your patience. And now we're prepared to return the favor, all right?
As I said, with respect to punitive damages, this case is about Nick Perrotto and so much more; and I promised I would talk to you about an instruction, I thought we had it,
but I'm sorry that we don't.
Okay. Here's what I was talking about before, when I was talking about harms suffered by other persons, right?
In determining whether punitive damages are warranted, you may not seek to punish a defendant for any harms suffered by any individuals other than Nicholas Perrotto.
You may consider evidence concerning harms suffered by persons who are not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility or wrongfulness of each defendant's acts of fraudulent concealment or agreement to conceal that caused Nicholas Perrotto's injury or death.
You can consider -That's why we talk about 20 million deaths, 480,000 a year, right? And we talk about bigger-picture conduct that contributed not only to what happened in Nick Perrotto, but what happened to others; right?
That's why this case is about Nick Perrotto and much more. It's about a defendant who lied to the entire nation for 50 years, right?
And when we think about the $250 billion that were spent, that's -- you know, that's fairly numbing because it's so large. So is considering that an industry, for every day for 50 years, didn't tell the truth. That's numbing, too, because it's so long of a period of time, right?
You remember the Frank Statement. This is the first public statement that kind of set forth their position. And from there on out, when they spoke to the public, they lied.
Please consider that in assessing whether you -- or, rather, considering whether you believe punitive damages are warranted.
As I talked about earlier, they created addicted smokers, right? We deliberately played down the role of nicotine; hence, the nonsmoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfactions it may offer him and no desire to try it. Instead, we must somehow convince him, with wholly irrational reasons, that he should try smoking.
I mean, think -- think about that for a moment. Knowing what you know now, knowing what you know now, and knowing what these
defendants knew about their product, here they are acknowledging that they want to get people to start smoking.
Corporations and people are equal under the eyes of the law, but you've got to act like a person if you want to be treated like a person.
They, knowing their product was addictive and deadly, are somehow trying to convince people who don't smoke to start smoking.
That's what punitive damages and entitlement to punitive damages is all about.
They create addicted smokers who become like rats in a cage. Remember this? We played it in opening statement, and I asked you, when you began, to think about that as the case went along. Right?
Put a hungry rat in a cage. Put a lever in the cage. Make it so that a push on the lever delivers a pellet of food. In its random movements, the rat will push the lever, he'll get the pellet. The rat will soon associate lever-pushing with the food pellet. In time, he will be rapidly pushing the lever for food.
Consider the smoking -- consider the
smoker. Smoking the cigarette is the lever press.
That's how they thought of their customers and that's what they knew about their customers. They knew what they would do and need to do once they become -- became addicted.
Doubt was their product. Obviously, the key word is "confusion," because they knew if you gave an addicted smoker a psychological crutch, they were going to keep smoking, and millions and millions did to the tune of billions of cigarettes. That's what their motive was. And it worked.
1957, had it not been for the successful defensive operation, the industry would be in a deplorable position. It all came back to that.
Keep our industry going and thriving for as long as possible. Cast doubt, right?
This talks about selecting medical and scientific witnesses that will say whatever we want them to say.
I mean, Dr. Proctor drew you that octopus-looking thing, right? I forget what he called it, because there were 13 arms and legs coming out, or 13 legs.
This was a huge operation that did any number of things, but most of all -- most of all, we come back to where it began, truth.
The truth matters. And there are consequences.
Here it is, if you simplify it all. In 1968: Our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes.
That's exactly what they were doing before, and continued to do. And that -that -That's simple. It's simply stated. It's not as elegant as comparing smokers to rats in cages or some of these other things that Claude Teague wrote; but, in its simplicity and directness, right, we know exactly what they were doing. And that -- that, right there, is wrong and deserves punishment, and that's what you have a chance to consider.
Never forget. Never forget, 1994, as Nick Perrotto is going through -- going through the pain of having lung cancer in '92, going through chemotherapy, radiation, getting a lung
removed, dealing with being on steroids for radiation pneumonitis, having his quality of life diminished, never forget that these folks still didn't tell the truth.
And they had the audacity, in 1994, to swear to tell the truth in front of Congress.
And what did they do?
(The video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: I would like you to rise, and those who will be testifying, as well, with you to rise.
VOICE: Would you raise your right hand?
Do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth?
VOICES: I do.
VOICE: Please consider yourselves to be under oath.
VOICE: Let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive.
Let me ask you first -- and I would like to just go down the row -- whether each of you
believes that nicotine is not addictive. I heard virtually all of you touch on it. And just "yes" or "no," do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
VOICE: I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
VOICE: Mr. Johnston?
VOICE: Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. There is no intoxication.
VOICE: We'll take that as a "no."
And, again, time is short. If you could just -I think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. We just would like to have this for the record.
VOICE: I don't believe that nicotine or our products are addictive.
VOICE: I believe nicotine is not addictive.
VOICE: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
VOICE: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
VOICE: And I, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. BASS: Thank you very much for listening to me. Mr. Hammer, as I said before,
I'm passing the baton to him to talk about the damages aspect of the case.
Thank you very much.



MR. HAMMER: Good morning -- or good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
I want to thank you for your time, especially on behalf of Debbie. Debbie and Michael and Nick, they appreciate everything you've given us -- to us and more. You have no idea.
And let's put up -Home stretch.
Thomas Jefferson, he said, many moons ago: Trial by jury is the best of all safeguards for the person and property of every individual.
That's why we're here. That's why we're here. And you, the jury, are going to make the decision in this case.
And Mr. Bass, he went through the verdict form, and I would expect you to check off all those boxes. If you don't determine that Nick died from lung cancer, we would ask you to go to the survivor claim, check off all those boxes. But we think we've proven the fact that Nick died from lung cancer -- as a result of his lung cancer which spread to his brain, lung cancer in his brain, and that's what killed him. We all know that.
Having said that, I'm going to talk to you about Debbie and I'm going to talk to you about Michael. And, you know, you heard from Debbie and you heard from Michael, and they talked about what Nick meant to them.
Take that down.
They talked to you about what Nick meant to them; and, you know, we're asking you, today, to measure the loss, measure the value of a man's life.
And how do you do that? How do you say, Nick Perrotto, what was he worth to Debbie? What was he worth to Michael?
How do you do that? How do you put a number on that? Because that's what we're
going to ask you to do. Because nothing you do here today is going to change anything as far as what happened to Nick, unfortunately, and the impact it's had on Debbie. But we're asking you to consider the loss, consider the harms, consider the damage that it's caused Debbie and Michael.
You saw Michael on the stand. You saw that kid. He's 32 years old, and he's still messed up. Thirty-two years old. He was 14 years old when his dad died. Fourteen. What kind of impact does that have on a kid?
He was ten years old when his dad had lung cancer. You know, you saw the pictures. You saw the pictures of Michael.
Let's put up Number 7. This was Debbie and Nick and Michael. They had a great life. They had a lot to look forward to. Many years to look forward to. You heard the life tables.
I mean, Nick was going to live probably until 80 years old if he didn't have the lung cancer. If he didn't get addicted to their product, he would have lived until he was 80 years old. Eighty years old. That's a long time.
And he's been dead now for a while, but he would have lived, conceivably, until 2019. Debbie would have five more years with him and she would have all those other years that she could have spent with him that she didn't.
That's a sad story. But we're not asking you for sympathy; we're asking you to measure the loss. Measure the value that a man has on his family, that a man has -- the love that he could have given Debbie all this time, the love he could have given Michael, and the guidance he could have given Michael.
You heard Michael. I mean, they didn't even cross-examine him. You heard Michael sit up here and tell you, I would be totally different if my dad was around. That was a huge impact on this kid. Huge. And so how do you measure that?
You heard Debbie, you know, my friends, my relatives, they said, you know, Debbie, you got to -- you got to get over -- you got to get out there and date, you got to get out there and make something of yourself, you know? You can't keep yourself in this hole.
And so what did she do? She goes out and
she does it. And it didn't work out. And she's been alone all this time. Why? Because she said to you, I'm never going to find anybody like Nick. That's real stuff.
And you heard about the loss. She had
a -Nick and Debbie built a home here in Palm Beach County, in Boca. She lost that home just months ago. You think if Nick were here that would happen? That's real loss. That's real loss.
She's living in a tiny little apartment now. She had a beautiful home. She lost it. Why? She couldn't do it herself. That's a sad story. And we're not asking you for sympathy; we're asking you to compensate her for her loss.
And on the verdict form -- go to Number 7 -- there was already a stipulation as to this number. There was a stipulation as to the total amount of medical expenses, the loss of earnings, the loss of services in the past and the future, the loss of support. Those are already stipulated numbers. And if you add those up --
Defense isn't refuting it; they're basically saying, yeah, these are the numbers that we agreed to.
If you add those numbers up -- and I ask you to write them down, because they're important, and you're going to put them down on your verdict form just like this, hopefully, because that's what they've agreed to -- those numbers total 522,683.61.
Those are the numbers. $87,338.61, $88,282, $186,429, $32,421, and $128,213, for each of those lines. And we'd ask you to fill that in because that's what is agreed to. And, as I said, it totals 522,683.61.
Now, as I said, you know, Nick would have lived, conceivably, another five years. And she and -- Nick and Debbie and Michael would have been totally different people today.
So how do you measure the loss of a man? How do you measure that? How do you determine -Well, you know, how do you put a number on that? Nothing on earth, nothing on earth, can make up for the loss of one who has loved you.
Debbie sits here today really a broken woman. Michael, even worse. You know, he's 32 years old. And some of you might say, hey, you know what, he's been in and out of drug rehab, get over it. Well, you know what? It's because he didn't have a father. And he shouldn't be rewarded for that, but he shouldn't be punished for that, either.
And it's only because of what these companies did. And it's only because of what these companies did. And they're going to stand up here and say it's all Nick's fault.
He smoked, his choice, it's all his fault.
Well, there's a portion on the verdict form -- and I ask you to turn to Page -Danny, that's on Number 11.
On your verdict form, Number 11 asks you to state the percentage of any responsibility for Mr. Perrotto's lung cancer or COPD that you charge to: Philip Morris, R.J. Reynolds,
Lorillard, Liggett, and Nick.
Well, you know, Nick smoked. Yeah, Nick made his choice when he was 13 years old to start smoking, when everybody in the world was back in those days. Thirteen years old.
He was born in 1939. 1952, 1953, depending on where you want to figure it, by then he was a regular smoker. 1953, just a year before the Frank Statement came out.
Imagine, just imagine, what this world would be like if the Frank Statement said: A Frank Statement to smokers -- knowing what they really knew -- a Frank Statement to smokers -"frank," meaning truthful -Imagine if it said, all across the paper on a Sunday morning, full-page ad, quit or die, because we, the tobacco companies, are taking responsibility for our product, and it's been confirmed that it kills people, so please quit.
Imagine if they would have done that.
How many lives would have been spared, including Nick Perrotto? Because, remember, he just started smoking when he was a kid. It would have changed the entire world, entire world.
And that's why they need to be punished.
But it's also why, when you determine the percentage of fault, Nick's fault pales in comparison.
Maybe he should have tried harder, but
you know what? It pales in comparison to these companies. Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds and Lorillard, they were there at that first meeting at the Plaza Hotel.
Well, guess what? For PM, I would submit 30 percent.
For R.J. Reynolds -- do you have that, Danny? -- 30 percent.
MR. GDANSKI: Write it down. Use the ELMO.
MR. HAMMER: Okay. Can you give me the ELMO, Danny?
MR. GDANSKI: Yeah, you're good.
It's Question 6, Steven, 6 and 11.
MR. HAMMER: For R.J. Reynolds,
25 percent. For Lorillard, 20 percent. For Liggett, 15. And I would say ten for Nick.
And, you know, you might say, well,
10 percent for Nick? I mean, the guy was a smoker, he smoked all those years.
But, folks, Nick's -- Nick's choices,
Nick's responsibility, Nick's fault pales in comparison to what these folks did. Pales in comparison.
Because you know what? If you want to
sell a product here in America, you want to do business here in America, sell a product that's not going to kill people. Sell a product that's not going to kill half its users. Sell a product that's not going to addict kids when they're 12 and 13 and 14 years old. Sell a product that you're not going to target kids when they're 12 and 13 and 14 years old.
Do the right thing. When you find out your product is killing people, do what you said you would do. All those promises. You heard -When Dr. Proctor was on the stand, you heard him play it: We'll stop making it. If anything is proven, we'll stop making it.
We'll take out the bad stuff. All the way back to DuPuis.
Remember that scientist? You guys saw the film with the -I think it was 1958. If there's anything bad -- we don't think there is -- we'll remove it. The filters will take it out.
Instead of saying, there is something bad, you got to stop smoking and we'll set up smoking cessation programs for you --
They didn't do that. They could have.
That was the choice they made. And that's why Nick, 10 percent.
Same thing on Question 6. If you turn to Question 6 on your page, I would submit to you the same exact thing. Thirty, 25, 20, 15, and ten. Because that is justice, that is right, and that's what we're here for. We're here to seek justice.
The arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends towards justice. Martin Luther King said that.
And it's been a long, long road for Debbie Perrotto to get us here. It's been a long road. And it's time to seek justice in this courtroom. And it's time to mete out punishment to these defendants for what they did for their conduct. That is justice.
That's why we're here. That's why Debbie's here.
We're going to be asking you to give us money in this case.
And I want to take a look at Picture Number 1, and Picture Number 3, and 5. You saw a lot of these. Picture 6, picture 11. This
is a happy couple, a loving couple. And that's what Debbie's missing for all these years.
Picture Number 8, Number 9, Number 10. Number 12. Look at Michael. He's a happy kid. He was. He's a shell of what he was.
Picture Number 14, the last picture he's got of he and his dad. Oh, I'm sorry, the last picture that the family has together. That's the last family picture, last Christmas.
Picture Number 15, that's the last picture ever taken of Nick with Debbie.
Picture Number 16. This was the Christmas after Nick was dead. He's gone. And that has been Christmas ever since for Debbie.
Picture Number 17.
Oh, I'm sorry, take that down.
MR. COFER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Counsel -MR. HAMMER: Take that down. Excuse me.
THE COURT: Counsel, need to come sidebar? Mr. Cofer?
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
THE COURT: Hold on. Wait for everybody.
Yes. Go ahead.
MR. COFER: You ruled and they ignored your rulings.
MR. HAMMER: That's -- that is -That's totally my mistake. I had it written down. I should have marked it off my list. I apologize. It was flashed up really quick.
MR. COFER: So what do we do about this?
THE COURT: I don't know. What do we do about this?
MR. HAMMER: Judge -THE COURT: I don't think Mr. Hammer did it intentionally.
MR. HAMMER: No.
THE COURT: I'm happy to grant a curative.
MR. COFER: Would you please instruct the jury that you instructed plaintiff not to show that last slide, and they did it -MR. HAMMER: Judge, whatever you feel is appropriate.
MR. COFER: -- they did it even though you told them not to do it.
THE COURT: I will do that. I will grant that curative. Okay.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, you know, we've been having a lot of sidebar conferences. At the last conference, before closing arguments, I instructed plaintiff's counsel and ordered them not to show the picture that they just showed. And they did it, anyway.
So we're going to move forward. But it's down and we're going to continue forward. That's okay.
MR. HAMMER: I apologize.
THE COURT: That's okay. I accept your apology. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Hammer.
MR. HAMMER: I apologize, ladies and gentlemen. That was a total mistake on my part.
I want to look at Picture Number 2. Nick and Debbie right at the beginning of their lives. And so it's over. It's been over for a long time. And, you know, you never forget your love. You don't. And as far as Debbie's concerned, she's still married to Nick. She always will be. And she misses him every day.
She does. You saw that.
So what is fair? What is just? What is right? How do you measure the loss? I would submit to you that, for Debbie, and her pain and suffering, in a case like this -Can you put up -Well, I've got the verdict form. And that's on Page -- it's Number 7.
I would submit to you that the appropriate number for Debbie is $12.5 million, and the appropriate number for Michael is $7.5 million.
That's a lot of money. That is a lot of money. And it's not going to bring Nick back. It's not going to do anything other than compensate them for their loss.
Now, you know, you might say, that's a lot of money, that's crazy money, what are you -- Hammer, what are you talking about?
You might be saying that to yourselves.
But you know what? When you think about it in terms of loss for a woman like Debbie, for a son like Michael, and what it's done to this family, and torn them apart like it did, that's appropriate.
Now, we're going to be asking you for punishment. That total, along with the medical and other economic damages, comes out to $20,522,683.61. And that's just a number I'm suggesting to you, as far as the 12.5 and 7.5.
And you know what? You may say, I think it should be more, but you may say, I think it should be less. And we totally respect that. Whatever you feel is appropriate, that's what you determine.
But I'll tell you something, folks, under the circumstances, the pain and suffering that Debbie endured, watching Nick suffer, at such a young age -- such a young age, she was 40 -- in her 40s when she lost her husband, Nick was in his 50s, 50 years old and he died and Michael was 14 -- and they've lived all these years waiting for their day in court, waiting for justice, waiting for six people like you to do the right thing.
And that's why I say, it may be too much, it may not be enough. But that's your decision. This is a number I'm just suggesting to you. And I'm suggesting that, under the circumstances, that's reasonable, that's fair,
and it's appropriate in a case like this.
With regard to -If you don't think Nick's death was caused by his lung cancer, metastatic disease to his brain, if you think, well, the guy had lung cancer -- because, certainly, he did -but it didn't kill him, and you think, well, maybe the defense is right, maybe he died from the volvulus and it had nothing to do with his lung cancer, if that's how you think, then, on Page 12 of the verdict -- or Number 12 of the verdict form, there's a question about -- if you just think he should be compensated for the pain he endured. And I would submit to you -The medical expenses we talked about, and that carries over from the figure that I gave you as to the medical expenses, but I would -I would suggest $5 million for Nick's pain and suffering that he endured from 1992 till the day he died is appropriate.
What that man went through is horrible.
What Debbie endured and watched her husband suffer through was horrible. What Michael endured and watched his father go through was horrible.
And so we have the medical expenses that carries over from the other page -- I'm trying to find that -- that was 87,338.61, for a total of five million -- for a total of 5,873,000 -I'm sorry, five million -I kind of missed a zero there. $5,087,338.61. And that's what I believe is appropriate.
Now, how much time do I have?
THE CLERK: You have eight minutes.
MR. HAMMER: Thank you.
You know, that sounds like a lot of money, but in the scheme of things, it's really not. It's really not. It's reasonable. It's fair. It's just. Because what we're here for today is to seek justice, is to do the right thing. And for a corporation such as Philip Morris, R.J. Reynolds -MR. COFER: Objection, Your Honor; inappropriate argument for compensatory damages.
THE COURT: Counsel, sidebar.
MR. HAMMER: I'm also talking about punitive damages.
(The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
THE COURT: Just wait.
State your objection.
MR. COFER: My objection is this is improper argument with respect to compensatory damages. He was asking for compensatory damages, he was then asking how to justify it.
He starts talking about how big these corporations are. It's completely inappropriate for the amount of compensatory damages, and I object.
MR. HAMMER: Well, that -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, except that I was done talking about compensatory damages. I was talking -THE COURT: Okay.
MR. HAMMER: -- about punitive damages. MR. COFER: No. He tied it together in a way that it was clear -THE COURT: I'll just sustain the objection. Just move forward.
Okay.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
THE COURT: All right. That last objection is sustained for the record.
Your lunches are here. We're almost there, ladies and gentlemen. Your food is back there.
MR. HAMMER: When corporations like Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds and Lorillard and Liggett, when they get together and decide, you know, let's kill people -- because that's really what they decided -- let's addict kids, let's do these things because our money is more important than people's lives, that's, basically, what they're saying.
That's what they said for all those years: Our money is more important than people's lives.
When a company does that, that's just wrong. There's something wrong with that. You got to say that to yourselves. It's just wrong, and it deserves punishment; and it deserves punishment from you folks here today.
You folks here today have a unique opportunity. You are six people that got to learn about what these companies did for all those years.
Dr. Proctor says, yeah, there's millions of documents and they're all on Legacy, you can go on the Internet and look at it. Very few people do. You guys probably never even heard of that. Well, today you have. Over the past few weeks, you have.
You've learned something that most people don't even know. You've learned what these companies have done for the sake of the almighty dollar. And that's why they should be punished. It's just wrong. If you're going to act like a person -As Mr. Bass said, if you're going to act like a person, behave like a person. If you're going to do the right thing, the right thing would have been to tell the truth back in 1954.
The right thing would have been to say, hey, you know what, America, it's been proven that our product causes cancer and our scientists have even established that, too, and so you know what, you ought to quit and we'll help you.
Instead, they said, believe us, we would never hurt you. And they lied for the next 50 years. And then they lied in front of
Congress. They lied just about -Basically, they lied all through Nick's life. And they say it's got nothing to do with Nick. They didn't tell the truth until after he was dead. And that's only because they were forced to. They were forced to.
They would still be lying today if they didn't get caught. Think about that. That's why they need to be punished.
THE CLERK: Five minutes.
MR. HAMMER: Thank you.
And they haven't changed. They haven't changed. And that's why they need to be punished. They haven't changed.
Reynolds came out with what? The cigarette with the little ball in it, minty ball -MR. WEAVER: Objection, Your Honor; facts not in evidence.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. WEAVER: Cautionary instruction.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, disregard the last statement.
MR. HAMMER: Philip Morris came out...
The fact is, they deserve to be punished
for what they've done, and Debbie deserves to be compensated.
Debbie has waited now for many, many years, for justice. That's all she's asking for. She's asking for justice for her and for Nick, because Nick's not here to speak for himself.
Do the right thing. That's all we're asking you to do.
I want to thank you very much.



MR. GDANSKI: It's me. You said Mr. Hammer, Mr. Bass, it's me. I figure I spoke a lot during the trial and if anybody gets up to say something at the end on Friday at 5:15, it should be the one who stood up the most right here and talked the most.
So having said that, I can't possibly on behalf of Debbie Perrotto, Michael, Nick,
everyone who has worked this entire case, defense lawyers, plaintiffs lawyers, thank you. It's 5:15 on Friday and you're all still here.
That is unprecedented. It is magnificent. It's appreciated from all of us. And everyone in this courtroom recognizes the sacrifice and is thankful for it. It has been a tremendous privilege and honor and it is a tremendous privilege and honor to represent Debbie and Michael and to tell the story we've told to you.
It is, I can't imagine, a story you all thought you were going to hear when you came in here. And it's not a story that most people get to hear. They don't get to see the light that we shine on the tobacco companies. And we got to tell you who Nick Perrotto was and the tobacco companies got to tell you their side of the story. And that is super important, because the first thing Mr. Cofer said right out of the box in voir dire he said, there's two sides to every story. And it sounds very appealing. It sounds very, very appealing to think, hey, there's always another side to that story, let me wait to hear it. You know, Dr. Proctor talked about that. He talked about the fact that the
companies said, listen, we need to wait for more evidence. We need to hear the other side. We need to hear the rest of the proof, it's not proven yet. And that's what Dr. Proctor explained, it appeals to people's sense of wanting to hear, you know, something else, but the bottom line truth in our country is that some stories don't have another side.
What is the other side to their manipulating nicotine? What is it? Why are they doing that? What's the other side to their continuing to sell a product they engineered that they know it kills 470,000 people a year? What's the other side to that story? Anyone tell you the other side to that story? Mass deaths? An epidemic? What is the other side? Where is it? What is the other side?
They present any proof to you about, hey, he we don't kill 470,000 people a year through a product that we manipulate the nicotine in and we know smokers smoke just for nicotine? Did they show you anything to negate that, to affect that, to take that away? Instead they just ignore it as if it's meaningless, as if it's not important at all to the case. How could that
possibly be? How could that possibly be?
What's the other side to marketing to children and creating replacement smokers when their parents die? What's the other side to that story?
You know, 1994 the Surgeon General came out with a report on youth smoking. And it's such a prevalent epidemic that in 2012 they had to come out with another one -- or 1996, whatever, 20 years ago they had one. Here's the history and the progress of youth smoking. 2012 we haven't made a dent. The death rate increases year after year. Is that a positive thing?
They point to 60 million Americans and say,
60 million Americans quit smoking; how many of them died? Did they tell you that statistic?
How many of them were real smokers? Dr. Hurt said those people only smoked 100 or more cigarettes. We all know people that smoked 120,
130 cigarettes, would we ever march around and use them as a great statistic to talk about how wonderful it is that people stopped smoking? Of course not. Of course not. It's not a proper use of statistics.
How many of those people developed emphysema
and are alive today and they quit smoking because they got put on oxygen? How many of those people had holes cut through their throat and had to stop smoking? That is the wonderful makeup of the statistic they use, 60 million Americans. It's meaningless. It's absolutely meaningless.
And, you know, while they tell you there's another side to every story, what's the other side to sitting on the sidelines watching millions and millions of Americans die, including Nick Perrotto, all the while denying you have anything to do with it? What's the justification? What is it?
You know, we like to think we live in a world of moral relativism where everything is weighed against each other and everything has its opportunity, that is just sometimes true and it's nice and we like to teach our children that. But sometimes -- I know with my kids -I've got three little kids. When two of them fight with each other and they say, he did it; no, he did it. Then I talk to them, I find out one of them is just lying sometimes. Sometimes I'm like, hey, you should really be in trouble.
That's actually no good what you did. I heard both sides of the story, but I'm going to reject one of them. I mean, isn't that the way it ends up? You don't just take two sides and say, oh, okay, that's it, two sides to every story.
And, you know, Mr. Bass said this, the numbers do numb. A lot of these lawyers have been doing this for a little bit of time. The numbers do numb.
Slide number 5.
You know, you need to see it. You hear all these numbers in the case. You hear 20 million people have died in this country from smoking cigarettes since 1964, 20 million. Nick is just one, Nick is just one. So that's just one widow, there's 19,999,999 others. We can only bring you one. We can only talk to you about one.
250 billion dollars spent on advertising.
You say the number it just sounds like a lot, you might as well just say it's a lot. It's not a lot, it is the most money spent on advertising a consumer product in the history of this country. Imagine that. A company knows that product they're selling is being engineered to
create an epidemic of death and they just continue to pour more money into that, pour more money into it.
And then when doctors like Dr. Proctor and Dr. Hurt come in here and try to expose them, they try to come back and say, well, those guys are biased. Calling Dr. Hurt biased is like calling a cop biased who is against crime.
Dr. Hurt treats people who suffer awful diseases caused by smoking day-in/day-out. No doctor in the country has treated more nicotine-addicted patients than Dr. Hurt. Of course he's against smoking. It would be insane if he wasn't.
Imagine if he's like, well, I treated all these patients, but, you know, I'm not against the tobacco companies. They're creating death. And all of it is being seen by him, of course he's going to hate it.
Dr. Proctor. If he's seen the documents that he's seen and he's not someone who says, hey, this product should be abolished -- that's the title of his book, The Case For Abolition.
Why? Because it's tremendously awful. I mean, no product when used as intended kills the consumer. Think about it. What other product
is there that if you use it the way they intend you to use it, you're more than likely if not going to die from it. There's nothing like it.
I asked Dr. Hurt: If you added up the deaths from all the other addictive substances, legal and illegal, does it even touch the iceberg of the harm caused by these companies' products? The answer is no.
You know, before you got here, before anybody learns this, you probably don't think of that. You know, people smoke, people drink, people do this, people do that, it's all just, you know, part of life. This is amazingly massive. On the scale of unprecedented harm in the history of humanity, it's unknown, it's unknown.
And you know what, you absolutely can, in deciding whether punitive damages are warranted, consider whether these companies disregarded the safety and welfare of the public, not just Nick, the public. It's in your instructions.
Take a look at the instruction number 19.
19, number 19. No one has shown this to you.
We should have, but we will now. Instruction number 19, point 3.
"In considering whether or not you should award punitive damages, you can consider whether these companies disregarded the safety and welfare of the public."
That's number -- point number 3.
Point number 4. And it's "or," it's not even "and." All these bullet points on instruction number 19 you're looking at, it's any of those.
You can also consider whether they've shown reckless indifference to the rights of others.
How could the evidence we've put in indicate any result otherwise? They've shown the most flagrant disregard for human decency. It's beyond parallel. It's unknown.
And I have to say, I spent a lot of time with Dr. Proctor on the stand, I did, it was two full days. And I'd like to have it been shorter. I spent time with Dr. Hurt, I spent time with Dr. Rothschild. And we don't know -we have to do our very, very best to represent Debbie Perrotto. And they are going to defend this case tooth and nail. And these are fantastic lawyers. Philip Morris, Reynolds,
Lorillard, Liggett companies, they get excellent
lawyers. So we have to make sure we put on the best case possible. Sometimes that might have been too much evidence. We just don't know.
But we've got to put in what we think is necessary, because we don't want you to ever go back there and say, hey, they didn't cover this issue, they didn't call his oncologist, they didn't call his treating doctor and they didn't call this.
So if we put in too much it's because we wanted you to have all the ammunition you need when you get back there to make the correct choice based on the evidence. If it's too much -- and it's Friday at 5:25, it's hard to imagine we didn't push this a bit too hard, but we've done our best to give you what you needed.
Now, the real truth is that the other side of this company's story is that while this epidemic was created and sustained, while that was all happening, their other side was their bottom line, which was a flowing river of money, money unknown outside of any other industry. What industry profits from killing people intentionally? And it just happens. Think about it. We all know cigarettes exist. We all
know tobacco companies create a product that kills people. It is an epidemic of death that hides in plain sight and no one seems to think to do anything about it. Surgeon General is trying their best. You all have the power, you all have awesome power. So much power I was talking with Steve and everybody else, we're jealous of it. We would love to have the power you have. You can go back there and say to these companies: We will not stand for this.
We will not stand for a company that sits on the sidelines, watches people die, does nothing about it, then when they sue you, they say, oops, you didn't die from a tobacco-related disease; if you did, you weren't addicted; if you were addicted, your addiction didn't cause your disease and by the way, you never should have -MR. COFER: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
Counsel want to approach?
MR. COFER: Yes, please.
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. MAGUIRE: Your Honor, we went straight from a windup, which is really about this is selling a deadly product, not about deception, then we moved straight into an attack, an epidemic of death and then we immediately dived into the defense of the case. That was just a horrible sequence. And, respectfully, I don't think we can get back from that. So Lorillard would move for a mistrial.
MR. GDANSKI: I've done nothing even close.
THE COURT: You've been very passionate and I'm impressed, but don't cross the line.
MR. GDANSKI: I know.
THE COURT: Be careful.
MR. COFER: We'll join in the motion.
MR. WEAVER: As does Reynolds.
THE COURT: Understand, but be careful.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
MR. GDANSKI: Told me I'm being passionate, but sometimes I talk and I get a little subdued.
So if I'm too passionate, good. I don't have too time to be passionate, so I'll take advantage of it.
The bottom line is, you know, while they
were denying the health effects of smoking, they were making exceptional profits. That is what drove this. And, you know, we don't need to look any further than the documents, the documents.
Slide number 4.
We showed it to you in the beginning. Even the documents become numbing because there are so many of them and we can't show you that many. The whole process becomes numbing. Sometimes we've got to go back and say, what are we doing here?
This is Philip Morris talking to itself,
"Who ain't for more money?"
"Who ain't for more money?"
Show me the document that says: Who ain't for saving lives? Show me that document.
Show me the document that says: Who ain't for ending this epidemic? Show me that one.
Show me the document that says: Who ain't for protecting children? No.
Their document says, "Who ain't for more money?"
And it's important, because it just doesn't end there. It talks about the bottom line, what
is the business all about? The business is just about nicotine. And they were so scared back then, this is in 1969, they were so scared that the FDA would come out and say nicotine was a drug, or cigarettes were a drug because it had nicotine that they really, really didn't want that to happen because they know it would be impactful. So there's addiction in this case, tobacco companies, they are addicted to money. And what's driving that addiction is nicotine. Without nicotine, they'd have no business. They know that. They've known that for years and years and years. They know it today. It's not a secret. They know it today.
And you learned about it -- you probably learned about a bunch of different subjects you never thought you'd learn so much about. One of them has got to be the design of cigarettes. Because people probably think cigarettes fall out of trees and end up on a shelf at Walgreens. They don't. You ever think about how they get there? You know, they're not just one day they're there. Tobacco companies make sure they're there. They make sure they're always there. They make sure they're highly visible.
They make sure you can't miss the cigarette, it's right behind the cash register. You can't buy a product at Walgreens and not see a tobacco product.
MR. WEAVER: Objection, Your Honor, facts not in evidence.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GDANSKI: Tobacco products -MR. WEAVER: Move to strike.
THE COURT: Disregard the last statement.
MR. GDANSKI: Yes, Judge.
Tobacco products are everywhere. They don't get everywhere by accident. The industry makes sure they're everywhere. Why? For this reason: Because they want people to smoke and not just people, not just people, they want kids to smoke and they want people who aren't yet smoking to start smoking. Talked about that.
One of the documents, I don't have it here, from Claude Teague where he says: We're going to get you to start smoking for wholly irrational reasons, just find some reason to get that cigarette in their mouth, whether it's advertising or peer pressure, something, some way to create the process by which you start
ingesting the cigarette because they know you're going to get nicotine for wholly irrational reasons and thereafter they'll discover the true secret or whatever the document says contained therein.
What is it?
MR. HAMMER: Satisfaction.
MR. GDANSKI: Satisfaction. The true satisfaction contained therein. And, you know,
I listened to the closing arguments and you think to yourself, why does it have to be so incredibly hard for people to stop smoking? I mean, they make it sound -- it's a complete trivialization of addiction. Why does it have to be so hard? They make it sound like if one day Nick woke up, he was going to just stop smoking, that was going to be it. That's just not addiction. It trivializes addiction. It undermines addiction. It renders addiction meaningless to suggest that an addict can just like this (indicating) stop using the addictive substance. Heroin addicts can't just one day stop using, neither can nicotine addicts. It's nonmedical, it's nonscientific to suggest as much. It doesn't make any sense. They know
that without nicotine, there would be no cigarettes, there would be no tobacco business, there would be nothing.
PT 01809, please. This is in evidence 01809. This if from Philip Morris.
Page 5, please.
"Without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse. PM would collapse and we'd all lose our jobs and our consulting fees."
I see this and I say, good, let that happen. Fantastic. What's the problem? What would be wrong with that?
MR. COFER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
Mr. Gdanski.
MR. GDANSKI: Okay.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GDANSKI: After recognizing that smoking cigarettes causes disease, kills people and that people smoke for nicotine, what do they choose to do? They choose to keep the nicotine in cigarettes, control it, manipulate it and instead cause many, many unnecessary injuries and death. I mean, that's the only way to view
this evidence. There's no two ways about that. That is a decision they made over and over and over again.
And in this case, you know, we only have the opportunity for legal reasons to bring the Perrotto family before you against the tobacco companies. We only have that opportunity. We can't do it en masse. It was. It can't be -MR. COFER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. GDANSKI: -- done that way -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GDANSKI: We can't bring anybody else in this case to sue the tobacco companies -MR. COFER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. WEAVER: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GDANSKI: We only represent Debbie Perrotto right now. Debbie Perrotto against the tobacco companies, Nick Perrotto's case, but in this case you have the unique opportunity to speak for all the silent people -MR. COFER: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. COFER: May we approach?
THE COURT: Counsel, sidebar, please.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. COFER: You have repeatedly warned him. This is an improper argument. You've told him to be careful. He's asking to punish or harm to others: It's beyond Debbie; we can't do it en masse.
I move for a mistrial.
THE COURT: This one I have to reserve on.
MR. GDANSKI: I'll read from the jury instructions.
THE COURT: I'm reserving on the motion.
MR. COFER: And in addition, I'd ask you to instruct the jury that is improper that this is a case about one smoker. They're to decide that case and that case only.
MR. MAGUIRE: Your Honor, I don't think an instruction is going to cure, but if Your Honor is not going to grant the mistrial -THE COURT: I'm reserving on the mistrial.
MR. COFER: Then no instruction.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
MR. GDANSKI: One of the things that was talked about was the measure of damages. We
asked for a lot of money for the Perrotto family, for Debbie and Michael, by any stretch.
And we think that if you see the evidence, which you are 100 percent entitled to see it, that is a fair value; it can be more, it can be less, it's whatever you think is just.
But Mr. Cofer used this "if you worked every day, how long would it take you to make that much money" type of analogy. And we thought about it, we talked about it, because it didn't strike me as having a connection to valuing the harm and valuing the pain of a person when they lose somebody else.
You can never put a value on the loss of somebody. You can't value it based on how much money people make in a year. If a rich man dies, is he entitled to more money for his spouse than if a poor man dies? That doesn't make any sense. And here's an analogy why. Some things are worth more than their value. Some things are worth more than their value.
And everyone has, you know, items that you can think about that.
THE COURT: Mr. Hammer is calling you.
MR. GDANSKI: Anyway, I'll do this and I'll
use some slides.
Some things are worth more than their value. My point is this, if you have a family and there's an heirloom and it's passed down from generation to generation, it can be actually worthless if it was to be sold on an open market, nobody would buy it, nobody would pay a penny for it, but to the family it can be unbelievably priceless. And it's passed from one to the next to the next and then you send it to someone else in the family, whatever it is, could be a photo, could be a crib, it could be anything. You send it to your kid as a crib for her newborn child and the crib gets lost in transit. Is the company going to call you and say, hey, it was only worth 20 bucks, that's what we're going to pay you. To you it was worth so much more.
To Debbie, Nick's value can't be identified by just, you know, how much people make in a year, it devalues and desensitizes people's pain and suffering.
Let's put up The Frank Statement. PT 307.
You know, one of the questions on the verdict form contains -- let me just read it to
you.
In 1954, 1955 the tobacco companies -- we know Nick is smoking, we know he's a kid. We know that is an optimal time to get someone to start smoking. And they tell everybody that they "accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility, paramount to every other consideration in our business."
That is their pledge, that is their promise, that is their words, the words they chose to use, they chose to use. And for 40 years they continued to make that promise and make that promise and make that promise to people just like Nick, just like Nick and Nick. You can't exclude him from the group of people. He's smoking at that time.
THE CLERK: You have 10 minutes,
Mr. Gdanski.
MR. GDANSKI: Ten minutes, thank you so much for the extra time.
THE COURT: She's giving you 10 extra minutes. That's included in the extra minutes.
MR. GDANSKI: Page 105 of the Surgeon General 3895. PT 3895124.
"Nicotine addiction is the fundamental
reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products. And this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases described in this report."
This is question 1. I'm not going to make light of question 1 on the verdict form and talk about one part and not the second part. This is question one.
Nicotine addiction is why people smoke.
There is no other reason that people smoke. Nobody chooses choice. Nobody chooses addiction. It's unheard of. You have people -the idea that people choose to remain addicted is nonscientific. The idea that people choose to become addicted is nonsensical. It defies anything to do with why people use addictive substances.
One of the things that the documents have taught everyone in case -- PT 02130 -- is the motivation -- I'm sorry, PT 01525 -- the motivations of the tobacco companies, because everyone knows you can judge somebody on what they say when they think nobody is looking, right? When people talk in public forums sometimes they may say things that are crafty
because it's public, but when nobody is looking that is the measure of a true person's intent.
This is from Brown and Williamson, "Lest some lawyer be looking over our shoulder, I do not concede that even one person dies of a chronic disease that is caused by smoking cigarettes." This is why the conspiracy and the fraud maintained itself and picked up speed for years after years. They said it the best in their own documents, three fronts, litigation is one of them. They were scared of people suing them.
Slide number 2.
When it comes to the question of addiction, "The lawyers reminded us, I'm told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case. We can't defend continued smoking as 'free choice' if the person was 'addicted.'"
This is their words 1980. This is their words 1980. There was no advertising that came out in 1980 that says, hey, smoking is bad for you, we can't defend it as free choice if the person was addicted.
Can I get the pack of Merit cigarettes that's in evidence, please?
THE COURT: Of course. The evidence cart is right there.
MR. GDANSKI: We can't defend it as free choice if the person was addicted. Think about that. Think about that in light of everything you've heard in this case.
This is actually the brand of cigarettes that Nick smoked from the time he smoked them. And here they are, Merit Menthol. These are regular ones. I showed it to you with Dr. Hurt.
It has a slogan on the Philip Morris section.
It's very hard to read, it's Latin. There was a Latin phrase earlier used today, this is my Latin phrase. It says, "Veni Vidi Vici."
Dr. Hurt told you what it means. It means: We came, we saw, we conquered. That is the arrogant recognition of the truth and the sad testament to their corporate values. That's it.
You're not going to find it on the pack today.
Back then: We came, we saw, we conquered. Ask this one question: Who did you conquer? And why are you bragging about it? Why?
Slide number 10, please.
They talked about Nick having multiple decisions, multiple opportunities and multiple forks in his road. That applies with equal and if not greater force and effect to them. They had so many opportunities to tell the truth, so many and they would have been impactful. And theirs come at an earlier time than Nick's.
Theirs come when Nick is just 12.
1953 mouse skin-painting studies.
Dr. Proctor told you the acousto experiment.
They already knew their product was causing harm and killing people.
1966, the cautions, they could have come out and said, We agree. The warnings, We agree. Surgeon General, '88, they could have come out and said, We agree it's addictive. '89, '94, all of these were opportunities. '94, as late as '94, Nick is sick. As late as then they could have come out and said, We agree with all of this, our product is dangerous and deadly.
We recommend people stop using it.
Or, alternatively, you know what they could have done? They could have lived up to the promise they made to stop making it if they found out it was harmful to health.
We showed you multiple promises that they made to the American public when -MR. COFER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GDANSKI: We showed you promises that they made to stop making cigarettes if they found out it was harmful to their health, to the public's health. Their promises. Their promises.
PT 01913.
All of these are in evidence.
Let's go to the next page, please.
This is an internal tobacco company document talking about their expert witnesses. Remember Dr. Proctor talked about one whole arm of the conspiracy was the development and finding of expert witnesses. He also said, although I can't recall his exact words, "Our medical/scientific witnesses will say whatever we want them to say."
Clearly implying, if not stating, that they lacked credibility and integrity.
You know, that's amazing. It's amazing.
Merit cigarettes, lights, low tars, if they sold a light and low-tar cigarette today, it
would be illegal. Illegal in this country. The law doesn't permit it anymore.
So they want to come back -- we can take that down. They want to come back and say, our client should have known and how could he possibly believe lights and low tar were healthier? Everybody knew they were dangerous. The federal government has said those descriptors were so deceptive that to put them on the packages today -MR. COFER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GDANSKI: Today we know it would be illegal to sell a light and low-tar cigarette.
We know the ones that Nick smoked were light and low-tar cigarettes.
The findings, can you just put up number 30, please.
So I want to focus on one finding, because it gets glossed over.
The bottom one, please. Can you blow that up a second? Can you do that?
This is an important finding. Because we all know the defendants agreed to conceal, we know they committed a conspiracy to omit
information. I think the evidence is overwhelming to that effect. And the finding is here for your benefit, but here this finding that the instructions tell you you have to hold as if their your own says that they did it with the intention, with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. So this isn't just we did bad, we did wrong and we conspired, this is an intent finding of why they did it. "Smokers," Nick,
"would rely," that's on the verdict form, "on information to their detriment." Words that are taken from the verdict form. These are words that you'll see on your verdict form on the questions regarding the fraud and conspiracy.
PT 01040, please, page 9.
They talk about the warnings. Their own documents, they thought the warnings might be a plus, might be a plus because some teenagers would want to rebel and say, hey, now these things, now people are saying they're dangerous, so let's start smoking them. They were so excited they thought the warnings would be a plus. That's from their own documents.
The medical case, it sounded like Mr. Cofer
rolled over on his having lung cancer that
spread to the brain. You know, he sort of said,
listen, that could very well be the case. Of
course it's the case. If it's not the case, it
means that every doctor who treated Nick at
Good Sam was wrong, everyone was wrong, everyone
was wrong. They didn't even bring a witness to
say that his lung cancer didn't spread to his
brain.
MR. WEAVER: Objection, Your Honor -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. WEAVER: -- improper burden shifted.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. WEAVER: Caution -MR. GDANSKI: No one -MR. WEAVER: -- please.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, disregard the last statement.
MR. GDANSKI: No one in this case ever said anything other than Nick's lung cancer spread to his brain. You won't find it in your notes, you won't find it in the transcript, you won't find it anywhere.
Now, on the volvulus issue, they say we called Dr. Kleinman because we were so scared of
Dr. Ganz. Just the opposite. When Dr. Ganz was testifying we scratched our heads and said, this guy, he's so easily debunkable. It's so easy to prove what he's saying wrong. Let's just ask someone who looked at the pictures that he didn't look at and tell us what the pictures say. Because, remember, Mr. Cofer, super good lawyer, he said our case rests on -MR. COFER: I won't object to that.
(Laughter.)
MR. GDANSKI: He said our case relies on X,
Y and Z. Their case, their medical case rests on two things as well. Their medical case rests on Nick having a volvulus in August of '95 and January of '96, their medical case rests on that. So think about that and then think about what Dr. Kleinman came in and said, absolutely not, I've got the pictures. Because Dr. Ganz's whole theory was, oh, yeah, yeah, this is a recurring volvulus and it magically twists and untwists and, you know, that's how the last one got to be so bad. Well, take away the first one, take away the second one, it all falls apart. You know why it falls apart? And I asked Dr. Ganz: Hey, you know, what was it, I
mean, the last volvulus, the one you're saying really twisted and kinked, that's the one that killed him, why this one? Even if you're assuming everything you say is correct, why is this the one that killed him? What happened in between? What was it that now he's dead?
Obviously, we all know the answer. He had brain surgery three days before, three days before.
I said, you think it's just a total coincidence. Because imagine the coincidence that it has to be, a tremendous happenstance, a tremendous, utter-perfect coincidence. I mean, the man has cancer that goes from his lung to his brain. They put him on the table and they had to cut open his brain. And by the way, this is -- you know, you see Dr. Rothschild. This is the end result of smoking. They put you down on the table, they strap you down, they cut open your brain and they chip, they chipped away at Nick's brain to make sure they got as much tumor as possible.
THE CLERK: You have one minute,
Mr. Gdanski.
MR. GDANSKI: I think the evidence is
overwhelming -- thank you -- that this man died from lung cancer. That if he didn't die from lung cancer, who does die from lung cancer? That is all the evidence in this case.
Can you put up PT 02197, please.
Can I just get five extra minutes?
THE COURT: Any objection? Mr. Gdanski is requesting five additional minutes.
MR. COFER: I'll give him three.
MR. GDANSKI: I'll take three, deal.
I don't care about that section. They know benzopyrene must go. Can you go to the first two paragraphs, please.
The industry in 1958 they have a power struggle, it's a mental, internal power struggle. You see it here.
"All of us are caught" -- "At least all of us" -- or "At least most of us in the tobacco industry are caught between a guilt complex and a power complex."
Right? They feel a little bit guilty, because they know: Man, the stuff we're doing is wrong, but, man, they got a lot of power.
And they say, "The guilt complex is a simple math. We tend to suffer from the --
MR. MAGUIRE: Objection, Your Honor. May we approach?
MR. GDANSKI: Don't hold it against my time.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
THE COURT: What's the objection?
MR. MAGUIRE: We can't tell if that's in evidence.
MR. GDANSKI: It's in evidence. I put it in last night.
THE COURT: Okay.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
MR. GDANSKI: This document, it's not one you've seen before. It's not one I showed you during the examination of witnesses. So it's a new document, but it is in evidence.
They say, "The guilt complex is a simple matter. We tend to suffer from the sternly repressed fear that our opponents are right and we are wrong on the question of health and that we are thus devoting our business lives to the propagation of lung cancer."
1958, Nick is 16 years old, about to turn 20 years old, 19 years old. They are devoting
their entire business to the propagation of this deadly disease lung cancer. These are their words. They want to hold Nick 100 percent responsible. They want to hold Nick in this case 100 percent, say, it's all your fault?
They're devoting their whole business, their business model just to develop lung cancer.
And, you know, after this document, they didn't just shut it all down; they kept selling cigarettes, obviously, we know that.
You know, the context of this case, Nick is the victim. Nick is the victim. There's an industry that lied to the public and Nick trusted them, Nick relied on their statements after '82. Here are the ads. Here are the ads.
We put them in evidence, you have them. "Break away to Merit." "Millions endorse Merit."
After 1982.
There's an instruction in this case -- there are important jury instructions, there's ones that you should look at and they're the following ones: "Each conspirator is responsible for the acts of every other conspirator." It's in the instructions. "Each conspirator is responsible for the acts of every
other conspiracy."
I don't have time to read it to you know,
I'm running out of time. That's a super important instruction.
The instruction on the four points of punitive damages, look at them.
The concurring cause instruction, when it comes to the addiction whether it has to be a legal cause, the concurring cause instruction.
Mr. Perrotto, he could have smoked [sic] and we accept some responsibility for that, but there is no way to say that all of his smoking had nothing to do with addiction, addiction played no role in his smoking. Because on a "No" on question one would be the same as saying addiction played no role in his continued smoking and that undermines addiction.
Can you please put up slide 12.
I thought that this was the most poignant testimony that Debbie gave. And I remember her saying it and I sent an e-mail to myself: Make sure you cut out that testimony. I don't remember if it was on cross or direct or redirect, it doesn't make a difference.
This is Debbie talking, "I did everything in
my power and Nick worked with me to try and quit smoking. That's not concrete? That's not any effort to try because he's not here to defend himself? I don't believe that."
Nick Perrotto is not here to defend himself when they accuse him of never making a concrete attempt to quit smoking. Is that fair? To accuse a man who can't be here to defend himself? His wife said he tried -MR. COFER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GDANSKI: -- Santo said he tried to quit smoking, but he can't remember each specific attempt. His first wife from 1958 to 1974 can't remember how many minutes went by in the morning until he smoked his first cigarette and that's it, that ends the three weeks of hard work we put into this case, that means Nick's not addicted. That's the result.
Debbie is here to speak for Nick. We have the honor and privilege of speaking for Nick.
Nick Perrotto was obviously addicted. Mr. Bass showed you 40 million caught in the web of addiction; Nick is not one of them? Can't be, can't be. If Nick Perrotto is not a class
member, and the class membership was described to you in the beginning of the case, it's all Florida citizens who meet these requirements, all of them. That ain't just 10 people. I'm talking the whole state, all -MR. COFER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained. Counsel.
MR. GDANSKI: If Nick Perrotto is not a class member, who is? Who is? Who would be?
MR. WEAVER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
THE CLERK: Times up, Mr. Gdanski.
MR. GDANSKI: I have one minute.
On behalf of Debbie and Michael and Nick -THE COURT: Mr. Gdanski.
MR. GDANSKI: One line to read on behalf of Debbie, please?
THE COURT: Go ahead.
MR. GDANSKI: On behalf of Debbie, Michael and Nick, we wish you good luck and God bless in bringing this verdict. You're going to go back there, appoint a foreperson. And, you know, it's 10 to 6. Nick used to say to his brothers, because I hope, we hope that we get to Phase II, you say "Yes" to the last question, we hope this
is not the last time we get to present argument and evidence to you, so not going to say good-bye, say what Nick said to his brothers, see you later, see you guys soon.
Thank you very much. You've been a fantastic, awesome and wonderful jury.
Everybody in the room knows it, Judge knows it.
And it's all yours now. Good luck.
