          MR. REILLY:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Good afternoon, everybody.  Hope you had a
      good lunch.
          And thanks to Ursula for letting me go first
      again.  That's not lady-like, right, but...
          You know, I want to begin my closing
      argument just as Mr. Alvarez did, by thanking
      you guys for your service.  We have taken you
      away from your homes, your jobs, your normal lives for three weeks.  And you guys have asked
      great questions.  You've paid wonderful
      attention.  And of course this trial, that's
      exactly what we hoped you would do as jurors, so
      thanks.
          Now, when I ended my opening statement in
      this case, I said to you that I was confident
      that what I was telling you in my opening
      statement was what the evidence was truly going
      to be.  And I warned you that I was going to
      bring many of the same boards -- you probably
      can't see them back there -- but many of the
      same boards that I used in my opening statement
      I was going to be using again in my closing
      argument because that's how confident I was that
      that's exactly what the evidence was going to
      be.  I have more boards now but many of them are
      the same ones that I used in my opening
      statement because the evidence did turn out to
      be just exactly what I said.  And now I'm going
      to supplement those with additional boards.
      Same timeline with a few little additions to it.
      That's what I'm going to do.
          Also, I warned you at the end of my opening
      statement that Judge Murphy was going to read to you a set of instructions that was going to be
      many pages long.  You have them now and they
      are.  And I said they would be filled with legal
      terms.  And they are.  And I said you'd get a
      multiple-page verdict form as well and that that
      would be filled with legal terms too, and it is.
          Now, I said to you that I thought we could
      condense all that down, and I used this same
      board, into just those two words, control and
      responsibility.
          Now, aside from the medical issue in this
      case -- and because she put on all the evidence
      about it, Ursula is going to talk to you about
      the medical issue in this case, aside from that
      that is exactly what this case turned out to be
      about.  And this is not a class action.  I
      realize that Mr. Alvarez in his closing argument
      talked about what he perceived to be a lot of
      misconduct on the part of -- he talked about the
      American public and Americans in general.  This
      is no longer a class action, ladies and
      gentlemen, and you know that now.  You have the
      instructions.  You have the verdict form -- or
      you'll have the verdict form.  You have the
      instructions.  You know this is a case brought on behalf of one person and one person only.
      And it's about one smoker's decisions and one
      smoker only.  And who is that?  Paul Pollari.
          So the question then becomes control.  Who
      was in control of Mr. Pollari's decisions about
      how he lived his life?  Who was in control of
      Mr. Pollari's decisions about whether he would
      become a smoker, whether he would continue to
      smoke, whether he would become a regular smoker
      and whether he would stop or not and what level
      of motivation if he thought about stopping would
      he apply to quit smoking, or would he decide he
      wanted to continue to smoke.
          I said that's really what this case was
      really all about.  And I said when you -- of
      course there's a claim in this case that
      Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds had some level of
      control over the decisions that Mr. Pollari
      made.  And I said once you knew about the
      personal story of Mr. Pollari then you could
      address the second question that this case is
      really about, and that is responsibility.  Who,
      if anybody, other than Mr. Pollari was
      responsible for the decisions that he made about
      his own smoking? You remember -- I used this board too -- I
      suggested to you that as the evidence came in
      you'd think about who was in control of his
      decisions about smoking, who controlled where,
      when, how much he smoked?  I could add who he
      smoked with.  Did he ever lose control or did he
      continue to demonstrate control throughout the
      entire time he smoked, including the ability to
      control whether he smoked on the job or not?
      And did anything that Philip Morris or
      RJ Reynolds said or failed to say about the
      health risks of smoking have any -- have a
      substantial impact on Mr. Pollari's decisions
      about smoking?
          And you remember I said, you know what, in
      order to know the answer to that, all those
      questions, which really those -- the questions
      in your instructions are really all about that.
      I said you're going to have to know how
      Mr. Pollari lived his life, right?  And even now
      in this closing argument that Mr. Alvarez just
      made how much time was spent talking about
      Mr. Pollari's life and how it's spent?  Out of
      that whole presentation, an hour and a half.
          Well, where did the information come from in this case that dealt truly with Mr. Pollari?
      Well, of course, Mrs. Pollari came.  Her
      children did not come.  Claudia and Richard did
      not come.  Her daughter-in-law Cindy came.  And
      that, ladies and gentlemen, is it in terms of
      witnesses who came who actually knew
      Mr. Pollari.  That's it.  That's it.
          Well, so I said in my opening statement that
      I was going to spend the bulk of my time talking
      to you about how Mr. Pollari lived his life.
      And I said I was going to just walk you through
      Mr. Pollari's life.  And I used this very same
      timeline.  And what I want to do right now is --
      because I'm pretty old-fashioned, not too high
      tech.
          This is that same timeline.  And I started
      in the '30s and I went straight on through to
      the end of his life in 1994, right?
          And you remember I said this timeline is
      divided into things above the timeline related
      to Mr. Pollari and his life.  The things below
      the timeline are things that were going on here
      in the United States about smoking and health.
      And now what I've got over here, these are --
      I've hidden the court reporter from you, I apologize, but every word that I say, every word
      that His Honor says, every word that a witness
      says is all taken down by the court reporter.
      And it's transcribed -- they're very fast.  It's
      transcribed every day.  We get what they call
      daily copy.  So we can tell you line by line,
      word by word what every witness has testified
      to.  And that's exactly what I'm showing you
      right here when it says "Trial TR," that's trial
      transcript.  That's the page.  That's the line.
          So what I've done here is I've taken out
      excerpts from the actual trial testimony to show
      you what Mrs. Pollari and her daughter-in-law
      actually said in this trial about Mr. Pollari,
      what he knew, what he and she talked about, the
      true history of Mr. Pollari's life in connection
      with his smoking in this case.
          You learned that Mr. Pollari was born in
      Brooklyn in 1932.  His parents were nonsmoking
      Italian immigrants that had a clothing factory,
      right.
          1932, and you remember they brought in
      Dr. Robert Proctor, the history of science
      professor.  He's been paid almost 3 million
      dollars to testify in cases.  What did he make this week?  What did he tell me?  Made like
      $50,000 this week, $60,000, and he wasn't
      through yet.
          But he acknowledged three or four basic
      facts for sure.  One was from the very beginning
      of cigarettes, from the very beginning of
      tobacco, tobacco has been a source of pleasure.
      Why?  For a very large part because there's
      nicotine in the plant, there's nicotine in the
      leaves, and there's nicotine in every tobacco
      product.  It's like alcohol in beer.  It's like
      alcohol in wine.  Why do people drink it?  Why
      do people smoke it?  Why do people chew it?
      They're looking for the effect that nicotine
      brings.  And is that some secret?  Dr. Proctor
      acknowledged that that's been known for 150
      years.  There's no secret about it.
          Second basic fact, people have associated
      cigarettes and tobacco products of all kinds
      with danger, danger to your health for a very,
      very, very long time, since the beginning of
      these products.  Now, the danger has changed
      over time.  You remember way back at the turn of
      the 19th century to the 20th century cigarettes
      were illegal because they were thought to be dangerous, not because of lung cancer, for other
      health reasons.
          So pleasurable, dangerous and guess what,
      the third one is, if you begin to use a tobacco
      product, including cigarettes, it can be very
      difficult for some people to quit.  Whether you
      call it an addiction, whether you call it a
      habit, doesn't matter.  Remember the joke we
      shared about Mark Twain?  Mark Twain said it's
      easy to quit, I've done it a thousand times.
      That's the 1860s.
          So there you go.
          And I said, you know what, 1930s, was there
      information out there readily at the fingertips
      of anybody if they wanted to go read it?  And
      World Book Encyclopedia, I've put the pages in
      evidence, what the 1930 World Book Encyclopedia
      said about nicotine, cigarettes, tobacco, it's
      all there.  It was no secret.
          Reader's Digest, another nice source of
      information.  You've got articles, we put them
      in evidence, showing nicotine shortens your
      life, hard to quit but you can quit if you
      really want to.  It's all there.  And it's in
      evidence if you want to take a look at it. All right, well, what did we learn about
      Mr. Pollari's life growing up?  Almost nothing.
      Almost nothing.  And as far as smoking is
      concerned, all we learned was that at some later
      point in time after he got married to
      Mrs. Pollari he told her that he had his first
      cigarette when he was 12 or 13 years old.
      That's it.  That is it.
          We didn't learn anything about his -- why he
      smoked that first cigarette.  We don't know
      anything about what his parents thought about
      it.  Did he hide it?  Did he get punished for
      it?  We don't know any of that.  And for sure we
      don't know that there was -- we don't know what
      kind of cigarette it was.  We don't know who
      made it.  And one thing is for sure, nobody
      said, that knew Mr. Pollari, nobody came here
      and said that Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds had
      anything to do with him beginning to smoke.
      Nobody.  Nobody that knew Mr. Pollari.
          All right.  Did people -- did anybody in the
      Pollari family know from 1946 that smoking came
      with a health risk?  Sure.
          Remember, I asked Mrs. Pollari about her own
      brother, 20 years older than she.  And I said, isn't it true that in 1946 your brother as a
      smoker developed a very bad cough, went to the
      doctor, the doctor said, your cough is due to
      your smoking, you need to stop and he stopped
      just like that?
          And I said, Mrs. Pollari, How old were you
      then?
          20 years old.
          And I said, You've known since you were 10
      years old that smoking could be bad for your
      health, haven't you?
          And she said yes.  She said yes.
          Do we know when Mr. Pollari became a regular
      smoker?
          No.
          Do we know how many cigarettes he smoked
      every day?
          No.
          And there's the story of her brother Carl.
      It's all right there in the trial transcript.
          Mr. Pollari left school in the ninth grade.
      Mr. Alvarez described him as a school dropout,
      right?  But I asked Mrs. Pollari, your husband
      wasn't some guy that wasn't smart, she said, oh,
      no, he was very intelligent.  That's her testimony.  He was very intelligent.  So we're
      not dealing with a guy who couldn't make it in
      school.  What did he do?  He left school to go
      join his parents working in their clothing
      factory.  Was he a bright guy?  Absolutely.
      That's what we're told.
          Let's go to the '50s.
          Mr. Pollari turns 18 in 1950.  Why do I tell
      you that?  Mr. Alvarez put up a bunch of
      documents saying, hey, these documents show that
      Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds was targeting
      underage people.  The reason I show you that is
      because this is the instruction that Judge
      Murphy gave you over and over again whenever
      they showed a document like that.  The judge
      said, Evidence relating to alleged youth smoking
      and marketing after 1950 when the decedent
      became an adult and alleged misconduct after he
      passed away in January of '94 is not relevant
      and it cannot be considered by you in
      determining everything -- every question on that
      verdict form until the very last line, can't be
      used.  So why is he telling it to you?  To make
      you mad, get you mad, that's why.  Because it
      doesn't have anything to do with Mr. Pollari. He's 18 and ready to buy cigarettes legally.
      And we don't even know if he's smoking at this
      point.
          1950 starts that what their Dr. Proctor
      described as an avalanche of information flowing
      to the American public about the health risks of
      smoking.  It starts with the Wynder and Graham
      statistical study and builds over time.  Was
      this some secret from the American public?
      Absolutely not.
          Was this some secret from the Pollaris?
      Absolutely not.
          How do we know?  Well, we know that Mr. and
      Mrs. Pollari meet in 1954 at the butcher shop.
      They have a romance that is very quick.  They
      get married.  She sees that he's smoking Camel.
      She has no idea why he was smoking Camels.  It's
      made by RJ Reynolds.  Did he ever tell her, you
      know what, RJ Reynolds influenced me to buy this
      pack of cigarettes?  No.  Nope.
          Did he ever tell her Philip Morris did
      something to me, said something to me that
      caused me to begin smoking or to continue
      smoking?  Never did.  There is no evidence to
      that effect in this case.  And, again, this is not a class action.  This is about one smoker's
      decisions and that's it.
          Now, part of that avalanche of information
      included television programs.  And you remember
      that there was a program that you saw little
      bits of called See It Now hosted by Edward R.
      Murrow.  And I have to take this down for just a
      minute.
          Because, Michael, would you just put up...
          I think Dr. Proctor said this was a two-hour
      program or it was an hour two nights in a row.
      And Mrs. Pollari actually remembered watching
      that program.  Here's her testimony.  She
      remembers watching the 1955 See It Now program.
      Remember, they were married and she said they
      had that little TV and she loved to watch the
      See It Now program and she could actually
      remember this program about watching -- "You
      remember seeing the See It Now program that
      covered smoking that we saw here in this
      courtroom?
          "Yes."
          Let me just show you a quick segment.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:) VOICE:  It is now established, in my
      opinion, beyond a reasonable doubt that
      cigarette smoking greatly increases the
      probability of developing lung cancer.
          In my opinion people should be warned of the
      dangers and they are being warned.  What they
      then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or
      not, is their own business.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. REILLY:  That was E. Cuyler Hammond from
      the American Cancer Society.  Mrs. Pollari
      couldn't recall whether or not her husband was
      sitting beside her at the moment because
      obviously that's 60 years ago, but she said it
      would have been the normal thing for him to be
      sitting right beside her at the end of the day
      after work and they watched TV together.  And
      Mrs. Pollari can remember that program from 60
      years ago.  That's how impactful that program
      was.
          And there was E. Cuyler Hammond talking
      directly to the Pollaris saying, hey, it's up to
      you now.  If you don't smoke, you shouldn't
      start.  If you smoke you have to make up your
      mind whether or not you're going to continue to smoke.
          Now, for the rest of that decade I asked
      Mrs. Pollari, "In fact, throughout the '50s you
      really never even talked to him," meaning your
      husband, "about smoking, did you?"
          And what was her answer?  "No."
          Now, I realize that Mr. Alvarez put up a
      series of questions where he asked her, did your
      husband think this?  Yes.  Did he think this?
      Yes.  Did he think this?  Yes.  And I'm not her
      lawyer and I asked her flat out, did you talk to
      him the rest of the '50s about smoking?  And
      that was the answer right there.  No.
          People are quitting by the end of the '50s.
      What did Dr. Proctor say?  He said a million
      people a year are quitting smoking.  We just saw
      E. Cuyler Hammond say, it's up to you to decide
      whether you're going to quit or continue.  There
      you go.
          What did Mr. Pollari decide?  He decided,
      no, he was going to continue to smoke.
          1956 is the year that Lorraine is born and
      Mr. Pollari is working as a butcher.
          Michael, could I get you to come take some
      of these away?  Thank you. Thank you very much.
          So let's go to the '60s.  Lots happens in
      the '60s.
          1960 their son Richard is born.  Here we
      have the number 13 million Americans have quit
      smoking by the early '60s.
          1962 unfortunately Mr. Pollari's mom died
      from cancer.  She was a nonsmoker.  She has
      liver cancer.  What's important about that in
      connection with Mr. Pollari's story?  Well, what
      we learn is that Mrs. Pollari notices that he's
      smoking more because of the stress of having his
      mother die.  And I said, "After she died, after
      a period of time, as the stress relaxed, your
      husband went back to, in your observation,
      smoking about as much as he had before, right?"
          And her answer was "Yes."
          So now you know people smoke for a variety
      of reasons.  Here's one of the reasons why Mr.
      Pollari smokes; it helps him deal with stress.
      And there it is in black and white.  He also
      knows in 1962 about watching someone die with
      cancer.  And he knows -- the Pollari household
      knows in 1955 that if you smoke you run the risk
      that you too could develop cancer. All right.  Let's go to 1964.  That's the
      year that their daughter Claudia was born.
      That's also the year that the Surgeon General's
      Report came out.  And you saw the news coverage
      of the Surgeon General's Report and so did
      Mrs. Pollari and Mr. Pollari.
          Here's the testimony.  "You remember seeing
      the media coverage of the Surgeon General's
      Report in '64?
          "Yes.
          "It was big news, right?
          "Yes.
          "You saw it -- you had a television.
          "Yes.
          "Would it have been your normal practice to
      have spoken to your husband about something like
      that?
          "Yes.
          "But that would have been a normal
      conversation for you and your husband to have,
      right?
          "Yes.
          "About that time your husband began to try,
      at least make those quitting gestures of
      throwing away his cigarettes, throwing away his ashtrays, throwing away his" --
          But she said an hour later he'd light up
      again.
          Do the Pollaris know that the Surgeon
      General has determined that smoking presents the
      risk of lung cancer?  Sure.
          '64 Surgeon General's Report came out,
      Mrs. Pollari told Mr. Pollari, this is her
      statement to him:  "When the Surgeon General's
      Report came out, you were worried about his
      health, weren't you?
          "Yes.
          "You said to him you wanted him to stop
      smoking because you wanted him around for a long
      time, didn't you?
          "Yes.
          "You were worried that his smoking would
      shorten his life span?
          "Yes."
          Yes.  She said absolutely, no question about
      it.
          But her and his awareness doesn't stop
      there.  We know that around this time he
      switched from his Camels to Kools.  Did he ever
      discuss with his wife why he was switching to Kools?  No.  We have no idea.
          1966 the first warning went on the packs of
      cigarettes.  It said, "Caution:  Cigarette
      smoking may be hazardous to your health."  That
      was big news.  It was on every package of Kools
      that Mr. Pollari bought and smoked.
      Mrs. Pollari remembers the warnings, the '66
      warnings.  She told Mr. Pollari that smoking was
      hazardous to his health just like it said on the
      package.
          "Yes.
          "He didn't deny that, did he?
          "No.
          Mr. Pollari, "He didn't tell you he thought
      cigarettes were safe in the mid '60s when he was
      making these quit-smoking gestures, did he?
          "No.
          This is Mr. Pollari's smoking decisions.
      This is Mr. Pollari's life.
          How about the public service announcements?
          Bill Talman.
          Let me put this down.  It's a mixed blessing
      to have these boards.
          Here's that Bill Talman public service
      announcement.  I don't want to play the whole thing, just a little tiny bit.  Y'all remember.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  This is the house we live in.
          This is Billy.  He's pretty handy to have
      around.
          Steve, home from college.
          Barbie, looking after her brother Timmy.
          Debbie --
          (Video clip was stopped.)
          MR. REILLY:  That's enough.  You remember
      this.  This is the one where he says, hey, I
      don't want to lose this fight.  I've got lung
      cancer.  If you don't smoke, don't start.  If
      you smoke, quit.  Don't be a loser like me.
          Did they see that public service
      announcement?  Absolutely they did.  Did they
      talk about that public service announcement?
      You bet.
          They watched the Bill Talman public service
      announcement and talked about it.
          "Do you remember that?
          "Yes.
          "In fact, you and your husband saw it --
      that ad together, didn't you?           "You talked about it.
          "And it was upsetting to both of you, wasn't
      it?
          "Very."  Very.
          Does this sound like a gentleman who was
      being influenced by the tobacco industry, by
      Philip Morris, by RJ Reynolds, by ads in
      magazines or on television?
          Mr. and Mrs. Pollari told their children,
      don't smoke, it's dangerous.  You know, you
      don't even have to listen to what he says to his
      wife; you can listen to what he says to his
      children.
          "When your children were growing up you told
      your children don't smoke, didn't you?
          "You told them, it's dangerous, I don't want
      you to do it, it can be very hard for you to
      quit."  I don't care whether you call it an
      addiction or habit, very hard to quit.
          "You told them all that stuff, didn't you?
          "Yes.
          "And so did your husband, didn't he?
          "Yes."
          This is the story.
          Mr. Pollari is still making those quitting gestures but he's not quitting.  Those PSAs
      continue to run.  By the end of the '60s there
      are 30 million ex-smokers here in this country,
      according to their expert Dr. Proctor.
          The '70s.
          1970 there's a new warning on the packs of
      cigarettes.  You know, some people might ignore
      the warnings, but not the Pollaris.  Here is
      Mrs. Pollari remembering that the 1970 pack
      warning changed and she talked about it with
      Mr. Pollari.
          And I said, "So he was completely familiar
      with this change in the warnings, wasn't he?
          "Yes."
          1971, you heard that the tobacco companies,
      the cigarette manufacturers, took -- voluntarily
      took all cigarette advertising off of
      television.  That was said to you I think just
      yesterday, maybe the day before.  Mrs. Pollari
      remembers that.  This was big news, too.  And so
      did Mr. Pollari.
          By 1970 -- "You moved in 1971."  This is
      when they moved to Florida, right.
          "...all the advertising for cigarettes on
      television stopped, didn't it? "Yes.
          "And you observed that it stopped.
          "Yes.
          "And you knew why"...
          "Because cigarettes were known to be
      dangerous and that's why they were taken off the
      air as ads or television programs, right?
          "Yes.
          "And you talked to your husband about it and
      you said, hey, look, they've taken ads off of
      TV, haven't they?
          "Yes.
          "And he understood why the ads were taken
      off TV too, didn't he?"
          What was the answer?  You know the answer.
      The answer was "yes."  The answer was yes.
          That warning in 1972 went on all the
      remaining print advertising, whether it was a
      billboard, a magazine, a newspaper, that same
      warning was right there.
          They've now moved to Florida.  Mr. Pollari
      changes brands to Marlboro Reds.  Any testimony
      about why he changed to Marlboro Reds?  No.  No.
      Something that Philip Morris said about
      Marlboros?  No.  No testimony about that. Mr. Pollari is working as a butcher in
      various small grocery stores.
          1978, that was a very interesting year
      because that's the year that their daughter
      Claudia was diagnosed by the doctor with very
      severe allergies.  And the doctor said, your
      daughter shouldn't be around smoke, shouldn't be
      around smoke.
          Now, two things happen in 1978, or right in
      that time frame, the Pollaris decide that there
      will be no more smoking in the house.
      Mr. Pollari begins to smoke outside.  And that
      is the same time when Mrs. Pollari begins to
      smoke herself.  She's 42 years old and she
      begins to smoke socially with her husband when
      he's -- he's still making those quitting
      gestures when you're snagging cigarettes from
      him.
          Yes.
          She said, Well, I only smoke socially.
          I said, "So you say socially.  What kind of
      social event would it be where you would snag a
      cigarette from him?
          Oh, "if we were sitting outside, you know,
      just like that." "Out on your patio?
          "Yes.
          "All right.  So if the two of you were just
      sitting outside at the end of the day and he was
      smoking a cigarette you would say, give me one
      of those too, something like that.
          "Yes.
          "All right.  And he would give you one.
          "Yes.
          "And then you would smoke together.
          "Yes."
          Now, ladies and gentlemen, you've got to ask
      yourself, 42 years of age, you've told your
      children, don't smoke, smoking is dangerous, it
      can be very hard to quit once you start, and
      what you've been telling us is that your husband
      has been trying, seriously trying to quit for
      all these years and now you're asking him for
      cigarettes and smoking with him.
          One of the pleasures that people have from
      smoking is the social aspect of smoking.  So not
      only can it relax you, not only can it help you
      deal with stress, but people smoke because it's
      a social thing to do.  And there you have
      testimony from Mrs. Pollari about her deciding at age 42 to smoke.
          That same year is when the Pollaris meet
      their future daughter-in-law Cindy, and Cindy's
      dad had died a year or two or three earlier of
      lung cancer from smoking.  And Cindy came and
      told you that Mr. Pollari knew that her dad had
      died from lung cancer from smoking.
          Yes.  Yes.  That's Cindy's testimony.
          The next year -- so does Mr. Pollari know
      that if he continues to smoke he's running the
      risk of developing lung cancer?  Of course.
      That is undeniable.  At this juncture that is
      flat undeniable.
          That same year -- or the next year, sorry,
      1979, he went to work for Albertsons.  And you
      know that they had that very serious no smoking
      policy.  You guys asked a great question about
      whether it was complete, you couldn't smoke on
      the premises anywhere, or could you take a smoke
      break, could you go outside in the parking lot.
      Mrs. Pollari I don't think knew the exact
      limits, but one thing is for sure, Mr. Pollari
      couldn't smoke on the job and that meant, what
      did she say, he worked an eight-hour day and he
      worked five days a week.  Now he's going to work from 1979 to 1982 until he gets fired not for
      smoking on the job, but because poor work
      performance.  So he's going to work for three
      years with no problem complying with whatever
      the exact limits of smoking were.
          Let's go to the '80s.
          And by the way, here in the '70s that's
      when -- what's coming up is this idea that
      Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds said something
      about you ought to smoke lights or low-tar
      cigarettes because they're safer.  They're not
      going to show you an ad, there are no ads where
      Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds put an ad on
      television like Cindy thinks she remembers.  You
      know who put the ads on television recommending
      that people, if you're going to continue to
      smoke, smoke a lower tar and nicotine cigarette?
      It was the American Cancer Society, the public
      health organizations.  And you'll remember this
      ad because you saw it.
          Could you play just a little of that James
      Earl Jones.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  Before we begin, a few moments of silence for people who are still smoking.
          Now, if you're still smoking, here's the
      next thing to think about:  Just how bad is your
      cigarette?  It matters quite a lot.  You see,
      bad as they all are, some are worse.  There are
      118 different kinds and brands of cigarettes.
      Short ones, long ones, longer than longs, cotton
      filters, air filters, activated charcoal filters
      and some with no filters at all.  You can buy
      yourself all kinds of trouble.  Up to 31
      milligrams of tar, up to 2.2 milligrams of
      nicotine, the least you could do, and goodness
      knows it isn't much, is get a low-tar and
      nicotine cigarette and cut down.
          Here's the tar and nicotine list.  Send for
      it.  It's free.  Get to know your enemy before
      you strike a match.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. REILLY:  Let's go to the '80s.  In spite
      of the recommendations of -- or the admonishment
      of their parents their daughter Claudia began
      smoking around 1980.  Remember I said that part
      of the pleasure of smoking is the social aspect
      of it.  Remember that Mr. Pollari was fired from
      Albertsons in 1982.  He opened his own fish market that same year, 1982, and there he and
      his daughter worked and they smoked in their own
      fish market together.  Now, he could smoke as
      much as he wanted because he owned the place,
      right?  So now he and his daughter are smoking
      together in the fish market.
          You remember -- we'll get to it here in a
      little bit, but you remember their world-class
      expert Dr. Drobes said that one of the telltale
      signs for him that Mr. Pollari must have been
      addicted was because he was taking the risk, the
      health risks of filleting fish while he was
      smoking.  And so I asked Mrs. Pollari whether or
      not Mr. Pollari thought it was dangerous for him
      to be smoking and filleting fish since he was an
      expert meat cutter.  And I said, "Did your
      husband ever hurt himself smoking and cutting
      fish?
          "No.
          "Did he ever report to you that it was
      dangerous for him to be smoking and filleting
      fish?
          "No.
          He was an expert meat cutter, wasn't he?
          "Yes. "I mean, very talented.
          "Yes.
          "And it's what he loved to do."
          Did Mr. Pollari control his smoking when it
      was required to do so?  Absolutely.  He goes
      back to work -- he closes Pisces.  He goes back
      to work at Albertsons where they have that
      restricted policy, right?
          1983 he went to that smoking-cessation
      seminar.
          Any chance going to that smoking-cessation
      seminar that Mr. Pollari has any doubts about
      whether or not smoking presents a health risks
      for him?  The testimony was that when he went to
      that no-smoking -- I'm sorry, when he went to
      that seminar that they showed him pictures of
      blackened lungs and they made him smoke a whole
      bunch of cigarettes in a row to make him hate
      cigarettes, right.  They were telling him how
      dangerous cigarettes were to convince him to
      quit smoking.
          Come on.
          All right.  You heard about him talking with
      Dr. Bonnano, the gynecologist, and Dr. Bonnano
      telling him, don't smoke, smoking is dangerous for you.  But Mr. Pollari didn't ask Dr. Bonnano
      to assist him in any way in quitting smoking.
          Mrs. Pollari said that she was subscribing
      to the Sun Sentinel, seeing articles in the
      paper about the health risks of smoking and
      pointing them out to her husband.
          "You would point those out to your husband,
      wouldn't you?
          "Yes."
          They saw the Yul Brynner public service
      announcement.
          Can you just -- I don't want to play it all,
      just a tiny bit just to refresh everybody's
      recollection.
          (Video clip was played and taken down to the
best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
          VOICE:  Ladies and gentlemen, the late Yul
      Brynner.
          VOICE:  I really wanted to make a commercial
      when I discovered that I was that sick and my
      time was so...
          (Video clip stopped.)
          MR. REILLY:  You guys remember it.  Was that
      impactful?  Sure.  Sure.
          Mrs. Pollari said right about the time of the Yul Brynner public service announcement in
      1986 that's when she decided, you know what, I'm
      not going to smoke anymore.  She had now been
      smoking with Mr. Pollari for about, what, eight
      years, eight years of snagging cigarettes
      whenever she wanted to and smoking with him.
          And now she said, "You talked with
      Mr. Alvarez about the Yul Brynner public service
      announcement.
          "Yes.
          "You and your husband both saw it together.
          "Yes.
          "Do you remember that it aired in about
      1986?
          "Uh-huh.
          "And that's the time you quit smoking.
          "Yes.
          "And I'm asking you whether or not that
      public service announcement influenced your
      decision to never smoke --
          "It could, yes.
          " -- again.  Pardon?
          "I said, it could, yes.
          "All right.  You talked with Mr. Pollari
      about the public service announcement. "Yes."
          What happens?
          Several things happen.  Mrs. Pollari said
      she didn't know that her son Richard smoked
      until she went to his wedding, because he lived
      at home until right then.  He lived at home
      until he got married.  And then when he moves
      into his own home, he begins to smoke at his own
      home.  And what's he smoking?  Marlboro Reds.
          So what do he and his dad smoke together?
      Because they do smoke together.  They both smoke
      Marlboro Reds.
          Mrs. Pollari and Cindy both remember that
      Mr. Pollari was smoking Marlboro Reds at Richard
      and Cindy's wedding in 1986.  Cindy stated that
      Mr. Pollari switched to Marlboro Lights in '87,
      '88, '89 and '90.
          "Do you know whether it was the same year or
      the next year or the year after that?
          "I don't recall.  It was shortly sometime
      after, whether it was a year, within a year or
      two.
          "So it may have been '87, it may have been
      '88.
          "Correct. "It might have been '89.
          "Correct.
          "All right.  Could it have been '90?
          "I don't know."  I don't know.
          We do know that from a photograph or two
      that they showed you that at some point
      Mr. Pollari was smoking Marlboro Lights.  And
      this is the discussion.
          Here's Mrs. Pollari under oath.
          "All right.  Because sitting here today you
      actually don't remember talking to your husband
      about why he switched to Marlboro Lights, do
      you?"
          You can see her answer, "I don't recall."  I
      don't recall.
          And Mr. Alvarez read another part of the
      transcript where Mr. McPharlin asked her, Did
      anybody know your husband better than you?
          No, nobody knew her husband better than her.
          But I asked her flat out, Did you ever talk
      to your husband about why he switched to
      Marlboro Lights?  I mean a direct question, not
      an indirect, Did anybody know him better than
      you?  And that was her answer, "I don't recall."
          Cindy said Mr. Pollari knew that his cigarettes were unsafe and dangerous.
          I asked her flat out, Mr. Pollari knew that
      his cigarettes were unsafe.
          "Yes.
          "He knew that they were dangerous.
          "Yes."
          Cindy stated that Mr. Pollari knew that
      Marlboro Lights were still going to be dangerous
      and hoped that they would be a little less
      dangerous.
          "And he knew that Marlboro Lights were still
      going to be dangerous.
          "Yes.
          "All he was hoping was that maybe they'd be
      a little less dangerous.
          "Yes."
          But then Cindy noticed that Mr. Pollari was
      smoking more after he switched to Marlboro
      Lights and she told him about it.
          She said, hey, you're smoking more
      cigarettes.  You are defeating the purpose of
      switching to a lower tar and nicotine cigarette.
      "That's the kind of conversation you had, isn't
      it?
          "Yes." Was this some secret to Mr. Pollari?
      Absolutely not.
          All right.  Let's go to the '90s because
      we're about through with our walk.  He got fired
      in 1990.  He had worked for Albertsons for, what
      is that now, seven years.  You know, if you
      worked for a company and you spend 2,000 hours
      that's a 40-hour work week, he's now spent, I
      don't know, 2400, 2500 hours working at
      Albertsons following their rules, not violating
      them.  And, yeah, he messes up three times and
      he gets fired.  What does he do?  Does he go
      home and say:  Mrs. Pollari, I can't hack it; I
      can't work in an environment where I can't
      smoke; I'm not capable of controlling my
      smoking?  No.  He turns right around and goes to
      work at Winn-Dixie where they have the same kind
      of policy, the same kind of policy.
          There it is.  In that same time frame --
      Mrs. Pollari couldn't remember exactly when --
      Mr. Pollari did talk with Dr. George about the
      patch, but she said it didn't go any further
      than just talk.
          Was he really serious about quitting and
      quitting for good?  Really?  That's her testimony.
          Here's some general information.
      Mrs. Pollari would tell Mr. Pollari smoking was
      dangerous and he did not deny it or say
      cigarettes were safe.  I asked her flat out,
      "And you would say, hey, look, it says right
      here, smoking is dangerous, right?
          "Yes.
          "And he wouldn't deny it, did he?
          "No.
          "He wouldn't say, oh, no, that's wrong,
      they're safe, I'm fine.  He didn't do that, did
      he?
          "No."
          The conversation with Cindy I just read to
      you.  Here is -- I mean, this is flat out
      direct.  I asked her, "He didn't say, oh, the
      cigarette company's telling me it's okay.  I've
      seen ads for Marlboro.  He didn't tell you, I've
      seen an ad for Marlboro, these are safe, I'm
      okay, did he?
          "No."
          What was her answer flat out?  No.
          Now I'm going to take you right to the
      verdict form because that's where we are. Before I get there, though, I want to show you
      instruction number 18.  Because I think it
      speaks volumes about -- so what do we know about
      Mr. Pollari and Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds?
      Well, we know that he bought cigarettes
      manufactured and sold and advertised by
      Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds.
          And instruction number 18 tells you, this is
      the law, this is the law that Judge Murphy has
      given you, "The manufacture, advertisement and
      sale of cigarettes are lawful activities.  The
      defendants cannot be held liable merely for
      manufacturing, selling or advertising
      cigarettes."
          He also has given you instruction number 19.
      It says, "The warning labels placed on cigarette
      packs by Reynolds and Philip Morris comply with
      the federal law.  Philip Morris and Reynolds and
      other tobacco companies have no obligation to
      place any additional warnings on their cigarette
      packages further as long as the cigarette packs
      bear the federally-mandated warnings.  Cigarette
      advertising after July 1, 1969 cannot be the
      subject of any claim that the advertising
      undermined or neutralized the warnings or made them less effective."
          That's the law, ladies and gentlemen.
          Not only that, did you -- in that walk
      through Mr. Pollari's life was there ever any
      intersection between Mr. Pollari, I mean really
      Mr. Pollari, not the American public, not things
      spoken out in general, not programs, not clips
      from programs on Nightline or things of that
      nature, things that Mr. Pollari actually saw
      that you heard Mr. Pollari actually saw actually
      influenced him?  Because that's the testimony.
          All right.  So what's the first question?
      Mr. Alvarez correctly read it to you and he
      correctly stated that there are four pieces to
      this first question.  Was Mr. Pollari addicted
      to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so,
      was the nicotine a legal cause of death by
      primary lung cancer?
          So there are four questions there.  Was he
      addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?
      That's one.
          If so, was such addiction a legal cause of
      death by primary lung cancer?  So there's...
          Third question is, did it cause his death?
          And the fourth question was, was his death by primary lung cancer?
          Ursula is going to talk to you about 3 and
      4.  I'm just going to talk to you about 1 and 2.
          And it's true that neither Ursula nor I
      brought a separate addiction expert here because
      when I gave you my opening statement I said,
      look, we appreciate your time as jurors and I
      promise to use your time efficiently.  And when
      I got through cross-examining Dr. Drobes, I knew
      that what I wanted to do with you guys in
      connection with this first question and the
      second question was to simply walk through what
      I established in cross-examining Dr. Drobes and
      then let you guys decide.
          It's true that Judge Murphy doesn't give you
      a definition of addiction.  And he doesn't give
      you a criteria for determining whether or not
      Mr. Pollari was addicted or not.  It is for you
      guys to decide.
          But when I was cross-examining Dr. Drobes, I
      said, hey, he has been -- Dr. Drobes referred to
      NIDA, the National Institute --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Excuse me, Mr. Reilly.  I'm
      sorry.  I apologize.
          I have an objection about this demonstrative.  If we could just approach.  I
      apologize.
          THE COURT:  Sure.  No problem.
          Counsel, do you have a copy of the
      demonstrative?
          MS. HENNINGER:  Yeah, I've got it.
          (A discussion was held off the record.)
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Judge, I worked it out with
      Mr. Reilly.
          MR. REILLY:  You need to stop the clock.
          THE COURT:  It's running, Mr. Reilly.
          MR. REILLY:  I'm only kidding.
          So what happened?  NIDA, the National
      Institute on Drug Abuse, they have definition of
      addiction, they have statements that they make
      about how you determine whether someone is
      addicted or not, right.  Well, here's what they
      said and this is what I cross-examined
      Dr. Drobes with.  I said, look, NIDA says that
      there has to be a distinction between physical
      dependence and addiction, right, because
      physical dependence is not addiction.  I said,
      NIDA says you specifically -- it specifically
      provides that just being physically dependent is
      not addiction.  That's in NIDA's definition. Just having withdrawals or cravings doesn't
      mean someone is addicted.  In order to determine
      whether someone is addicted or not you need to
      look at more criteria, and they recommend the
      Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-5.  And that's
      exactly what Dr. Drobes spent a great deal of
      his time going through and what I spent a great
      deal of time talking about on cross-examination
      with him.
          And you remember he said, well, in order to
      satisfy -- he said, hey, I never use this.  I'm
      not a clinical psychologist who treats patients.
      He's a researcher.  But he walked through it and
      he gave you the reasons why, and he said, you
      know, you've got to have six of these, you've
      got to satisfy six of these in order to actually
      be addicted under the DSM-5.
          And so what I did was I wrote on this board
      the things that he said for eight of them.  One,
      two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight.  I
      said, let's take a look at how you decided that
      he met those criteria.
          The first one it says, assumes -- I'm sorry.
      First one is "tobacco taken in larger amounts
      and over longer period of time than intended." He said, I admit that I have no idea how long
      Mr. Pollari intended when he began smoking to
      continue smoking.  He said, but many young
      people when we interview them they don't have an
      idea of how long they're going to smoke.  So I
      gave him that one.  So he had no basis to give
      him that one because Mr. Pollari never said how
      long he intended to smoke.
          The third one, number 3, "great deal of time
      spent on activities necessary to obtain or use
      tobacco."  Well, there wasn't any time taken in
      obtaining tobacco, but he said, look, the guy
      smokes a lot.  And Mr. Alvarez said, hey, he
      smoked a lot.  So he spent hours a day smoking.
      And he did spend hours a day smoking, but is
      that really what this calls for, really?
      Because what he's doing when he's smoking if
      he's working and smoking if he's cutting fish,
      filleting fish, what's he really doing?  He's
      really filleting fish.  He's really working,
      right.  So does that really satisfy number 3?
      That's up to you guys.
          But what we do know is that he could also go
      for long periods of time without smoking,
      without smoking at all.  Number 4, did he have craving or strong desire or urge to use tobacco?
      On direct examination Dr. Drobes said that when
      he gave his deposition he said, I don't have
      enough information to meet that criteria so he
      didn't give it to him, but when he came here to
      trial with no new information he said, oh, no,
      I've changed my mind.  He meets it.  I've
      thought about it some more, he meets it.
          How about number 5, "recurring use resulting
      in failure to fill major role obligations at
      work, school or home"?  He said that comes from
      being fired.  Did he pay any attention to the
      fact that he spent all those years not having a
      problem?  Nope.
          Number 6, "continued use despite persistent
      or recurrent social or interpersonal problems
      caused or exacerbated by effects of tobacco."
      What Dr. Drobes said was that he concluded that
      there was tension in the household because
      Mrs. Pollari wanted him to quit and he didn't.
          Did Mrs. Pollari come here and say that to
      you guys?  No, absolutely not.  As a matter of
      fact, what did Mrs. Pollari end up doing?
      Snagging cigarettes and smoking with him.  But
      the doctor concluded that he satisfied that one too.
          Mr. Pollari couldn't attend church, eat out
      at restaurants or attend a movie because he
      needed to smoke.
          I asked Mrs. Pollari about that and she
      said, oh, he could attend mass without a
      problem.  What he didn't like doing was going to
      Confirmation or First Holy Communion.  He had
      three children.  He had three Confirmations,
      three First Holy Communions.
          I said, well, did he go?
          Oh, yeah, he went to all of them.
          So how in the world did he satisfy that?
          And I asked, Did he go to restaurants?
          Yes.
          Did he go to movies?
          She said, you know, he didn't smoke in
      movies after no smoking was allowed in movies,
      but we would go to the movies.
          So did he really satisfy that?  No.
          This is the best one, probably.  Number 8.
      "Recurrent use in situations in which it is
      physically hazardous."
          There he is.  Hazardous?  No.
          He said, look, the guy was cutting fish and smoking.  And his daughter Claudia said that was
      dangerous in her deposition, right?  And you saw
      what happened when I asked Mrs. Pollari about
      that.
          And finally, he said he meets the withdrawal
      criteria even though he never even walked
      through the withdrawal criteria.
          So you guys have to decide for yourselves
      does he really meet these criteria?
          Here's the testimony.  Oops, I think I took
      the verdict form down.
          Just so you see it.
          He could sit through a meal without leaving
      to smoke?
          Cindy remembers Mr. Pollari would sit
      through the family dinners without smoking, he
      would have a cigarette after dinner with her
      husband.  And he could sit through a regular
      Catholic mass without smoking.  There it all is.
          So what's the answer to this question?
      Well, you guys have to decide whether in light
      of what NIDA says that having cravings or having
      withdrawal or both doesn't make you addicted.
      And I asked Dr. Drobes whether or not under the
      DSM criteria 50 percent of the daily regular smokers don't -- aren't addicted.  He disagreed
      with it, but he said, yeah, that's what they
      concluded.  For him virtually every regular
      daily smoker was addicted.  Everybody.  So did
      he find Mr. Pollari to be addicted?  Of course
      he did.
          You guys have to decide whether he's
      addicted or not.  But even if you unanimously,
      and it has to be unanimous, even if you did, you
      then are only halfway down with the addiction
      question, you have to find that addiction was a
      legal cause of why he developed lung cancer.
      And you've got a big instruction about legal
      cause.
          What's it require?  It requires that you
      guys find that if he was addicted his addiction
      was so substantial cause of why he continued to
      smoke that it's what they call -- what Judge
      Murphy calls a "but for" reason, that, frankly,
      he couldn't control his smoking.  He smoked
      involuntarily.  But for addiction he would have
      quit and quit and avoided getting an illness and
      dying.  That's their burden of proof.  Have they
      satisfied you about that in this case?  There's
      no more evidence.  Right now have they satisfied you about that?  Because if they haven't then
      the answer to this question is no.  If they
      didn't satisfy you that he was addicted the
      answer is no.  If they didn't satisfy you that
      addiction was the legal cause of death the
      answer is no.
          And Ursula, when she gets through talking to
      you, if they didn't satisfy you that either he
      had a primary lung cancer or that was the cause
      of why he died, then the answer to this first
      question is no.  And, frankly, some of you might
      say, well, I don't think he was addicted.
      Others might say, I don't think addiction was
      the legal cause.  And others might say, I don't
      think it was primary lung cancer.  And others
      might say, I don't think that's why he died.  It
      doesn't matter.  But collectively you have to
      unanimously decide whether the answer to that
      whole question is yes.  And if you unanimously
      don't decide that the answer to that question is
      yes then the answer is no and you can go home.
      And that's that.
          All right.  Let me go through the rest of
      the verdict form.
          Only if you all answer every aspect of that question yes do you go on.  And it asks -- the
      second question is whether or not cigarettes
      manufactured by Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds
      were a legal cause of Mr. Pollari's death.  The
      only way that could be true would be if you
      found that cigarette smoking cigarettes
      manufactured by Philip Morris were a "but for"
      reason why he developed lung cancer and died, if
      that's what you conclude, but I don't think you
      will.  Same for Reynolds.  So let's drop down to
      number 3.
          Only if you've answered all these questions
      yes do you even get to number 3.  Please state
      the percentage of any fault that was a legal
      cause of Mr. Pollari's death that you charge to
      Reynolds, Philip Morris and Mr. Pollari.
          In light of that personal story, I saw that
      Mr. Alvarez wrote down 5 percent of the
      responsibility is on the shoulders of
      Mr. Pollari.  Ladies and gentlemen, was there
      anybody else in the mirror every day when
      Mr. Pollari woke up, like everybody does, looked
      in the mirror and decided how he was going to
      live his life that day?  Really and truly?  Is
      there somebody else that was responsible for how he took care of his body?  Really?
          Of course I leave these numbers to your
      sound discretion, but really and truly in light
      of all that history Mr. Alvarez said, oh, a
      12-year -- Mr. Pollari wasn't making -- didn't
      stop making decisions when he was 12.  He made
      decisions about smoking his entire life.
          So really and truly when you have a history
      of awareness like that, is there a number here
      that isn't 100 percent?  Isn't 90 percent -- I
      mean, really and truly.  But I leave that to
      your sound discretion.  You have good judgment.
          THE COURT:  Approximately 10 minutes,
      Counsel.
          MR. REILLY:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Only going to say one thing about the total
      damages.  Mr. Alvarez said 11 million dollars.
      Ladies and gentlemen, that's $100,000 a year for
      110 years, 110 years.
          Let's look at these fraud questions.  I told
      you the story.  What they have to show is that
      something that Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds said
      or did was relied on to his detriment, and after
      May 5, 1982.  Anywhere in that whole story was
      there any indication that Mr. Pollari was relying on anything that Philip Morris said or
      didn't say or Reynolds said or didn't say?
          It not only has to be relied on, but it has
      to have been so important that but for it he
      would have quit smoking and quit in time to
      avoid dying.  That's their burden of proof.  You
      get a big old instruction about it.  It includes
      the concept of legal cause.
          Here's legal cause.  It has to have had a
      direct -- he not only has to have seen it but it
      has to have had a substantial impact on his
      decisions about smoking.  How substantial?  But
      for it he wouldn't have smoked, he would have
      quit, never started, would have quit.  He would
      have avoided getting lung cancer.
          Same for this agreement question.  What are
      the answers to these questions?  In light of
      that story, they're all no.  And for goodness
      sakes, after May 5th, 1982 in light of the story
      that I showed you, the answer is clearly no.
          All right.  Finally, you have to answer the
      question, and you only answer the question, this
      question if you've answered questions 5 and 7 or
      5, 6, 7 and 8 yes.  Otherwise you don't go to
      these questions at all. Are punitive damages warranted against
      Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds?  Obviously that
      was a huge focus of Mr. Alvarez's.  That's where
      he'd like you to go, punitive damages.  Get
      there any way you can.
          In these instructions you get told it can
      only relate to some wrong that was done to
      Mr. Pollari.  And they have to carry their
      burden of clear and convincing, which is a much
      higher standard than the regular standard, which
      I already showed you they didn't qualify for
      that.
          Some of the things they criticized.
      Dr. Proctor said you ought to make cigarettes
      that are uninhalable, you ought to make
      cigarettes that have no nicotine.  Well,
      Philip Morris made cigarettes that have no
      nicotine.  You just heard Dr. Farone, the guy
      that got fired from Philip Morris, say
      cigarettes ought to be nicotine free.  Well,
      nonaddicting, there they are.  Guess what?  They
      didn't sell.  Nobody wants them.  And the public
      health community criticized Philip Morris for
      even making them.
          Filters.  Do filters work?  Here's the International Agency for the Research of Cancer.
      They say filters do reduce the health risks of
      smoking.  They reduce the health risks of
      smoking for lung cancer, for pharyngeal cancer,
      for esophageal cancer.  Now, there's not
      complete agreement within the public health
      community about whether they work or not, but
      there's the world's largest medical
      organization, the World Health Organization
      covers the whole world.  And they say yeah.
          Bill Farone, Dr. Farone, said, yeah, they
      actually make a safer cigarette.  This is a
      highly filtered cigarette.  He said, they don't
      spike cigarettes with nicotine.  That stuff
      about polonium, here's the Surgeon General in
      1971 saying in reported levels polonium-210
      isn't causing anybody any harm.
          How about the pH, that idea that
      manipulating nicotine by adjusting the pH
      actually makes them more potent in terms of
      nicotine?  Here's the Surgeon General in 1979
      and 1983 saying, hey, look, that's what was
      called the unprotonated or what they call
      freebase nicotine.  Here's the Surgeon General
      way back 30, 40 years ago saying, hey, there's only protonated nicotine in smoke.  There it is
      right there twice.
          This is no -- how about the end of the
      Tobacco Working Group?  They were really
      critical -- Dr. Proctor who wants uninhalable
      nicotine-free cigarettes that no one will ever
      buy and no public health organization has ever
      endorsed his uninhalable nicotine-free
      cigarettes.  He was critical of Philip Morris
      and RJ Reynolds' involvement in the Tobacco
      Working Group yet here's Dr. Farone who worked
      at Philip Morris who testifies against
      Philip Morris saying he was in favor of the
      Tobacco Working Group and he thought -- "you
      went to Philip Morris, you thought it was a good
      thing.
          "I thought the process was good, yes."
          All right.  So what's the answer to this
      last question?  The answer is no, there is no
      reason to be awarding punitive damages in this
      case.
          All right, ladies and gentlemen, that ends
      my closing argument.  Obviously you've been very
      attentive for me.  I greatly appreciate it.  I'm
      going to sit down now and Ursula is going to get       up and make her presentation.  And then you
      understand that Mr. McPharlin has an opportunity
      to talk to you for I think as much as 30
      minutes.  So I don't know what he's going to
      say.  He's probably going to criticize
      Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds some more.
          But just ask yourself, you've heard the
      story now of Mr. Pollari.  Where does
      Philip Morris and where does RJ Reynolds and
      whatever he's complaining about fit into the
      real story of Mr. Pollari?
          Thanks.
          THE COURT:  Counsel, thank you.
          Ladies and gentlemen, my understanding is
      that Ms. Henninger needs a minute to set up.  So
      we're going to take a short recess.
          Remember the admonition.  You are not to
      discuss the case.  Don't form any opinion about
      the case.  Don't allow anyone to discuss the
      case in your presence.
          Just leave your notepads and your jury
      instructions on your chairs.  We'll be back with
      you shortly.  Thank you.


          MS. HENNINGER:  Thank you.
          Counsel.
          Mrs. Pollari.
          Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
          Well, guess what, I'm not last today because
      there's one more after me.  So this is really
      the first time I've had an opportunity to talk
      with you and I'm not last and I'm very excited
      about it.  I'm going to try to slow down
      because, as you guys know, I can be a very fast
      talker.
          And I want to start kind of where I started
      with opening statements that this is
      Mr. Pollari's case.  It's not a case about
      smokers in general.  It's not the Engle class
      action.
          And remember when I came in here and did
      opening statements, I told you that every
      question on the verdict form would have
      Mr. Pollari's name in it.  And it does.  When
      you get the verdict form, his name appears in
      all of these questions except for the last one, and that's because it's his case.
          Now, I also did something in opening
      statements; I told you that there were five key
      facts, and I used this very same board, if you
      remember.  And these five facts I told you the
      evidence would show, and it did show these five
      key facts, and these facts answer every question
      you have to answer or will help you answer every
      question you have to answer in this case on the
      verdict form.
          So let me remind you of what these are.
          Mr. Pollari did not start smoking because of
      anything RJ Reynolds or Philip Morris said or
      did.  Mr. Pollari knew that smoking was
      dangerous and addictive decades before May 5th,
      1982.  Despite knowing smoking was dangerous,
      Mr. Pollari continued to smoke.
          Plaintiff cannot prove that Mr. Pollari had
      primary lung cancer.
          And Mr. Pollari died with cancer, not
      because of cancer.
          We started out there and I wanted to start
      out here today.  And I'm going to walk through
      the verdict form in this case.  I'm not going to
      repeat things Mr. Reilly said.  He did a good job going through the evidence in this case, but
      as he told you, I have some special issues to
      talk about as well.
          So let's start with something that was told
      to you the very first day you walked through
      that door.  Mr. Alvarez told you that plaintiff
      has the burden of proof in this case.  And
      plaintiff has to prove -- meet her burden with
      evidence presented in this case, evidence about
      Mr. Pollari.
          Plaintiff failed, failed to prove her claims
      against RJ Reynolds.  Plaintiff failed to prove
      her claims against Philip Morris.
          Now, I'm going to run through just some
      quick slides that say some very bold statements
      that are important for you to remember when you
      go back and look at the verdict form and
      deliberate.
          There is no evidence that Mr. Pollari based
      any of his smoking decisions on anything
      RJ Reynolds or Philip Morris said or did.  As
      Mr. Reilly said, there's no intersection between
      the evidence you heard in this case and
      Mr. Pollari's life.
          Mr. Pollari quit smoking RJ Reynolds' cigarettes in 1971, 44 years ago.  RJ Reynolds'
      cigarettes did not cause Mr. Pollari's death.
      We're going to talk about that in a little bit.
      And for decades, you heard about some of the
      Philip Morris products, but you also heard
      Dr. Farone and Dr. Proctor talk about how
      RJ Reynolds has worked for decades and has spent
      more than 1 billion dollars trying to make a
      safer cigarette.
          Now, Mr. Reilly showed you this instruction.
      It's very important, because you may not like
      cigarettes.  You may not like cigarette
      advertising.  But they're legal.  And as
      Mr. Reilly told you, Philip Morris and RJ
      Reynolds cannot be held liable merely for
      selling, manufacturing or advertising
      cigarettes.
          So you might remember when I started my
      opening statement I said, you're going to hear a
      lot of evidence in this case and it's important
      to keep your eye on the ball.  So hopefully you
      remembered that.  Because I said, ask yourself
      as you hear the evidence, what does this have to
      do with Mr. Pollari?  Don't get distracted.
          Well, there were some distractions in this case related to cigarette design.  I want to
      talk about what those distractions were before I
      get into the verdict form.
          First, Dr. Proctor and Dr. Farone told you
      that despite everything they said about
      inhaleability, nicotine, freebase nicotine or
      ammonia they said that cigarettes are dangerous
      and addictive by nature.  They said that
      roll-your-own cigarettes and cigarettes from the
      1800s, before Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds ever
      existed, were just as dangerous and just as
      addictive as manufactured cigarettes.
          Inhaleability.  Both Dr. Farone and
      Dr. Proctor talked about inhaleability, but
      cigarettes were inhalable decades before
      RJ Reynolds or Philip Morris ever made a
      cigarette.  Cigarette inhaleability was never a
      secret.  It's been known since the 1860s.
          And, ladies and gentlemen, an uninhalable
      cigarette does exist.  It's called a cigar.
          Now, another distraction -- keep your eye on
      the ball -- youth marketing.  In Mr. Alvarez's
      closing he showed you a lot of documents from
      the '70s and '80s regarding youth marketing.
      But the fact of the matter is is that no one knows when Mr. Pollari became a regular smoker.
      And the first witness in this case, the very
      first witness to see him smoke, he was 22 years
      old.  The documents that you were shown about
      youth marketing were when Mr. Pollari was in his
      40s.  There's no evidence as to why he started
      to smoke and there's not even a shred of
      evidence as to what advertisements Mr. Pollari
      saw when he was a youth.
          There's no evidence that youth marketing had
      anything to do with Mr. Pollari.  Don't be
      distracted.
          So let's talk about the verdict form.  And
      the very first question on the verdict form is
      class membership.  You might remember these
      three hurdles.  I broke out in opening statement
      class membership into three components, medical
      causation, addiction, addiction causation.  I
      think Mr. Reilly broke out medical causation
      into cause of death and primary lung cancer.
      For the purposes of this argument I'm going to
      keep it into one box.  So there's three hurdles,
      three things plaintiffs must prove to get a yes
      on the first question, and they haven't been
      able to do that. So let's start with the first one.  This is
      one that I presented some evidence on recently,
      the last two days or last day of court, I
      believe, last two days.  Plaintiff failed to
      prove medical causation.  And in this plaintiff
      must prove that Mr. Pollari died from primary
      lung cancer that was caused by smoking
      cigarettes.  Plaintiff did not prove that
      Mr. Pollari had a cancer that started in his
      lungs.  Plaintiff did not prove that Mr. Pollari
      died as a result of primary lung cancer.
          What evidence did they provide to you?
          Well, you didn't see any medical record
      saying where the cancer started.  What you did
      see were two medical records, and you saw that
      Mr. Pollari was hospitalized for 13 days for
      reasons unrelated to his cancer.  You saw that
      he had an acute hemorrhage with a massive bleed
      days before he passed away.  And he was released
      from the hospital with an infection.  He goes
      home because he wants to go home, and he dies
      less than two days later.
          You got testimony from Dr. Abel, who is the
      doctor who signed the death certificate, but he
      doesn't remember Mr. Pollari.  He doesn't remember what he did to determine the cause of
      death, but he said he doesn't make house calls,
      he didn't see him after he left the hospital.
      He didn't say he talked to Mrs. Pollari to find
      out anything about how he died.  He checked out
      of the hospital and that's the last involvement
      Dr. Abel had.
          Now, plaintiff has the burden of proving her
      claims in this case.  And they brought you
      Dr. Abel.  And Mr. Alvarez talked about how he
      was involved in the care and treatment of
      Mrs. -- I mean, Mr. Pollari, and he was.
      There's no doubt his name is on the medical
      records.  But he doesn't remember a single thing
      about Mr. Pollari outside of what those medical
      records say, not a single thing.
          Now, Mr. Alvarez said that Dr. Abel was the
      only doctor to testify that he ever met Paul or
      Rose Pollari.  Well, he doesn't remember that.
      He also said that he was the only doctor to
      testify that diagnosed Mr. Pollari with any
      medical conditions.  He doesn't remember that.
      He said he's the only doctor to testify that he
      ever examined or provided treatment for
      Mr. Pollari. MR. ALVAREZ:  Excuse me, object to this
      demonstrative, Judge, where it says "where are
      they?"
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Take it down.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Can you take off the header,
      please?
          He said he was the only doctor to testify
      who was involved in trying to save Mr. Pollari's
      life.  He doesn't remember that.
          He said he was the only doctor to testify
      that had access to Mr. Pollari's medical
      records.  He doesn't remember that.  And he
      can't tell you what medical records he
      specifically had.
          Now, there were other doctors involved in
      the care and treatment of Mr. Pollari.  You see
      their names in the two medical records we have.
      You have the cytologist.  You have the
      radiologist.  You have the vascular surgeon.
      You have the thoracic surgeon.  There's another
      cytology.  Dr. Abel said there was probably a
      gastroenterologist and a radiation oncologist.
      Plaintiff has the burden of proof.  Maybe those
      doctors remember something.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Judge, I object to this.  It's inappropriate.
          THE COURT:  Thank you.  I'd sustain the
      objection.
          Let's move on, Counsel.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Now, plaintiff has the
      burden to prove, let's start first with primary
      lung cancer.  Because remember, there's two
      components to medical causation, primary lung
      cancer and cause of death, all right.  So it's
      crucial for you to remember that the defendants
      do not have any burden of proof in this case.
      There is not a burden for Philip Morris or
      RJ Reynolds to bring you evidence to prove or
      disprove that Mr. Pollari had this cancer or
      that cancer.
          Now, we did bring you some experts so that
      you could help understand what records we do
      have, and we have two.
          One is a cytology report.  So we brought you
      a pathologist, somebody who is trained to
      interpret and read cytology.
          The other record we have is related to a
      gastric hemorrhage, or gastric ulcer hemorrhage,
      so we brought your a gastroenterologist, the
      kind of doctor who actually treats those hemorrhages.
          And we're going to talk about what they had
      to say, but before we do there's one thing the
      experts, both Dr. Abel and Dr. Peterson agree on
      regarding the cancer; cancer is more likely to
      spread to the lung than to start there.  The
      majority of cancers found in the lung have
      spread to the lung from somewhere else.  Cancer
      from virtually any organ in the body can spread
      to the lung, and there are a number of cell
      types that can originate in the lung.
          And both doctors told you that neither of
      the two medical records we do have available to
      us in this case say the term "primary lung
      cancer."
          So the one record we have that relates to
      the cancer at all is the cytology report.  You
      guys have seen it.  You probably have it
      memorized because it says one thing.  It says
      poorly differentiated carcinoma non-oat cell
      type.  Both Dr. Abel and Dr. Peterson told you
      that's not a cell type of cancer.  Dr. Peterson
      said that tells us nothing about the primary
      site of the cancer.
          So let's look at what it does tell you. Dr. Peterson, a pathologist, an anatomical
      clinical pathologist, a forensic pathologist,
      the only doctor who came in here and told you,
      hey, I've taken training to read cells under a
      microscope.  Let me tell you what pathology is.
      Let me tell you what this cytology report says.
      And what he said is poorly differentiated
      carcinoma, it's simply another way of saying you
      can't determine the cell type.
          Poorly differentiated carcinoma is not, it
      is not the same thing as saying lung cancer.
      Non-oat cell cancers can arise in organs other
      than the lung and they commonly do.  And non-oat
      cell cancer is not, is not another way of saying
      lung cancer.
          Now, the objective evidence we have in this
      case is the -- are the physical records,
      something that you can actually look at.  And
      you'll have them.  They're the exhibits, and
      they'll go back with you to the jury room when
      you deliberate.
          Dr. Abel came in here, and he was the
      treating physician.  And he cared for
      Mr. Pollari.  There's no doubt about that.  But
      what's important to remember is he does not recall anything about his treatment of
      Mr. Pollari outside of the objective evidence,
      and the only objective evidence we have is the
      cytology report, the death certificate and the
      hospitalization, those lab reports.
          So because Dr. Abel doesn't have any
      objective evidence to support his opinions and
      tell you what he did exactly for Mr. Pollari he
      speculates and he says, I must have done these
      things because this was my normal standard and
      care.  But Dr. Abel didn't tell you
      specifically, I remember doing this to
      Mr. Pollari.  I remember giving him a CAT scan.
      I remember ruling out cancers in other places.
      He can't say that, and he didn't say that.
          Now, if you believe that Mr. Pollari had a
      primary lung cancer, there's still some other
      important things that you have to consider.
      Plaintiff did not bring you any evidence of what
      cell type of cancer was in Mr. Pollari's lungs.
      Plaintiff did not bring you any evidence that
      the cell type of cancer was one that's in those
      instructions you have, instruction number 11
      lists out the cancers that the Engle jury found
      were caused by smoking.  There's no evidence that Mr. Pollari had one of those.  And for that
      reason plaintiff cannot meet their burden of
      proof that Mr. Pollari had a primary lung
      cancer, much less a primary lung cancer caused
      by smoking.
          So let's move on and talk about the second
      component of medical causation or the hurdle,
      and that's the cause of death.
          Mr. Pollari died with cancer, not because of
      cancer.  And, again, remember, there is no
      burden on the defendants to prove that to you.
      In fact, the plaintiff has to prove that
      Mr. Pollari died because of cancer.
          Now, Mr. Pollari died less than two days --
      he went home on the 10th and on the -- oh,
      sorry.  He went home on the 8th and at 1:15 in
      the morning on the 10th he passes away, less
      than two days after being discharged from the
      hospital for a hemorrhage that was unrelated to
      his cancer.
          Now, what's more likely -- you've heard a
      lot in this case about statistics and
      generalities and the fact that 90, 95 percent of
      smokers get cancer because of epidemiology.
      Well, Dr. Haines said something that's very important because -- he said, "Because of the
      proximity to an acute life-threatening illness,
      as I've described, that there is a probability
      based on likelihood that he died of a
      complication related to that."
          Now -- oops, sorry.  Getting a little ahead
      of myself.
          So he goes in for the hemorrhage.  He's
      discharged.  The proximity -- remember he tried
      to explain it.  If you leave the hospital and
      you have a complication or you die within a
      certain amount of days, I forget the exact days
      he said, it is presumed it is because of a
      complication of that hospitalization.
          So let's talk about what those complications
      could be.  And, again, I can't emphasize enough
      that defendants don't have the burden of proof,
      but we brought you a doctor, a
      gastroenterologist, to talk to you so you can
      understand what happened to Mr. Pollari in the
      hospitalization based on the laboratory data we
      have.
          So plaintiff has the burden to prove that
      Mr. Pollari did not die of a complication.
      There were three complications that Dr. Haines talked about, if you remember.  The first one
      was a cardiac event.  He said that because
      sometimes when you hemorrhage --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Excuse me, Judge.  This is
      improper.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Can you take that down?
          MS. HENNINGER:  Remember, he talked about,
      okay, if you have a massive hemorrhage it can
      put stress on the heart and that causes
      sometimes a silent heart attack.  He used the
      fancy term "myocardial infarction," if I
      remember correctly.  That's just another way of
      saying heart attack.  So he used that term and
      he said that's one of the possibilities.
          But then he talked about two other
      possibilities that I want to go into a little
      bit more detail on, and that's, one, the risk of
      a re-bleed and, two, the risk of infection.
          Now -- so Mr. Pollari goes to the hospital.
      It's determined at some point, we don't know
      exactly how, but that he has a hemorrhage of a
      gastric ulcer.  Dr. Abel told you on the stand
      that he did not know how long Mr. Pollari had
      that gastric ulcer.  But he had it at a point where he started hemorrhaging.  And under the
      best of conditions, Dr. Haines told you in
      response to one of the questions, under the best
      of conditions a bleed of that magnitude would
      have taken two to four weeks to heal.  Now,
      gastric ulcers that have hemorrhaged have a
      great propensity to re-bleed.
          I want to talk briefly about the causes of
      gastric ulcers, because you heard today a little
      bit of mention of steroids.  Dr. Haines, the
      only doctor that has treated gastric ulcers his
      entire career, I think he said he does
      hemorrhage once a day, sometimes three or four
      hemorrhages a day of gastric ulcers, if I
      remember correctly, he said that it has been
      absolutely shown that steroids do not cause
      ulcer disease and do not cause bleeding.
          At one time even he was taught in medical
      school that they did.  But in the '80s and '90s
      science evolved, it changed.  You see how
      science evolves and changes just through some of
      the evidence in this case.  And in the '80s and
      '90s they discovered that H. pylori, that
      bacteria, and the use of NSAIDS are the true
      causes of gastric ulcers.  And there's a scientific consensus now steroids do not play a
      role.  Some of that old-school thinking is still
      around, but steroids do not cause gastric
      ulcers.
          So that's the evidence with regard to
      whether or not Mr. Pollari possibly had a
      re-bleed.
          Now, can anybody -- we didn't bring
      Dr. Haines in here to tell you that he did have
      a re-bleed.  I want to make that clear.  Because
      why?  I don't have a burden of proof.
      Philip Morris doesn't have a burden of proof.
      RJ Reynolds doesn't have to prove to you that's
      what happened.  So when Dr. Haines comes in here
      and says, yeah, that's a possibility based on
      the evidence I have, that's exactly what we're
      doing, is raising the possibilities for you,
      because plaintiff hasn't met their burden.
          So let's talk about infection.
          You saw this chart.  You guys are probably
      sick of seeing the lab data all the time.  So
      Dr. Haines came up with this chart, and
      basically what it shows is the white blood cell
      counts and the band levels.  And what you see
      based on this chart is at some point, I don't even know how to use a pointer, but at some
      point between January 1st and January 5th -- you
      see he has normal white blood cell counts on
      January 1st, but then when they go and check him
      on January 5th they've shot way up, as have his
      band counts.  So some point between that time he
      develops an infection.
          Now, everybody that came in here, Haines,
      Abel, Peterson, everybody that came in here
      said, yeah, you can have an increase in white
      blood cell counts for a variety of reasons not
      just infection; that's true.  But as
      Dr. Peterson and Dr. Haines explained to you
      they showed you the band count.  And remember,
      the band count looks at immature blood cells.
      So when your body has an infection it creates
      those immature cells and it pushes them out, I
      think the term is, pushes them out, it creates a
      high band count and that shows, what, your body
      is responding to infection.
          So the band count is important because it
      shows Mr. Pollari had an infection at least as
      of January 5th.  Now, Dr. Abel didn't even
      mention the band count.  And that's significant.
          Why?  Because he took the stand and told you he didn't believe that Mr. Pollari had an
      infection at all.  He didn't believe -- when he
      was in the hospital, he looked at this data and
      he said, I don't believe he had an infection.
      There's no bona fide evidence that he had an
      infection.  He didn't look at the band counts
      with you.  He didn't explain them.
          Now, he denied he had an infection.  He
      didn't talk about the band counts.  Mr. Pollari
      wanted to go home and he was sent home.  And
      Dr. Abel discharged him.  And unfortunately, he
      passes away less than two days later.  And
      Dr. Abel, keep in mind, Dr. Abel didn't see him
      on the 9th or the 10th.  He doesn't make house
      calls.  He told you he doesn't do any postmortem
      examination.  The next day after he dies he
      finds out he died.  We don't know exactly how.
      But he finds out he died and he writes down what
      he had just been treating him for.  He told you
      he had been treating him for lung cancer.  He
      puts that down and he also puts down the
      hemorrhage.  But he didn't know, he told you he
      didn't believe, he didn't know he had an
      infection, he didn't consider these other
      complications, so of course Dr. Abel put that on the death certificate.
          Now, Judge Murphy gave you an instruction
      about the death certificate, and that's
      instruction number 10, and it's that the death
      certificate is prima facie evidence of certain
      things.  And that's defined for you, fact,
      place, date and time of death and the identity
      of the decedent.
          So I wanted to apply that law to the facts
      of this case in more of a visual way for you.
      So what I did is I highlighted in yellow
      everything that the death certificate is prima
      facie evidence for, okay.
          What isn't it prima facie evidence for?
      What's highlighted in red, the cause of death.
      Plaintiff has the burden of proving that to you.
      And plaintiff hasn't met that burden.  For those
      reasons they don't get over the first hurdle,
      which is medical causation.
          So Mr. Reilly talked about, discussed
      addiction in spades.  I'm not going to talk
      about DSM criteria or the definitions of
      addiction.  I have three things to say about
      addiction.  No doctor who treated Mr. Pollari
      diagnosed him as addicted to cigarettes.  Fifty percent of daily smokers are not addicted.  And
      Dr. Drobes told you, I believe that all smokers
      can quit.
          So he doesn't get over the first hurdle.
      Doesn't get over the second.  There's one last
      hurdle in the first question, and that's
      addiction causation.  "Plaintiff must prove that
      addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of
      Mr. Pollari's primary lung cancer and death."
          Mr. Reilly also talked about this with you.
      He read you the instruction.  I just want to
      focus on what Dr. Proctor told you because he
      told you that millions and millions of Americans
      quit smoking.  And that correlated with the
      information, by the way, that the public health
      community was putting out about the dangers of
      smoking.
          10 million.  He told you these numbers.  19
      million.  It increased over time as awareness
      increased over time.  And what's very
      interesting is he said that the worry about
      health, the fact that people were worried about
      their health was the number one reason why
      people were quitting by the millions.  He also
      told you that these smokers were also heavy smokers.  Heavy smokers, addicted smokers, and
      they quit, 60 million have.
          Is Mr. Pollari any different from the 60
      million of smokers in this country that have
      quit?  No.  Because his cigarettes were not any
      more addictive, no evidence of that.  His brain
      was not affected any differently than smokers
      who quit.  He was not exposed to any different
      advertising than smokers who quit.  He was not
      exposed to tobacco company statements from
      Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds any different than
      any other smoker who quit.  And he did not smoke
      more than smokers who quit.
          So for that reason plaintiff can't get by
      the first hurdle much less the second or the
      third hurdle.  So when you get to this first
      question on the verdict form, ladies and
      gentlemen, I submit to you that the answer is
      no.  And if you answer no, the case is done, you
      don't need to go further in the verdict form.
      But again, kind of like opening statements, I
      have a job to do so I'm going to march forward a
      little bit, all right, and I'll try to do it as
      quickly as I can.
          The second question on the verdict form is what I call brand causation.  Plaintiff must
      prove that smoking cigarettes manufactured by
      RJ Reynolds or Philip Morris was a legal cause
      of Mr. Pollari's death.  Now, I want to talk a
      little bit about the instruction on this because
      it's going to say the next issue for your
      determination is whether smoking cigarettes
      manufactured by each of the defendants was a
      legal cause of death, just like I had in that
      hurdle there.
          RJ Reynolds, he stopped smoking either
      product, Camel or Kool, by 1971, 44 years ago.
      Now, Mr. Alvarez read you some questions that he
      asked Dr. Abel about whether or not smoking of
      Reynolds' cigarettes were -- that 17-year period
      would be a substantial contributing factor.  But
      Dr. Proctor also had something to say about that
      and so did Dr. Abel.  But Dr. Proctor told you,
      remember he talked about the epidemiology, and
      he said based on the epidemiology smokers lose
      10 years of their life, okay, or they die 10
      years earlier.  If you quit smoking by the age
      of 30 you get 10 years back.  You go back to
      baseline.  If you quit smoking by the age of 40
      you get 9 years back of your life. If Mr. Pollari had quit by 1971 when he was
      39 years old, which is when he stopped smoking
      RJ Reynolds' cigarettes, he would have virtually
      eliminated all of his risk.
          Dr. Abel put it a different way for you.  He
      said that if Mr. Pollari had quit smoking when
      he stopped using RJ Reynolds' products he would
      have been unlikely, he would have been unlikely
      to develop cancer.  So for that reason the
      answer to the second question, and I'm just
      going to speak for my client on this one, for
      RJ Reynolds is no.
          So what happens next?  Well, the third
      question relates to comparative fault.  I'm
      going to skip that one for a second and come
      back to it at the end, but I want to go on to
      talk about questions number 5 through 8 which
      relate to concealment and conspiracy.
          Got a lot of instructions on this.  I'm
      trying to point some of the important ones out
      to you or some of the instructions, both sides
      showed instructions, but jury instruction number
      15, which happens to be on page 16 of your
      packet, has the language about concealment.  And
      it says some key things.  I've highlighted them for you.  I'm not going to read the whole
      instruction, but "reasonably relied to his
      detriment," "material information not otherwise
      known or available" and "whether such reliance
      was a legal cause of Mr. Pollari's death."
          We're going to talk about that as we go
      through, but there's another really important
      part in instruction number 15, and that's
      material fact.  A material fact is one that is
      of such importance that Paul Pollari would not
      have acted as he did but for the concealment or
      omission of that fact.  Material fact but for.
          So let's talk about plaintiff's concealment
      claim against Reynolds and against
      Philip Morris.  The question really is, did
      Mr. Pollari die because he relied on something
      RJ Reynolds or Philip Morris said or did that
      was not already known to him?
          Mr. Reilly walked through a timeline showing
      you all of the things that Mr. Pollari knew.
      Evidence specific to Mr. Pollari, not to smokers
      in general, but specific to Mr. Pollari.
          Remember the chain.  Used this in opening
      statement, and I said, at the end of the case
      plaintiffs aren't going to be able to link that chain, they're not going to be able to link the
      concealment or agreement to conceal with
      Mr. Pollari's primary lung cancer or death, and
      they're not going to be able to link that chain
      because Mr. Pollari knew that smoking was
      dangerous and caused lung cancer for decades.
      Mr. Reilly just spent a better part of his
      closing argument laying that out for you.
          Now, no witness in this case told you that
      he started or continued smoking because of
      anything RJ Reynolds, Philip Morris said or did.
      No witness told you he ever saw or read an
      advertisement by RJ Reynolds.  No witness ever
      told you he smoked Kool or Camel because of
      anything RJ Reynolds said or did.
          There's no evidence that RJ Reynolds
      influenced his smoking decisions one way or
      another and there's no evidence for
      Philip Morris either.
          I want to talk specifically about
      Mrs. Pollari.  She's the only witness who came
      in and talked about the Camels or the Kool
      cigarettes.  Cindy the daughter-in-law didn't
      know him when he smoked those products.  Let's
      look at what Mrs. Pollari said.           I asked her, Did you ever talk to him about
      why he picked Camels?
          No.
          Did he ever in the 40 years of marriage you
      had, did he ever mention Camel advertising?
          No.
          What about Kools?
          Well, it's a little confusing at some of the
      Kool questions because Mrs. Pollari told you
      that she had no idea why her husband smoked
      Kools.  She told you she had no idea why he
      smoked Kools.  But she does remember that Kools
      were filtered.  And I asked her, because once I
      heard that I was like, well, could you say that
      you and Mr. Pollari, did you ever talk about the
      fact that filters or Kool were filtered
      cigarettes?
          And she said, no, I don't recall.
          There's no evidence in this case that
      Mr. Pollari ever saw an ad for Kool cigarettes.
      That's Mrs. Pollari's testimony.
          So let's talk about conspiracy.  Instruction
      number 16 also contains some information
      regarding plaintiff's claims for conspiracy
      against Reynolds and Philip Morris.  I've highlighted some of the important language.  But
      remember key language, "not otherwise known or
      available."
          And here you've got to remember that
      Dr. Proctor told you a couple things.  He told
      you that the conspiracy was limited to the
      health effects of smoking and the addictive
      nature of smoking.  And that's what the
      conspiracy is.  It's not a conspiracy to market
      to youth.  It's not a conspiracy to market
      filtered cigarettes.  It's not a conspiracy to
      market low tar.  Not that any of that, none of
      that had to do anything with Mr. Pollari.
          So let's look at this same question.  I
      added something new.  Anybody be able to tell
      what it is?  It's the date May 5th, 1982.
      Because you remember, you've seen the verdict
      form now, you've seen that some questions are
      just asked generally and some have a specific
      date, and that's May 5th, 1982.  And I want to
      read to you the part about the verdict form,
      which is also in number 16, that talks about
      that date.
          And it says, If your verdict is for the
      plaintiff on that issue you will then be asked to determine if any act, if any act on which
      Mr. Pollari reasonably relied occurred after
      1982.
          It's not whether or not they argue that he
      relied after 1982.  There has to be an act after
      1982 that he reasonably relied on.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, not the standard.
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, I gave you
      the instructions.  Those are the instructions
      you're to rely on.  This is counsel's argument.
          Proceed.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Now, that's why, same
      question, I included the date in here because
      I'm going to focus a little bit on pre 1982.
      Mr. Reilly focused on the whole story.  He went
      from the beginning all the way to the end.  I'm
      going to stop in 1982 in the interest of time.
      But some things are very important.
          The warning labels in 1966 and then 1970.
      Mrs. Pollari said that the warnings were
      powerful and impactful.  She told Mr. Pollari
      things like they're hazardous to your health,
      just like it says on the pack.  These weren't
      just things that were on there that there's no
      testimony about.  They talked about them.  He knew they were there.  And she told her husband,
      you've got to quit smoking.  I don't want you to
      die from lung cancer.  That was her testimony
      when she took the stand and Mr. Reilly was
      asking her questions.
          So you have to keep in mind not already
      known or available.
          Now, I had a timeline you guys might
      remember that I used in opening statements with
      all of the information that Mr. Pollari had
      available to him prior to 1982.  Remember it had
      some little pictures on there.  Well, this isn't
      the same one, because it has a lot more
      information now based on the testimony.  And
      fortunate for me Mr. Reilly covered all of it.
      But I'm going to just remind you of a couple
      things that he didn't say.
          The first evidence of Mr. Pollari that
      anybody saw him smoke was 1954.  That's when he
      met his wife.  One year later they watch that
      See It Now program that Mr. Reilly played for
      you, one year later.
          There's warnings in magazines or articles in
      magazines, newspapers even before that time
      about the dangers of smoking.  They taught it in schools, et cetera.
          There's '64 Surgeon General's Report.  We've
      heard all about that.  We heard about how they
      knew it.  They saw the news reports.  They
      talked about it.
          And then the warnings.  You watched the Bill
      Talman PSA.  I'm not going to go over any of
      that again except for one thing is that when
      they watched it -- remember Mrs. Pollari took
      the stand and Mr. Reilly was asking her
      questions about it.
          She said, We watched it.
          Mr. Reilly said, You discussed it.
          And she said, yes.  She said, Paul, look at
      that, you've got to quit smoking, I don't want
      you to die from lung cancer.
          So that Bill Talman thing was very powerful,
      and they talked about it.
          Clearly the warnings changed.  You've heard
      about it.  What's this green line?  1971.  They
      moved to Florida.  He quit smoking RJ Reynolds'
      products.
          The information continues all the way to
      1982, and as Mr. Reilly pointed out to you, it
      does not stop there.  It continues.  But Mr. Pollari knew that smoking was dangerous and
      addictive decades before 1982.  Look at all the
      information on this chart.
          So for that reason you get to four
      questions.  I get to do four questions at once,
      so we're going to do 5 and 6 together, because
      did Mr. Pollari "reasonably rely to his
      detriment on RJ Reynolds and/or Philip Morris'
      concealment or omission of material information
      not otherwise known or available concerning the
      health effects or addictive nature of smoking
      cigarettes and, if so, was such reliance a legal
      cause of Paul Pollari's death?"
          Now, the answer to this one is clearly no.
      I'm going to check it for RJ Reynolds.  It also
      checks "no" for Philip Morris.
          The next question is virtually the same,
      it's just asking the question about was there an
      act after 1982.  Again, "no."
          Seven and 8, not going to read the whole
      thing, you're probably tired of seeing the
      verdict form that you guys haven't gotten yet,
      but you're going to get it soon, I promise.  But
      essentially 7 and 8 are versions very similar to
      5 and 6.  And for both RJ Reynolds and Philip Morris the answer is "no."
          So we've gotten through up to 8.  I skipped
      3, right?  So I told you I'd come back to 3 and
      that's the comparative fault question.
          And Mr. Alvarez talked about that and
      Mr. Reilly talked about that and I'm not going
      to say much except you have to look at the
      instructions on that and remember what
      Dr. Proctor and Dr. Farone both told you is that
      RJ Reynolds tried to develop and market safer
      cigarettes.  They analyzed smoke chemistry, they
      published about it.  The Surgeon General cited
      some of their analytical studies in the '64,
      '79, '81 and '89 reports.  And Dr. Farone said
      RJ Reynolds devoted historically a tremendous
      amount of financial resources and scientific
      talent to try to develop a safer cigarette.
          So let's talk a little bit about the law.
      And you heard the Court's instructions, they're
      in this big packet, you're going to get it --
      well, you have it already.  But the assignment
      of fault relates only to actions that were a
      legal cause of Mr. Pollari's death.  RJ Reynolds
      and Philip Morris cannot be assigned fault for
      actions that were not a legal cause of Mr. Pollari's death.
          THE COURT:  Five minutes, Counsel.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Okay.
          Plaintiff has the burden of proof.  I'll
      submit to you that Reynolds, Philip Morris,
      Reynolds is zero.
          So let's get to the final question.
      Punitive damages.
          Let's look at this, because punitive damages
      the instructions will tell you can only be
      awarded for concealment that was a legal cause
      of Mr. Pollari's death.  You may not punish the
      defendants for harm suffered by anyone other
      than Mrs. Pollari.  Punitive damages are in
      addition to damages that compensate
      Mrs. Pollari.  And they can only be awarded to
      her estate.  And they cannot be awarded for harm
      to other smokers.
          Now, this is a very important point and the
      instructions tell this to you.  Plaintiff has
      the burden of proof.  We've all said it a
      thousand times, you're probably tired of hearing
      it, but the burden of proof for entitlement to
      punitive damages is bigger.  It is clear and
      convincing evidence.  You can find that in your instructions on instruction number 21.
      Plaintiff must prove entitlement by clear and
      convincing evidence.
          Punitive damages are not warranted against
      RJ Reynolds because it's published its research,
      I just talked about this, and it was cited in
      four Surgeon General's Reports.  And you've
      heard Dr. Proctor say, I've seen documents that
      Reynolds scientists genuinely believed that
      filter and low-tar cigarettes were safer.
      Reynolds developed and marketed safer
      cigarettes.  And there's jury instruction number
      21 that's on page 24 of your instruction
      booklet, it talks about mitigating evidence.
      And it says, "Mitigating evidence is evidence
      which may demonstrate there is no need to impose
      punitive damages against the defendants."
          Well, you heard a lot of mitigating evidence
      for both Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds through
      Dr. Proctor and Dr. Farone.  I'm going to focus
      my last few minutes on my client and let's look
      at what Dr. Farone told you.
          He says that Reynolds has a website that
      tells smokers who are concerned about their
      health that the best option is for them to quit. He also talked about, remember that
      ingredients list, but he also talked about how
      Reynolds voluntarily discloses its ingredients
      on its website.  And they've given the list of
      ingredients since 1986 and never has anyone said
      take this one or that one out.
          Both Dr. Proctor and Dr. Farone talked about
      how Reynolds invented new technologies to try to
      reduce cancer risks from smoking.  And Reynolds
      has succeeded in lowering the levels of
      carcinogen.  And they spent a lot of money
      trying to develop that heat-not-burn cigarette.
      Remember both Dr. Proctor and Dr. Farone talked
      about them.  Premier was the first one, it was
      the first one that came out.  They did this big
      743-page monograph.  It contains a lot -- oops,
      got it upside down and turned around -- lots of
      studies, there's animal studies, mutagenicity
      studies, all of the studies that Dr. Farone told
      you should be done were done on Premier and
      published in this book.
          And some people said, you know, it could be
      a safer cigarette, some people said -- they
      attacked Reynolds for it.  The fact of the
      matter is when it was marketed consumers hated it, it didn't taste right.  But Reynolds didn't
      stop there, they went on with Eclipse.
          Eclipse is the second heat-not-burn.  That
      one's still on the market, it's not doing too
      well.  Reynolds hasn't given up because it's now
      trying something called Rivo.  Dr. Proctor told
      you about that.  He also said -- you know what,
      they both talked about all of these products.
      Well, Dr. Farone had been deposed a long time
      ago, he didn't talk about Rivo, but Dr. Proctor
      did.
          Dr. Farone then told you about a different
      kind of product that Reynolds is marketing and
      selling and that's Snus.  It's a modern kind of
      smoke-free tobacco product.  It's not inhaled.
      It's that little pouch that Dr. Farone talked
      about.  And he said it was a very, very good
      step toward the reduction of risk and it was a
      viable harm reduction strategy.
          Both Dr. Farone and Dr. Proctor, the two
      experts plaintiffs called in on company conduct
      and cigarette design said that Reynolds was
      always innovating.
          They showed you a document in closing today,
      it's Plaintiff's Exhibit 1820.  Remember that number because remember I showed it.  And they
      use it to say the exit gates would suddenly open
      if people figured out how to quit.  And then
      what that document says is it goes on and gives
      three options.  The third option is develop
      safer alternatives.  Look what they did.  Look
      what they're doing.  And Dr. Proctor told you
      they're even selling e-cigarettes.
          So for that reason punitive damages are not
      warranted against RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company.
          Now, I didn't start by thanking you because
      I knew that's how I wanted to end.  And luckily
      I have saved enough time to thank you guys.
      It's been a long trial.  You guys have paid
      fabulous attention, everybody in this room
      appreciates it.  Thank you for the opportunity
      to let me present my evidence.
