          MR. REILLY:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          I can't proceed without my assistant.
          You know what, Michael, I'm just going to
      use the ELMO.  Just if you could switch it over
      because I have the board here.
          Well, it is the end.  There's no question
      about that.  And I want to begin my closing
      argument the same way I've addressed each of you
      in every time I've talked to you, and that is by
      thanking you for your service again. We've now come to that part of the trial in
      which you are being asked to determine what
      amount of punitive damages you think is
      appropriate in this case.  And I told you at the
      beginning in my opening statement of this phase,
      I said I was going to walk you through how
      Philip Morris operates today.  I've told you you
      were going to learn about things that I couldn't
      tell you about in the prior phase, and you did.
      And, quite frankly, I'd be surprised if you
      weren't surprised by things that have happened
      in the last 15, 16, 17 years.  They were totally
      inconsistent with what you heard in the first
      phase of this trial; I know they are.  They are
      completely inconsistent.
          So that's why I presented that evidence to
      you.  I told you I was going to do it, and I did
      it.  Now, why did I do that?  Because the
      instructions that Judge Murphy has given you are
      much more complete than what you just saw and
      heard, much more complete.  And they are your
      instructions in this case.
          And I'm just going to walk you through them.
      I apologize for taking a little bit of time,
      but -- and there are three pages of them.  The judge has told you that "punitive damages may be
      awarded against the defendant based only on the
      conduct that is the basis for your findings that
      the defendants are liable to the plaintiff for
      fraudulent concealment and/or conspiracy to
      fraudulently conceal."
          So the findings you made, whatever ruling
      you made in connection with the products being
      defective or Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds being
      negligent, that's not in play here.  And the
      judge is telling you that straight up front.
          So if you were upset in Phase I because
      cigarettes were inhalable and defective --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, whether they were
      upset, Judge.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. REILLY:  I'll say it differently.
          If the reason or part of the reasons why you
      checked the boxes as you did in Phase I was
      because cigarettes were inhalable and you
      thought they shouldn't be or because you thought
      cigarettes shouldn't contain nicotine, that's
      not part of this phase.  That's what that says.
      "In determining whether to assess punitive
      damages against the defendant and, if so, in what amount, you may punish defendants only for
      the specific conduct that caused Mr. Pollari's
      lung cancer and death."
          You may not consider the conduct underlying
      plaintiff's claims for strict liability or
      negligence."
          And Mr. Alvarez talked about deterring
      others.  Well, it's also part of your
      responsibility to determine what amount of
      punitive damages are necessary to not just
      punish but deter Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds.
      And that's a big reason why I showed you what I
      showed you and I'm sure why Ursula Henninger
      showed you what she showed you about RJ Reynolds
      and the need to deter in the future.
          You may be sitting there going, Why did you
      show us all that stuff about the FDA?  Why did
      you show us all that stuff about the Master
      Settlement Agreement?  Because the judge's
      instructions are much more complete, much more
      comprehensive than just punish.  They are.  They
      are.  And that's why he gave them to you.
          So number 3 says, "Whether there is a
      continuing need for deterrence in light of any
      changes in the conduct of the defendant from the conduct on which you based your determination
      that punitive damages were warranted."
          That's front and center first page.
          "You should impose punitive damages only if
      you conclude that monetary liability beyond your
      award of compensatory damages is necessary to
      accomplish punishment and deterrence."
          You guys awarded 10 million dollars.  That's
      why I wanted to explain to you what the net
      effect of your decision was in the first phase.
      This is not an insignificant amount of money.
      You awarded 10 million dollars in Phase I.  I'm
      telling you things you already know, but that's
      a fact.
          "You should not award punitive damages if
      you conclude that those purposes will be
      satisfied by a defendant's compensatory
      liability."
          That's something you guys have to consider.
          "In deciding whether punitive damages are
      warranted, you may not seek to punish the
      defendants for any harm suffered by any
      individual other than Paul Pollari."
          "If you decide to award punitive damages
      against a defendant the award should be no greater than the amount that you find necessary
      to punish that defendant for its intentional
      misconduct that caused Mr. Pollari's lung cancer
      and death, and to deter that defendant and
      others from engaging in such misconduct in the
      future."
          What's the significance of that "and
      others"?
          Well, I explained to you in my opening
      statement, and I'm going to quickly go through
      it on a little timeline that I've got, that
      there is changed behavior from Philip Morris and
      you heard it from RJ Reynolds, part of it was
      brought about by resolving litigation, part of
      it was brought about by voluntary acts on the
      part of Philip Morris and part of it was brought
      about by this Food and Drug Administration
      legislation, of which Philip Morris promoted.
          When you are thinking about the message that
      you send with your verdict on this issue, you
      have companies that are moving, I would think,
      in a direction that you think they should be
      moving in.  I mean, the things that you saw
      different in this phase, they clearly are in 180
      degree direction from what you saw in the years prior, 180 degrees.
          So now you've got companies that are moving
      in a direction that I think most probably you
      have some sense that that's the right direction.
      That's my -- I could be wrong, maybe you're
      sitting there going, no, no, I think they ought
      to be just going out of business or something.
      But as you find from elsewhere in this
      instruction, making cigarettes is a legal
      business.  It's still a legal business.  And the
      Food and Drug Administration now has the control
      over how that is to be done.
          And I just showed you with a document that I
      just read to you from the Food and Drug
      Administration that they say we have a
      comprehensive program in place for controlling
      cigarette manufacture and marketing.
          So here you've got to ask yourself, you know
      what, you're sending a message, and Mr. Alvarez
      just said, Send a message to the folks that are
      currently operating Philip Morris and RJ
      Reynolds and, yeah, you're going to send a
      message to them.  And what, honest to goodness,
      what do you want your message to be?  Do you
      want your message to be, I'm simply punishing you for the conduct of folks who -- and you're
      going to see it here in just a minute -- who are
      no longer there, it's dealt with by Judge Murphy
      in these instructions, people who are not there,
      haven't been there.  That's why I asked
      Mr. Jupe, Are those guys all dead?  They're not
      just not there, they're dead.
          So I'm going to show it to you in just a
      minute where the judge talks to you, instructs
      you how you are to take that into consideration.
      So now the question is, What message do you send
      to the people at Philip Morris who are moving in
      this direction?  And what message do you then
      send to other companies, to other individuals,
      to other organizations about whether, you know
      what, what happens to you if you're doing
      something that you think is out of alignment,
      you heard Mr. Jupe say it, out of alignment with
      where society wants this company to be?
          If there are other people or companies or
      organizations that view themselves as being out
      of alignment, by your message do you encourage
      them to take this new path, or do you encourage
      them to continue the way they are because it's
      not going to do them a bit of good, they're just going to get smacked.  And that's what you have
      to ask yourself.  It's not because Ken Reilly
      says you have to ask yourself that.  It's
      because Judge Murphy has told you that's the law
      here in the state of Florida.  That's the law.
          Mr. Alvarez put up 15 million dollars to be
      awarded against Philip Morris, 15 million
      dollars to be awarded against RJ Reynolds, and
      that was just plain smack money.  That's what it
      was.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge,
      inappropriate.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          Rephrase, Counsel.
          MR. REILLY:  Right.  That was too
      colloquial.
          That was money that represented no
      recognition of changed behavior, no -- that was
      just to punish.  You heard him say it over and
      over and over again, over and over and over
      again.  But that's not what these instructions
      tell you.  What these instructions go on to say,
      "If you -- I think I read this.  If I did I
      apologize for reading it again.
          "If you decide to award punitive damages against a defendant, the award should be no
      greater than the amount that you find necessary
      to punish that defendant for its intentional
      misconduct that caused Mr. Pollari's lung cancer
      and death and to deter that defendant and others
      from engaging in such misconduct in the future."
          Now let's go to the bottom paragraph.  "In
      determining whether punitive damages are
      warranted, you may also take into consideration
      any mitigating evidence.  Mitigating evidence is
      the evidence which may demonstrate there is no
      need to impose punitive damages or that a
      reduced amount of punitive damages should be
      imposed against the defendants."
          Final page.  "In determining the amount of
      punitive damages, if any, you may not punish
      either defendant for any conduct that complied
      with federal or state law, was authorized by
      federal or state law or was otherwise lawful
      where it occurred.
          "The manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a
      lawful activity protected by federal law.
      Therefore, you may not impose punitive damages
      to punish a defendant for simply manufacturing,
      selling or advertising cigarettes." And here's the final paragraph I want to
      read to you.  "In determining the amount of
      punitive damages, if any, to assess against a
      defendant, you should consider the extent to
      which the defendant's conduct has changed from
      the conduct on which you based your
      determination that punitive damages may be
      warranted, and the extent to which the
      circumstances have changed.  You are entitled to
      conclude that misconduct that occurred in the
      distant past and involved actors who are no
      longer associated with a defendant need not be
      punished or that it should be punished less
      severely than recent misconduct."
          That's the judge's instructions to you.  And
      that's why I told you this stuff.  That's why I
      presented this evidence.  This is not Ken Reilly
      making this up.  This is because this is how the
      state of Florida, the law of the state of
      Florida is.
          And that's why -- that's why very quickly I
      walked you through the creation of the Master
      Settlement Agreement and all the restrictions
      that went along with that; the restrictions on
      advertising being removed from billboards, the end of sponsorships of concerts and sports
      events and the end of branded merchandise.  And
      the enforcement that the Attorneys General of
      all 50 states have the power to make sure
      there's compliance by Philip Morris, RJ
      Reynolds, et cetera.
          That's why I told you about Philip Morris
      creating its website.  I'm sure that's why
      Ursula Henninger told you about the creation of
      the website by RJ Reynolds.  How else can you
      effectively communicate with the American
      public?  We live in a modern time, a time when
      communication with the American public by the
      Internet, by a website is incredibly effective.
      And can there be any question that there was a
      180-degree turnaround from the position that you
      saw those CEOs five years earlier standing
      before Congress and swearing that smoking hadn't
      been proven to cause lung cancer and other
      diseases or not being addictive?  And here five
      years later with new management, with new folks,
      what did they say on their website?  That's why
      I showed it to you.  That's why Ursula Henninger
      showed it to you.  There's no question about it.
      There's no question about it. Smoking causes lung cancer.  Smoking is
      addicting.  There's no safe cigarette and
      filters do not make cigarettes safer.
          As of 2000 Philip Morris began its work
      toward getting legislation that would finally
      put in the hands of a government agency the
      power to regulate the tobacco industry, because,
      as you heard today and you heard throughout this
      trial, there have been voices saying, you should
      do this, you should do that, you should do this,
      you should do that, but now there is a
      government agency that has the power, the
      authority to not only make the determinations of
      how cigarettes should be made and marketed, how
      they should be designed, what ingredients they
      could or should or shouldn't have, but also the
      power to enforce it, the power to say, You must
      comply.  That's a big deal.  It's never existed
      before in this country, never existed before in
      this country.  And here, amazingly,
      Philip Morris promoted it, said, Please, do
      this.  Amazing, really.
          Philip Morris voluntarily -- I mean, we talk
      about young people beginning smoking.
      Philip Morris voluntarily took ads off the back covers of magazines in the early 2000s and
      stopped advertising in magazines altogether in
      2005.  I mean, you think about it, and you heard
      Mr. Jupe explain, if you want to see a
      promotional piece other than, you know, you walk
      in the store and there's an array of cigarettes
      and the price for Marlboros or something, if you
      want to see a real ad you have to be 21 years of
      age.  You've got to go on Philip Morris'
      website, secure website where they double-,
      triple-check how old you are.  That's what
      you've got to do to get promotional material
      from Philip Morris, or you've got to sign up and
      prove that you are 21 to get Marlboro, even
      Marlboro ad.
          And you heard about the We Card program.  I
      know you guys have gone into stores, gas
      stations, et cetera, I know you've seen that
      little thing that says "We card."  You know
      where that comes from now.  You didn't know it
      until today, but now you know where that comes
      from.  That's an effort by Philip Morris and RJ
      Reynolds to get stores -- to get the people who
      walk in to know they're going to get carded and
      the people who work there to make sure they do. But I know you didn't know that until today.
          THE COURT:  Counsel, can I see you sidebar
      for a second?
          (The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
          THE COURT:  How much more do you have?
          MR. REILLY:  Five minutes.
          THE COURT:  Because you're at 20 already.
          MR. REILLY:  Sorry.  Five minutes.
          THE COURT:  Because we need to move this on.
          (Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the
following proceedings were held in open court:)
          MR. REILLY:  If you couldn't hear it, that
      was the bell going off.  I have five minutes.
          All right.  Let's move along.
          You know about the letter to President Obama
      in 2009.  You know about the signing of the act
      in 2009.  You know about the control of
      Philip Morris by the FDA starting in 2009.
          And you know about lights.  Lights played a
      role in this trial.  You know that lights are
      gone for good.
          All right.  One other thing I need to point
      out, and that is if you decide that you're going
      to award an amount of punitive damages, they only go to one spot, and that is to
      Mrs. Pollari.  They don't go anyplace else.
      They go on top of the 10 million dollars you've
      already given her.  That's one other thing I
      need to point out.
          So that's it, ladies and gentlemen.  Now you
      have a much more complete understanding of just
      exactly what's involved in your job in deciding
      what amount of punitive damages you guys decide
      unanimously to award in this case.
          Thanks a lot.


          MS. HENNINGER:  It's always my job to move
      this around.
          Good afternoon.  Well, again, we find
      ourselves -- or I find myself in the position of
      being close to 5:00, but I think you all
      understand I have to walk through this because a
      significant amount of money has been requested
      by my -- of my client.  And I'm going to walk
      through the instructions and I'm going to walk
      through some of the evidence that's been
      presented in this part of the trial.  It's been
      a big day, a long day, but a lot of evidence has
      been presented over the last day and a half related to this.
          But before we go any further, I want to talk
      about the instructions.  You guys have them in
      your lap.  And this is the set of legal
      principles which you need to follow in order to
      render your decision in this phase of the trial.
      And it's very important because there's one
      question for you to answer.  And the question
      is:  Should RJ Reynolds be punished?  Should
      punitive damages be awarded to Mrs. Pollari
      because RJ Reynolds concealed or entered into an
      agreement to conceal?  That same type of
      conduct, it has to be the type that caused
      Mr. Pollari's death.  That's the issue here.
      We've heard a lot about other things that have
      taken the eye off the ball of that issue.  It's
      not youth smoking.  It's the concealment and the
      agreement to conceal claim.  That's why we're
      here in this phase of trial, and these
      instructions guide you through answering this
      one last question.
          Now, it was suggested to you because you
      answered question number nine on your verdict
      form, that it's a given that there's automatic
      punitive damages, but these instructions make very clear -- and what I've done is I've put the
      page number up there just so you can go back if
      you need to and verify anything I say.  But it
      is your discretion.  You may decline to award or
      assess punitive damages against RJ Reynolds or
      Philip Morris.  That's based on the evidence
      you've heard.  You have that discretion.  That's
      the law in Florida.  The legal rules are
      different and the evidence you've heard is
      different.
          Now, Mr. Reilly pointed this out, but
      punitive damages can only be awarded to
      Mrs. Pollari.  In other words, they're not going
      to go to public health agencies or
      smoking-cessation groups --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge,
      inappropriate.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Okay.
          Now, I want to talk about punitive damages
      on page 1.  It also talks about how punitive
      damages are in addition, in addition to the
      compensatory damages you've previously awarded
      Mrs. Pollari.
          Now, you unanimously -- it's been a long day, sorry.
          You unanimously agreed that 10 million
      dollars was sufficient to fully compensate
      Mrs. Pollari, and you fully compensated her.
      And these damages, the damages plaintiffs are
      requesting now, are in addition to those
      damages.
          Now, this is a very important instruction
      because your award has already been 10 million
      dollars, as I pointed out, and on page 2 the
      judge has told you that you should not award
      punitive damages if you conclude that those
      purposes of punitive damages would be satisfied
      by Reynolds' compensatory liability.  In other
      words, Florida law recognizes that your award of
      10 million dollars to Mrs. Pollari has the
      effect of punishment and deterrence to Reynolds.
      That's the law.  And you should not award
      punitive damages above that if you think that
      that effect has taken place.  And we presented
      evidence about that all day today.
          And perhaps what we're really here for, and
      this is perhaps the most important thing to
      remember on page 1 of your instructions,
      Reynolds can only be punished for conduct that is the basis for the concealing of information
      and agreeing to conceal information that was the
      cause of Mr. Pollari's death.  It's not for
      anything else you've heard about either in this
      phase or the first phase.  This is the sole
      basis of what you can award punitive damages
      here.  It's a very, very narrow question.
          And we're going to continue to look at the
      legal framework that's going to help you answer
      that so you can stay focused on what the law is
      in Florida.
          And I'm going to continue to do that.
          Look on page 2.  The law tells you that in
      deciding whether punitive damages are warranted
      you may not seek to punish the defendants for
      harm suffered by any other individual other than
      Mr. Pollari.
          And why is that?  We've seen objective
      evidence of that today through Dr. Garner
      because you've learned that there's almost 4,000
      other of these types of cases pending in the
      state of Florida, and they have their right to
      bring claims and to ask for punitive damages.
      And in this case we're only assessing the harm
      caused to Mr. Pollari. Now, this is one that Mr. Reilly touched on
      and the judge has instructed you, and it's on
      page 3.  You're entitled to conclude that the
      misconduct that occurred in the distant past and
      involved actors that are no longer associated
      with Reynolds or Philip Morris should not be
      punished or should be punished less than more
      recent conduct.  And that's an important
      relevant point because that's what we've spent
      all day talking about.  What is happening?  Who
      is making the decisions how these companies are
      operating today?  This is a very important
      instruction in assessing punitive damages in
      this case given everything you've heard.
      Reynolds migration strategy, how they inform
      their customers today, and there's not been one
      piece of evidence, not one piece of evidence in
      these last day and a half about any concealment
      since 1998 or any agreement to conceal since
      1998.  That's what you're here to assess
      punitive damages on, and you haven't been given
      any evidence.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, you rely
      on the instruction I give you. Proceed, Counsel.
          MS. HENNINGER:  So let's talk about things
      in the distant past.  We talked about
      Mr. Pollari stopped smoking Reynolds' cigarettes
      in 1971.  Dr. Proctor, when he was here, told
      you that the conspiracy that they heard so much
      about in the first phase of this trial ended in
      1998.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I'm going to object to this,
      Judge.  It's outside the scope of this phase.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Okay.  You heard from
      Dr. Garner today that some of the things that --
      the past is gone.  There's no more Tobacco
      Institute.  The Council for Tobacco Research is
      gone.  The Tobacco Industry Research Committee
      is gone.  And people like Anne Browder no longer
      exist.  And this happened as a result of the MSA
      you heard about, Mr. Jupe talked about it.  And
      this isn't anything that's forced.  This was a
      settlement negotiation between the tobacco
      companies and the state Attorney Generals.  Yes,
      they filed lawsuits, but the parties got
      together and they negotiated the terms of the
      agreement and one was that this would no longer happen.
          You heard from Dr. Garner there's no more
      Dr. Teague, none of these actors that you've
      seen documents and memos on, none of them are
      with RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company any longer.
      The past is gone.  That's why that instruction
      about past conduct is so important.
          There are no more secret documents.  You
      heard about the depository.  That doesn't -- the
      depository, everything is out there; in fact,
      everything they write currently goes on the
      depository.
          Dr. Garner spent a lot of time talking to
      you about new ownership, who's running the
      company, what they're trying to do, what
      products they're trying to put out there, the
      executives and the scientists and what the goals
      of RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company are.  And
      punishment without a purpose is simply revenge.
      And there has to be a purpose --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Mr. Alvarez asked you, send
      a message, send a message to my client
      RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company.  He told you to send a message.  What kind of message would you
      be sending to a company that over the last 15
      years has changed everything about the way it
      does business?  It's making new products.  It's
      trying to reduce the risk of harm of its
      consumers.  And it's telling people, hey, go to
      the convenience store, we sell this right next
      to cigarettes.  It's a nicotine replacement
      product.  They're trying to reduce the risk of
      smokers with all their products.  And they're
      telling them about it and they're putting things
      on the website.  It's a different company.  The
      past is gone.  What kind of message does he want
      you to send?  Not to change your ways?
          Now, this instruction is important, I'm not
      going to go into any great deal, because one
      thing that punitive damages cannot be assessed
      for is simply selling and manufacturing
      cigarettes; you saw that in the first phase,
      it's also part of this phase.  Just simply
      selling cigarettes, we've talked about it all
      the way back since jury selection, just because
      of the fact that some of you may not like
      cigarettes that's no reason to impose liability.
          Now, the instruction -- this is also from page number 1, you should consider whether
      there's a continuing need -- and this is really
      important in light of the evidence that
      Dr. Garner brought you today -- a continuing
      need for deterrence in light of the changes in
      the conduct of RJ Reynolds from the conduct
      which you thought entitled plaintiff to punitive
      damages.  And this is very important in light of
      the products they're making, in light of what
      they're trying to do, in light of how they're
      informing their customers.
          That's why we presented this evidence to you
      and spent a good part of today doing it.
          So really the issue is:  Are punitive
      damages needed to prevent RJ Reynolds from
      concealing and agreeing to conceal information
      in 2015?  That's the issue for you.  And I'm not
      going to go through in detail all of the
      website, because we just finished it with
      Dr. Garner, but you know RJ Reynolds does inform
      consumers today in 2015, they do it through
      their website.  They talk about their
      reduced-risk products, they tell people to quit
      and they tell them about cessation aids.  They
      talk about the diseases that they also agree that smoking causes.  They talk about the need
      to quit, how it reduces your risk.  And that
      there's no safe cigarette.  All of these things,
      the ingredients are all there for anybody who
      wants to look.  It's a different company.  The
      business environment at RJ Reynolds has changed.
          Now, one of the things that Reynolds does,
      and you saw this with Dr. Garner, this is on
      RJ Reynolds' website and it's the migration
      strategy.  It's how they want people to go from
      smoking cigarettes to trying to switch to
      products that present less risk.  That's where
      RJ Reynolds' business model is today and that's
      what Dr. Garner told you about.  They're trying
      to get their customers to choose less risky
      products.
          And, of course, they tell people on the
      website, you know what, if you're concerned
      about your health, you should quit.  Well, what
      else would you ask Reynolds in 2015 to tell
      somebody who is smoking?  If you're concerned,
      quit; but if you want to continue using tobacco
      products, let us tell you about some of these
      alternatives.  Let us tell you about smoke free
      tobacco and let us tell you about nicotine replacement.  That is what you want a tobacco
      company to tell you.
          Now, you've heard about all the innovative
      products and you've heard about them from
      Dr. Proctor and Dr. Farone and today Dr. Garner
      explained them in great detail, but RJ Reynolds
      has done a tremendous job throughout the years
      trying to research and develop products to put
      on this continuum of risk, to give smokers an
      option; if they don't want to stop using
      nicotine, they can move to the next level, then
      next level, then hopefully down to a complete
      smoking cessation with the nicotine replacement
      products.  A wide range of products, a wide
      range of risk.
          And they tell their consumers about it.  You
      didn't hear too much about Premier, but you
      heard about Eclipse, Revo, Snus.  Snus is a
      viable harm reduction strategy.  And you heard
      it's not inhalable and it reduces the risk of
      diseases like lung cancer, because they've seen
      it in Sweden.  And RJ Reynolds brought it to the
      United States and marketed it and sells it
      nationwide.
          You heard about VUSE, the electronic cigarette.  You heard about how they're working
      with the FDA so that the FDA governs the
      marketing and sale of electronic cigarettes.
          And most importantly you heard about
      voluntary warnings that Reynolds is putting on
      VUSE.  This isn't mandatory, this isn't
      something they're forced to do.  This is
      something they though, a voluntary warning that
      goes on VUSE saying, this is a nicotine product,
      let us tell you about it.  And they put it on
      there and they tell people about this.  They're
      not forced to do this.  This is what they're
      doing because it's the responsible thing to do.
      They have a new product and they want to warn
      consumers about potential risks.
          Now, most importantly, the latest product,
      the Zonnic product.  Not only have you heard
      about the tobacco products, but you know now
      that nobody, nobody forced RJ Reynolds Tobacco
      Company to go to Switzerland and buy a nicotine
      replacement company, bring it to the United
      States, run it through FDA approval so that they
      could market and sell nicotine gum.  Nobody
      forced them to do that, Reynolds is doing that
      because they think it's the right thing to do. And not only is it the right thing to do to have
      this gum and make it available, they're
      marketing it in an innovative way.  You don't
      have to go to CVS or Walgreens or some pharmacy,
      you can go to 7-Eleven on Las Olas Boulevard,
      you can walk up to the counter and you will see
      Zonnic right there, right there before you can
      even get a cigarette you can get the gum from
      RJ Reynolds.  And what's important is it's
      cheaper.  You heard a lot about pricing and the
      importance of pricing.  It's cheaper than
      cigarettes.  Reynolds is offering something to
      help people quit smoking cheaper than buying its
      cigarette product.
          And you saw some -- heard a lot about youth
      marketing and youth smoking rates, but today we
      published some documents showing that youth
      smoking is actually at all time lows in this
      country and in the state of Florida.
          So I'm briefly going to talk about
      mitigating evidence.  You've seen this
      instruction and this instruction tells you that
      you can consider mitigating evidence with regard
      to punitive damages.  And I want to talk briefly
      about some of the mitigating evidence you've seen in this case in these last two days.
          FDA, you heard a lot about it.  Under FDA
      regulations the companies are in lockdown.
      There are no secrets.  They can have surprise
      inspections.  They can come in and say I want to
      look at your documents.  They can actually say,
      as Dr. Garner said, hey, you teach us the
      science we need to know so that we can regulate
      you.  And there's no more secrecy, everything is
      transparent, everything is in the open.  FDA
      fully regulates these companies.  And what's
      amazing is these companies actually pay the FDA
      to regulate them.  There are user fees and you
      heard Reynolds alone has paid 565 million
      dollars in user fees in the last six years.  So
      we're paying for this regulation.
          You heard some from Mr. Jupe about the MSA.
      And the MSA shows that all the companies have
      paid 66 billion dollars, that's with a B.  And
      that will go on in perpetuity because of the
      agreement they entered into.  66 billion
      dollars, 4 billion dollars for the state of
      Florida.  And as you've heard, some of those are
      earmarked, those funds are earmarked for youth
      smoking prevention programs. Now, the MSA also covers how the cigarette
      companies can advertise, that's also now covered
      by the FDA.  Mr. Jupe talked to you about that.
      No more billboards, no more cartoons.
          So I want to go back to page 1 and tell you,
      talk about your discretion.  And in your
      discretion, given everything you've heard that's
      happened in the cigarette business and in
      RJ Reynolds specifically, you may decline to
      award punitive damages or assess punitive
      damages in this case.  And that's because things
      have changed.  The past is gone, you've heard
      that.  There's a new way of doing business and
      there's new products that are trying to get
      smokers to reduce their risk.  And the conduct
      has changed and there's been no evidence of any
      concealment since then.
          So, ladies and gentlemen, when you get this,
      I submit that, respectfully, you answer no,
      punitive damages are not warranted.
          But I understand that some of you may
      disagree.  So I want to talk a little bit about
      plaintiff's request for 15 million dollars.  15
      million dollars from RJ Reynolds and 15 million
      dollars from Philip Morris.  There's no explanation for that amount, so I want to think
      about it on some of the facts in this case.
          In the first phase of this case you awarded
      Mrs. Pollari 10 million dollars.  You
      apportioned 15 percent of that fault to
      Mr. Pollari.  But because you answered "yes" on
      the questions regarding concealment and
      conspiracy, that apportionment doesn't apply.
      So she gets the whole 10 million dollars.  But
      15 percent of 10 million dollars is 1.5 million.
      There are two defendants.  And I suggest one way
      to consider this would be to divide the 1.5
      million and have 750,000 per defendant.
          You may think, well, that just doesn't seem
      very much; they're asking for 15 million and
      here she's saying $750,000.  Well, let me put
      this in context to you.  You've heard about the
      number of lawsuits and an award of 750 --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge, this is
      inappropriate.
          THE COURT:  I don't know where you're going
      with it, Counsel.  Let me see it.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Take that down.
          THE COURT:  Why don't you come sidebar a
      second. MR. ALVAREZ:  You know what, Judge, I'll
      withdraw it.
          THE COURT:  I still want a sidebar.
          (The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
          THE COURT:  How much more do you have?
          MS. HENNINGER:  I'm getting there.
          THE COURT:  You've been 20 minutes.
          MS. HENNINGER:  I told you 30 minutes before
      we started.
          THE COURT:  We're on a time constraint.
      Mr. Reilly said 15 minutes, he went 20.
      Mr. Alvarez said 15 minutes, he went a little
      less.  I know you said 30, but I thought we were
      going to try to keep everything half hour per
      side.
          MS. HENNINGER:  I didn't understand that.  I
      thought I made very clear my client, I have to
      represent them.  I asked for a half an hour.
      I'm going to try to cut it.
          THE COURT:  If the jury can't stay, we'll
      come back tomorrow, that's what's going to
      happen and you'll do your rebuttal tomorrow.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  So what are we doing?
          THE COURT:  She's going to continue and we're going to see if they can stay.
          (Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the
following proceedings were held in open court:)
          THE COURT:  Counsel, please proceed.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Just to put it in a little
      context, an award of $750,000 in each of the
      pending cases against RJ Reynolds alone would be
      2.85 billion dollars just in punitive damages.
      So I wanted to give you a little bit of context
      because you've heard the financial numbers,
      you've heard what they're requesting and I
      wanted to put in context, their request.
          Now, if you take 15 million dollars and you
      put it to the same number of Engle cases that
      are pending, that would be 57 billion dollars.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I object to this, Judge, about
      future cases that haven't been tried.  It's
      inappropriate.
          THE COURT:  Thank you.  Counsel, the
      objection is overruled.
          MS. HENNINGER:  And it would be 57 billion
      dollars.  That's to put it in context for you,
      ladies and gentlemen.
          Now, I'm going to end with where Mr. Alvarez
      started where he said he wanted you to send a message.  And I want to ask you again what kind
      of message would it be sending to Winston-Salem,
      North Carolina, what kind of message would it
      send to say, hey, we understand you've changed
      the way you've done business; we understand
      you've now informed your consumers; we
      understand you put everything on the website; we
      understand that you've spent a lot of money and
      you've worked to develop these new products that
      hopefully will reduce the risk to smokers; we
      understand that you're now trying to get people
      to quit by providing cessation aids, what
      message does it send to get punitive damages
      awarded in case after case after case?  What
      kind of message is that to a company?  What's
      that say to the other companies that he wants
      you to deter by your punishment of Reynolds in
      this case?
          So I want you to think about everything.
      And I ask you to look at the jury instructions
      when you're rendering your verdict in this case.
          And I want to thank you again for your
      attention.  I know it's a little bit late, but
      as you know, there's a lot to go over and thank
      you very much, ladies and gentlemen.
      