MR. FURR:  Counsel, Ms. Enochs. 
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.  
THE JURORS:  Good afternoon. 
MR. FURR:  Last night, around 9:30, you 
delivered a verdict in favor of plaintiff for $21 
million.  You might have wondered how the 
defendants were going to react to that.  Are we 
going to react with anger?  No.  Are we critical of 
your verdict?  No.  Are we disappointed in the 
verdict?  Of course we are.  We ask you for you -- 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Excuse me, Judge.  We had 
the same objection.  You denied us from thanking 
them and now -- 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. FURR:  But mostly, we are respectful of 
your verdict.  Respect the judicial system, respect 
the jury system, and we respect the diligent, hard 
work you did to arrive at your verdict.  It is 
clear that not everyone agreed all the time.  But 4846
you worked through it, you looked through the 
evidence, you asked questions, you asked for more 
evidence.  We appreciate the effort that you put 
in. 
And the verdict you delivered last night is 
where I want to start, because that's the starting 
point for where you are today and where you go.  
What your verdict really told us is that R.J. 
Reynolds' intentional misconduct or their gross 
negligence, or their both, before 1981 was a cause 
of Mr. Purdo's death.  And you indicated that you 
thought that we should go to this phase because you 
indicated that punitive damages were warranted.  
But now you've seen your jury instructions, 
and notwithstanding your verdict last night, you 
recognize from your Instruction Number 3 that 
regardless of what you decided yesterday, that you 
are not required to award punitive damages in this 
phase, and it is up to you as to whether or not to 
award punitive damages.  And there is a reason for 
that.  
What's being requested of you, of course, is a 
rather extraordinary thing. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Objection. 
THE COURT:  Overruled. 4847
MR. FURR:  After fully compensating the family 
for the damages they ask you to compensate them for 
in the amount of $21 million, you're being asked to 
award to them $25 million more.  $25 million more 
above and beyond what you found was required to 
fully compensate them. 
That's an extraordinary request.  And as a 
result of that, there are a new set of legal rules 
that come into play.  Your new instructions are 
very, very different than the instructions that you 
had yesterday.  And they're different in two 
important ways.  First, they limit very narrowly 
the conduct for which you can award punitive 
damages.  Second, they tell you that some of the 
evidence that you saw in the first phase of this 
case is not to be considered in this phase because 
this inquiry, as a matter of law, is much narrower.  
And so I hate to spend too much time on this, 
but I am going to walk through some of those 
instructions with you and highlight for you some of 
the legal rules, the guidance that the Court has 
provided to you on how you should deliberate and 
make your decision about punitive damages, because 
things are different now.  Instructions are 
different.  You're going to see they place some 4848
limitations on how you proceed, and there are new 
things for you to think about.
And I'll start with this one.  Instruction 
Number 6, "While you were allowed to consider harms 
to other persons who are not parties to this 
lawsuit in determining whether to assess punitive 
damages, in this phase of the trial, any amount of 
money that you award as punitive damages must be 
based solely on harms caused to Plaintiff and based 
solely on the misconduct that caused those harms."  
So when you get to deciding -- 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Excuse me.  I apologize, 
Mr. Furr.  
Can we just approach for just one second?  
THE COURT:  Sure, of course. 
(The following proceedings were had before the 
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
THE COURT:  What's the objection?
MR. PAIGE:  That is an incorrect statement of 
the law.  He says you must -- you must not consider 
the reprehensibility.  That's -- that's wrong.  You 
can consider the reprehensibility of the comment to 
others, but a lot of the reprehensibility of the 
conduct went right to our client. 
THE COURT:  Okay.  That's fine.
Specialty Reporting, Inc.
941.468.2779 / nancy@specialtyreporting.com

MR. PAIGE:  So, I mean, it has to be clarified 
on the board, too, because it's a misstatement on 
the board.
MR. FURR:  I can't change the PowerPoint right 
now.  I'll clarify. 
MR. PAIGE:  He's going to put up a PowerPoint 
with a wrong -- I mean, he's going to say it in one 
second, and the wrong PowerPoint is going to be up 
there. 
THE COURT:  Okay.  Just say it's -- just go up 
there and say it's -- 
MR. PAIGE:  Well, he isn't to use the 
PowerPoint anymore if it's wrong. 
THE COURT:  Okay.  Okay.  All right.  
(The following proceedings were had in open 
court before the Court and the jury.)
MR. FURR:  Pull that back up, Cliff. 
In the first phase of this case, you heard a 
lot of evidence about reprehensibility with respect 
to the harm of others.  You may not consider 
reprehen- -- reprehensibility with respect to the 
harm of others as you decide whether and how much 
to award in this phase.  
In fact, the instruction is very clear that 
now you cannot consider the harm to anyone other 4850
than Mr. Purdo, and you can't award any damages for 
conduct other than that that you have found to be a 
legal cause of Mr. Purdo's death.  
So we need to take a closer look at the facts 
in the first phase to remind us what those facts 
mean for the restrictions that the Court's rules 
place on your deliberations. 
Of course, Mr. Purdo quit in 1981, therefore, 
conduct by the companies after 1981 could not have 
contributed to Mr. Purdo's death and cannot be a 
basis for your decision about whether and if so how 
much to award with respect to punitive damages.  
And that includes conducts like company 
documents after 1981 that are talking about 
subsequent conduct, cigarette design after 1981, 
statements made by the companies, the 1994 
testimony that you keep seeing from Congress, other 
videos, advertisements you saw, documents related 
to the marketing of cigarettes to youth.  
None of that after 1981 can be considered with 
respect to your decision about Mr. Purdo, punitive 
damages to the Purdos. 
Instruction Number 2, again, will tell you, 
"You will now determine the amount of punitive 
damages, if any," and those words matter, "if any, 4851
to be assessed as punishment and as a deterrent to 
others.  And any amount would be in addition to the 
$21 million that you have already awarded the 
Estate of Tom Purdo."  
Like I said, an extraordinary request.  The 
request is now to award the estate $46 million.
Other important limitations that the 
instructions place on your deliberations include 
this.  You may not consider the Engle findings 
regarding Reynolds' conduct in your assessment of 
punitive damages.  In your assessment of punitive 
damages, it's as though those findings don't exist.  
An important -- an important consideration we 
would ask you to think about is where the punitive 
damages go to.  This was talked about all the way 
back in jury selection.  After you've made your 
decision, and all six of you had to vote 
unanimously on what would be full and fair 
compensation for the family, after you rendered 
that verdict, you had fully compensated the family, 
but you're now being asked to award additional 
damages to the family.  
And as Mr. Alvarez discussed in jury 
selection -- we'll come back.  
Well, let me do this.  This is important.  4852
Instruction Number 4 is the one I would ask you to 
look at.  The law recog- -- because it states, "You 
should not award punitive damages if you conclude 
that monetary liability beyond your award of 
compensatory damages is necessary to accomplish 
punishment and deterrence."  
So while your award yesterday was for 
compensatory damages to the family, the law 
recognizes that with respect to Defendants that 
award itself has the result of serving as 
punishment and deterrence to the companies.  And 
that's Instruction Number 4.  It's recognized right 
there. 
As we said, punitive damages can be awarded 
only to the Estate of Mr. Purdo.  And as 
Mr. Alvarez discussed with you in jury selection, 
they can't be awarded to public health agencies or 
anti-smoking organizations or smoking-cessation 
clinics, or any other smokers, anyone other than 
the Estate of Mr. Thomas Purdo.  
That's a factor that you're entitled to 
consider as you decide whether and if how so -- how 
much punitive damages to award.  
You're also reminded in your jury instructions 
that, in Number 8, that, "The manufacture, sale, 4853
and advertising of cigarettes is a lawful activity.  
You may not impose punitive damage to punish a 
Defendant for simply manufacturing, selling, or 
advertising cigarettes."
In other words, just because they remain in 
the cigarette business making and selling a 
dangerous and addictive product, the companies 
can't be punished for that.  That's protected.  
They're allowed to do that.  
You might recall from phase one again, I'll 
remind you, that the Court instructed you that 
Dr. Proctor's testimony, much like plaintiffs asked 
you to consider today in their efforts to establish 
that they should receive punitive damages, you can 
also consider it with respect to our defense of 
punitive damages.  
So really the question for you now is, should 
Reynolds in 2016 be punished for wrongful conduct 
that you found to have caused Mr. Purdo's death?  
And that conduct, as you know, stopped 35 years ago 
when he stopped smoking in 1981.  That's really the 
question that you have before you now.  
And you're entitled to consider mitigating 
evidence.  In fact, the instruction -- I would ask 
you to look closely at Instruction Number 3.  The 4854
language indicates that you should consider 
mitigating evidence, and it defines mitigating 
evidence as evidence which may demonstrate that 
there is no need to impose punitive damages against 
a defendant.  
And I'm going to suggest to you several pieces 
of evidence that we would ask you to consider as to 
whether or not this evidence serves the function of 
acting as a mitigating factor as you consider 
whether to award punitive damages.  
Those categories include these things.  First, 
Reynolds does not conceal or agree to conceal the 
health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes in 
2016.  That's the company you're being asked to 
punish today.  
Second, cigarette smoking is rapidly declining 
in this country.  You'll see in that same 
instruction that you're entitled to consider how 
circumstances have changed when evaluating whether 
to award punitive damages. 
So we're going to look a little bit at how 
smoking has changed in this country, because the 
circumstances of cigarette smoking in the United 
States are very, very different than they were when 
Mr. Purdo was smoking.  4855
We're going to ask you to consider the fact 
that cigarettes are dangerous and addictive by 
nature, not by design, as Dr. Proctor and 
Dr. Henningfield explained to you, that as 
Dr. Proctor explained to you, that Reynolds has 
spent a fortune trying to make a safer cigarette. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.  I 
thought we weren't supposed to use Dr. Proctor in 
this phase. 
THE COURT:  Counsel, sidebar. 
(The following proceedings were had before the 
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
THE COURT:  Go ahead, Mr. Alvarez. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  I just said -- I just said 
you can't use any of the testimony in -- in this 
phase to determine punitive damages.  You can't use 
any of what Dr. Proctor said.  So, I mean, he just 
said that to them, and now he's -- he's talking 
about Dr. Proctor and what he -- I mean, it's an 
inconsistent position.  
Either we could talk about Dr. Proctor or we 
can't talk about Dr. Proctor.  I'm not sure. 
MR. FURR:  I don't -- I think he might be 
mishearing things.  I never said you can't talk 
about Dr. Proctor.  In fact, I recognized that 4856
during Mr. Paige's argument, he argues to the jury 
that we didn't bring you any more evidence because 
we're relying upon the evidence that Dr. Proctor 
put in in phase one.  So I don't understand. 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  And there shouldn't be any 
speaking objections. 
THE COURT:  Okay.  All right.  I'm going to 
overrule. 
(The following proceedings were had in open 
court before the Court and the jury.)
MR. FURR:  You might recall just a little 
while ago Mr. Paige argued -- explained to you that 
they did not bring you further evidence because 
they were relying in part upon the evidence that 
Dr. Proctor brought you in the first phase of this 
case.  Well, we are, too.  There are things that 
Dr. Proctor told you about that we're going to ask 
you to consider as mitigating evidence.  
One of those things is Dr. Proctor told you 
that Reynolds spent a fortune trying to make a 
safer cigarette and that Reynolds makes a 
nicotine-replacement product that it markets 
nationwide to smokers to help smokers quit if they 
want to do so.  
So I'm going to look just a little bit closer 4857
at that.  Because, again, with the focus being that 
you're deciding whether to punish the company in 
2016 for conduct that could -- that for the last 
conduct that could be the basis for your punishment 
in 1981, you're entitled to look at how the 
companies have changed and how circumstances have 
changed. 
It's Instruction Number 10, in fact.  "In 
considering the amount of punitive damages, if any, 
to award against the Defendant, you should consider 
the extent to which that Defendants' conduct has 
changed from the conduct on which you based your 
determination that punitive damages may be 
warranted, and the extent to which the 
circumstances have changed."  
Like I said, because of the nature of the 
request being made, there's a new set of legal 
rules that are provided to you to guide your 
deliberation.  
Well, Dr. Proctor told you that the conspiracy 
ended in the year 2000.  The CTR is gone, Tobacco 
Institute is gone, that there is no conspiracy, and 
there's no concealment.  Not only is that 
information not concealed, Dr. Proctor told you 
that Reynolds has informed smokers since the year 4858
2000 that its products caused cancer.  They don't 
just conceal it, they tell smokers.  Stop -- they 
didn't just stop concealing that information, they 
now affirmatively tell smokers that information. 
He also told you that since the year 2000 
Reynolds has affirmatively told smokers that its 
products are addictive.  So no smoker will ever 
again, and will never again, since the year 2000, 
be harmed because R.J. Reynolds has concealed 
information about the dangers of cigarettes or the 
addictive properties of cigarettes.  Instead, they 
advise smokers of those things. 
The campaign of doubt, the effort to create 
confusion, the effort to create a false 
controversy, all of that ended a long time ago and 
could never hurt people again in the future.  
We also heard from Dr. Proctor, and, of 
course, again, this morning from Dr. Lipowicz, that 
the industry, since the year 2009, has been 
regulated by the FDA.  And you heard that, in a 
shorthand fashion, I'm sure Mr. Tepikian will cover 
this in more detail, that the FDA regulates design 
of cigarettes, how they're made, what goes into 
them.  
The FDA regulates everything that the tobacco 4859
companies tell people about cigarettes.  Their 
communications with consumers, their 
advertisements, all of that has to be approved by 
the FDA. 
You were told that the FDA regulates nicotine 
levels.  The FDA has the authority to control the 
amount of nicotine in cigarettes today.  So the 
companies do not have discretion to design products 
how they want or to advertise them in ways that 
could harm smokers or to manipulate the nicotine 
levels in ways to current smokers.  The FDA 
controls all those things. 
So there's no punitive damages needed to deter 
or punish the company for doing those things.  They 
don't do them anymore. 
I mentioned that, when we looked at 
Instruction 4, I believe it was, it had -- it 
instructed you that you could consider how 
circumstances have changed, how circumstances have 
changed, because circumstances of cigarette smoking 
in the United States have changed dramatically.  
Dr. Proctor explained all this to you.  
He told you that smoking in the United States 
is in a rapid decline, that there are about 4 
billion less cigarettes sold every year and that 4860
adult per-capita consumption has declined steadily 
since 1963.  In fact, his testimony was, "And 
today, adult per-capita consumption is actually 
about 75 percent less than it was in 1963."  
Answer:  "That's right.  '63, it's around 
4,400 cigarettes smoked per year per adult, and now 
it's almost a third of that."  
He told you that today a much smaller 
percentage of adults smoke, that among adults who 
do smoke, they smoke a lot fewer cigarettes per day 
and that the tobacco companies are selling fewer 
cigarettes per day.  
What Dr. Proctor described as the cigarette 
epidemic or the smoking epidemic is over.  That's 
over.  In fact, he went further and told you that 
the tobacco-burning cigarette market is in a period 
of collapse and that smoking prevalence among 
adults has been decreasing since 1964.  
And, again, the primary way he described it 
was that smoking is in rapid decline and that 
smoking has been de-normalized.  In other words, 
it's an abnormal thing to do.  It's no longer like 
chewing gum.  It's an abnormal thing to do that you 
can only do in certain places.  And we all know 
that there's a great deal of -- of -- in this -- in 4861
society today, smoking cigarettes is widely 
criticized.  
And no one likes to be around cigarette 
smoking, and it's restricted to only certain types 
of places.  And Dr. Proctor described this simply 
having been de-normalized.  
But it went -- goes even further than that, 
because one of the simple issues in this case has 
been youth smoking.  And one thing that's 
absolutely clear is that what Dr. Proctor described 
as a youth smoking epidemic is over even faster 
than the smoking epidemic.  
He told you that youth smoking has plummeted 
since 1997, that smoking by junior high and high 
school students is down by at least 66 percent 
since 1996, that it's been de-normalized, that it's 
not cool or glamorous or sexy anymore.  In fact, 
it's stigmatized today for kids to smoke and that 
those rates are declining even faster than adult 
rates, especially here in Florida.  
The testimony was that Florida has the second 
lowest rate of youth smoking in the United States.  
And within Florida, Broward and Palm Beach counties 
are tied for the second lowest rate of smoking in 
Florida.  The youth smoking epidemic is over.  The 4862
smoking epidemic is over.  And Dr. Proctor told you 
that cigarette smoking is on the way to becoming 
extinct in this country.  
I asked him, "Do you expect us to reach a date 
where basically that we have no cigarettes left in 
our society; right?"  
Answer:  "Yeah, I think it -- it will become 
extinct." 
And so you're being asked to punish companies 
that are actually on the way to the -- the business 
of selling tobacco-burning cigarettes is on its way 
to extinction anyway.  And you're entitled to 
consider how those circumstances have changed. 
You mentioned before that you have Instruction 
Number 8 that says you can't punish the company 
merely for making, selling, or advertising 
cigarettes.  It's a legal product.  And although 
it's on its way to becoming extinct, they have the 
right to stay in that business, and they can't be 
punished merely because they continue to be in that 
business. 
Both Dr. Proctor and Dr. Henningfield talked 
to you about cigarette design, so I want to look at 
that.  They both explained to you that cigarettes 
are dangerous and addictive by nature, that 4863
blending, additives, and engineering are not the 
reason that cigarettes were dangerous or addictive.  
They told you that nicotine occurs naturally 
in tobacco, that there's less nicotine in a 
manufactured cigarette than in the plant, that 
adding ammonia does not make cigarettes more 
addictive, that adding additive-free cigarettes 
were not safer or less addictive.  And they told 
you that cigarettes can't be made safe.
You might remember Dr. Proctor told you that 
the only safe cigarette is the cigarette that's not 
smoked.  
He explained to you that tobacco leaf picked 
from the ground in a tobacco field would contain 
nicotine.  And if you lit that leaf, the smoke that 
you would generate from that unprocessed leaf would 
contain about 7,000 chemicals, including all of the 
same carcinogens that you find in cigarette smoke, 
that they can't be made safe. 
Dr. Henningfield told you that manufactured 
cigarettes are no more addictive or dangerous than 
roll-your-own cigarettes and that they actually 
deliver less tar and nicotine than many 
roll-your-own cigarettes.  
And finally, as I mentioned, Dr. Proctor told 4864
you the only safe cigarette is one that you don't 
make.  
So the -- R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris are 
in the business of selling a product that's 
inherently dangerous and addictive, which cannot be 
made safe, but is a legal product, and legal for 
them to do so.  
But what have they done?  As Dr. Proctor told 
you, Reynolds has spent a fortune, a fortune, 
trying to make safer cigarettes since the 1950s.  
He also told you with respect to this issue 
about filter fraud and -- and whether the 
advertisement for filters misled consumers.  We 
didn't mention this in phase one, but Dr. Proctor 
told you that there is no evidence that Reynolds 
scientists believed that smokers of filtered 
cigarettes were getting just as much tar and 
nicotine as smokers of unfiltered cigarettes, and 
there's no evidence that Reynolds scientists 
believed that the filtered cigarettes -- the 
filters on the cigarettes were ineffective.  
And, in fact, he told you that the Reynolds 
scientists -- he saw documents reflecting that 
Reynolds scientists genuinely believed that filters 
were better for health. 4865
He explained to you that Reynolds had made 
between 50 and a hundred efforts to make it a less 
hazardous product.  We talked at length about the 
Premier cigarette where Reynolds spent about a 
billion dollars over the decade of the '80s trying 
to develop a cigarette that heated, but did not 
burn tobacco.  
He told you it was less mutagenic.  He thought 
it would be less carcinogenic.  But it failed in 
the marketplace, and ironically, it was criticized 
by the public health community.  
Reynolds also told the world about all the 
scientific studies that had been done with that 
product.  After it failed, he explained to you that 
they brought it back into the company, they spent 
several hundred million dollars trying to 
reengineer it so it would burn with little tobacco 
and impart better a little better taste, have a 
better chance to reach consumer acceptability, but 
still it was rejected by the public because they 
just haven't adjusted to the taste.  
And he also explained that even the Eclipse 
cigarette, even though it burns a little tobacco, 
is still less harmful at least with respect to lung 
cancer than others.  4866
So the place the companies find themselves in 
now is that they make a legal product that is 
naturally dangerous and addictive that cannot be 
made safe.  That cannot be made safe.  That's just 
the nature of the business.  It is legal to do so.  
You can't punish them for the basic nature of the 
business.  
We looked just a moment ago at Dr. Proctor's 
testimony that the smoking of cigarettes is on the 
way to becoming extinct in this country.  And 
Reynolds is actually accelerating that process 
because, as Dr. Proctor explained to you, they're 
making a nicotine-replacement product to help 
smokers quit.  
He told you about the product ZONNIC that is 
being made at Reynolds that is marketed to make 
nicotine replacement more accessible to smokers.  
Unlike other nicotine-replacement products that are 
put behind the counter in the pharmacy, it's put on 
the stand, the same place that cigarettes are sold 
so that when a smoker reaches for a pack, the 
ZONNIC is right there, that they can choose 
instead.  
It's in smaller packages, it costs less.  It 
actually costs less than a package of cigarettes, 4867
and so Reynolds is making that option available to 
smokers.  I submit to you that that should be 
considered by you as mitigating evidence with 
respect to whether a company who in 2016 is making 
a product to help smokers stop smoking should be 
punished. 
You also heard through some of the depositions 
that were played a little bit more information 
about how Reynolds informs consumers about the 
dangers of smoking.  
Mr. Paige played for you some deposition 
excerpts from Dr. Borgerding, one of the Reynolds 
company scientists.  And here is what 
Dr. Borgerding told you.  He told you that much 
like you heard about with Philip Morris, that 
Reynolds has on its website links that direct 
smokers to the websites of the National Institute 
of Health, the National Institute of Drug Abuse, 
the CDC, and to Surgeon General's Reports for more 
information on smoking and health. 
So in the first phase, you heard that Reynolds 
and other companies fought the Surgeon General, 
they criticized the public health findings, they 
went on television, they held press conferences 
criticizing those findings, telling the public that 4868
those findings were wrong and were misleading the 
public. 
Today they do the opposite.  Today they link 
to those things on their websites so that the 
public has access to the information by going to 
their website.  
Dr. Borgerding explained to you that today in 
2016 Reynolds' view is that if a smoker is 
concerned about the risks of smoking, they should 
quit.  No ifs, ands, or buts about it, they should 
quit.  He also told you that Reynolds works hard to 
reduce the risks for those who want to continue to 
use tobacco products.  In other words, they're 
still trying to develop reduced-risk tobacco 
products.  
And as you saw from Dr. Lipowicz this morning, 
those reduced-risk tobacco products have to go 
through the FDA process now and be approved by the 
FDA and verify that they are reduced-risk products 
before they can be marketed to the public. 
Dr. Borgerding further told you that Reynolds 
is working to reduce the health impact of tobacco 
upon society. 
So what's changed since the days Mr. Purdo was 
smoking?  Really everything that matters has 4869
changed.  There's no more concealment.  Instead, 
companies provide information to the public about 
the dangers of smoking.  Instead of discouraging 
people from quitting, they encourage people to quit 
if they want to, and they actually provide a 
product to them to help them quit.  
And so with respect to this question of 
whether punitive damages are needed in 2016 to keep 
Reynolds from repeating past conduct, I submit to 
you that the answer is no.  The companies --
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Object.  May we approach?  
THE COURT:  Sure. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  I apologize. 
(The following proceedings were had before the 
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) 
THE COURT:  Mr. Alvarez. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  So it was a long statement 
of law that they put up.  The -- the purpose of 
punitive damages is to punish and to deter other 
corporations, not what he put up on the board here.  
So I think it's inappropriate. 
MR. FURR:  Well, actually, the case law makes 
clear it's also to deter the tortfeasor from 
repeating that conduct.  
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Right.  4870
MR. FURR:  That's -- while that not might be 
the source, the case law says that. 
THE COURT:  So it's part -- 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  I think -- 
THE COURT:  So it's part of it, that's your 
response?
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Show me in the -- show 
me -- show me where it says that in the instruction 
that you gave.  There were a lot of instructions 
that you -- you denied.  
Let me see.  
Okay. 
THE COURT:  Okay?  
MR. FURR:  Thank you.  
(The following proceedings were had in open 
court before the Court and the jury.) 
MR. FURR:  Can you put that back up?
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Excuse me.  I apologize, 
Mr. Furr. 
MR. FURR:  That's okay.  If I had to apologize 
for all the mistakes I made, I wouldn't do much 
else.  
And so one of the ways you might want to think 
about this question about whether to award punitive 
damages is, are punitive damages needed in 2016 to 4871
keep Reynolds from repeating the past conduct.  And 
you know they're not.  That's not going to happen.  
They're a regulated industry that has come 
clean and tells the public about the dangers of 
smoking and tells the public to rely upon the 
public health authorities when making decisions 
about smoking, and they are trying to help smokers 
quit, if that's what they want to do.  
But having gone through the first phase of 
this case, I realize you might not agree with me 
about whether they need punished.  And so I'm going 
to talk with you a little bit about if you decide 
to punish them, what a reasonable award for 
punishment would be that is consistent with the 
instructions that you get.  
And I'll start with this, reminding you about 
the award you've already made.  You've fully 
compensated the estate with $21 million.  And we 
would ask that you look at your instruction and the 
direction that "any amount of punitive damages that 
you award must bear a reasonable relationship to 
the amount of compensatory damages you awarded to 
Mr. Purdo's estate."  
It should be an analysis based upon your prior 
verdict, in other words.  And we would ask that you 4872
consider thinking about how to award punitive 
damages as follows.  
You awarded $21 million to the estate.  13.86 
million of that is against Reynolds after the 
reduction for the comparative fault that you 
assigned to Mr. Purdo.  
During closing arguments, Reynold -- excuse 
me, the plaintiff accepted on behalf of the estate 
that Mr. Purdo was 5 percent at fault for the cause 
of his own death.  What we would suggest to you 
that would have a reasonable relationship to the 
verdict is you award them the damages related to 
the 5 percent of fault that was attributable to 
Mr. Purdo.  
You actually went higher than that, you went 
to 22 percent to Mr. Purdo.  We recommend you give 
them that 5 percent back that they admitted.  And 
if you do that, for Reynolds, if you take 5 percent 
of the award that you made against Reynolds, that 
would be a total award of -- excuse me, a punitive 
damage award of 693,000, which would bring the 
total award against Reynolds to 14,553,000, which 
would be sufficient damages to punish Reynolds and 
deter it from its past conduct.  
As you've heard, there are thousands of Engle 4873
cases pending.  Dr. Henningfield, the deposition 
you actually saw, he testified that he was 
spending -- testifying in thousands of Engle cases.  
Dr. Lipowicz told you about the number that Philip 
Morris faced.  
And I submit that with that number of cases 
pending, a request for $25 million in punitives in 
a single case is simply unreasonable when you think 
about the thousands of cases. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Objection.  That's 
inappropriate argument, Judge. 
THE COURT:  Overruled. 
MR. FURR:  When you think about the thousands 
of plaintiffs yet to have their case tried, it's 
unreasonable to award $25 million to a single 
plaintiff that you've already compensated with $21 
million. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Excuse me, Judge.  Can we 
approach?  
THE COURT:  Sure. 
[#DELETED OBJECTION DIALOGUE#]
MR. FURR:  So the simple point I want to leave 
you with is that when there are thousands of these 
Engle cases pending, we would ask that you consider 
whether awarding another $25 million in a single 
case is a reasonable thing to do.  
I'll take you back to an instruction that we 
already looked at.  It was Instruction Number 4 
that said, "You should not award punitive damages 
if you conclude that those purposes will served" -- 
"be satisfied by your compensatory award."  And, in 
other words, the award has a punitive effect on the 
defendant.  
Again, when there are thousands of pending 
cases, $21 million is enough punishment for any 
single case.  
Well, I'll end up this way.  
THE CLERK:  Ten minutes, Mr. Furr. 
MR. FURR:  Excuse me?  
THE CLERK:  You have ten minutes remaining.  
MR. FURR:  Okay.  I'm not going to need ten 
minutes.  
Some things to you -- for you to think about 
with respect to whether punitive damages will be 
awarded.  I would ask that you ask yourself the 4881
question, is a punitive award needed to make 
Reynolds stop concealing information?  No.  Would a 
punitive damage award make people more aware of the 
dangers of smoking?  No.  Would it cause smokers to 
change their behavior?  No.  Would it improve 
public health in any way?  No.  Would a punitive 
award cause the US Congress to reconsider the 
legality of cigarettes?  No.  Do we need a punitive 
award to get the FDA involved?  No.  
That's already happened.  
And so given that the compensatory award that 
you've already made is adequate punishment in terms 
of R.J. Reynolds, we would ask that you stop there 
and not go any further.
The only other thing I want to remind you of 
is an instruction that you -- part of an 
instruction that you got in the first phase.  And 
that is, you were told that you are to listen to 
other jurors with an open mind as they discuss 
their viewpoint, but you are also told this.  Do 
not give up your own honestly-held opinions just 
because other people think differently. 
Thank you very much.  Thank you, Your Honor. 


MR. TEPIKIAN:  Ms. Enochs, Counsel.  Ladies 
and gentlemen.  Once again, it's late in the day 
and I'm standing up here talking before you.  As I 
said, I don't know, a couple hours ago, Philip 
Morris and I respect your verdict.  We heard your 
verdict that you issued last night, and we respect 
it.  
I brought you Dr. Lipowicz today to tell you 
about the changes that occurred with the tobacco 
industry and Philip Morris over the last 20 years 
because I wanted you to understand that evidence.  
That's evidence that you did not have before you in 
the first phase of the trial.  
The first phase of the trial you heard, you 
know, a lot of evidence, as I said, that goes back 
50, 60 years.  You saw a lot of evidence that the 
original Engle jury saw when they considered those 
findings.  
What you heard today, though, was evidence 
that the Engle jury never heard.  They didn't hear 4883
anything about FDA regulation, they didn't hear 
anything about the MSA, et cetera.  And I'm going 
to go through that.  I'm going to go through that. 
I am, of course, going to try to be respectful 
of your time.  Mr. Furr has very diligently and 
carefully gone through the jury instructions.  I'm 
going to go through a few of them with you, but I'm 
not going to go through all of them.  Obviously, 
you have a set of instructions in front of you and 
he had them up on the board.  
But I do want to say that the reasons he 
posted at the end there of why punitive damages are 
not appropriate for R.J. Reynolds, they fully apply 
for Philip Morris as well.  They fully apply. 
Now, the question before you, and I said it 
earlier, is whether it's necessary to award 
Mrs. Enochs and her children more money to punish 
Philip Morris for the things that happened long ago 
and will not happen again.  
The judge has given you the instructions on 
that.  Mr. Furr has gone through those.  But you 
can only -- you can only award punitive damages if 
you conclude that it's necessary over and above.  
And it's your discretion not to award punitive 
damages.  There is a specific question.  There is a 4884
specific instruction with regard to that.  And that 
you should only award -- that you should not award 
punitive damages if you conclude that the purposes 
will be satisfied by the compensatory damage award 
you've already given the Enochs Estate, Mr. Purdo's 
Estate, $21 million.  
Judge Sasser's instructions walked you through 
that and Mr. Furr discussed it as well, but you 
can't punish Philip Morris for legal behavior, for 
selling cigarettes, and there is a specific 
instruction on that.  
There can't be any punishment for Philip 
Morris -- to Philip Morris for any harm that -- it 
can only be punished for harm to Mr. Purdo.  And as 
the jury instruction said, you must consider 
mitigating evidence.  And here is the jury 
instruction on that. 
And I'm going to talk a little bit more about 
that. 
You know, ladies and gentlemen, cigarettes are 
a legal product in this country.  It's been 
determined that cigarettes should be sold.  It's 
legal to market and sell them.  There is a warning 
label on the packs of cigarettes.  The decision 
about whether or not individuals smoke is a 4885
decision that we've decided as a country people 
should make.  
And it's not unlike they're -- how we regulate 
alcohol.  They all carry risks.  But I want you to 
know that it is a legal product. 
You may disagree with it, you may disagree as 
to whether or not cigarettes should be a legal 
product, but that's not why we're here today.  
That's not the purpose of this lawsuit.  That's not 
the issues that you are being asked to decide. 
So what you are being asked to decide is 
whether there is specific conduct that harmed 
Mr. Purdo and whether or not there should be 
punishment.  
Mr. Furr has already touched on this, but he 
is absolutely correct that any conduct after 1981 
could not be used and cannot be considered when you 
consider whether or not to punish R.J. Reynolds or 
Philip Morris.  Because that's conduct, any conduct 
after 1981 could not have harmed Mr. Purdo.  
But I want to make sure you understand that 
the conduct and the MSA and the FDA and the changes 
that the companies have undergone is evidence that 
you should consider.  That is post-1981 evidence.  
But it is evidence that you should consider as 4886
mitigating evidence.  As mitigating evidence.  
If you look at the instruction, it says, 
"Mitigating evidence, if any.  Mitigating evidence 
is evidence which may demonstrate that there is no 
need to impose punitive damages or that a reduced 
amount of punitive damages should be imposed 
against the Defendant."  
Again, that's why I brought Dr. Lipowicz to 
the area.  That's why I brought him here to tell 
you about the MSA, the FDA, the regulations, the 
restrictions that govern the tobacco industry and 
Philip Morris today so you can understand that the 
conduct that occurred in the past, in the '50s, in 
the '60s, in the '70s, can't occur again.  
Documents are disclosed.  The companies don't 
make any statements with regard to smoking and 
health.  They don't make any -- they don't make any 
statements that contradict the Surgeon General.  
They point to the Surgeon General and other 
public health officials as the place where people 
should get information.  They make sure that there 
is a single voice being heard.  They no longer 
engage in that discussion.  So I want you to think 
about that.  
And what I would like to do is just walk 4887
through the MSA.  Again, I'm not going to go 
through all the jury instructions that Mr. Furr 
did.  Obviously, it's late in the day.  But, you 
know, ladies and gentlemen, this is serious.  I 
mean, this is serious.  
Your verdict last night was substantial, $21 
million.  And plaintiff's counsel are asking for an 
additional $25 million on top of that.  So I know 
it's late, but I do want to take the time necessary 
to make sure you understand where things are now. 
So the MSA.  You heard that about 20 years 
ago, the 50 states filed lawsuits against the 
tobacco companies for reimbursement, seeking 
reimbursement for health costs, and as a result of 
the MSA, there were a number of restrictions that 
were put in place with regard to how Philip Morris 
and R.J. Reynolds and the other tobacco companies 
conduct business.  
The MSA provided for, first, significant 
payments to the states, and you saw that 
information about the billions of dollars that are 
paid and the billions of dollars that are paid to 
Florida. 
You saw that there -- you heard that there is 
no longer is a CTR or a Tobacco Institute.  Those 4888
have been disbanded.  You heard about the 
advertising restrictions that are in place now as a 
result of the MSA.  You heard about the websites 
that both companies have that provide information 
about smoking and health, a single voice for 
consumers. 
As a result of the MSA, Philip Morris no 
longer advertises on billboards, there is no signs 
in stadiums, arenas, there is no cigarette 
advertisement on busses, there is no advertising in 
concerts.  You will not find any Marlboro or any 
other branded type of hats or anything like that.  
They can't do that.  
If you see that now, it's because someone 
either got it 20 years ago or perhaps they are 
buying it off of eBay, but they are not getting it 
from Philip Morris and they are not getting it from 
any other tobacco companies. 
They no longer put products in movies, that 
doesn't happen anymore.  And as you know, and it 
wasn't part of the MSA, but there is no more TV 
advertising or anything like that.  
In 2002, you heard Dr. Lipowicz tell you that 
Philip Morris took their ads, cigarette advertising 
off the backs of magazines.  They didn't have to do 4889
that, but they did that.  And in 2005, you heard 
that they voluntarily stopped advertising in 
magazines altogether.  You pick up a magazine 
today, you will not find a single Philip Morris 
advertisement in there. 
That's a restriction.  That's something that 
Philip Morris did on its own.  And since 2005, the 
only place that you would see any type of Philip 
Morris advertising is if you went into a 
convenience store and you were purchasing a pack of 
cigarettes, you would see something -- some type of 
logo or something like that behind the counter. 
The Master Settlement Agreement prevents 
Philip Morris from either directly or indirectly 
advertising, promoting, or marketing in any way to 
youth.  
And every year, Philip Morris makes these 
payments to the states.  And those payments, as you 
heard, continue into perpetuity.  They'll go on for 
forever.  As long as Philip Morris is in business, 
they will continue the make those payments to the 
states, they will continue to make payments to the 
State of Florida.  
You have also learned that Philip Morris has 
complied with the MSA and the restrictions.  In 4890
almost 18 years, there's never been an enforcement 
action by any attorney generals on Philip Morris. 
So I also want to touch on the fact that if 
the MSA bars Philip Morris and the other companies 
from making any type of material misrepresentation 
about their products, they are not allowed to do 
that anymore.  And it also ensures there is no 
concealment because it requires that Philip Morris 
and the other tobacco companies publicly post their 
documents.  And that's also part of the FDA.  
That's also part of the requirements for FDA.  And 
that Philip Morris strictly complies with that. 
So 15 years ago, Philip Morris also changed 
what it said about smoking and health.  And you've 
heard Dr. Lipowicz tell you that Philip Morris' 
position on smoking and health is that Philip 
Morris agrees with the overwhelming medical and 
scientific consensus that cigarette smoking causes 
lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and other 
serious diseases in smokers, and smokers are far 
more likely to develop serious diseases like lung 
cancer than nonsmokers.  And there is no safe 
cigarette.  
Philip Morris also said that they agree with 
the overwhelming medical and scientific consensus 4891
that cigarette smoking is addictive, that it can be 
very difficult to quit smoking, but that this 
should not deter smokers from trying to quit. 
Those are simple, clear messages that Philip 
Morris provides to consumers now, and they don't 
engage in any discussions other than making those 
statements.  
Today, Philip Morris directs the public 
through its website to the messages of the public 
health community and it's done so for over 16 
years.  
Let's talk a little bit about FDA regulation.  
That was a major component of the testimony that 
Dr. Lipowicz provided you today. 
You heard that Congress granted the FDA 
authority to regulate the tobacco companies in 
2009, and you heard that Philip Morris had been 
supporting that since 2000.  Since 2000, they've 
been supporting that.  
And you saw the letter that Philip Morris, and 
it's part of the evidence, and I encourage you to 
take a look at it, the letter that Philip Morris 
sent to President Obama voicing their support and 
the reasons why they thought that it was important 
to do. 4892
Dr. Lipowicz told you it was to establish a 
common set of high standards for all tobacco 
manufacturers doing business in the US.  It was to 
have a framework for evaluation of tobacco products 
that are potentially less harmful than conventional 
cigarettes.  And it was to create clear principles 
for the accurate and scientifically grounded 
communication about tobacco products to adult 
consumers.  That's why Philip Morris supported FDA 
regulation.  
Now, you also heard that to carry out the 
mandate that the federal -- that the FDA set up the 
Center For Tobacco Products and that the Center For 
Tobacco Products is funded by moneys from the 
tobacco companies and Philip Morris with user fees.  
You've heard all about that, and that's so they can 
do research.  That's so they can gather more 
information, and that's part of it.  
The FDA act contains many of the same 
restrictions that were part of the MSA with regard 
to the advertising, but it gives the federal 
government the power to enforce those laws as well.  
So you have the states and also the federal 
government.  
You heard that the FDA has the right to show 4893
up at any Philip Morris facility at any time 
unannounced and that they have.  They can do that, 
they can inspect anything, any time.  
You have heard the FDA can seize products, 
shut down Philip Morris factories, and impose fines 
for any kind of noncompliance.  The FDA can 
establish the level of constituents in smoke 
including nicotine.  They can't take it down to 
zero, but they can tell the companies you need to 
take the nicotine down to .0001.  They can do that.
They also, Philip Morris and the other 
companies, provide the FDA with the exact formulas 
and ingredients for every one of their cigarettes, 
the exact formulas and ingredients.  And that 
Philip Morris also provides the ingredients list to 
its customers.  
The FDA can prohibit Philip Morris from 
placing any new products on the market.  Philip 
Morris or R.J. Reynolds or any other tobacco 
company cannot put a new product on the market 
without the FDA approving it ahead of time.  
And the FDA continues the obligations that 
Philip Morris and the other companies had about 
posting their documents and providing public access 
to those documents. 4894
So in short, as Dr. Lipowicz told you, the FDA 
pretty much controls everything that the tobacco 
companies do.  And they've been doing that since 
2009.  
So where does this leave us?  Where -- where 
are we now, in 2016?  Is it necessary to award 
Mrs. Enochs and the Estate of Mr. Purdo -- 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge, is it 
necessary. 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  You are to consider whether or 
not you should award additional money to the Estate 
of Mr. Purdo to accomplish punishment and 
deterrence.  That's what punitive damages are for.  
Is it necessary to punish and deter.  And I want 
you to think about that.  
If the conduct that has caused you to have 
concerns has been remedied, if the conduct that 
harm Mr. Purdo has been remedied, is there a reason 
for more punishment and is there a reason for 
deterrence?  
We know from your phase one verdict that you 
heard things that clearly concerned you.  There is 
no question about that.  But in this phase, my goal 
was to try to provide you with evidence about how 4895
things have been different and how things have 
changed.  
If you were concerned about cigarette 
advertising, you learned about the FDA and how they 
govern and control and restrict, and that the only 
place Philip Morris advertises publicly is now in 
the retail store.  
If what concerned you was the ingredients and 
additives in cigarettes, you now know that the FDA 
has a complete list of them all and the FDA 
controls what the companies put in a cigarette and 
they can't make any changes without the FDA 
approval.  
If what concerned you was whether or not 
people had information about what is actually in 
the cigarette, you know that the FDA has that 
information.  The FDA also has the power to tell 
the companies at any time take that out or take 
that out.  They have that power.  
If what concerned you was the level of 
nicotine in cigarettes, the FDA has the power to 
regulate that and to tell the companies exactly 
what nicotine levels should be in the cigarettes. 
If what concerned you was filtered 
cigarettes -- 4896
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  I object, Golden Rule 
violation, if what concerns you. 
THE COURT:  Okay, sustained. 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  You've heard evidence with 
regard to filtered cigarettes.  The FDA can tell 
the companies what to do with regard to the filters 
on their cigarettes.  
The FDA, and you heard about the marketing of 
lights and low-tar cigarettes, Mr. -- Dr. Lipowicz 
told you about that, he told you about the onsert 
and the tear strip and the information that Philip 
Morris was providing to customers who smoked light 
and low-tar cigarettes. 
You heard all of that.  
You also heard, if you were -- if the evidence 
that -- if part of the evidence was that you 
were -- excuse me. 
If it was because documents were not 
available, you now know documents are available and 
documents are regularly disclosed by the companies.  
You heard Dr. Lipowicz tell you about that.  
Things are different for Philip Morris, things 
are different for tobacco companies now.  It's a 
completely different environment that they're 
operating in.  It's a completely different 4897
environment than what was going on prior to 1981. 
If you look at the evidence and you consider 
the evidence, think about this.  A person who is 18 
years old now would never have seen a Philip Morris 
advertisement on TV or heard a radio ad, seen a 
billboard, saw anything in a stadium or on a bus.  
If someone under the age of 18 had a pack of 
cigarettes, they would note and they would see 
there is a federally mandated warning label on 
there.  They would have never heard from Philip 
Morris, would have never heard any statement from 
Philip Morris other than that smoking is dangerous 
and addictive. 
THE CLERK:  You have ten minutes, Counselor. 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  Okay. 
They would have never heard about The Tobacco 
Institute, and they would never have heard about 
the Council for Tobacco Research.  For their entire 
lives, they would have been able to look at 
millions and millions and millions of pages of 
internal company documents, because they are 
publicly available.  
During their lifetime, Philip Morris would 
have spent close to 70 billion dollars to the 
states and $4 billion to Florida for tobacco 4898
prevention.  
The tobacco industry has undergone significant 
reform.  Punitive damages in this case are not 
necessary to deter Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds.  
First, they've already been deterred and controlled 
on how they conduct their business.  You heard 
about that with regard to the restrictions that are 
in place.  
And as for a message that punitive damage 
would send, I want you to think about this.  What 
does it say if a company enters into legally 
binding agreements that fundamentally change their 
business and put you under government oversight?  
What does it say that even if you agree to pay 
substantial sums of money to address conduct of the 
past, you still are punished with punitive damages?  
What is that message?  What is the incentive then 
to change?  
If you want to encourage companies to change, 
that goal -- 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Objection, inappropriate. 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  The goal would not be served by 
providing -- by awarding punitive damages here.  
The message would be that you're going to get 4899
punished no matter what you do, even if you've 
changed your conduct for the last 20 years.  
Now, notwithstanding this changed environment, 
Mrs. Enochs is asking for $25 million, $12.5 
million alone from Philip Morris.  And I talked to 
you about the deterrence, so now I want to talk to 
you a little bit about the punishment and whether 
or not that's reasonable.  
Mrs. Enochs -- think about the amount 
Mrs. Enochs is asking for.  It needs to bear a 
reasonable relationship to the compensatory award 
that was provided in the first phase of this case.  
Now, you clearly found that Mr. Purdo smoked 
Merit cigarettes.  By your verdict, that is clear.  
But again, the evidence was that Mr. Purdo's use of 
Merit was only a fraction of the total that Mr. -- 
that he smoked through his lifetime. 
Based on the evidence and your phase one 
verdict, you determined that Philip Morris was 12 
percent at fault, and based on that amount, based 
on that percentage and the amount that you 
assessed, Philip Morris is responsible for 2.5 -- 
$2,520,000. 
Is $12.5 million reasonable in light of the 
compensatory award that you assessed against Philip 4900
Morris?  I would suggest that the evidence doesn't 
support that.  
Remember, Mrs. Enochs and the estate of 
Mr. Purdo has been fully compensated.  Your award 
in phase one, fully compensated.  Any additional 
money you award now will go to them.  It doesn't go 
to the public.  It doesn't go to hospitals, it 
doesn't go to cancer research.  It goes to them. 
You should not award punitive damages if you 
conclude that the purpose of punitive damages will 
be satisfied by the amount you've already awarded 
in the compensatory phase.  Mr. Furr talked about 
that.  $21 million.  
And remember, you cannot and should not -- 
well, you cannot punish Philip Morris for any harms 
suffered by any individual other than Mr. Purdo.  
That's in the jury instructions.  
And I want you to consider that there are 
3,000 -- approximately 3,000 additional Engle cases 
pending.  If 12.5 million was awarded in those 
3,000 pending cases, it would be billions of 
dollars. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Judge, that's why -- 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  -- I asked to strike. 4901
THE COURT:  Disregard.  Stricken. 
MR. TEPIKIAN:  Members of the jury, you've now 
heard about FDA regulation, the Master Settlement 
Agreement, and the changed positions that Philip 
Morris has on smoking and health.  You know that 
the wrongful conduct that occurred cannot happen 
again.  And given the considerable changes over the 
last 16 years, I would submit to you there is no -- 
it is not necessary to award additional punitive 
damages in this case.  
As I said, in the first phase of this trial, 
you found that Philip Morris was 12 percent at 
fault, and you found that Mr. Purdo was 22 percent 
at fault.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I would suggest that 
when you look at the compensatory award and you 
consider the proportion of fault that you assessed 
to Philip Morris, that $150,000 would be the 
appropriate amount of money, not the 12.5 million 
that plaintiff's counsel are asking for.
This is the last time I'm going to get to 
speak with you.  Mr. Alvarez or Mr. Paige is going 
to have an opportunity to speak again, and then 
you'll begin your deliberations.  As with Mr. Furr, 
I want to tell you, we very much appreciate the 4902
time you put into hearing this case and the 
sacrifice you made with your lives.  
As Mr. Furr said, we're not upset by your 
verdict.  Yes, I was disappointed with your 
verdict, but I respect it, and I recognize it, and 
I know Philip Morris does as well.  Thank you very 
much for your time.  I would ask that you only 
consider the evidence that we presented today.  
Thank you. 
