MS. GALLAGHER: Thank you.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. This case is
about Richard Reider and the decisions he made. And as I go
through the evidence that you've heard and seen in this
courtroom over the past week, I want you to keep one question in
mind, and that is, is the Plaintiff in this case entitled to
millions and millions of dollars, when her husband knew and
25 102 understood the risks associated with smoking and never tried to
quit?
Mr. Reider made the decision to start smoking, and he
made the decision to continue smoking, knowing full aware of the
health risks of smoking. And he had the right to make that
decision. But if he never tried to quit smoking, then the
Plaintiff has not proved her case. And I'm going to spend my
time explaining to you why that is the case.
And to go through the evidence, I'm going to start
with an outline, to kind of follow through what you've heard
through the course of this week. And there's a lot of stuff on
there, but let me just talk briefly about it.
And you see it starts in 1958, and the reason the
timeline starts in 1958 here is because that's the first time we
ever really know anything about Mr. Reider. That is when the
Plaintiff in this case, Ms. Reider-Kirk, met Mr. Reider, and at
that point he was already smoking.
Now, we don't know why Mr. Reider started smoking.
There's no evidence of that. But what we do have is Dr. Burns'
testimony about the greatest predictors of whether someone will
smoke. And Dr. Burns told you that the greatest predictor of
whether someone will smoke is whether their family and friends
smoke. We don't know anything about Mr. Reider's friends at
this time in the '50s, but we do know about his family. You
know that his father smoked, you know that his older brother 103 smoked. In fact, you know that there were a lot of people in
his family that smoked cigarettes.
So we know in 1958 Ms. Reider-Kirk meets Mr. Reider,
and he is smoking. And at that time he is smoking a Marlboro
Red cigarette, the same cigarette that his older brother smoked,
and it's a filtered cigarette. Let's be clear that Mr. Reider
always smoked a filtered cigarette. He didn't go from an
unfiltered cigarette to a filtered cigarette.
Now, we also know that during this time, that both Mr.
Reider's mother and Ms. Reider-Kirk's parents don't approve of
his smoking, and Mr. Reider knows that.
In 1963, Mr. and Mrs. Reider get married. Mr. Reider
at that point is reading the newspaper, he's watching the news.
In fact, you heard his best friend, Mr. Cato, describe him as
well versed in current events.
And then we brought you a whole bunch of Time
Magazine, newspapers, Reader's Digest, different TV reports that
talked about smoking being dangerous and that smoking was
addictive. But what's important in this case is that we know
Mr. Reider got that message and he got that message loud and
clear.
In 1964, the Surgeon General comes out with a landmark
report that tells the American public smoking causes lung
cancer. And 1964 was also a very big year for the Reiders,
because as you will recall, that's when Ms. Reider finds out 104 that she is expecting their first child. And she goes to the
doctor, and the doctor in 1964 tells her, "You need to quit
smoking because smoking can be bad for your child." And what
does she do? She goes home and she stops smoking. She makes
that choice.
In 1966, the first warning label goes on every pack of
cigarettes that was ever sold after that, and it says "Caution:
Smoking may be hazardous to your health."
Then we go, up at the top here, from the 1960s all the
way through the '80s, Mr. Reider's mother is harping on him and
telling him he needs to quit smoking, and she's more specific
than that. She says, they will make you sick, they are not good
for you, they are bad for you, and in fact, she tells him, they
will kill you.
We go to 1969, Ms. Reider-Kirk finds out she's
expecting again. She goes to the doctor, and again her doctor
tells her, "You need to quit smoking." She makes that decision,
she goes home and she stops smoking.
And then at some point in the 1960s or early 1970s we
have Mr. Reider referring to his cigarettes as coffin nails, as
in "another nail in your coffin."
Also, during this time period we have the incident
with Mr. Reider and Mr. Mataic, who are out hunting, and Mr.
Reider takes a handkerchief and blows cigarette smoke through
it. He then takes that handkerchief and compares it to his own 105 lungs when he tells Mr. Mataic, a smoker at the time, "This is
what our lungs looks like."
Then in 1970, the second warning label goes on and
it's strengthened, and it says "Warning: The Surgeon General
has determined that smoking is dangerous to your health."
In 1973, Mr. Reider's father dies from lung cancer.
Mr. Reider's father, who was a heavy cigarette smoker, dies of
lung cancer. Imagine the impact on Mr. Reider.
Now, I want to go back to something about the coffin
nails. Because you heard Dr. Burns when he was here, and Dr.
Burns said, "Well, when he talked about his coffin nails, I
think he was joking about it, and so therefore, I don't think he
had internalized it and he didn't really know it was bad for his
health."
Well, what the evidence was, is that Mr. Reider
referred to his own cigarettes as coffin nails both before and
after his own father died from lung cancer.
And according to Mr. Mataic, Mr. Reider would cough,
and as he said, would hack up a "ginder" and say, "Where are my
coffin nails?" That is clear evidence that Mr. Reider knew that
smoking was not only bad for health in general, but was bad for
his health.
Now, in 1974 the Reiders moved to Florida. So we're
going to move forward in time now into the 1980s. And in the
19 -- February of 1982, Mr. Reider has his first heart attack. 106 And after he has his first heart attack at age 39, his doctors
tell him, "You have got to quit smoking." And his doctors tell
him, "You have got to quit smoking, otherwise, you are putting
yourself at risk for yet another heart attack."
And sure enough, in June of that same year, Mr. Reider
has another heart attack, and then has to go through a
six-vessel bypass, the "CABG" surgery that Dr. Burns talked
about, in July of 1982.
How does his father-in-law react to this? After he
has his heart attack, his father-in-law starts clipping out
newspaper articles and magazine articles about the risks of
smoking, about the risks of lung cancer, and starts sending them
to Mr. Reider. Not once, not twice, but on a continuous basis
every time he finds an article, he sends it to Mr. Reider.
And Mr. Reider's own family is telling him that he
needs to quit smoking. Not just his doctors, but his wife and
his children are telling him that he needs to quit smoking.
Then we get to 1985, and you've heard about the
rotating warnings from 1985. And two of those warnings you
heard about specifically, and one was smoking causes lung
cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy.
Now, was any of this a surprise to Mr. Reider in 1985? No. He
had already experienced that through his own life experiences.
His father had had lung cancer, he himself had heart disease,
and he had heard about these complications of pregnancy way back 107 in the 1960s when Ms. Reider came home and said, "My doctor told
me I've got to quit smoking because it could be bad for the
baby." This was not news to him.
One of the other warnings said "Quitting smoking now
greatly reduces the serious risks to your health." And Dr.
Burns explained that, he explained how quitting at any time can
be better for a smoker, but then he also told you that quitting
reduces the excess risk of a smoker from developing lung cancer.
Remember that graph, his graph that he created, where
you put in the age and you put in if somebody were to quit by
this point, and you remember those lines? If Mr. Reider had
quit smoking 15 years ahead of time, it was kind of difficult to
tell the difference between the lungs. Dr. Burns explained all
of that.
Now, after his heart attacks, Mr. Reider was disabled
for the rest of his life. He continues to smoke. And then in
August he has yet another heart attack. And again, his doctors
are telling him -- the medical records are in there, you can see
he goes to the doctor on a regular basis. The doctors are
telling him, "You have got to quit smoking."
And then in 1995, Mr. Reider is diagnosed with lung
cancer, and unfortunately, there is nothing that can be done,
and he passes away.
Now, with all of this evidence, how does this apply to
the questions that Judge Rodgers gave you? And I'm going to do 108 much like Ms. Barnett did, and go through the questions with you
one by one.
And the first question is addiction. And you will
notice that in the instructions you got, there is no definition
of addiction. Whether you want to use chronic relapsing brain
disease or whatever definition of addiction, that is up to you.
But you need to remember that Dr. Burns testified that not
everybody who smokes a lot of cigarettes is addicted. And when
you think of Dr. Cummings, remember his test, that his,
Heaviness of Smoking Index, that somebody who has never smoked a
cigarette would end up being addicted.
I want to spend more of my time on question No. 2,
which was the question that Ms. Barnett showed you, and let's
put it back up.
Emily, can I have the ELMO, please? Thank you.
Now, whatever definition you choose to apply of
addiction, and whether or not you believe Mr. Reider was
addicted, that is not the end of what you have to consider.
Remember when Ms. Barnett would ask the experts, Dr. Cummings
and Dr. Burns, well, does trying to quit have anything to do
with being addicted, and they said no.
But what it has to do with is this question, and
that's why you have two questions. You have one question on
addiction, and then you have this question as to the legal cause
of his death. 109 Now, you showed -- Ms. Barnett showed you the
definition of legal cause, and I'm going to put it back up
because there's one part I want to focus on.
And here you see we have the long definition of legal
cause, but it says "So that it can reasonably be said that but
for the addiction, the death would not have occurred. It has to
contribute substantially --" right above that. When Ms. Barnett
was up here talking to you, she kept saying "a" cause, "it has
to be a cause." Well, it doesn't just have to be a cause, it
has to be a substantial cause. It has to be a "but for" cause.
And that's important, because what that means is that,
in answering question 2 --
Will you put that up, please?
In answering question 2, it means that the Plaintiff
has to prove to you that Mr. Reider's addiction was so strong
that but for that addiction, he would have quit in time to avoid
his injury. That is the only way you can say yes to that
question, is but for his addiction. Was his addiction so strong
that but for that addiction, he could have quit in time to avoid
his injury.
Now, Mr. Reider had --
Thank you, Kate.
Mr. Reider had the right to make the decisions about
his smoking, he had the right to continue smoking if he wanted
to, and he is the person responsible for those decisions, and 110 we're not criticizing him for that. But when you make those
decisions, you accept the responsibility for those decisions.
So let's go and look at Mr. Reider's opportunities to
try to quit smoking.
So let's look at Mr. Reider. Mr. Reider, in 1964, the
Surgeon General reports that smoking causes lung cancer. Mr.
Reider never tries to quit then. Mr. Reider never triesto quit
when Ms. Reider comes home and says, "I'm quitting for the
health of our baby." Mr. Reider never tries to quit smoking
when the first warning labels come out. Mr. Reider doesn't
try -- never tries to quit smoking the second time his wife
quits when she is pregnant with their second child.
Mr. Reider never tries to quit when his mother tells
him, "Cigarettes are going to kill you." Mr. Reider never tries
to quit when the second warnings come out, telling him that
smoking could be dangerous -- is dangerous to his health.
Mr. Reider never tries to quit even when he is
referring to his own cigarette as coffin nails. Mr. Reider
never tries to quit even when he acknowledges that a brown stain
on a handkerchief is what his lungs look like. And Mr. Reider
never tries to quit when his own father died from lung cancer.
The evidence from Dr. Burns is clear. If Mr. Reider
had tried to quit smoking at any of those times, and he had quit
smoking at any of those times, we wouldn't be here. He would
not have gotten the lung cancer that he later developed. 111 And every single witness who came in to testify to you
in front of this -- in front of you was consistent that Mr.
Reider never tried to quit smoking at any time. At any time.
Now, the Plaintiff brought you some evidence that she
wants you to believe were actual attempts by Mr. Reider to quit
smoking, and let's look at those.
Darlene Reider told you, "Oh, yeah, my dad tried to
quit when he came home from the hospital." Well, think about
that. This man has had a very serious surgery. He's been in
ICU, and he comes home, and it takes him a few hours to pick up
a cigarette. Does that really sound like a quit attempt to you?
They brought you evidence of Wellbutrin and said,
"This is Mr. Reider trying to quit, when he was on Wellbutrin."
Except that the Wellbutrin was Ms. Reider's, not his. Except
that the Wellbutrin you're supposed to take for 7 to 12 days --
7 to 12 weeks, he took for two days, smoking the entire time.
Same thing with the patch. The patch wasn't his, it
was Ms. Reider's. He wore one patch for one day. Does it sound
like a real quit attempt to you to say, I took some of my wife's
pills, put on a patch for one day, and smoked the entire time?
That, ladies and gentlemen, is not evidence of trying
to quit smoking. That is evidence of what Dr. Cummings told you
about when someone doesn't want to quit, but they want to get
somebody to quit harassing them and quit telling them; as he
described, the parents who bring the children into his stop 112 smoking clinics, and that child has no desire to quit, it's not
going to happen. That's what these were. These were not quit
attempts by Mr. Reider.
And we know that these weren't quit attempts because
the Plaintiff herself does not think these were quit attempts.
In this courtroom the experts have tried to characterize those
instances of being on Wellbutrin, of not smoking a cigarette for
a few hours when you come home from the hospital, of being on a
patch for a day, as quit attempts. But let's look at what Ms.
Reider-Kirk had to say about this.
And you saw these earlier. Way back in 2011, before
we were coming anywhere near this courtroom, Ms. Reider filled
out information under the penalty of perjury. "I declare under
penalty of perjury that all the information provided in here is
true and correct." This is May of 2011. And she was asked a
specific question, and that question was "Did the deceased
smoker --" that's Richard Reider. "Did the deceased smoker ever
try to quit smoking?" And she wrote "No."
And then the next question is, if he ever tried,
please tell us about it. Tell us when it was, what he used, how
long he smoked. And that was left completely blank. Then a few
months later Ms. Reider again filled out what we call
supplemental worksheets, where you can go and amend or change
your answers if you want to. And in November of 2011, she
declared again that these answers were true and correct, and 113 we've got the same question, "Did the deceased smoker ever try
to quit smoking?" And again, she says "No."
Ms. Reider never thought her husband tried to quit
smoking. And that's consistent with what you heard from every
other witness. Mr. Mataic, Mr. Cato, never ever saw him do
anything that looked like he was trying to quit smoking. It's
one thing to say, "I want to quit." It's another thing to do
something. It's that old, you know, "listen to what I say and
not what I do." Well, let's look at what he did, or, really,
didn't do.
Because to quit smoking takes not only motivation and
the desire to quit, but you have to do something, you have to
actually try. And there is no evidence that Mr. Reider ever
tried to quit smoking. He never went to a smoking cessation
class. As far as we know, he never asked his doctors for help.
He never asked his doctors for medication like his wife had. He
never asked his doctors for a patch like his wife had.
He never threw away the reminders. If you're trying
to quit, you have to get rid of the reminders. You have to take
those ashtrays and throw them away, hide them so you don't see
them.
One thing you have to do in order to quit smoking is
to at least get rid of your cigarettes. You've got to throw
those away. He never took that basic step. He never tried to
quit smoking. 114 And that's important, because Dr. Burns and Dr.
Cummings both told you that anyone can quit smoking, any smoker
can quit smoking, heavily addicted smokers quit. In fact, Dr.
Cummings told you that, based on his definitions, most of the 60
million people who have quit smoking in this country were
addicted and they quit, and most of them quit with no medical
assistance at all, because things like the patch and these
medications are new.
And another important thing they told you is that
addiction does not prevent you from trying to quit smoking.
There is nothing about addiction that makes you not try. And
there has been absolutely no evidence in this case that Mr.
Reider was any different than the tens of millions of Americans
who quit while he was alive.
You know, Dr. Burns talked about that cycle of
cessation where people were stuck in the circle. And while he
was doing that, I thought "hmm." Now I keep telling you what
does this have to do with Mr. Reider, and that's because Mr.
Reider never got in that cycle, he never ever got in that cycle
because he never tried, he never tried to quit smoking. And
Plaintiff can't prove that he couldn't quit if he didn't try.
We know that had he quit back in those times when he
knew smoking was dangerous, when he knew he should quit, that we
wouldn't be here because he would not have gotten his lung
cancer. 115 So the answer to question No. 2 is no. If Mr. Reider
had quit smoking, we wouldn't be here. The sole legal cause of
his lung cancer was his failure to quit smoking, and in fact,
his failure to ever even try.
Now, the third question you have in front of you talks
about comparative fault. And I don't think you'll get here
because you have to answer yes to questions 1 and 2 to get to
question No. 3. But I have to address all the questions because
this is my one time to talk to you.
Question No. 3 asks about comparative fault. And they
told you -- Ms. Barnett already told you that you should
consider Mr. Reider's smoking, that he started to smoke and that
he continued to smoke. But when you think about this question,
you need to think about who's making the decisions. Because
both Dr. Cummings and Burns told you it's up to the smoker to
decide whether to quit. Nobody can make a smoker quit. They
have to be motivated and they have to try. And it would take --
as Dr. Cummings' "Smart Move" pamphlet said, you've got to put
up with some uneasy moments. And the only person who can do
that is the smoker. Nobody can make you do that.
And because those were Mr. Reider's decisions and the
decisions he made, if you get to this question, those were 100
percent his decisions. He made the decision at every step of
his life whether he would continue to smoke or whether he would
try to quit, and he never tried. 116 The fourth question -- and I'm going to do similarly
to what Ms. Barnett did, is to talk about questions 4 through 7
together.
And Kate, if you would put up four. Do we have the
ELMO?
And you saw this question before. "Did Richard
Reider, Sr. rely to his detriment on Philip Morris's concealment
or omission of material information after May 5th, 1982
concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking
cigarettes?" And then it says "If you answered yes to question
4 according to your unanimous determination, then you will
consider whether Mr. Reider's reliance was a legal cause of his
death." And then it asks you about legal cause, and questions 6
and 7 are similar.
Now, you heard a lot about what happened in the '50s,
'60s and '70s, and you've got the date here of May 5th, 1982.
And you don't need to worry about where that date comes from.
It is from the Engle litigation, and that has nothing to do with
the specific facts of this case. But it is important for you
because it is the date that you need to look at.
And another thing is, in your instructions you will
see that this reliance here -- which we didn't hear much about
when Ms. Barnett was talking. We heard a lot about what Philip
Morris did, and we heard a lot about what the American public
knew or didn't know. The question that you have to answer in 117 this whole case is about Mr. Reider, what statements or
concealment affected Mr. Reider? What did he rely on to his
detriment? That's a big part to this question.
And you will see in your instructions that the
reliance must be reasonable. In other words -- here it is.
"Therefore, in determining whether Richard Reider, Sr.
reasonably relied to his detriment on a statement by Philip
Morris that concealed or omitted material information --"
something that would have mattered to him "-- you may not
consider evidence of alleged statements, concealments, or other
conduct that occurred before May 5th of 1982."
You know that Mr. Reider knew long before May 5th of
1982 that smoking could cause lung cancer. And we went through
all those dates on the timeline. Remember in 1973 his own
father had lung cancer. He had his own first heart attack
months before May 5th, 1982. In February of 1982 he has a heart
attack and his doctors tell him, quit smoking or you're going to
have another one. Mr. Reider was well aware of the health
consequences of smoking, not because of what everybody else
knew, but because of experiences from his own life.
Now, let me talk a little bit about the Plaintiff's
theories of the information that was concealed. And she talked
about that Mr. Reider was somehow defrauded because Philip
Morris claimed smokers would get lower tar and nicotine from
filters and lights. So let's talk a little bit about filters 118 and low-tar or light cigarettes.
Because what the Plaintiff wants you to believe here
is that, even though Mr. Reider understood the health risks of
smoking in general, that he was somehow fooled into thinking
filtered or low-tar and light cigarettes were safe. And this
information comes from Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings. And let me
digress for a minute and talk about that.
You have an instruction from Judge Rodgers that says
"When a witness has been or will be paid for reviewing and
testifying concerning the evidence, you may consider the
possibility of bias and should view with caution the testimony
of such a witness where court testimony is given with regularity
and represents a significant portion of the witness's income."
Well, what do you know about Dr. Burns? He has
testified to juries like you over 50 times. And we know that he
has been paid in these cases, but he can't tell you how much.
All we know, that he has been paid somewhere between $3 million
and $10 million for working on these cases. That's as much as
he can narrow it down for you.
And then we've got Dr. Cummings, who, in his war on
tobacco, has testified in 50 cases, in front of juries just like
you, and also earned a substantial amount of money. And under
the Court's instructions, that's one of the things you need to
consider when evaluating their testimony.
So let's get back to low tars and filters. First of 119 all, filters were always the cigarette that Mr. Reider smoked.
And I'm a little confused because if they're saying that Mr.
Reider smoked filtered cigarettes back in the '50s because he
thought they were safer, well, that tells you right there that
before he ever picked up a single cigarette, he made a decision,
"I'm going to choose this one because I know it's safer." He's
smoking Marlboro filtered cigarettes because that's what his
brother smoked.
Now, what the Plaintiffs are telling you is that the
low-tar, light cigarettes, that this somehow -- that somehow Mr.
Reider thought these were safe. And this is based on what Dr.
Burns told you. And what Dr. Burns spent hours telling you
about was that, in his opinion, across the population, meaning
looking at all these studies, across the population, on average,
low-tar or light cigarettes do not give smokers less tar and
nicotine. He's talking about averages. He is not talking about
individuals.
But let's look at individuals, and in fact, let's look
at Mr. Reider, because this case is about Mr. Reider, not the
general public, not all smokers, it's about Mr. Reider.
And what do we know about Mr. Reider and his smoking
of Marlboro Light cigarettes? Well, we know that when Mr.
Reider was smoking Marlboro Light cigarettes, he was not getting
the same amount of nicotine as he did when he had been smoking
Marlboro Reds. 120 How do we know this? Because he had to smoke more of
them. Remember Dr. Cummings and Burns told you that smokers
compensate to get to that same level of nicotine. When they
switch from one cigarette to a different cigarette, they
compensate because they're not getting that same amount of
nicotine, and so they do things to get more. They talk about
things like puff volumes, and whether they smoke more of a
cigarette. Well, here it's very simple. Mr. Reider started
smoking more, and so much more that 30 years later both his
children remember it was a lot more. In fact, you heard he went
from buying packs to cartons. And if his children noticed this
substantial increase in his smoking, then surely Mr. Reider
noticed it. He's the one buying the cigarettes.
And so the idea that on a population level, people
weren't getting the less tar and nicotine from every cigarette,
is irrelevant to Mr. Reider, because his own smoking behavior
told you that when he started smoking those light cigarettes, he
wasn't getting the same level of nicotine, and that's why he had
to smoke more, and he was perfectly aware of that.
Let me mention something else, too, because Dr.
Cummings, I think, characterized Mr. Reider's switch to light
cigarettes as another quit attempt.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, I want you to think about
that. Do you really think that switching to a different kind of
cigarette, and then smoking a whole lot more of them, is an 121 attempt to quit smoking? Smoking more cigarettes is an attempt
to quit smoking, that is what Dr. Cummings would like you to
believe.
And by the way, Philip Morris never said that low-tar
cigarettes were safe. Even Dr. Cummings admitted that Philip
Morris never used the word "safe" in describing lights, never
said that lights were less addictive, never said lights will
help you quit smoking. In fact, nobody told Mr. Reider that.
The evidence was exactly opposite of that.
The public health community who was saying, quit
smoking, quit smoking, quit smoking, when they talked about
low-tar and light cigarettes, or filtered cigarettes, for that
matter, they said, "Smokers, what you need to do is quit. But
if you can't quit, based on these 50 epidemiological studies
that are out there, you reduce your risk a little bit if you go
to filters or light cigarettes." The public health community
never said they're safe, they said they're less dangerous, but
your risk of getting diseases like lung cancer is substantially
higher than somebody who doesn't smoke. That's what the public
health community was telling people. That's what the brochures
said. If Mr. Reider had gone to a doctor and seen those
American Cancer Society brochures, it was going to tell him,
quit smoking, you can reduce your risk a little bit if you
switch.
And what else was out there about light cigarettes? 122 Marlboro Lights always had warnings on the packs. Remember,
they came out in 1971, and that's when every single cigarette --
past the time when every single cigarette had to have a warning
on it. Every single Marlboro Lights ad had a warning on it,
because that changed also in the early '70s.
And the warnings were always the same. It's not as if
Mr. Reider one day picked up his Marlboro Reds, and it said
"Warning: The Surgeon General has determined that smoking is
dangerous to your health," then the next day picked up Marlboro
Lights and it said these are safer, or these are less dangerous.
It had the exact same warning on it. There wasn't a separate
warning for lights, it was all the same.
And Mr. Reider's doctors were telling him to quit.
It's a little unclear as to when Mr. Reider actually quit -- or
actually switched from Marlboros to Marlboro Lights, from the
Reds to the Lights, but most people say it was after his first
heart attack. His doctors didn't tell him, "Oh, that's fine,
you switched from the Reds to the Lights, so I'm not going to
tell you to quit smoking anymore." They continued to tell him
to quit smoking, no matter what kind of cigarettes he was
smoking.
His family did the same. They didn't all sit back and
say, "Oh, now you're smoking Marlboro Lights, it's all fine."
You heard from Ms. Reider-Kirk how she pleaded with her husband
to stop smoking after his heart attack, how his kids asked him 123 to stop smoking after his heart attack, and that was all while
he was smoking Marlboro Lights.
And Mr. Reider himself has a heart attack, his doctors
tell him to quit, he switches to lights, and he has another
heart attack. That in and of itself tells Mr. Reider, "I can't
avoid these health risks by switching to light cigarettes."
And again, in these questions you have the "legal
cause of the death" question to answer, and the analysis on that
is the same. Dr. Burns explained that if he had continued to
smoke Marlboro Reds, if he hadn't switched, he still would have
gotten his lung cancer.
And Dr. Cummings told you an interesting fact, because
Dr. Cummings told you that he did his own study. In 2004 he
went and looked at people who smoked Marlboros and people who
smoked lights -- people who smoked, you know, regular
cigarettes, people who smoked lights, to see if there was any
difference in their rates of quitting. Because at one point,
you know, he's telling you that Marlboro Lights was a quit
attempt, this was how he was trying to quit. Well, in his own
studies, he looked at people who went from regular cigarettes to
light cigarettes, and said, let's see if there's any difference
in the rate at which they quit. And there wasn't.
Switching does not affect the rate at which people try
to quit. And nothing about switching to lights prevented Mr.
Reider from trying to quit. 124 Now, Dr. Cummings is the one who brought you the
Plaintiff's theory, his theory, about these design changes to
cigarettes that made them more addictive. He talked about all
sorts of documents from the 1960s forward, about reconstituted
tobacco, ventilation holes, the filters, all of these different
things, and he wants you to believe that those changes in design
made those cigarettes more addictive.
He wants you to believe that, but that's not what Dr.
Cummings believes.
Remember when I asked him if he believed that the
cigarettes on the market today were more addictive than the
cigarettes from the 1950s, and he said no.
So although he wants you to believe that all of these
design changes from the 1960s forward made these cigarettes more
addictive, he himself doesn't believe that. He says the
cigarettes back in the 1950s, before all of these design
changes, the cigarettes today are the same, they are just as
addictive, not more, not less. So he doesn't even believe the
theory he's trying to get you to believe.
And let's go back and talk about what Mr. Reider
believed. Because he knew that cigarettes could cause cancer
long before May 5th of 1982. We've gone over those dates. Mr.
Reider did not need nor was he waiting for Philip Morris to tell
him what he had already known for decades. And when you're
answering that question, it is specific to Mr. Reider. 125 The Plaintiff has brought you no evidence of any
statement after 1982 that Mr. Reider heard, and they sure
haven't brought you any evidence of any statements that he
relied on after 1982. And they can't. Because what they're
saying he didn't know, Mr. Reider was fully aware of. He knew
that smoking was dangerous and he made the decision not to quit
smoking.
The Plaintiff has failed to prove that Mr. Reider
reasonably relied, to his detriment, on something he didn't
know, of any alleged statement or omission or concealment after
May 5th of 1982, that was the legal cause of his disease. The
Plaintiff has failed to prove that to you.
Now, the next question you have to answer is damages.
And I can't tell you how to answer that question except to say
that $8 million is a whole lot of money. But I do want to talk
about one thing here because I think you've been left with the
wrong impression. When Darlene Reider was testifying, she told
you that her mother, the Plaintiff, had been hospitalized twice
for issues surrounding Mr. Reider's death. In fact, she told
you that Ms. Reider was hospitalized after Mr. Reider was
diagnosed, and then again after he died.
Well, I think Darlene was confused, Darlene Reider was
confused. It's been a long time. Because Ms. Reider's medical
records are in evidence, and you can look at them if you want
to. And what you will see is that Ms. Reider was hospitalized 126 seven months before Mr. Reider was ever diagnosed with cancer,
and then was hospitalized again about a year-and-a-half after
his death, and there was a lot more going on in her life at that
time than just dealing with the loss of her husband.
Now, the final question I'm going to address with you
is punitive damages. The final question asks you whether you
find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are
warranted against Philip Morris. And the issue here is clear
and convincing evidence. This is a different standard, a
different burden of proof on the Plaintiff than preponderance of
the evidence. And she has to show you by clear and convincing
evidence that she's entitled to punitive damages, whether she
gets more money.
And when you look at the instructions, you see that
it's a much higher standard.
Kate, can you put it up?
That is more -- "In contrast, clear and convincing
evidence is evidence that is more compelling and persuasive. It
is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and
of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction
without hesitation about the matter in issue."
It's a much higher standard. You have to be really,
really convinced that punitive damages are appropriate.
And the punitive damages have to be awarded on --
based on harm caused to Richard Reider, not to the general 127 public, not to the rest of the world, and not to all of the
other smokers. Harm caused to Mr. Reider.
And what the Plaintiff is saying that harm is, is that
he was somehow fooled into thinking that cigarettes,
specifically light cigarettes, were safe. And you know from the
evidence in this case that that is not true. So there is
nothing Philip Morris did that harmed Mr. Reider, and you should
answer that question no.
The same as you should answer questions 4 through 7.
The evidence in this case is that Mr. Reider had the
information he needed to make an informed decision as to whether
to quit.
Now, when I stood up both at opening and today, I told
you that this case was about Mr. Reider. And Plaintiff has
failed to prove her case to you. She has failed to prove that
Mr. Reider's addiction was so strong that but for that
addiction, he would have quit smoking in time to avoid his
injury.
What this case is about is that Mr. Reider never
tried. He never even tried to stop smoking. He knew about the
health risks of smoking and continued to smoke despite knowing
of those risks. He decided not to try.
Now, I'm about to sit down, but unlike Ms. Barnett, I
don't get to come back up here. I don't get a chance to tell
you, "Wait, wait, wait, I want to say something about what Ms. 128 Barnett just told you." And so while you're listening to Ms.
Barnett, please think, okay, if Ms. Gallagher could get back up,
what would she tell me? And I'm guessing the question I would
be asking you would likely be, what does this have to do with
Mr. Reider? Because it all comes down to Mr. Reider. Not the
general public, not the world. Mr. Reider.
Mr. Reider was the only person who could make the
decision to smoke or to try to quit. Those were decisions that
he made during his lifetime, knowing the risks of smoking, and
those decisions should not be second-guessed in this lawsuit,
his decisions, and the Plaintiff is asking you to award her
money for his decisions.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for your
jury service. Thank you so much for your attention. We really
appreciate it.
THE COURT: All right. Thank you.
Ms. Barnett?
MS. BARNETT: Yes, Your Honor, I believe the
Defendants might have something to address with the Court.
MR. CHESIN: At your discretion. It can be now or it
can be after.
THE COURT: Let's do it after.
MS. BARNETT: Okay.
I know you guys are tired of listening to lawyers
talk, so I'm going to try to be brief here, but there's a few Rebuttal Argument/Barrett
129 things that I feel like I need to say.
First of all, what the lawyers say -- it's in the
instructions, and you know this. What the lawyers say up here
are not facts, and you guys paid close attention, you took good
notes. If there's a question about what evidence came in, look
at your notes, because there's some things that have been said
that I didn't hear, like all that business about how his first
cigarettes were always filtered cigarettes, because I never
heard proof about what his first cigarettes were. We don't
know. We just know the filtered Selectrate cigarettes he was
smoking when Barbara Reider met him.
Or Dr. Burns and this whole thing about he would not
have died if he had stopped. You remember I brought that chart
up after that question was all done, and I said, but what about
this column, what is this relative risk 2.78, and Dr. Burns said
it means even if he did quit, he had 278 percent greater chance
of dying than somebody who had never smoked.
And so in the timeline that came up here -- we didn't
see that timeline during trial, when there was a witness here
who could have looked at it. I don't believe the evidence came
out the way that was on that timeline. But anyway, none of that
is evidence. The evidence is in your notes and what you heard.
And the same for the study that Dr. Cummings did. Right, he did
a study that showed it turns out when people go to light
cigarettes, it doesn't help them quit. That doesn't mean Rebuttal Argument/Barrett
130 they're not trying to quit, but the study did show it doesn't
help you quit.
So that's the first thing I want to say, and the
second is this: The law, the law is on the instructions that
the Court gives you, and from nowhere else. So what the lawyers
say up here is not the law. And Ms. Gallagher just said we had
to prove he could not quit. For his addiction to have been a
cause or a substantial contributing factor, we had to prove that
Mr. Reider could not quit. That's not in the instructions,
that's not on the verdict form. You look at instruction 8 and
10, which sets out what's required to prove legal cause. It
doesn't say anything like that.
Now, as the judge said in the beginning, Philip Morris
had the whole time in this case to bring any witness they
wanted, any expert they wanted. They didn't bring anybody here
at all to explain what happened or to tell you something we said
was wrong, and instead they attacked Mr. Reider and they just
did it, attacked him for not trying hard enough to quit. Maybe
his wife could attack him and criticize him for not trying
harder, and maybe his children could criticize him for not
trying harder to quit. But if there's anyone in the whole wide
world who shouldn't be allowed to come in here and say, we're
not responsible because he didn't try hard, it's Philip Morris,
who worked so hard to get him addicted and keep him addicted,
and make sure it was as hard as possible to quit. Rebuttal Argument/Barrett
131 Oh, when Mr. Reider was alive and they could sell him
cigarettes, they didn't want him to quit, they wanted him
smoking. But now here, now, they want to say this whole case is
about quitting. That's what the case is about. Because they
don't want you to think about what Philip Morris did. Never
mind our business model was to keep people smoking and keep them
from quitting, and make it as hard as possible, and get them
young while their brains are still vulnerable. Never mind all
that.
And they also attacked him saying he knew the risks.
How can Philip Morris come in here and tell you it's his fault
because he knew, he should have known? For 50 years they said
they couldn't figure out whether or not smoking causes any
diseases of cancer. But it's his fault, he shouldn't have
listened to us, he never should have believed us, we couldn't
figure it out.
And remember too -- I'm not going to put it back up,
but the Engle findings say clearly, what was hidden was not
known, not otherwise available. If someone brings this up in
deliberations, remind them that's already been determined and it
can't be challenged. It applies in this case.
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor, that
mischaracterizes the evidence -- I mean, the finding.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MS. BARNETT: Then they attack Dr. Burns and Dr. Rebuttal Argument/Barrett
132 Cummings, men who have spent decades trying to help people quit
smoking, and to warn people. What Dr. Burns and Cummings did in
this courtroom, all they did was show you what Philip Morris
said behind closed doors, when they thought nobody was looking,
versus what they said to the American public and to Mr. Reider.
And if what they said was wrong, if they were biased
and sinister, and these witnesses who were just paid people like
that, then surely, Philip Morris would have brought you a
witness to prove that what they said wasn't right and wasn't
true. There wasn't anything like that. They didn't show
anything was incomplete or one-sided whatsoever. And they
can't. Because what Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings showed you, all
those tags, it came out of the records Philip Morris was forced
to turn over. And since they can't show you that Dr. Burns or
Dr. Cummings was wrong, they come and attack them personally,
and undermine them, and try to distract you just like they did
with the Surgeon General and with the --
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor, that's
improper, defense of lawsuit.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MS. BARNETT: So if anybody in deliberations was to
say, "I don't know, these guys testify a lot in lawsuits,"
remind them, of course Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings are called to
testify in cases like this because they're the leaders in the
field, they know this better than anybody. They've published on Rebuttal Argument/Barrett
133 it, they teach, they have grants, they work with the Surgeon
General's Office. Of course that's who we would call to
testify, the people who know it best.
And by the way, the other thing about Dr. Cummings
having this bias and wishing cigarettes wouldn't be sold,
right -- if somebody in deliberations says, "Well, he said he
wishes that cigarettes that are like today aren't sold anymore,"
remind him, again, he just showed us the documents of what
Philip Morris knew and did and said, and given his decades of
work with people with cancer and trying to quit, and his study
of everything that Philip Morris did to cigarettes to make it as
hard -- not to say they're more addictive, as hard to quit as
possible, as hard to quit as possible, to keep people hooked,
and to be sure teenagers got hooked while they were vulnerable,
is it any surprise, after his study of what Philip Morris did,
that he would wish Philip Morris would change their business
model? Of course not.
But that doesn't mean the documents he showed you
should just be disregarded, and forget everything Philip Morris
did, because he wishes they would change their stripes.
And -- oh, the whole business about -- I think I heard
that only Burns and Cummings told you that these omissions and
concealment were something that caused his injury. We heard it
from the family, too, and from friends. Richard Reider smoked
lights because he thought they were safer, and he smoked low Rebuttal Argument/Barrett
134 nicotine because he thought it would help him quit, and nobody
said anything different. You heard the cross-examination about
all the depositions, the hundreds, thousands, however many
pages. If there was any witness out there who said, "Oh, no, he
wasn't fooled, he knew, he smoked them for some other reason,"
because -- I don't know what -- some other reason, you would
have heard that deposition testimony, you would have heard that
if there was any evidence like that whatsoever.
They say they never -- they never ever, ever said,
never said anything about them being safer, and never said
anything after '82 -- first of all, you saw the packs of
cigarettes, from '82 before, and after '82, all the packs said
right on the front "low tar and nicotine."
And if I could go to the ELMO with three quick
documents, Philip Morris documents.
Did they think they were communicating these things
were safer? This is Exhibit 1387. We looked at these -- and I
don't want to do a lot of this, but "For our marketing, we need
to make sure to emphasize the pack and its lowered tar and
nicotine legend, we want to make sure people see that."
Exhibit 1387.5, we want to communicate low tar, with
white tipping on the cigarettes that communicates low tar, with
the white with the gold chevron without any red element, that's
what we want to say in our marketing.
And what did they -- Exhibit 1387. Also, the exit Rebuttal Argument/Barrett
135 brand -- remember the study they did of people quitting. They
did a study of people quitting, to figure out how to stop it.
This is what -- this is not what was said in this courtroom, but
this is what Philip Morris said internally when nobody was
looking. "The very fact, then, that a smoker has decided to
switch from a full-flavor cigarette to a low-delivery cigarette
tells us something very important about him, he is concerned
about his health, and he is willing to do something about it."
Let me wrap up. So we know it from their documents
and we know it from the family, and Dr. Burns and Cummings just
showed you what their documents showed.
Now, the end of that, Philip Morris said, "The whole
time she's talking, think 'What would she tell me?'" She would
not tell you anything about what Philip Morris did, you know
that, because she stood up here for 45 minutes and she didn't
say a thing about Philip Morris. She spent the whole time
trying to distract you and make you focus only on anything and
everything, including Ms. Reider's mental health, besides what
Philip Morris did. And she said when she started this case,
it's just about Mr. Reider. It's not. It's about Philip
Morris. And just because they won't admit this case is about
them, and just because they won't talk about what they did or
bring any witnesses to explain what they did, don't ignore that.
The timeline that was up there, there was something
big missing from what I saw. Nothing about what Philip Morris Rebuttal Argument/Barrett
136 was doing, what they were saying, how they were designing these
cigarettes, nothing. So don't ignore what Philip Morris did
just because they haven't talked about it and keep pretending
like it didn't happen, don't let them take that conduct off the
table or sweep it aside by not talking about it.
Thank you very much.
