                   CLOSING ARGUMENTS
          MR. GARY:  Good afternoon, members of the
     jury.
          We've come to the end, I have about 30 minutes
     to talk to you and defendants will have 30 minutes,
     so it will be about an hour that you have to still
     be with us.  And, again, I want to thank you
     because I know that if there's one thing that I can
     say, and I've been trying cases for 40 years, I've
     never seen anybody that paid more attention on any
     jury than you have, and I say that from my heart.
          No matter what your verdict is and no matter
     what do you, I want you to know that.  Members of
     the jury, I know that you what you just heard, you
     didn't fall for that.  I mean, there was no reason
     for him not to come clean with you and he didn't.
     He didn't.  Don't rely on us.  Rely on the Surgeon
     General's report.
          If you're selling a product that's killing
     people, you're putting it out there, why shouldn't
     the people be able to rely on you?  He says, Don't
     rely on us.  I mean, they find a way to weasel out of anything.
          And let me tell you one other thing -- now,
     this is the thing that you've got to think about:
     He's just testifying today, and that's okay, been
     here since Tuesday, but look at what phase of the
     trial he's testified in?  He's been here since
     Tuesday.  Well, I was waiting to see what was going
     to happen because they wanted to bring him in to
     get sympathy, sympathy --
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  Members of the jury, for the life
     of me, I can't understand it.  He bragged about the
     $40 billion that they paid back over 15 years,
     that's about 2.9, $2.8 billion a year.  For a
     settlement they made because they know what they
     had done.  And that was going backwards.  That
     wasn't going forward.  But even if you contact for
     15 years, they paid 40.  That's about $2.8 billion
     a year.  We still pick up a tab for somebody.
     Because if we're talking about $96 billion a year
     on smoking-related diseases that they cause --
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.  This is
     beyond --
          THE COURT:  Argue the issues here, Mr. Gary. MR. GARY:  Members of the jury, $96 billion a
     year.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Healthcare costs are not at issue.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  It's time for these people to
     understand that they're not going to continue to
     get -- to get a license to kill people.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  It's time, members of the jury,
     this phase of the trial is called punitive damages.
     And what are punitive damages?  Punitive damages
     are designed for a defendant to deter the defendant
     from doing bad things.  And if you don't do it,
     they keep on doing it.  If you slap them on the
     wrist, they keep on doing it.
          They talked about the little money they paid
     out, but what about the money that they are making
     off cigarettes that's harmful to the health and
     they know it causes lung cancer.  They know it.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Excuse hang on, Mr. Gary.
          Sustained.  Move along.
          MR. GARY:  Members of the jury, $100 million in punitive damages.  $100 million in punitive
     damages will get their attention.  They brought up
     the fact that they only paid altogether in punitive
     damages $100 million.  That's why they keep on
     doing what they're doing.  They can make a safer
     cigarette and they won't do it.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection.  No evidence.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Rephrase.
          MR. GARY:  Somebody, somebody got to get their
     attention.  At some point members of the jury, they
     got to understand that their money and their power
     and their influence is not going to take them any
     further.
          They got to understand, members of the jury,
     they can't get past the evidence in this case.
     They are guilty of punitive damages and don't let
     them get off lightly.  They come in here and they
     want to cry poor mouth.  That's what they want to
     do.  They want sympathy out of you.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  Members of the jury, I'm not going
     to talk to you long now.  You know -- you know this
     case.  You know what it's about.  You've heard it.
     You know this case.  You know what has happened here.  And you're going to do something about it.
     I know you're going to do something about it.  The
     time is up.  And it's judgment day.  It's judgment
     day.
          Members of the jury, let me just say this,
     480,000 people every single year, 480,000 people --
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Relevance.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. GARY:  480,000 dying, you know they're
     dying.  Members of the jury, they don't have to --
     Dr. Proctor said -- and I asked him the question:
     Do they have to die?  And he said no.  You got to
     get their attention.  You can't bring back Michael.
     You can't bring back the millions that have died
     and are long gone --
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  You can deter their actions.  You
     can deter -- you can change the way they do
     business.  And I submit to you, members of the
     jury, that you have a rare opportunity, like I
     said, and it's one that you may never get again.
     You have the power.
          As jurors you have the power.  You can see wrong, and you can make it right, you see suffering
     and you can stop it.  And you can --
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.  This is
     well beyond the range of this case.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. GARY:  You can bring major corporations to
     their knees when you catch them wrong.  And they
     are wrong, they're wrong, they are wrong.  And it
     has to stop now.  And it's going to stop in
     Pensacola, Florida.  Pensacola, Florida.  That's
     where it's going to stop.
          I'm not going to talk to you much longer
     because I know you got -- you have it.  You're
     going to do the right thing.  You're going to make
     a difference.  You're going to do it.  And you're
     not stuck with $100 million.  $100 million, as I
     said before, may not be enough.
          And let me tell you -- when he gets up there
     prancing and talking about $100 million is
     outrageous, outrageous, then you just think about
     what their actions are doing to our children.  And
     he gets up there and talks about they are not going
     after kids.
          You heard Dr. Proctor, they are spending big
     money going after children.  Babies.  Like I said before, that's not even a fair fight.  Going after
     our children to make a dollar.
          Members of the jury, we didn't say it.  They
     said that the high school student was the base of
     their business.  They ain't going to stop.  They
     just on.  When it's all said and done, they just
     move on to the next case.
          Members of the jury, I don't know what your
     verdict is going to be, but I know you know that
     these people, the defendants, have lied.  They have
     lied.  And I want to show you one clip before I sit
     down.
          Members of the jury, they said that they
     didn't know that this -- the one before that.
          Bear with me.
          This is the one -- the clip, members of the
     jury, where they went to Washington D.C. raised
     their right hand and swear to tell the truth, and
     they lied.  They lied to the United States
     Congress.  Let's see it.  They already said earlier
     on that nicotine was a drug and nicotine will get
     you addicted and they straight to --
               (The following video clip was played as
follows:)
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  The question of whether or not nicotine is addictive.  And let me ask you
     first, and I'd like to go down the row whether each
     of you believes that nicotine is not addictive.  I
     heard virtually all of you touch on it.  Just "yes"
     or "no:"  Do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  I believe nicotine is
     not addictive, yes.
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  Mr. Johnston?
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  Congressman, cigarettes
     and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic
     definitions of addiction.  There is no
     intoxication.
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  We'll take that as a
     no.  Again, time is short, I think each of you
     believe that nicotine is not addictive but would
     like to have this for the record.
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  I don't believe that
     nicotine or our products are addictive.
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  I believe nicotine is
     not addictive.
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  I believe that nicotine
     is not addictive.
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  I believe that nicotine
     is not addictive.
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  And I too believe that nicotine is not addictive.
               (The video clip was ended.)
          MR. GARY:  Do I have to say anymore.  Members
     of the jury, they knew nicotine was addictive and
     they had said it.  They had said it.  Twenty years
     before that.  And they still went up to Washington
     D.C. and took the oath -- now, we talk to you about
     the oath when we were picking this jury.  And see,
     the oath supposed to mean something.
          You raise your hand before God and put your
     hand on the Bible to tell the truth, nothing but
     the truth, so help you God, and you flat out lie
     the way they did.  It's not right.  Something is
     wrong about that.  They don't get no free ride to
     lie at the expense of killing people.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  It's about Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gary.
          MR. GARY:  I can't take it no more.  Thank you
     members of the jury.  Do the best you can.  Do the
     right thing.  God bless you in your deliberations.


                REBUTTAL CLOSING ARUMENT
          MR. GARY:  Members of the jury, did you hear
     what he just said?  He said:  Do you think that anything you all can do on -- he said that you all
     think that anything you do, that if you award
     $100 million, he said it ain't going to change us.
     They're going to keep doing what we're doing.  He
     challenged you.  He said:  Do you think that if you
     award $100 million that that's going to stop R.J.
     Reynolds?
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection; mischaracterization.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Rephrase.
          MR. GARY:  Do you think that awarding $100
     million is going to change us?  He's challenging
     you.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Mr. Gary.  Talk about
     punishment and deterrence.
          MR. GARY:  You've got to deter them.  You've
     got to show them that it will make a difference.
     You got to get their attention.  You can't -- you
     can't let an attitude like that -- you've got to
     deter them from doing this anymore, and what I --
     you may decide it may take more, based on what he
     just said.
          Members of the jury, do the right thing.
     You've already decided -- you checked the punitive
     damages block. You know that it's needed.  You know what
     they're doing based on the evidence.  Speaking
     about -- he told but what they were doing for kids.
     Are they marketing to kids?
          127.
          And Dr. Proctor, you know he was one of the
     most credible people in this courtroom.  Well, why
     do they have the interest in the youth market?
     Well, it's called the base of their business.
     That's now.  That's what they're doing.  That's
     what they're doing, members of the jury.
          G2.
          480,000 people.  Those are tombstones.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  And you would challenge that.  And
     members of the jury -- 125 again.
          When you get to the kids now, they act like
     they have been supporting kids, they have been
     doing everything for kids, but they've done
     nothing.  They've done zero.  Did they market to
     kids?  There it is.  Yes.  How are they going to
     answer that?
          G3.
          Babies.  Babies.  They targeted them.  Get them smoking, keep them smoking.  Because they are
     our future business.  That's how they planned to
     keep making the big bucks that they made.  You
     think the little money they pay to the state of
     Florida, that's peanuts.
          They make billions and billions and trillions
     of dollars.  You may decide that $100 million is
     not enough.  And based on what you just heard from
     him, you may decide to do that.
          But whatever you do, members of the jury, we
     want you to know this family will be -- will be
     a -- gracious to you for that.  And another thing
     too, he talked about no charitable organization as
     far as the punitive damages are concerned.
     Mr. Johnson --
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  -- a number of organizations.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  Do the right thing.  You all got
     the power.  You have -- you have -- you know this
     case.  You know it.  You got your notes.  And
     challenge either one of us on anything that these
     experts said because you heard a lot of distortion
     here this evening. MR. BARINGER:  Objection.
          MR. GARY:  Nothing but distortion.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GARY:  You check your notes.  You put your
     heads together and see what they've done towards
     helping people, advising people that nicotine --
     this man set up here this evening, this evening,
     and tried to say nicotine is not a problem.  And
     some people taking 20, 30, 40, 50 cigarettes a day.
     And he says nicotine is not a problem.
          I know you want to laugh him out of here.  I
     thank you members of the jury.  Thank you for your
     time.  Thank you for your effort.  And we'll be
     more than happy with whatever you decide.
          May God bless you in your deliberations.
