          MR. BARINGER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Good morning, everyone.
          THE JURY:  Good morning.           CLOSING ARGUMENT
          MR. BARINGER:  I wanted to start out by
     joining what Mr. Gary said yesterday.  We want to
     thank you very much.  We know that this has been a
     disruption of your normal life.  We know it's been
     a sacrifice and we know it has been challenging,
     I'm sure, to say the least, to stay engaged during
     this two -- over two-week process, and to pay
     attention the way you did.
          And one of the things that I've been
     extraordinarily impressed with were your questions.
     You guys actually asked some better questions than
     we did.  But it shows that you have been paying
     very close attention.  It shows that you have
     listened to the evidence and have an appreciation
     for the issues.
          So I do sincerely want to thank you.  You have
     made true a constitutional guarantee.  You've made
     good the promise to have a fair and impartial jury
     that will consider the evidence and will render a
     just and fair verdict.  You've done your duty to
     your country.  You should be very proud of that and
     we thank you for it.
          This case is about Michael Johnson.  It's
     about one smoker.  And it's about what the evidence will show about the choices that he made and what
     effect, if any, Reynolds' conduct had on those
     choices and what the result is.  That's what we
     are -- that's what you have been here all of this
     time to decide about Michael Johnson.
          You know, there's an old adage in -- among
     trial lawyers:  If the law is on your side, you
     pound the law.  If the facts are on your side, you
     pound the facts.  If neither are on your side, you
     pound the table.
          You heard a lot of table pounding yesterday,
     and that's because the evidence and the law are
     going to show that Mrs. Robinson was not able to
     meet her burden of proof to show that Reynolds'
     conduct was the legal cause of Mr. Johnson's death,
     and that's what I'm going to spend my time taking
     about.
          Now, in that table pounding yesterday you
     hear, you would think this case was a referendum on
     tobacco, on tobacco companies.  But that's not what
     you're here to decide.  There may be conduct that
     you heard about that you don't like, but if that
     conduct didn't have an effect on Mr. Johnson, it
     can't be the basis of your verdict and your
     decision in this case. It has to be tied to Michael Johnson.  It's
     their burden to prove that it had an affect on
     Michael Johnson, not just that making you angry or
     making you upset about something like that.  That's
     not what this case is about.
          Now, people like Dr. Proctor whose book was
     about the abolition of tobacco and want to see
     cigarettes and tobacco done away with, they have an
     absolute right to have that point of view.  Of
     course you can do that.  But that's not what this
     trial is to decide.
          Remember that cigarettes are a legal product.
     And what that means is in 1965 when Congress
     considered the results of the 1964 Surgeon
     General's report, Congress considered the fact that
     the Surgeon General had determine that smoking
     causes lung cancer.
          The Surgeon General determined that it is very
     difficult for some smokers to quit because of
     nicotine.  Those things weren't secret from anyone.
     And Congress considered that.  And what was
     Congress' decision?  To continue to allow the sale
     and advertising of cigarettes but with the proper
     warning that Congress mandated.
          And we'll talk about and you've seen the warnings that Congress decided were appropriate
     based on the evidence before Congress.
          And why did they do that?  Because in the
     United States of America people are given a choice.
     Yes, they have to be informed and that's what
     Congress did through the warnings, but once they
     are warned, once they understand the risk, it's
     their right to take that risk if they want to.
          But every bit as American as the right to make
     a choice is the responsibility for the consequences
     of that choice.
          In 2009, the United States Congress considered
     the whole issue again.  And what did they do?  They
     reaffirmed that cigarettes, tobacco would continue
     to be allowed to be sold in the United States even
     though Congress knew very well about the 480,000
     people that they say have smoking-related deaths
     ever year.  Congress knew that.
          But what did they do?  They continued to allow
     it to be sold and they gave the Food and Drug
     Administration regulatory authority, regulatory
     authority over the manufacturer, the sale of
     cigarettes.
          The FDA has the power to ban menthol if it
     wants to.  It has the power to ban the use of ammonia or any other ingredient if it wants to.
     But that's where the decision lies.  And this trial
     is not about those issues.
          On the verdict form that you will receive,
     there won't be a question about whether or not
     cigarettes are dangerous, whether they're addictive
     or whether they should continue to be sold.  Those
     aren't the questions.  And we're here to have you
     answer the questions that are on that verdict form.
          And this isn't a case about Reynolds' conduct
     in general.  The evidence has to be tied to
     Michael Johnson.  And I told you about those
     400,000-plus Americans that you hear about.  But
     the fact that they are smoking related, they're
     called smoking-related diseases, doesn't mean that
     Reynolds' conduct or the conduct of any other
     tobacco company was the legal cause of those
     deaths.
          That's what trials like this are to determine.
     That's why we're here, and we're here not about the
     480,000.  We're here about one.  We're here about
     Michael Johnson.
          We're not here to relitigate the Engle class
     action, though for two weeks and virtually all of
     yesterday that's what you saw.  A relitigation of those same common issues.  That wasn't the
     question.  The question was:  How did they relate
     to Michael Johnson?  What difference did they make
     to Michael Johnson?  And you heard virtually
     nothing about that.
          And remember, on the findings, this is the
     instruction that the court read to you.  The
     findings I have described to you do not establish
     whether Michael Johnson was a class member, or the
     degree, if any, to which R.J. Reynolds' conduct was
     the sole or contributing cause of Michael Johnson's
     death.
          You heard all about the findings again
     yesterday.  What did you hear about applying those
     findings to Michael Johnson?  Nothing.
          Remember, the Engle findings -- the Engle
     jury, the class action jury heard nothing about
     Michael Johnson, almost like you.  The Engle
     findings don't establish that he was a member of
     the class.
          They don't establish that addiction to
     nicotine was a legal cause of his death.  They
     don't establish he died because of the dangers of
     smoking were unknown to him.  And the Engle
     findings don't establish that Reynolds is at fault in this case.
          During the course of the trial, you heard
     about a number of issues that had nothing, frankly,
     to do with Michael Johnson.  The red herring.  I
     mean, those are things that distract you from the
     real issues.  And I want to get rid of some of
     those right away.
          The first is about cigarettes in general.
     Cigarettes are dangerous and addictive by nature.
     They aren't made that way through the manufacturing
     process.  They start out that way.
          Remember, roll-your-own cigarettes,
     Dr. Benowitz and Dr. Proctor both told you
     roll-your-own cigarettes are just as dangerous and
     addictive as manufactured cigarettes.
          If you went out to a tobacco field and you
     picked the tobacco, if you cured it, if you chopped
     it up and you put it in paper and smoked it, it
     could cause lung cancer if you smoked it long
     enough and it could cause addiction if you smoked
     it long enough.  It doesn't need to be a
     manufactured cigarette for those things to happen.
     It's by nature.
          There's less nicotine in cigarette tobacco
     than in natural tobacco.  In fact, if you did that roll-your-own tobacco, you would be getting more
     nicotine than if you smoked a manufactured
     cigarette.
          Menthol cigarettes, Dr. Proctor told you
     menthol cigarettes are not more dangerous or
     addictive than a nonmenthol cigarette.
          Additive-free cigarettes.  You heard a lot
     about additives.  They showed you lists of
     ingredients.  But what was the bottom line?
     Dr. Proctor told you, their expert by the way, told
     you that additive-free cigarettes are not less
     addictive or dangerous.  All the talk about
     ingredients, but the bottom line from Dr. Proctor
     was they are not more addictive.  They are not more
     dangerous.
          About Kool cigarettes in general, think about
     what Dr. Benowitz and Dr. Proctor told you.  During
     the years that Mr. Johnson smoked them, there was
     no safer cigarette available anywhere.  There was
     no less addictive cigarette available anywhere.
     And there was no cigarette easier to quit during
     the time that he smoked.
          And remember what -- for all that you heard
     about ammonia, remember what Dr. Proctor told you
     about Kool cigarettes?  There's no evidence of ammonia in Kool cigarettes.  So why did they spend
     so much time talking about it?  They didn't connect
     it to Michael Johnson, and that's what their
     obligation was.
          And very important, from Dr. Proctor, today's
     manufactured cigarettes are no more addictive than
     cigarettes in the '20s, '30s, '40s.  Remember all
     you heard about the Reynolds' documents about
     nicotine.  And they said, well, it was a deep, dark
     secret.  They said they used that in the
     manufacturing of the cigarettes, implying Kool.
          But Dr. Proctor told you all that
     manufacturing, all that research, all of that made
     no difference.  They're no more addictive than they
     were before all of that took place.
          They did talk about pH.  And they said, well,
     Reynolds did research into manipulating pH and that
     was a part -- but the part he admitted that they
     didn't tell you on direct was that was a part of an
     effort to reduce the health risks of smoking.
          Remember the idea tar was where the problem
     was.  Carcinogens that you heard so much about are
     in the tar.  And remember what Dr. Proctor
     admitted, the research that was going on about pH
     manipulation, changing the tar to nicotine ratio was so you would deliver the nicotine to the smoker
     but give them less tar in the process to try and
     make it less hazardous.  But it failed.  They
     couldn't make one that was consumer satisfying or
     consumer acceptable, so it never got marketed.
          They talked about satisfaction a lot.  And
     Mr. Acosta when he was going through the Reynolds
     documents with Dr. Proctor would come to a line in
     it where it said, you know, when -- and he would
     satisfying, that was a code word.  That was a code
     word for addiction, wasn't it, and Dr. Proctor said
     yes, that was a code word for addiction, satisfying
     cigarette.
          The interesting thing is that the
     Surgeon General of the United States used the same
     terms.  And I don't think even they would tell you
     that the Surgeon General was trying to make
     cigarettes more addictive.  It was trying to make
     them safer.
          The Surgeon General advocated trying to alter
     the tar/nicotine ratio using pH, whatever they
     could to have a satisfying cigarette that led to
     minimal exposure to toxic products.  That's the
     truth about what it was all about.
          They talked about advertising.  Advertising was perfectly legal, is perfectly legal.  And there
     is zero evidence that Mr. Johnson started or
     continued smoking because of advertising.  What
     evidence did they -- did they bring to you about
     that?
          You heard and saw all about advertising
     yesterday afternoon.  How did they tie it to
     Michael Johnson?  What did you hear?  Did they have
     a single witness that took the stand and said
     advertising had something to do with why
     Mr. Johnson smoked?  None.  They didn't even try.
          All they did was put a bunch of documents in
     front of you and make insinuations.  They included
     brands that Mr. Johnson didn't even smoke.  You saw
     those, you saw the Flinstones and Winston.  He
     never smoked Winston.
          And they showed you a lot of ads that ran
     before Mr. Johnson was even born.  Remember the ads
     from the 1930s on Kool cigarettes?  What in
     heaven's name from ads from the 1930s have to do
     with what Mr. Johnson did about his choices about
     smoking?  Nothing.  They have nothing to do with
     Mr. Johnson.
          They talked about youth marketing.  And they
     showed you some documents.  They showed you a document from Dr. Teague, and remember, it was a
     draft and it was a proposed new brand.
          Ladies and gentlemen, you saw a lot of
     documents that were drafts, that were proposals,
     that were ideas.  Ideas don't influence what
     Mr. Johnson did.  Actions, if anything, might have.
     But they never told you that those proposals were
     followed up.  They never said that the draft turned
     into a final version or anything happened to it.
          But the interesting thing was they read pieces
     of it to you but they didn't read it all to you.
     They didn't tell you that in Dr. Teague's document
     he said we should not in any way influence
     nonsmokers to start smoking.
          They did another one, they did a Diane Burrows
     document.  They didn't read you that RJR's
     consistent policy is that smoking is a matter of
     free and informed adult choice which the company
     does not seek to influence.  They didn't read you
     that part.
          The other thing they didn't tell you is that
     the entire document was talking about brand
     switching from 18 to 24-year-olds.  If you look at
     that document when you go back into the jury room,
     you will see that over 200 times the definition of the smokers they were talking about were 18 to
     24-year-olds.
          Now, they did talk about -- they showed you a
     chart from the back of this document.
          Can I have the ELMO for a second?
          You saw this yesterday from Mr. Gary.  And he
     said they had information on 12-year-olds.  Why in
     the world would they be out collecting that
     information?  The interesting part is that the
     source of the information, if you can read it, is
     HEW, the United States Department of Health,
     Education and Welfare was the one that was out
     doing the research.  It wasn't R.J. Reynolds that
     was out studying 12-year-olds.
          And if you look at the entire document, you
     will see it's all about brand switching from 18 to
     24-year-olds, not how to get 12-year-olds to smoke.
          This whole issue about what effect did it have
     on Michael Johnson?  You don't have to guess
     whether or not advertising had anything to do with
     why he started to smoke or continued to smoke
     because Mr. Johnson told his brother exactly why he
     started to smoke.
          He mentioned that he started smoking
     cigarettes because he saw my father smoking cigarettes.  That's why Michael Johnson started
     smoking, because he saw his father smoke and it
     made him want to smoke.
          It wasn't because the Flinstones were on TV in
     1960 when he was a baby.  And it wasn't because
     Joe Camel ads ran in 1988 when he was 28 years old.
     And those are the only examples they gave you.
     They didn't have anything to do with why Michael
     Johnson smoked.  It was because he wanted to smoke
     because he saw his father smoke.
          One other thing.  They read to you from the
     1967 FTC report and they talk about all the
     exposure kids got from watching TV and all the ads
     that were on TV.
          Well, two things happened.  Number one,
     Congress gave the FTC the power to regulate.  It
     also banned broadcast advertising of cigarette
     commercials starting in 1971 when Michael Johnson
     was 11.
          Then in 1979, the Surgeon General said, "As
     the cigarette industry has asserted, the major
     action of cigarette advertising now seems to be to
     shift brand preferences to alter market shares for
     a particular brand."
          And that was the analysis of the time when Mr. Johnson was a teenager.  That was the effect
     advertising was having, not causing people to start
     smoking, but to alter -- shift the brand.
          And remember, that's very important when you
     think about that Burrows document where she's
     talking about exactly the same thing.  Shifting the
     market share, not causing kids to start smoking.
          There was a suggestion yesterday and
     throughout the trial that in the 1970s when
     Michael Johnson was starting to experiment with
     cigarettes or became a smoker that no one knew, no
     one knew that smoking could cause lung cancer.
     They told you that.
          But the evidence is starting in the 1950s,
     there was tremendous publicity about whether
     smoking could cause lung cancer, about whether it
     was difficult to quit.
          Remember, the Surgeon General in 1957 said,
     "Our position is that we have informed the public
     through an excellent coverage of the press, radio,
     and TV."
          Dr. Heller from the National Cancer Institute
     at the same Congressional hearing said,
     "Newspapers, radio, TV, and other media have done
     an excellent job covering this problem and a very objective job.  This is an exceedingly valuable way
     of informing the public."
          The public was being informed long before
     Michael Johnson was even before.  In 1968,
     remember, you saw this before, and Dr. Proctor
     agreed.  Daniel Horn who was the federal official
     whose prime job was to inform the public to make
     sure the public was informed.  What did he say in
     1968 when Michael Johnson was only eight years old?
          "You can stand on a rooftop and shout smoking
     is dangerous at the top of your lungs and you would
     not be telling anyone anything they did not already
     know."
          The public had been well-informed by that
     point.  And, remember, the publicity didn't stop.
     And, remember, that millions of people were
     quitting.  Smokers began quitting in large numbers
     during the mid-1950s because of health concerns.
          Prior to '65, 17 million people quit and they
     continued and accelerated quitting in the 1960s and
     the 1970s.  And Dr. Proctor says that the 19 -- or
     the 1960s and '70s are when the important -- what
     he called the important quitting started.
          Ladies and gentlemen, ask yourself, if no one
     knew, if no one was informed, why were people by the millions quitting?
          Dr. Proctor was very interesting.  Mr. Acosta
     at one point asked him, he said, "Well, nobody
     was -- nobody was worried about lung cancer, nobody
     was interested in quitting."  And Dr. Proctor said,
     Yeah, that's right."
          Then, of course, Mr. Beach asked him, "Well,
     you said that the industry got together at the
     Plaza Hotel in 1953 and had to do something.  They
     formed the Tobacco Industry Research Committee.  If
     nobody was worried about lung cancer, if nobody was
     quitting, why would they have met?"
          And Dr. Proctor said, "Yeah, you're right."
     People were concerned.  People were starting to
     quit.  And that trend started in the '50s and it
     continued all along until we've reached 60 million
     people now that have quit smoking.  Now there are
     more former smokers in the United States than
     current smokers because people understand and they
     have understood for decades.
          I want to talk to you about, again, this case
     is about Mr. Johnson.  These are the crucial issues
     in the case.  This is what the case is all about.
     Was he a member of the class?  Did he have a
     smoking-related disease, lung cancer caused by smoking?  Was he addicted?  Did his addiction cause
     his death?  And did he smoke because he didn't know
     the dangers of smoking because of concealment?
          They utterly failed to prove any of those
     elements, and we're going to go through and I'm
     going to show you why.
          They completely failed to prove their case.
     The first part was plaintiff did not prove that
     Mr. Johnson died because of the dangers and
     addictive nature of cigarettes were unknown to him.
          Their whole theory on concealment is he just
     didn't know.  He didn't know it could be dangerous.
     He didn't know it could be difficult to quit.
     That's the heart of their concealment claim.
          But when he was a child, before he ever
     started experimenting, before he ever thought about
     it, he was warned by his parents.
          "When your children were growing up, you told
     them, including Michael, not to smoke?
          "Yes.
          "You told them it wasn't good for them, it
     wasn't healthy?
          "Yes."
          Mr. Johnson, Michael Johnson's father, told
     them smoking wasn't good for them.  As a young child, he heard that message.
          And remember what the evidence was, they would
     never -- Michael and his brothers would never smoke
     in front of his parents because they had been
     taught from a very young age that smoking wasn't
     healthy and they shouldn't do it.
          One of the other important parts -- and keep
     this in mind when we talk about it later -- you
     heard through Dr. Giakas, Michael Johnson's brother
     John.  And what did John say about it?  That
     Michael Johnson's father told them, "Don't pick up
     the habit, it's hard to quit."
          It wasn't a secret that -- to Michael Johnson
     that it could be difficult to quit.  His own father
     told him, "Don't pick up the habit, it's difficult
     to quit."
          Then, not only did his parents when he was a
     child talk to him about it, in 1970 he was only ten
     years olds.  And remember, ladies and gentlemen,
     the evidence is he hadn't even experimented with
     his father's roll-your-own cigarettes yet and the
     warning from 1970 went on packages of cigarettes.
     They were on cigarettes long before he even thought
     about buying them.
          And in 1985, you know that the warnings changed.  And keep this in mind from whenever he
     started smoking regular cigarettes, manufactured
     cigarettes, and his brother Walter says he thinks
     it's about the time Michael was 18, between that
     time and 1985, every pack of cigarettes he smoked
     had that warning.
          And from 1985 until he died, the cigarettes
     would have had one of those four warnings.  Every
     single pack of cigarettes he ever picked up in his
     life had a congressionally mandated warning on
     them.
          And before he was -- became a regular smoker,
     Michael Johnson believed his father's lung cancer
     was caused by smoking.  The evidence is he didn't
     become a regular smoker until around 1977 or '78.
     Walter says 1978.
          In 1977, Michael Johnson's father was
     diagnosed with lung cancer.  And every member of
     the family that you heard from said they all
     believed it was caused by smoking, most
     importantly, including Michael Johnson himself.
          I want you to think about this in terms of all
     they said about warnings.  What possible message
     could have been given to Michael Johnson by
     R.J. Reynolds or anyone else that would have been more powerful than the message that his own father
     died of lung cancer because of smoking?
           What could Reynolds have ever said?  How
     could they have ever delivered a message that was
     more powerful than smoking killed your father by
     causing lung cancer?
          And it is undisputed that that's what he
     believed.  His mother said that she told him about
     it and talked to him about it.  "You saw what it
     did to your daddy."
          His own father said before he died said, "Son,
     you don't need to smoke, look at what it's done to
     me."  His brother Walter for years throughout his
     life kept asking him, "Why do you smoke when you
     saw what happened to our father?"
          And what was Michael's response every time
     every one of those people asked him about it?  It
     was, "I'm going to smoke until I die.  I want to
     smoke."  He understood the risk.  He understood the
     risk in a way no one else could have ever delivered
     it.  He knew it because of his own father.
          I talked to you about that in opening, and in
     two and a half weeks, you've never heard a response
     to that from the plaintiffs.  Why?  There isn't
     one.  That is the simple unalterable truth. And as I said, when Walter Johnson talked to
     him about his father, he simply told him he liked
     to smoke.  For him, there was nothing better than
     lighting up a cigarette.
          Confronted with what happened to our father,
     Michael's response:  "I'm going to smoke till I
     die."
          And what about wanting to quit?  His brother
     described him as, I'd say, he was stubborn about
     not wanting to stop smoking.  And that's critical
     on this second question.  Plaintiff did not prove
     that Mr. Johnson was addicted and could not quit.
          Number one, it was clear that he didn't want
     to quit.  And remember what Dr. Benowitz told you
     during that long video, Dr. Benowitz said if you
     don't want to quit, you can't quit.  If you don't
     want to quit, you will not quit.
          Michael Johnson could not have been more
     clear, he wasn't interested in quitting, he wanted
     to continue to smoke.  And if -- ladies and
     gentlemen, if there was any doubt in your mind
     about whether Michael Johnson could quit smoking --
     and remember, the heart of their case is, oh, he
     couldn't, he was addicted, he couldn't quit.
          And they brought the $40 million man, Dr. Feingold, in to testify as their addiction
     expert.  And what did their expert tell you?  Of
     course Michael Johnson could have quit smoking.
     Their own expert said he could have quit smoking.
          They also had to prove to you that Mr. Johnson
     died of primary lung cancer caused by smoking.
     It's one of the elements of the class membership
     requirement.  But they didn't prove that either.
     And here's why.
          The primary location of Mr. Johnson's cancer
     could not be determined, why?  Because he refused
     to undergo further testing.  His doctor, his
     oncologist, could never figure out exactly where
     his cancer started because the test they needed to
     do to find that out, Michael Johnson refused to
     have.
          And that was his right.  It's not a criticism
     of him saying, no, I don't want the test.  But it's
     an undeniable fact the effect of that decision was
     you don't have the evidence, just like his doctors
     didn't have the evidence, to decide where did his
     cancer start.
          Now, you've heard from experts.  Ours, we
     brought in three real doctors that actually
     practice medicine and don't just play doctors in court.  And what did they tell you?  Mr. Johnson's
     cancer was more likely than not metastatic, meaning
     it started somewhere else and spread.
          And as for cause, the whole point, ladies and
     gentlemen, is until you know what kind of cancer it
     is, you can't possibly know what caused it.  They
     completely failed to carry their burden of proof on
     medical causation.
          The bottom line is they didn't prove he died
     because the information was unknown to him.  He
     didn't die because he was addicted and couldn't
     quit.  And they can't prove that he died from
     primary lung cancer because he didn't have the test
     that would have allowed us to finally figure that
     out.
          I want you to keep in mind something else that
     we talked about during opening, and that is that
     the plaintiff admits that Michael Johnson's actions
     related to his effort to quit smoking were a legal
     cause of his death.
          Given their failure of proof, it's no surprise
     that they would admit that at least it was
     partially his fault.  But I want you to think about
     what that really means.
          He knew before he became a regular smoker that smoking can be deadly and addictive.  We know that
     from his family.  We know that from what his mother
     and father told him and we know that from the
     effect of his father's lung cancer.  He knew that
     smoking could be dangerous and addictive and he
     continued to quit.  Of course they have to admit
     that.
          And this is the critical part:  Mr. Johnson
     could have and should have tried harder to quit
     smoking.  And this is where you have to use your
     commonsense.  Why would they admit that he's at
     fault at all if he couldn't quit?  If it was a
     completely futile effort, if no matter what he did
     and what he tried he couldn't quit, why would they
     admit fault?  It makes no sense.
          Why if he had -- if he didn't -- if he didn't
     have the ability to quit soon enough, soon enough
     to make it unlikely that he would develop lung
     cancer, why would they ever admit fault?
          And if he didn't know, if he didn't know that
     smoking could cause lung cancer and could be
     difficult to quit, why would they admit fault?  If
     he didn't know, why would they admit fault?  But
     they have.
          I want to talk about Mr. Johnson's choices for a minute.  Right side up would probably make it
     better.
          Throughout his life he had a lot of choices to
     make.  Starting from the very beginning, his choice
     was do I become a smoker or do I not start smoking
     to protect my health?
          His parents -- well, in 1966, there was a
     Surgeon General's warning.  He was only six years
     old, but if he saw it, he had to make a choice.
     But we know for sure he got warnings from his
     parents.  His mother and father warned him against
     smoking, and that gave him an opportunity to make a
     choice:  Do I become a smoker or don't start?
          And we know what he did.  He started
     experimenting with his father's roll-your-own
     cigarettes.  He made the choice to become a smoker
     even though he had been warned not to.
          He got warnings in school, and we'll talk
     about the textbooks.  All of the people that
     Dr. Giakas talked about that grew up in the
     Pensacola area said, yes, they did receive
     education, they heard in school that smoking was
     dangerous, and Michael Johnson is no different.
          So he had -- when he heard that, when he read
     about that in those books, he had a choice, do I become a smoker or do I not start to protect my
     health?  He chose to experiment and become a
     smoker.
          The 1970s Surgeon General warning, when he
     went to decide whether to buy that first pack of
     cigarettes, he knew about the warning.  And when he
     saw that warning, he had to make a choice, do I
     ignore the warning and become a smoker and do I
     heed the warning and protect my health?  He chose
     to start smoking.
          His father, when his father was diagnosed with
     lung cancer caused by smoking, Michael Johnson had
     to make a choice.  Do I risk this happening to me?
     Do I risk what's happening to my father happen to
     me?  Do I protect my health or do I smoke?  He
     chose to smoke.
          His father, when his father died he had the
     same choice again.  He not only saw the lung cancer
     and the suffering his father went through, he saw
     his father die.  And he had to make a choice:  Do I
     continue smoking or do I stop so that doesn't
     happen to me?  He chose to smoke.  He didn't choose
     to protect his own health.
          In 1983, he had a bet with his brother.
     They're out running on the beach and they made a bet who can quit longest.  He had a choice.  When
     that -- when that whole idea came -- was presented
     by that bet, do I quit or do I continue, he said
     I'll take the bet, he lasted for a day, day and a
     half and then he went back to smoking.
          Going back to smoking was a choice.  It was a
     choice between continuing to smoke and risking his
     health or stopping to protect his health.  He chose
     to continue, not to protect his own health.
          Every time he saw newspaper articles, TV
     shows, magazines talking about the dangers of
     smoking, and I showed you that even in the
     Pensacola newspaper it happened throughout his
     entire life, every time he saw an article like
     that, he had a choice, do I quit to protect my
     health or do I continue smoking?  And every time he
     chose to continue smoking.
          All of his family members, you heard the
     testimony about his family telling him, "Michael,
     you need to quit."  Every one of those was a
     warning.  Every one was, "Michael, you need to
     protect your health, you've got to stop smoking."
     Every time he chose to continue, every time.
          He saw public service announcements on TV.  He
     heard about the Great American Smokeout.  His brother said they watched Ed Asner on the Great
     American Smokeout together.  He had a choice:  Do I
     do what it takes to quit, even if it's difficult,
     do I do what I need to do to quit to protect my
     health or do I continue smoking?
          Every time he chose to continue smoking.  It
     was his right.  He was allowed to take the risk,
     but he did take the risk.
          Surgeon General's warnings in 1985 specific,
     it causes lung cancer.  He saw that warning, he had
     to make a choice.  He chose to continue.  Surgeon
     General's warning:  Quitting now greatly reduces
     your risk.  He chose to continue not to reduce his
     risk.
          Warnings from Mrs. Robinson and her family.
     You heard about those.  Again, every time someone
     came up to him and said, "Michael, you need to quit
     smoking," it was a warning, it was saying, "Protect
     your health, Michael," and every time he chose to
     continue not to protect his health.
          All of those choices he made, he rejected
     concern for his health for the benefits, the
     enjoyment that he got out of smoking, and that was
     his right.  And none of us are here to second guess
     that.  But what you do need to do is consider that when you decide who was responsible for
     Michael Johnson's death:  R.J. Reynolds or
     Michael Johnson.
          I want to get into class membership.  I want
     to talk about those three things that they have to
     prove.  The final instruction that you are going to
     get is about the standards for proving that he was
     a member of the class and there are three things
     that plaintiff has to prove.
          Michael Johnson had lung cancer, meaning he
     had primary lung cancer caused by smoking.  He was
     addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.  And
     third, that the addiction was a legal cause of his
     lung cancer and death.
          And I'm going to go through each one of them.
     I want -- one thing I wanted you to keep in mind
     is -- and it could be a little confusing from
     yesterday because plaintiff bears the burden of
     proof on all these.
          Mr. Chestnut in his comments to you yesterday
     said, well, Reynolds has to prove that the tumors
     in his chest were not caused by smoking, came from
     something else.  He said that they have to --
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Objection, Your Honor, that
     mischaracterizes my closing argument. THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. BARINGER:  He told you that we have to --
     if it's not lung cancer, we have to prove what it
     is.  And, ladies and gentlemen, that's clever but
     that's not the law.  The law is it's their burden
     of proof.
          Let's talk about medical causation.  The first
     question that you will see on the verdict form is
     did Michael Johnson have lung cancer?  And again,
     the question is did he have cancer that started in
     his lung and was caused by smoking?  Let's look at
     the evidence.
          The plaintiff brought in Dr. Feingold to talk
     to you about causation.  Dr. Feingold, the
     $40 million expert.  Let's look a little bit about
     him.
          Number one, there is absolutely no question --
          MR. GARY:  Objection, Your Honor.  There's no
     evidence that Dr. Feingold was a $40 million
     expert.
          THE COURT:  This is argument, Counsel, you'll
     be able to rebut.
          MR. BARINGER:  Dr. Feingold told you during
     his testimony that over the last 30 years, 31
     years, that he has billed out $40 million in fees to be an expert witness.  And he made that -- and
     by the way, 50 percent of that was profit to him.
          He talked about testifying 15,000 asbestos
     cases, 250 tobacco cases.  He admitted that less
     than 5 percent of his time is actually spent with
     patients and 95 percent of his income comes from
     testifying.  The man is the definition of a
     professional witness.
          And he's not the kind of doctor that
     Mr. Johnson ever saw.  He's a pulmonologist.
     Michael Johnson never saw a pulmonologist, none of
     his doctors referred him to a pulmonologist because
     that wasn't the specialty that Michael Johnson
     needed.
          Now, it is remarkable, I'll have to give him
     credit, he told you when we talked about are you a
     radiologist, he said, "Well, no, but I read all
     the -- virtually all the radiology in the hospital.
     I do it all the time even though I can't sign a
     radiology report."
          I asked him, "Well, are you a pathologist?"
          He said, "Well, no, I can't sign a pathology
     report, but I read -- I look at cells and I can
     consult with everybody, I spend all kinds of time
     reading pathology." I asked him if he was an oncologist, do you
     treat cancer patients.  When someone is diagnosed
     with cancer, they send them to an oncologist for
     treatment, not to a pulmonologist.  But he said,
     "Oh, no, I can prescribe chemotherapy, I can do all
     that."
          I asked him on the addiction side are you a
     psychiatrist, and believe it or not, he argued with
     me about whether or not he was a psychiatrist
     because he treats people with psychiatric
     disorders.
          The amazing thing is he does all of that in
     the 5 percent of his time when he's not off
     testifying.  You have to decide how much weight to
     give his testimony.
          But keep this in mind:  Dr. Feingold admitted
     because Dr. Boatrite was unsure of Mr. Johnson's
     primary, Dr. Boatrite wanted to do more testing to
     find out where it started.  He wanted an additional
     biopsy, he wanted more blood work, he wanted more
     radiology, and Dr. Feingold agreed that all of
     those tests were needed to figure out where
     Mr. Johnson's cancer started and he agreed that
     they were never done.  Even the tests that
     Dr. Feingold would have wanted were never done. Now, we brought you three doctors in the right
     disciplines, the disciplines that were involved in
     this case.  Dr. Cohen, a radiologist, Dr. Bennett,
     a pathologist and medical examiner, and Dr. Harris,
     an oncologist.
          These three men all actually practice
     medicine.  These three men actually spend 95
     percent or more of their time treating patients or
     doing their job practicing medicine.
          I showed you this in opening.  This is a
     timeline of all the issues that you heard about and
     I'm not going to go back over it.  But I want you
     to keep in mind, this is the chronology.  It starts
     in July 1995 and ends in 1996.  And those are all
     the medical records, that's what we know.
          I want to go back through some of them, not
     all.  Remember that -- in October of 1995,
     Dr. Tucker Gerhard talked about the July x-ray.
     And he said, "Well, there was cystic changes or
     there was small blebs.  But remember, that has
     nothing to do with cancer.  That wasn't cancer and
     they told you that that wouldn't turn into cancer.
     It was negative for masses in July.
          Now, in October, three months later, all of
     the sudden when they saw the -- off the CT there were two masses, large masses at the time.  Now,
     Dr. Feingold told you that, well, when this whole
     issue about whether there was one tumor or two,
     Dr. Feingold said, "Well, he had the first one,
     that Pancoast tumor, and it just sort of creeped
     down to the rest of his lung."
          The problem is the radiology doesn't support
     Dr. Feingold creep-down theory.  Dr. Feingold
     pretends, really, that there was only one tumor.
     We never heard him talk about the second tumor.
          But Dr. Cohen told you that with the CT scan
     with those microscopic slices that they can do, if
     it was actually one tumor that had just -- was in
     the process of creeping down, the CT scan would
     have shown that and it didn't.  There were two
     separate tumors, and that's what the radiologist
     who signed the report said.
          Dr. Cohen also told you that based on the
     radiological evidence, the difference from July '95
     to October '95 was rapid growth of the two
     separates tumors is more consistent with metastatic
     cancer than lung primary.  Two tumors
     simultaneously in the same lung is unusual for a
     lung primary.
          And keep in mind the radiology was all perfectly consistent with Mr. Johnson having a germ
     cell tumor that metastasized.
          Then we talk about pathology.  And this was --
     this was fascinating because this was a record.
     Remember, Dr. Feingold said, gee -- on his direct
     examination, he said, "Gee, I just don't have the
     results of the staining.  If we had that, that
     might say something."  He said I never got it.
     Plaintiffs never gave it to him.
          But remember when I showed it to him on cross,
     he said, "Oh, yeah, I did see that during my
     deposition."  He remembered all the sudden.  And
     then he acted like this is the key to the case,
     this proves I'm exactly right.  Remember how
     excited he got?  He'd seen that report before.  He
     didn't talk about it on direct.
          If that was the key evidence.  If that were
     the answer to everything, do you really think he
     wouldn't have remembered seeing it and wouldn't
     have talked to you about it on direct?  It makes
     zero sense.
          Dr. Benefit, the pathologist, he said the
     characteristics of his lung disease favor
     metastatic disease for three reasons; his young
     age, two masses appearing at the same time, and the rapid onset.  In other words, going from nothing
     showing to tumors of that size in just three
     months.
          And then Dr. Boatrite.  Again, Dr. Boatrite --
     this is in October of 1995.  Dr. Boatrite wants to
     do compete staging; obtain bone scan, CT of liver,
     SMA 18.  Those are the things he wanted to do.
          But the important thing is what did he say
     about why he wanted to do it?  "Dr. Boatrite, and
     when you write complete staging in that last
     record" -- talking about those tests -- "you want
     to determine the primary site of a person's cancer
     and determine whether the cancer has spread
     anywhere, correct?
          "Yes, sir."
          That's what Dr. Boatrite was trying to do.  He
     asked for those -- he wanted to do those tests
     because he wanted to know where Mr. Johnson's lung
     cancer or cancer started.  He didn't know at that
     point it was primary lung cancer.  It was a
     possibility but he wanted more tests to find out.
     And those tests were never ever done.
          Then in his next record, this is November of
     '95, after we saw he wanted to do the complete
     staging which wasn't done.  And Dr. Boatrite says, "We are not certain of his primary."
          And remember, folks, he knew -- Dr. Boatrite
     knew that Michael Johnson was a smoker.  He knew
     that he had a 20-pack-year history at that point,
     but he still didn't know where the primary was.
     The fact that he was a smoker did not answer that
     question to Dr. Boatrite.
          And Dr. Boatrite -- remember, this is
     incredibly important.  In November of 1995, he says
     he wants to do the staging, he wants to do the test
     because he suspects that Mr. Johnson might have a
     very treatable and potentially curable tumor.
          And what was he worried about?  What didn't he
     want to miss?  His own testimony:  "What
     potentially curable tumor types were you referring
     to?
          "A physician would not want to miss a germ
     cell tumor."
          Dr. Boatrite thought there was a possibility
     that Mr. Johnson's cancer could be cured because
     the evidence to that point was all consistent with
     germ cell.
          But Mr. Johnson didn't want the test to find
     out and he didn't want treatment.  And that was his
     right and we're not criticizing that.  But it does have an effect on your job here because we don't
     have the evidence, no one has the evidence that
     would answer the question.
          Let's talk about germ cell just for a minute.
     Germ cells, remember, they can rise in the testes,
     the retroperitoneum and the mediastinum.  Three
     different areas of the body.  They are 95 percent
     curable.  Even if they metastasize and spread, they
     are not caused by smoking.  They are most common in
     men in their 20s and 30s, and they can metastasize
     to the lung.
          Dr. Bennett also told you, and Dr. Harris, the
     oncologist, said that germ cell tumors can be very
     small, much smaller than the metastasis and they
     can in patients not produce symptoms.
          The question isn't whether they always produce
     symptoms or never produce symptoms, they do
     sometimes, sometimes they don't.  That's the point
     about the germ cell medley.
          Let's look at the next issue because
     Dr. Feingold told you, he said testicular cancer is
     a white man's disease, it's virtually unheard of in
     African Americans.  But that's not true.
          We showed you the incidents of testicular
     cancer -- and this is in black males.  I mean, folks, if Dr. Feingold was right, this chart
     wouldn't exist.
          And it shows you that the peak incidents of
     testicular cancer in African American men is in the
     35 to 39 age group.  The peek incidents for lung
     cancer is way down here, 65, 70.  Only 0.3 percent
     in Michael Johnson's age group.
          Let's talk about the notion of the fact that
     Dr. Boatrite suggested some chemotherapy, did that
     mean that that reflects that Dr. Boatrite had
     decided it was a lung primary.
          But Dr. Boatrite answered that question:  The
     Taxol-based chemotherapy that he wanted Mr. Johnson
     to have which he refused could be used for any type
     of epithelial carcinoma.  It was not lung cancer
     specific.  The fact that Dr. Boatrite considered
     using Taxol doesn't prove that Dr. Boatrite thought
     it was a lung primary.
          Then the April 29, 1996, followup of unknown
     primary epithelial carcinoma.  Now, what was that?
     Why does it say that?  Dr. Boatrite explained that
     that was the top of his differential list.
          What is a differential diagnosis?  A
     differential diagnosis is a list of possibilities.
     If you've made a definitive diagnosis, it's not differential anymore.  You've picked it.  It's a
     list of possibilities.  And at that point, unknown
     primary was at the top.
          Let's see what Dr. Harris told you about it.
     Again, he says, "All it means are possibilities and
     that at that moment in April of 1996, unknown
     primary was on the top of Dr. Boatrite's list."
          And remember, it doesn't mean that even the
     list, the whatever is at the top of the list is
     more than 50 percent likely.  It doesn't mean it's
     that high.  You can have a list where you think the
     odds of best for the top of your differential is
     30 percent.  It doesn't prove that it was over
     50 percent or that it was more likely than not.
          Let's talk the very last visit.
     September 4th, 1996.  Return for followup of
     unknown primary, most likely lung.
          The question was:  Why did Dr. Boatrite -- why
     did his differential apparently change from April
     until September from unknown primary, which he
     still says, but most likely lung?  Because the only
     thing that could have changed it medically were
     additional tests, additional information.  And,
     ladies and gentlemen, there were none.  There were
     no more tests.  There was no more information.  It was still uncertain at that point.
          The issue of whether there was a tumor ever
     found outside the lung, Dr. Cohen said, primary
     tumors can be smaller especially in those areas.
     Dr. Harris said, well, you can have tumors in the
     abdomen but you wouldn't be able to find them on
     physical examination.  Dr. Bennett, primary tumors
     can be silent and without symptoms.
          And remember, the biggest reason no tumor was
     found outside the lungs is because Mr. Johnson
     wouldn't let him do tests to find out.  He never
     had a CT of his abdomen.  He never had another
     biopsy.  He didn't have -- the reason you couldn't
     know for sure whether there was a tumor outside his
     lung, because the tests to find out weren't done.
     Not because there was no tumor outside the lung,
     they just never had a chance to look.
          Then the issue about the Pancoast tumor.
     Remember, even Dr. Feingold admits Pancoast tumor
     tells you where it is and what the symptoms are.
     It does not tell you that it is a primary.
          Dr. Feingold admitted that you can have a
     metastasis to the lung that becomes a Pancoast
     tumor.  The issue is whether it could possibly be a
     germ cell. And Dr. Harris and Dr. Bennett told you, yes,
     it can.  Dr. Feingold said, well, I have never seen
     a case.  Well, Dr. Feingold isn't an oncologist,
     Dr. Harris is.  And he said, yes, it is possible.
          Over on the medical issue.  The best you can
     tell with the evidence available is that it is an
     unknown primary.  Now, it's more likely that it was
     metastatic and our doctors told you why.  Two
     masses appearing at the same time in the lung is
     more likely metastatic than primary.
          The aggressive growth of the tumors is
     consistent with metastatic.  Mr. Johnson's young
     age, being very rare to have lung cancer in a 30 to
     35-year-old man indicates metastatic.  Lung is the
     most commonplace in the body for metastatic tumors
     to develop.
          The primary location cannot be determined to a
     reasonable degree of probably and there are a host
     of possible tumors that could have metastasized to
     his lung that were never conclusively ruled out.
          Ladies and gentlemen, we're left with a
     situation where the answer to whether or not he had
     primary lung cancer can't be answered.  It can't be
     answered because Mr. Johnson refused the test that
     would have answered the question. That's not good enough for plaintiffs to carry
     their burden of proof.  And so what I -- I am going
     to urge you to -- can I have the ELMO?  The first
     question:  Did Michael Johnson have lung cancer?
     The answer is no.  They didn't prove that he did.
          Your Honor, I don't know when you want to --
          THE COURT:  Appropriate break time?
          MR. BARINGER:  Yeah.
          THE COURT:  Take a ten-minute break.
          (The jury withdrew from the courtroom and the
following further proceedings were held:)
          (Recess.)
          THE BAILIFF:  Remain seated.  Circuit court is
     reconvened.
          THE COURT:  Ready to resume?
          MR. BARINGER:  Yes.
          THE COURT:  Call the jurors when they're
     ready, please.
          (The jury resumed its seat in the jury box and
the following further proceedings were held:)
          THE BAILIFF:  Jurors have been seated, Your
     Honor.
          THE COURT:  Counsel, please continue.
          MR. BARINGER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Where we left off we had just talked about medical causation, the first requirements for class
     membership, and I want to pick up now with the
     second requirement of class membership, the second
     question that will be on the verdict form, and that
     was, was Michael Johnson addicted to cigarettes
     containing nicotine?
          One of the things about this is that the court
     is not going to define what addiction means.  There
     is no legal definition to apply here.  So you're
     going to have to decide based on the evidence what
     you think it means and how to apply that.
          Now, you heard two totally different
     approaches during the course of the trial.
     Dr. Feingold came in and -- who is not actually a
     psychiatrist.  He said -- part of what he says was,
     well, Michael only made one quit attempt on a bet
     in 1983 so he couldn't really address whether he
     was motivated or not, so he ignored that.
          But he told you his standard.  He said anyone
     who smokes at least one pack a day is addicted.
     And that's not very helpful because that would mean
     every regular smoker in the United States is
     addicted and that doesn't seem to make a great deal
     of sense for the addiction idea and that doesn't
     make sense. Now, Dr. Feingold applied the Fagerstrom test
     and he admitted that he problems doing it reliably.
     The most important thing to remember about the
     Fagerstrom test is -- remember Dr. Benowitz, and
     they talked about Dr. Benowitz who is the -- he was
     the senior scientific editor of the 1988 Surgeon
     General's report.
          And in the testimony that you saw,
     Dr. Benowitz was asked about the Fagerstrom test.
     And the question was:  "Is that test typically used
     to determine whether a patient is addicted or not?
          "Answer:  No.  It's usually used to assess the
     severity of the addiction."
          So Dr. Benowitz, the senior editor for the '88
     Surgeon General's report on addiction is telling
     you that the test that Dr. Feingold used isn't used
     to determine whether someone is addicted, it's to
     determine how addicted they are.  It presumes that
     they are.
          But nonetheless, let's talk for a few minutes
     about how Dr. Feingold applied the Fagerstrom test.
     Remember, he said, "I had trouble coming up with a
     reliable diagnosis because the lack of
     information."
          One of the reasons there was a lack of information is the plaintiffs only gave him three
     of the 19 depositions to review, but he did the
     best with what he had.
          And remember how he scored it.  He said, "I'll
     give him two points for smoking within six to 30
     minutes of getting up in the morning."
          But, remember, the testimony from
     Mrs. Robinson was anything but clear about that.
     She said, "Well, I didn't know whether he showered
     first and then took and then smoked."  But she
     said, "Really, it was when he had his first cup of
     coffee.
          "How long was it before he had his first cup
     of coffee?
          "I don't know."
          And then she said -- and a lot of times
     remember she said what a fan he was of
     Krispy Kreme?  He wouldn't even have his first cup
     of coffee.  He would get ready to go, he would go
     to Krispy Kreme and he'd have his coffee and his
     cigarette.
          The point isn't the mathematical precision.
     The point is that Dr. Feingold took very, very
     vague testimony and decided he could apply it.  If
     it was -- if it was just a few minutes different than what Ms. Robinson -- the way her testimony was
     interpreted, he would have only got one point
     instead of two.
          The second one was he gave him three points
     for smoking more than 30 cigarettes, 31 or more per
     day.  You saw through Dr. Giakas that there were a
     long list of people that gave their estimates from
     their knowledge of Mr. Johnson about how much he
     smoked today.
          Mrs. Robinson and his brother Fitzgerald were
     the only ones that said on a daily basis they
     thought he smoked more than 31 cigarettes.  The
     whole list of other people -- his brother Mark who
     worked with him every day for that whole period in
     the '80s and then into the early '90s said he never
     smoked more than 15.
          The point is the evidence, if you look at that
     chart, if you remember Dr. Giakas, the overall --
     the chart doesn't suggest that he was smoking more
     than 31 cigarettes a day.
          Even Mr. Johnson himself when he told his
     doctor how much he had smoked, he said one pack per
     day for 20 years.  And I realize that's an average,
     but that's what you ought to look at what you're
     looking at how the Fagerstrom is applied.  It's not a fixed moment in time you're being asked.  They
     want you to conclude he was addicted that entire
     time.
          So then take Mr. Johnson's estimate, he
     thought he smoked one pack a day.  Dr. Feingold
     scoring would have been wrong if that was true.
          Then the best:  He gave him a point for
     smoking while he was sick in bed.  The only problem
     was he admitted -- Dr. Feingold admitted
     Mr. Johnson was never sick in bed.  He was never
     unable to get up and go around and do normal things
     like ride bicycles and things, of course he was
     sick.
          But the point was Dr. Feingold ignored what
     the test asked, made up his own criteria and said,
     well, he had lung cancer so that's the same thing.
     No, it's not the same thing.  The point is if
     someone is so sick they can't even get out of bed,
     are they still smoking?  Not if they're walking
     around and doing fine even if they have a serious
     disease.
          If he would have scored it the way the
     evidence suggests, it would have been a three.  And
     remember, Dr. Feingold told you his test, if the
     answer would have been three instead of six, the test would have indicated he was probably not
     addicted.
          Consider how he scored it, why he scored it
     the way, and even his own admission on what that
     means.
          Then you heard from Dr. Giakas.  Dr. Giakas is
     a psychiatrist.  Dr. Giakas treats people for
     addictions.  That's what he does every day, not in
     the 5 percent of his time that -- you know, like
     Dr. Feingold, the 5 percent where he isn't being a
     professional witness.  Dr. Giakas does it every
     day.
          Dr. Giakas went through the criteria from
     DSM V which he says is the standard.  That is what
     psychiatrists who treat addiction use.  And I'm not
     going to go through all of these again.  You saw
     Dr. Giakas go through and you understood his reason
     why.
          The point was of the specific criteria listed
     in the DSM V, Mr. Johnson met one of them.  But
     that's not even really the most important.  The
     most important part of DSM is DSM asks do you have
     a clinically significant impairment?  In other
     words, is the use of the drug, in this case
     nicotine, does it cause problems in your life?  Is it so -- are you so overwhelmed by it that it
     causes problems with your family life, with work,
     those sorts of things?
          That is -- according to Dr. Giakas, that's the
     sign that someone has an addiction problem.  They
     have a clinically significant impairment.  Did
     Mr. Johnson have it?  No.  What was his reaction?
     He enjoyed it.  Was he interested in quitting?  No.
     Did he make any serious efforts to quit?  No.  Did
     it cause him distress or problems in his social,
     his family, his work life?  The answer was no.
          And remember, all of the people that testified
     that the reason Mr. Johnson smoked was because he
     enjoyed it.  Keep in mind, first and foremost,
     Mr. Johnson, Michael Johnson said that was the
     reason he smoked, it was because he enjoyed it, not
     because he was compelled.
          But then think about it in terms of the
     profile that Dr. Giakas painted for you.  There are
     signs of impairment.  There are signs of distress
     that you can see in smokers that are addicted.
          Desperately want to quit, an addicted smoker
     desperately wants to quit.  Michael Johnson:  "I'm
     going to smoke until I die."  Did he regret
     smoking?  No.  Was he influenced by others?  It was his choice and his decision.
          An addicted smoker hates the fact that they
     smoke.  Michael Johnson enjoyed it.  He said there
     was nothing better than lighting up.  Complaints
     about smoking?  Michael Johnson never complained
     about his smoking.  Was he tortured?  Remember,
     nothing better.
          Was he in control or not in control?  He -- he
     could have made restrictions.  He would respect
     people saying, "Don't smoke in the car with me,
     don't smoke in my house, don't smoke in a
     restaurant, don't smoke when you're holding kids."
     He wasn't so out of control that he violated those
     kinds of normal limits and restrictions.  He was in
     control.
          Did he smoke against his will?  Of course not.
     He told people over and over, he told his brother,
     "I don't want to quit.  I want to smoke."
          Did he make repeated serious attempts?  Some
     people, you heard, will try 5, 10, 15, 20 times
     before they finally quit.  But they're determined
     to do it and they make those attempts.
          Did Mr. Johnson?  We know that out running on
     a beach once he made a bet and he quit for a day --
     or a day and a half.  No other evidence that he ever quit another day in those 20 years, even one
     day in his life did he quit.
          Did he seek assistance?  Never sought
     assistance.  He never went and he never went to
     anyone.  He never threw out ashtrays.  All those
     things were if you want help to get quit.  Did he
     want to quit enough to go to someone and say, "Hey,
     help me out here"?  Never, never.
          You have to decide whether Mr. Johnson meets
     the profile of an addicted smoker who had a
     clinically -- a clinical impairment or not.  You
     can balance the Fagerstrom that Dr. Feingold used
     that isn't intended for that purpose or you can use
     the gold standard, the DSM, which psychiatrists who
     treat addicts all the time use.
          I think the fair result -- can I have the
     ELMO, please?
          The fair report, Question Number 2, was
     Michael Johnson addicted to cigarettes containing
     nicotine?  The fair answer was no, they didn't
     prove that he was.
          Let's talk about the third element of class
     membership.  The third question is was such an
     addiction -- and this presumes you've decided he
     was addicted, otherwise you mark no on the form and you're done, the case is over.
          So this question presumes, not suggests, but
     presumes that you said yes.  So was such an
     addiction a legal cause of Michael Johnson's lung
     cancer and death?
          And, ladies and gentlemen, keep in mind, these
     are two completely different questions.  It's not
     asking again was he addicted.  As I said, this
     assumes that you decided he was.  So it is a
     totally different question.
          Was it the legal cause of his death?  What
     does legal cause mean?  Legal cause means but for
     that addiction, the death would not have occurred.
          Remember in opening I showed you the dominoes
     and I said if you take out the addiction, it all
     stops, he doesn't continue smoking until he dies.
     So if you take away the addiction, does it stop?
     That's the key question here.
          Because if you think about it and if it wasn't
     addiction that made him smoke, if it was the fact
     that he wanted to and he enjoyed it, the addiction
     could not be the legal cause because you can take
     away the addiction and he would still smoke because
     he wanted to because he enjoyed it.
          Let's talk about a framework for looking at this.  Was Mr. Johnson so overwhelmingly controlled
     by addiction to nicotine that he was unable to quit
     and prevent his death?  Or did he have the ability
     to quit and prevent his own death?  That's really
     the essence of what this question about addiction
     causation really means.
          And the evidence is pretty obvious.  First of
     all, keep in mind, again, and this is where it's
     absolutely relevant, plaintiff admits that
     Mr. Johnson's actions related to his efforts to
     quit smoking were a legal cause of his death.
          Ladies and gentlemen, this is the heart of
     addiction causation.  They admit that he should
     have and could have tried harder and quit.  And
     remember, keep in mind, the mission means that he
     must have been able or there's no reason to admit
     anything, that he did have the ability to quit in
     time to prevent his death.  That's what they've
     admitted.
          And why?  "He simply told me he liked to
     smoke, there was nothing better than lighting up a
     cigarette."  Ladies and gentlemen, when you think
     about why he did what he did, this tells you what
     it meant to him.  There was nothing better for him
     than lighting up a cigarette.  He didn't want to quit.  He didn't care about the risk he was taking.
     That's what it meant to him.
          And as I said, his brother, who talked about
     smoking for years with Michael was -- he was
     stubborn, he didn't want to stop smoking.  And
     Walter wasn't the only one.  The other family
     members all say basically the same thing;
     James Fitzgerald, Angie Brenson, Joyce Butler, even
     Mrs. Robinson said that he wasn't interested.  He
     was not interested in quitting.
          Sure, there were times.  His mother, for
     example, said, "Every time I told him, 'You saw
     what it did to your daddy, why don't you stop
     smoking?'  He said, 'Mom, I'm trying.'"  Well, of
     course he was going to say that.  Was he going to
     defy his mother?  He knew his mother didn't want
     him smoking so his answer and his excuse was I'm
     trying, but then his actions didn't back that up.
          And remember, it couldn't be more clear.  He
     wasn't interested in quitting.  When faced with the
     choice do you want to die like your father, take a
     chance of dying like your father, his answer was,
     "I'm going to smoke until I die."
          When his Uncle Winston quit smoking and they
     were talking about it with Michael and Walter were talking about it and he said, "Why don't you stop
     too like the uncle did?"  And Michael's line was,
     "I'm not going to stop smoking until I'm dead."  He
     wasn't interested in quitting.
          And then the actions.  Even if he said,
     "Momma, I'm trying to quit," or he told Cynthia,
     "I'm trying to quit," the words don't match the
     actions.  He didn't throw away his ashtrays.  He
     didn't set a quit date.  He didn't see a doctor.
     He never expressed any interest in a smoking
     cessation program.
          He never asked anyone for help.  He never
     asked his family members who quit how they did it.
     He never tried smoking cessation aids.  Remember,
     Mrs. Robinson said they never even talked about or
     considered giving him nicotine gum or anything.
          Then he never asked -- he ignored the loved
     ones that encouraged him to quit.  His bottom line
     on why don't you do something to try and quit, his
     answer was, "Everybody has got a bad habit, I guess
     this one is mine."  He wasn't interested.  He
     didn't do anything that would have showed he was
     sincere about wanting to quit.
          And remember, we talked about Dr. Benowitz.
     Sometimes people say they want to quit but don't mean it.  If someone doesn't want to quit, they are
     not going to quit.  The two biggest factors in
     success in quitting; motivation, perseverance.
     Mr. Johnson had neither.  He wasn't motivated.  He
     didn't want to, and he certainly didn't try
     repeatedly.
          Then there's Mark who you saw testify here,
     Mr. Johnson, his twin brother.  Did Michael try to
     stop smoking?  Only one time in 1983 when they were
     jogging on the beach.  Only one time in Michael's
     life did he know of him to try to quit smoking.
          And it wasn't because he wanted to protect his
     health.  Ladies and gentlemen, he wanted to, to win
     a bet with his twin brother.  The bet was who can
     quit longest, not who's going to quit to protect
     their life.  And he lost the bet and he -- and Mark
     never saw him try again.
          And remember, you heard this testimony about
     Verdell Salter, and the question was did he -- she
     said she thought she saw him chewing nicotine gum
     and he tried three or four times.
          Number one, as Dr. Giakas told you, nicotine
     gum wasn't available back in the early '80s when
     she said.  It would have been impossible.  There
     was no nicotine gum to get. The second thing was Mark Johnson, his twin
     brother, the entire time from 1981 to 1987 when
     Mr. Johnson was with Verdell Salter, Mark Johnson
     worked with him every day.
          Verdell said he's trying to quit.  She doesn't
     go to work with him.  Mark was there every day.  He
     said the only time in his life he ever saw him try
     to quit was when they were jogging in 1983.
     Michael Johnson wasn't chewing nicotine gum.
     Michael Johnson wasn't trying to quit during that
     period of time.
          Then there is all the people -- all of these
     people that you saw on here said they weren't aware
     of him trying to quit.  They never saw him put his
     cigarettes down.  They never saw him go 24 hours
     without smoking.  All of those people.
          Then there was Mrs. Robinson.  Mrs. Robinson
     said, well, there was this episode with gum and
     candy.  She said he chewed spearmint gum or green
     gum, Doublemint gum, and he ate cinnamon candy.
          He never said he was doing so in an effort to
     cut back.  She admitted that.  She couldn't
     remember when he did it or for how long.  She did
     not -- she did recall that he never stopped smoking
     while he was doing it.  And as I said, she never saw him quit for a day.
          He may have been chewing gum.  He may have
     been eating candy.  But he never told anyone he was
     even trying to cut down, let alone quit, and he
     never put his cigarettes down while he was doing
     that to see if he could.  Never.
          So the question is:  Did he want to quit?
     Unequivocally the answer is no.  He didn't express
     an interest.  He was stubborn about not wanting to.
     He didn't want to.  If he couldn't quit, that's why
     he couldn't quit, because he didn't want to.
          The next question is:  Was he able to quit?
     And the answer to that is absolutely.  All of the
     experts that testified in this case said he was
     able to quit, either because everyone can quit,
     even though for some it's very difficult.
          Some people may need assistance.  Some people
     may need to try multiple times.  Some people may
     need the support of others to help them.  But if
     they're willing to accept the help, if they're
     willing to commit to it, they are able to do it.
          And Dr. Benowitz, Dr. Feingold, Dr. Giakas all
     said there is not an addiction that cannot be
     overcome.  It's simply untrue that someone can't
     stop.  They may need help and it may be difficult, but it can be done.
          Now, this issue of choice.  The plaintiffs a
     number of times have read an old document and it
     was in the '60s, I think, by some lawyer who said,
     "Geez, we can't continue to defend smoking as a
     free choice if the person was addicted."  And
     that's what the document said.
          But just because it was written in a company
     document doesn't make it true.  Remember in opening
     I said there were documents that were written that
     were wrong, that were silly, that were stupid.
     This one was wrong.
          There is a free choice.  You don't have to
     take my word for it, it's very simple.
     Dr. Feingold said of course smokers have a choice.
     Dr. Benowitz said of course smokers have a choice.
     They told you that not only do they have a choice,
     but even addicted smokers can make that choice and
     they can successfully quit.
          The idea that there's no choice is utter
     nonsense.  How did those 60 million people who
     quit, 90 percent of which were supposedly addicted,
     how did they do it if they didn't have a choice?
     Somebody wave a wand and transform their mind and
     suddenly they weren't addicted and they stopped? No.  They made a choice.  They had the ability to
     do it and they did.
          Millions of heavy smokers -- Dr. Benowitz said
     millions of heavy smokers quit smoking from the
     '50s up into the '90s.  90 percent of them without
     any assistance, 5,000 people a day quit smoking,
     more than half of everyone that has ever smoked in
     the United States have quit.  60 million people
     have quit.  They had to have had a choice or
     that -- none of that that's on that chart could
     possibly be true.
          Then we heard a lot about brain changes and
     receptors.  Dr. Benowitz:  Nicotine addiction does
     not permanently change the brain receptors, they go
     back to normal.  Does not interfere with the
     smoker's ability to understand the dangers of
     smoking.
          It doesn't make them -- they talk about
     rationalization or denial, but it doesn't mean they
     don't understand the dangers.  It doesn't interfere
     with their ability to make an informed choice to
     quit or continue smoking.  And it does not prevent
     smokers from quitting permanently.
          And that is the scientific editor of the '88
     Surgeon General's report.  That is the expert that they brought here by videotape and had you watch
     for six hours.  That's what he says.
          Then, of course, the ultimate.  This case is
     about Michael Johnson.  It isn't about everybody
     else.  But, Dr. Feingold, his answer when I asked
     him in cross-examination in front of you could
     Michael Johnson have quit, he said of course.
          Michael Johnson, if they tell you
     Michael Johnson couldn't quit, think about what
     their own expert told you.  Their expert told you
     of course he could quit.
          Then let's talk about Dr. Feingold, he gave
     you a model.  And he said this is how addiction
     causes disease, and he said this is exactly what
     happened with Michael Johnson.  And he says, well,
     you're addicted so you smoke and then, remember,
     you're exposed to all those chemicals over and over
     and over, and he said that's why addiction causes
     disease.
          And he said addiction -- what he said about
     addiction was addiction means the smoker is likely
     to smoke the next cigarette, the next cigarette,
     the next cigarette, and it just keeps rolling, just
     continues.
          But there's a problem with that, a big problem with that theory.  And that is that presumes that
     this piece can't be changed.  That presumes that
     once you start and once you're addicted, you are
     powerless to stop the train from rolling.  But it's
     not true.  And Dr. Feingold admitted to you it's
     not true.
          Remember, I asked him, I said, well, the
     60 million people that quit were able to break the
     link, they were able to stop it.  And I said isn't
     it true that for those 60 million people, the day
     before they stopped, you would have said they're
     likely to continue smoking forever, and he said
     yes.  And I said in those 60 million cases you
     would have been wrong, wouldn't you?  And his
     answer had to be yes, because that's what happened.
          It is not an unbreakable chain.  It is not the
     truth that if you are addicted you will inevitably
     smoke until you develop a disease.  That's a lie.
     Smokers have the choice and they have the ability
     to stop that process.
          Michael Johnson, Dr. Feingold told you
     Michael Johnson had the ability to stop.  He had
     the ability to break the chain.  But he didn't want
     to.
          What happens if you do break the chain? Quitting smoking reduces the risks compared to if
     you continue.  And remember, this is absolutely
     critical:  No measurable risk of lung cancer until
     you have a ten-pack-year history.  The statistics,
     the signs says that it takes time.  It isn't a
     situation where you smoke one cigarette and you
     suddenly have an increased risk for developing lung
     cancer.
          And Dr. Feingold admitted that what medical
     science so far has determined is until you get a
     ten pack-year history you haven't got a measurable
     increase in risk.  And what does that mean when you
     flip it around?  It means that if you stop before
     you accumulate a ten-year-pack history, you are
     more likely than not, not going to develop lung
     cancer because your risk is basically the same as a
     nonsmoker.
          Now, how does that apply in this case?  I
     asked Dr. Feingold specifically, if Mr. Johnson had
     quit before reaching the ten-pack-year threshold,
     he more than likely would not have died of lung
     cancer in 1966, and I asked him specifically about
     1977 when his father was diagnosed.  And
     Dr. Feingold said that's right, if he had quit
     then, he more likely than not would not have died in 1996 of lung cancer.
          And remember, there is a question about where
     does the ten year start.  Dr. Feingold admitted he
     didn't know when Michael Johnson became a regular
     smoker.
          We know this whole thing about smoking at 13
     and 14, ladies and gentlemen, what they're talking
     about is he was stealing some roll-your-own tobacco
     from his father and smoking occasionally.  I doubt
     seriously he was stealing 20 cigarettes a day worth
     of roll-your-own from his father.  It takes time.
          He experimented when he was 13 or 14.  From
     Walter's testimony we know that the first time he
     saw him with a manufactured cigarette, the first
     time that Walter thinks he was a regular daily
     smoker was when he was 18.
          If you take Michael Johnson's own testimony
     that in 1995 he had a 20-pack-year history, it
     would mean that he -- that he's starting the clock
     around 1970, somewhere in that vicinity.
          But the point is this:  In 1977, he hadn't
     reached ten pack years.  In 1979, he hadn't reached
     ten pack years.  In 1985, it's questionable.
     Somewhere between '85 and '88, he would have
     reached the ten-year threshold. And I am not going to stand here and tell you
     that if he would have quit smoking after that, it
     would have made any difference.  We don't know, but
     scientifically based on the evidence, it's unlikely
     that it would have made a difference, but it would
     have made all the difference in the world if he had
     quit before that.
          He had within his own hands the power to
     prevent his own death.  And remember what we saw
     about all those choices, the choice between health
     and the choice between smoking, he made that
     choice.  And when he made that choice to continue
     smoking, he was taking away -- he was taking a risk
     that exactly what did happen would happen.  And he
     did it willingly all along the way.
          60 million people quit.  Were the cigarettes
     they smoked -- were the cigarettes Mr. Johnson
     smoked more addictive than the ones they smoked?
     Of course not.  They're all addictive.
          Was Mr. Johnson's brain affected differently
     than smokers who quit?  No.  And remember, this
     whole thing about whether he started at 13 or 14
     and his brain was young, Dr. Feingold admitted that
     virtually he said virtually everyone starts around
     14 or 15. So all the studies about what the effects are,
     every one of those people or the vast majority
     would have started young.
          Mr. Johnson's age didn't distinguish him from
     anybody else that was able to successfully quit.
     Did he smoke more than smokers who quit?  Of course
     not.  They talked about, Dr. Benowitz said, heavy
     smokers, two, three packs a day, four packs a day.
     Did Mr. Johnson smoke longer?  No, he smoked 20
     years.  There are people who quit far later than
     that.
          Did he try to quit unsuccessfully more than
     the people who did quit?  He tried once and it
     wasn't a real attempt.  Did he choose to continue
     smoking because he liked it and he did not want to
     quit?  Yes.  That is the one thing that
     distinguishes Mr. Johnson from the 60 million
     people who quit successfully.
          Can I have the ELMO?
          Ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is
     overwhelming:  Michael Johnson did not want to
     quit.  Addiction didn't prevent him from quitting.
     All of the experts said he had a choice.  All of
     the experts said that he had the ability to quit.
     All of -- or Dr. Feingold admitted that if he had basically by 1985, he probably wouldn't have died
     of lung cancer.
          Addiction to nicotine was not the legal cause
     of his death.  His choice to continue smoking when
     he had the ability to prevent it was the sole legal
     cause of his death.  The answer to Question
     Number 3 is no.
          I want to turn -- we've talked about all three
     elements of class membership.  You only go on with
     the verdict form if you have answered yes to all
     three.  And I don't think the evidence supports
     that, but obviously we have to continue through and
     talk about the rest.
          The next question you will see on the verdict
     form is state the percentage of fault, if any, that
     was a legal cause of Michael Johnson's death that
     you charge to Michael Johnson or R.J. Reynolds
     Tobacco Company.  This is where you apportion
     fault.
          And keep in mind, it's the apportionment when
     we start this whole discussion, all 100 percent of
     the fault starts out with Michael Johnson.  Why?
     Because the plaintiffs have the burden of proof.
     And until they satisfy the burden of proof that
     something Reynolds did was a legal cause of his death, 100 percent of the fault belongs to
     Mr. Johnson.
          Let's talk about what the evidence was very
     briefly.  Mr. Johnson ignored warnings from his
     parents, ignored warnings he received in school.
     He ignored the 1970 Surgeon General's warning.  He
     didn't quit when his father died of -- was
     diagnosed or died of lung cancer.
          He ignored warning from his own family.  He
     ignored the 1985 warnings.  He ignored warnings
     from the media and the public health community.  He
     ignored warnings from Mrs. Robinson family.  He was
     stubborn about not wanting to quit.
          He never used smoking cessation aids.  He
     never sought information or assistance on quitting.
     He never made a serious effort to quit.  He chose
     not to quit when other family members died from
     smoking-related diseases.  He wasn't willing to
     give up the enjoyment he received to protect his
     health.
          And the plaintiff admits that he was at least
     a partially -- partial cause of his death, and
     that's absolutely critical.  They admit that it was
     because he didn't try long enough and hard enough
     and didn't prevent his death when he had the ability to do that.
          Overwhelmingly, the evidence points to the
     reason that Mr. Johnson ultimately died was because
     he didn't take the action that he could have taken
     to protect his own health.  He accepted that risk.
     And remember what he said:  "Everybody has got a
     bad habit, I guess it's mine."
          And what did Mrs. Robinson tell you?  It was
     his decision whether or not to continue smoking.
     What else did she say?  After he -- after he was
     diagnosed with cancer, he never blamed anyone,
     anyone else.  He didn't ask to file this lawsuit
     because he thought it wasn't his fault.
          And I want you to remember what Dr. Benowitz
     said.  Dr. Benowitz, the addiction expert, said
     smoking cigarettes does not cause a smoker to lose
     the ability to be responsible for their own
     actions.  Remember that.
          Dr. Benowitz, he says -- how could you hold a
     smoker responsible for their choices if they
     couldn't do anything about it?  If the smoker
     didn't have the ability to stop, why would
     Dr. Benowitz hold them responsible?  Makes
     absolutely no sense.
          But Dr. Benowitz, the expert knows that they are still responsible because they still understand
     and they still have the ability and they are still
     the ones responsible for making the decision and
     doing whatever it takes to follow up on it no
     matter what kind of help they need.  It's their
     responsibility.  No one else's.
          As I said, the only way you shift any of the
     fault to R.J. Reynolds is if you decide that they
     did something wrong that was a legal cause of his
     death.
          Let me show this instruction.  It's important
     that you understand how this is going to be
     handled.  The verdict form and the instructions
     explain.
          If you -- whatever percentage of fault that
     you assign to Mr. Johnson will work to reduce the
     damages that you award by whatever percentage.  And
     the court said -- the court will do it.  The court
     will reduce the damages on the nonintentional
     claims.  You don't have to worry about that.
          But it does make a difference in what you
     think about when you're doing this allocation.  You
     cannot allocate fault to Reynolds based on
     plaintiff's concealment claims.  Those are the
     intentional claims.  They say the -- the concealment was intentional.
          If you find against Reynolds, and I'm
     certainly not suggesting you should, but if you
     were to find against Reynolds on the concealment
     claim, the amount of damages will not be reduced.
     Your apportionment of fault here on comparative
     fault will not reduce those damages.  And it's
     important that you understand that distinction so
     you're not confused about what's going do happen.
          If you find against Reynolds, if you find that
     Mr. Johnson was a member of the class, your
     allocation of fault will reduce your damages unless
     you say yes on concealment, then there will be no
     reduction.
          So I'm not going to suggest, obviously, a
     percentage.  Obviously, it's your sound judgment.
     But, ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is
     overwhelming that it was Michael Johnson's
     decisions about whether or not to smoke that were
     the legal cause of his death and he -- the
     allocation of fault should reflect that simple
     truth.
          Let me turn to the question of concealment.
     Verdict forms -- the Question 7 and 8 -- and if
     you'll forgive me, I'm going to skip over the damages for a little while, we'll come back to it.
     I'm just going to go to the concealment question.
          The Question 7 is:  Was the concealment a
     legal cause?  Question 8 is, essentially:  Was the
     agreement to conceal the legal cause?  For all
     intents and purposes, I'm treating them as exactly
     the same thing because the heart of the question is
     did Mr. Johnson die because of information was
     unknown to him?
          I do want to talk about what "but for" means.
     Legal cause.  This is the explanation you're going
     to get about what does this legal cause thing mean.
     The emphasis is on but for the concealment, the
     loss wouldn't have occurred.
          In other words, if it hadn't been for the fact
     that information was concealed, Mr. Johnson would
     have stopped smoking or would never have started
     smoking and wouldn't have died of lung cancer.
     That's what it all boils down to.
          And remember, the idea is if you take away the
     concealment, and in this case, that means give him
     whatever information they say was concealed, would
     it have made a difference?
          Pick any document they want to talk about, the
     question is this:  If you would have taken that document, put it in an envelope and mailed it to
     Michael Johnson, would it have made him quit?
     Would any of the information they said was
     concealed, would any of it have made him quit?
          And I'm going to suggest to you that the
     answer is overwhelmingly no.  If he didn't quit
     when he thought it killed his father, if he didn't
     quit when he thought if he smoked he took the same
     risk, is there anything R.J. Reynolds could have
     sent him in the mail or given to him or provided
     some other way that would have made a difference?
     I can't think of a reason that that would make any
     sense.
          Let's talk about how -- what they had to
     prove.  They talked a lot about things that weren't
     disclosed.  What they have to do, as I just talked
     about, is they have to link that up to his death.
          It's not enough just to say, well, they didn't
     publish this internal research on nicotine.  The
     question is did the fact that they didn't -- didn't
     publish that internal research on nicotine -- if
     there was any, it's just an example -- would it
     have made a difference?  It's not just that it
     wasn't -- whatever it was wasn't published, it's
     would it have made a difference?  That's the link they have to establish.
          They can't just throw things up against the
     wall and hope that you will speculate and guess
     about whether it would have made a difference.
     That's their responsibility to prove to you it
     would have made a difference.  It's not my
     responsibility to prove it wouldn't have.
          Let's talk about the first part.  The dangers
     and addictiveness of cigarettes were warned about
     long before Mr. Johnson was born.  Remember, the
     concealment claim is that information about the
     dangers of smoking and the addictive nature of
     nicotine were concealed.
          Well, ladies and gentlemen, the fact that
     smoking could cause lung cancer and the fact that
     it could be difficult to quit weren't a secret
     long, long, long before Michael Johnson was born,
     let alone started smoking.
          Remember, I told you, we didn't go all the way
     back to the '50s -- '40s and '50s about information
     but we said just think about it in the context.
     Soon after Mr. Johnson was born, when he was four
     years old, the Surgeon General's report was
     released.
          And I'm not telling you that he read the newspaper when he was four, but I'm telling you
     that the information was out there and that the
     population in general was exposed to it.  It was a
     fact that was widely recognized.  It got massive
     publicity.  It was the biggest story of 1964, and
     some say the biggest health story of the entire
     20th century.  It wasn't a secret that nobody knew
     about it.
          Dr. Benowitz and Dr. Proctor said on the whole
     idea of whether or not information had been
     available.  Smoking is dangerous and shortens life,
     hundreds of years.  Very hard to quit was known for
     over 100 years.  The fact that nicotine was the
     drug was known for more than a hundred years.  And
     it was reflected that the people knew that too.  It
     wasn't just scientists.
          Terms "addicted to smoking, coffin nails,
     cancer sticks," they became slang.  What does slang
     mean?  Slang means it is so well known when you use
     a term, everybody knows what you're talking about.
     There's no slang about things that are secret.
     It's slang about things that are well known.  And
     both of those facts were very well known.
          Then, of course, the 1970 warning itself:
     "Cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." And the important thing for you to remember here is
     Michael Johnson talked to his brother about that
     very warning.  And what did he say?
          "That's why I asked him about the cancer
     sticks.  Why are you still smoking those cancer
     sticks?"  And he was doing it in reference to the
     '70 warning.
          And what did Michael say?  "Well, that's the
     way I'm going."  That was his reaction.  The
     warning was there, that was his reaction to it.
          I want you to remember this whole question
     about his father.  It wasn't just his brother
     Walter who talked about it.  Before Michael's
     father died, before he died he said to his son, he
     said to Michael, "You don't need to smoke, see what
     it's done to him."  His own father said that to him
     before he died in 1979.
          His mother said, "You see what cigarettes have
     done to your daddy?"  He responded yes.  He knew
     what cigarettes had done to his father.  His mother
     and his father both talked to him about it
     specifically.  He knew that cigarettes were
     dangerous.  He knew from his father who said that
     don't pick up the habit, they're hard to quit, he
     knew they were addictive. The 1985 warnings, Walter talked to Michael
     about the '85 warnings, the specific one on lung
     cancer.  So he asked him about -- including the one
     that says causes lung cancer.  "I used to ask him
     why do you smoke those things?  He said he didn't
     want to stop and he was going to continue smoking."
          Why didn't he heed the 1985 warning?  Was it
     because he didn't know that smoking could cause
     cancer or be hard to quit?  No.  He didn't quit
     when he saw that warning because he didn't care.
     He wanted to smoke.  He ignored the warning.
          Cancer sticks, remember, all -- remember what
     we talked about slang, things become well known.
     They were talking about cancer sticks.  Cancer
     sticks were -- and Michael didn't say what's a
     cancer stick?  He knew very well what it was.  He
     was well aware of the link between smoking and
     cancer.  He just said, "I don't want to quit."
          I want to talk to you about a few specific
     things that the plaintiffs talked about in
     concealment.  One was this whole idea of the role
     of nicotine.  And this is about the deep dark
     secrets of nicotine research that supposedly went
     on at Reynolds that no one knew about.
          Mr. Acosta went through a bunch of documents, well, they were researching the role of nicotine,
     they knew it was a drug, they knew it had
     pharmacological problems -- or powers, they knew
     that smokers found it difficult to quit, all this
     internal research.
          And Mr. Acosta asked him sort of, "Well,
     wasn't all this stuff known internally at
     Reynolds?"  And Dr. Proctor said, well, yeah, but.
     It was essentially the same thing that
     Lenox Johnston wrote about in 1942.  There was no
     new theory.  This whole idea that nicotine was a
     drug and a cigarette was like a hypodermic, that
     you shoot in morphine, that he got all excited
     about it was in a 1972 document from Reynolds was
     the same -- exact same thing that Lenox Johnston
     wrote about 30 years before Dr. Teague put pen to
     paper.
          It wasn't a secret.  It wasn't something no
     one else knew, and they never identified anything
     that there was something specific that Reynolds
     knew, let alone whether Michael Johnson would have
     cared, let alone whether if he had known it would
     have made a difference.  They completely failed to
     carry that burden.
          Let's talk about carcinogens.  You've heard a lot about carcinogens.  You saw big boards that
     listed carcinogens.  Dr. Feingold went through all
     of those complex chemical names.  And the whole
     point was nobody knew about all these carcinogens
     in smoke.
          The whole idea was, geez, Reynolds knew.  They
     knew that there was -- there were tobacco-specific
     nitrosamines.  They knew there were poly-hydro,
     BAHs, benzoapyrene.  They knew all that, but nobody
     knew.  Michael Johnson couldn't possibly have
     known.  That's what they said.
          Dr. Proctor:  "It was widely reported in the
     lay media that there were carcinogens in cigarette
     smoke in the 1950s?
          "There was."
          Let me give you an example.  They said nobody
     knew about these things, only Reynolds.
     Reader's Digest, 1959:  "The carcinogenic
     cancer-causing factor in cigarette smoke is much
     less a mystery than it was a few years ago.
     Scientists are convinced that the primary
     carcinogens are higher polycyclic hydrocarbons
     formed by the combustion of tobacco at high
     temperature, about 880 degrees centigrade in the
     cigarette ember.  They have identified eight carcinogens, carcinogenic polycyclics in tobacco
     smoke."
          Deep dark secret?  Word got out.
     Reader's Digest published the article.  I'm not
     saying that Michael Johnson read it, but I'm
     telling you that the idea that people didn't know
     that there were carcinogens in smoke is ridiculous.
          They may not have known the specific chemical
     names, but is that what matters?  Remember, they
     said -- starting with mouse skin painting.
     Remember the LIFE magazine they showed you where
     they painted the tar on the back of the mouse and
     it got tumors?  Tar was what the public was
     concerned about.
          The whole reason for the whole idea of filters
     was because filters take some of the tar out.  Why
     would anyone care about taking some of the tar out
     if they weren't worried that it contained things
     that could cause lung cancer.  Of course everyone
     understood.  That's what tar was all about.
          I want you to think about it this way:  They
     showed you a chart with chemical names on it and
     they said essentially if people had known that,
     would it have made a difference?  I want you to ask
     the question to yourself would it have made a difference to Michael Johnson?
          Michael Johnson believed that his father died
     because he had lung cancer caused by smoking.  Does
     anyone seriously believe that if he had seen a list
     of chemical names on carcinogens, that would have
     made a difference instead of knowing his father
     died?
          I'm serious.  Think about it.  As a pure
     matter of commonsense, if he believes his father
     died from smoking, would a list of carcinogens,
     chemical names have made a difference?
          And oh, by the way, half the carcinogens, as
     Dr. Proctor admitted, half the constituents of
     smoke that we know about today we know about
     because of R.J. Reynolds.  R.J. Reynolds is the one
     that invented the means and found them and
     published them and told the public.
          Let's talk about ingredients for a minute.
     You heard and it was the same sort of thing, the
     big chart with here are our ingredients, here --
     particularly, here are ingredients that are used in
     other horrible sounding dangerous products.
          What did Dr. Proctor tell you?  Federal law
     has required the disclosure of all the ingredients
     used since the '80s.  Congress required notification of any ingredient that should be
     reviewed, that shouldn't be used.  Congress has
     never mandated the removal of any ingredients.  The
     FDA now has the power to regulate the use of
     ingredients.  It can ban any that it wants.
          But it's the same point I just made.  Think
     about this logically.  They want you to believe
     that if R.J. Reynolds had done something saying,
     hey, look, there's ammonia in this or, hey, look,
     there's licorice in this or whatever the list is
     you want to talk about, that that would have made
     Michael Johnson stop smoking and save his life?
          And it's the same point I made before:  If he
     thought it killed his father, are you seriously
     telling me that if he had known the ingredients
     responsible, that would have made a difference?
          He already believed that smoking cigarettes
     killed his father.  What possible difference could
     it make if he had the list of ingredients that went
     into them?  That makes no sense, none whatever.
          I want to talk to you about the 1994
     congressional testimony that you heard about.
     You've heard about it a number of times.  I'll bet
     you hear about it again.  It was the whole idea
     that the tobacco executives went in, in front of Congress, raised their hand and they were asked the
     question do you believe that nicotine is addictive.
     This was in 1994 and they said no.
          And I told you in opening that there was more
     to the story than that.  And we asked Dr. Proctor
     about it.  The question was, they said no, they
     didn't agree with the definition.
          And you can say it was ridiculous to have a
     debate about what do you call it.  Everyone agreed
     what they were talking about was difficulty in
     quitting, whether you call it habit or whether you
     call it addiction.
          Just like in 1964 when the Surgeon General
     called it a habit but acknowledged it was difficult
     to quit.  The issue was a name change.  And the
     tobacco industry, R.J. Reynolds said they didn't
     agree with the definition, they didn't think
     cigarettes should be equated with cocaine and
     heroin.
          And maybe that was wrong.  Maybe it wasn't
     worth any debate at all because the common ground
     was it's difficult to quit.  And I told you in
     opening that Mr. Johnston, the CEO of RJR in that
     same hearing said it was difficult for smokers to
     quit.  And Dr. Proctor confirmed exactly what I said.
          Yes, he said no to addictive, but what he said
     was they don't like the label but it's difficult to
     quit.  They acknowledged what smokers need to know.
     Does it matter what you call it?  If the point is
     if you do it, it might be difficult to quit, what
     possible difference does it make what name you use
     to describe the behavior?  That's the real story on
     the '94 congressional testimony.
          But I told you something else in opening.  I
     said that in this trial they would produce zero
     documents, zero documents that said R.J. Reynolds
     or any other tobacco company ever disputed that
     once a smoker starts, it could be difficult to
     quit.  And guess what?  How many did you see?
     Zero.
          What did Dr. Proctor say?  "You can't identify
     any specific statement made by anybody from any
     tobacco company or any of those affiliated
     organizations that said if you smoke, it might not
     be hard to quit?
          "Answer:  That's right."
          Not one document where RJR or anybody else
     ever disputed that it was difficult to quit.  And
     that's the issue a smoker needs to be concerned about, not what you call it.
          Your Honor, I don't know -- I could keep going
     but if you would like to stop, I'm happy to.
          THE COURT:  All right.  Take a five-minute
     break.
          (The jury resumed its seat in the jury box and
the following further proceedings were held:)
          THE BAILIFF:  Jurors have been seated Your
     Honor.
          THE COURT:  All right.  Counsel, please
     continue.
          MR. BARINGER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          I want to go back just for a second.  When we
     were talking about carcinogens I mentioned filters,
     and I do want to make a few comments about filters.
     You heard about in -- starting in the 1950s the
     market changed from unfiltered to filtered
     cigarettes.  And you heard that they were promoted.
     Although Dr. Proctor said the biggest reason for
     the popularity of filters was Reader's Digest.
          Nonetheless, he suggested that the companies
     had people try and -- had people switch to filters
     because supposedly they were safer.  And he talked
     about low tar cigarettes and light cigarettes being
     believed or thought to be safer.  And then only to find out much later on that they really weren't.
          Well, let me tell you the real story on
     filters.  The public health community in the 1950s
     urged all the manufacturers to develop filtered
     cigarettes.  Why?  Because they were concerned
     about tar.  Why?  Because it contained carcinogens,
     the well known carcinogen problem.  The public
     health community not only encouraged Reynolds to
     develop them, but it encouraged smokers to switch
     to filtered cigarettes.
          The public health community, the American
     Cancer Society, actively told smokers to switch.
     The public health community determined they were
     safer.  You remember when Mr. Beach was talking to
     Dr. Proctor, he went through a number of studies.
     And those studies said the smokers of filtered
     cigarettes have 18, 20, 30, 40 percent less risk of
     lung cancer than smokers of unfiltered cigarettes.
          And I want to you keep in this -- keep this in
     mind when they start talking you to about lies and
     deception.  Those studies that were published were
     designed, conducted, and interpreted by nonindustry
     scientists.
          It wasn't tobacco companies.  Tobacco
     companies didn't pay for them.  Tobacco companies didn't design or interpret them.  Independent
     scientists in the public health community designed
     those studies and they were the ones that published
     the results.
          Reynolds never told smokers that they could
     reduce their risk by 20 or 30 percent if they
     switched to filters.  The public health community,
     the American Cancer Society, that's who was telling
     that story, not Reynolds.  We do also know that
     filtered smokers are more likely to quit.  And
     that's the only tie this has to Mr. Johnson at all.
          Remember, there was no testimony in this case
     that Michael Johnson switched from unfiltered to
     filtered cigarettes because he thought they were
     safer.  We know why he smoked Kool Filter Kings,
     because his brothers and everybody he hung out with
     smoked Kools.  It wasn't -- they didn't say there
     was some connection to advertising.
          And the best part is they spent time talking
     about low tar and light cigarettes.  And they said
     well they really weren't safer.  What evidence did
     you hear that Michael Johnson ever smoked a light
     or a low tar cigarette?  Why did you have to sit
     through evidence about light and low tar cigarettes
     when everyone knows that Michael Johnson never smoked one.  Filters have nothing to do with this
     case.
          Let's talk -- we had talked about and I showed
     you information that was available about the
     hazards of smoking and the addictiveness of
     nicotine.  And I want you to remember, it's not
     just newspaper articles, it's not just TV shows,
     smokers get information from all kinds of different
     sources.  The government, public health community,
     friends, family, schools, mass media, word of
     mouth, pop culture, slang, cancer sticks, nicotine
     fix, nicotine feign, pop culture.
          Let's talk about what Michael Johnson was
     exposed to.  There was an issue about textbooks.
     Mark Johnson took the stand, they showed him the
     cover of a book and Mark, 40 years later, said I
     don't remember seeing the cover of that book.
          But you heard from Dr. Giakas that a number of
     those 19 witnesses that were in the same age group
     with Michael Johnson testified that in school here
     in Pensacola, at that time they were taught about
     the dangers of smoking in school.
          We showed you the state law that mandates that
     it be taught.  We showed you the book lists that
     were approved not only for the Pensacola public schools, but for the private Catholic schools in
     Pensacola as well.  And the books we showed you are
     on that list.
          And the point is, what were they teaching?  In
     seventh grade, smoking can cause death.  A
     relationship between cigarette smoking and lung
     cancer.  A definite degree of physical and
     psychological dependency.  What does that mean?
     Addiction.  Hard to quit.  Seventh graders were
     being taught.
          Another one, seventh grade, many people who
     have formerly smoked have stopped the habit even
     though it is hard to break.  Another factor is the
     smoking habits of parents.  Talks about smoking is
     likely to be taken up by young people who's parents
     or older brothers and sisters smoke.
          Think about the Johnson family.  Mr. Johnson's
     father smoked, Mr. Johnson's older brothers smoked.
     Exactly what they're talking about in this
     textbook.  Not advertising.  Not the Flinstones
     when he's of age.  His father, his older brothers.
     That's the influence.
          High school -- didn't stop in middle school.
     High school: cigarette smoking is a major cause of
     lung cancer.  Risk of ill health and death. Surgeon General has determined cigarette smoking is
     dangerous.
          Ladies and gentlemen, every one of those were
     warnings that Michael Johnson received.  And you
     remember that decision tree, in every case he got
     the warning, and in every case he chose to smoke,
     in every case he chose against the risk to his own
     health, every time.
          1977, teenagers, Michael Johnson was 17 years
     old.  What does the evidence tell us about which
     column he would have fallen in?  Is there any
     possible, possible reason to believe that he would
     have been in the 4 percent that don't know?
     Absolutely not.
          1977 was the year his father was diagnosed
     with lung cancer.  Is there any question in your
     mind that Michael Johnson would have been in the
     96 percent?  There can't be.  And the publicity
     that I showed you before leading up to Mr.
     Johnson's birth certainly didn't stop.
          And remember, Mrs. Robinson told you that
     Michael Johnson was a daily newspaper reader.  And
     what were the newspapers telling him?  And this is
     Pensacola, this isn't anywhere else, this is
     Pensacola.  Those who have quit live longer. 10 million people quit.  Report says cigarettes
     causes death.  Do you want to stop smoking?  I
     quit.  Don't smoke your life away.  Cancer, cancer,
     cancer.
          That's what he was reading about.  Every time
     he picked up a newspaper with one of those articles
     it was a warning to him to quit to protect his
     health.  And every time he said, No, I won't.  I
     don't want to.  I'll smoke until I die.  1980s,
     '90s, did it stop?  Did the publicity stop?  No.
     Stop smoking in five days.
          Ladies and gentlemen, if you don't know it's
     hard to quit what could that possibly mean to you?
     And those were the kinds of articles that were run
     for decades.  What would it possibly have meant?
     It would have been total confusion.  Hey, what in
     the world does this mean?  He knew very well what
     it meant.
          All the sources, all these sources of
     information were constantly giving him warnings.
     The warnings on the cigarette packs, warnings from
     his parents, don't start, it's a -- don't pick up
     the habit, it's hard to quit.  It's dangerous, it's
     unhealthy.
          Warnings from school, we just went through that.  Warnings from Mrs. Robinson and her family,
     from the death of his father.  His warnings from
     his own brothers and sisters, warnings from the
     media, warnings from the public health community.
          Mr. Johnson was surrounded by people and
     sources of information that constantly kept putting
     in front of him a choice.  A choice between
     protecting his health and minimizing the risk, or
     taking a risk in exchange for the enjoyment and the
     pleasure that he got from it.  It was his right to
     make that choice, but don't be dissuaded from the
     understanding that it was his choice.
          Now, they talked about -- they talked about
     the companies and the things that they said
     publically.  They talked about people going on TV
     and saying well, it hasn't been proven that smoking
     causes lung cancer.  And they say what was the
     effect of that?  They said, Oh, my goodness, it
     created doubt, it kept people smoking, it prevented
     people from quitting.
          During the whole period that they say this
     campaign is going on, what happens to belief about
     smoking causing lung cancer?  All the time these
     statements are going on, what's happening?  Belief
     goes up, up, up, up, up. 1981 -- or 1977 when Michael Johnson finds out
     his father is diagnosed with lung cancer,
     81 percent believe that smoking caused lung cancer.
     Do you think Mr. Johnson would have gone in the
     81 percent column or the 19 that said no, I'm not
     sure.  There's no question.  He would have been in
     the 81 column.
          And what happened -- the claim is that the
     company statements prevented people from quitting.
     Starting in 1955 with all the publicity, what
     happened to quitting during all of this time when
     all these statements were being made?  17 million,
     30 million, 60 million.  Massive quitting.  All the
     time that they say it prevented people from
     quitting.  How in heck's name did all those people
     quit if they couldn't because of what the company
     were saying?
          But more importantly, what impact did that
     have on Michael Johnson?  Every one of the
     witnesses you heard were asked did he ever dispute
     that he believed smoking caused lung cancer.  Never
     did.  Did he ever argue about whether it could be
     hard to quit?
          Did he ever say I don't believe it's proven.
     Did he ever say I don't think -- I don't think that it's bad for your health?  Did he ever say anything
     to anyone that reflected the fact that he had any
     doubt or that he relied on anything that the
     company said?
          Think about it.  He had people talking to him
     all the time about quitting smoking and you need to
     quit smoking.  And in all of those discussions with
     all of those people not one person, not one, says
     that Michael Johnson ever disputed the fact that
     smoking could cause lung cancer and it was risk to
     his health or that it was difficult to quit.  Not
     one in over 20 years of discussions about whether
     or not he should be smoking.
          What did Mrs. Robinson say?  He never
     indicated that he paid any attention to anything a
     tobacco company had ever said, right?  No, he
     didn't.  Never did.  And again, no evidence that he
     ever debated or disputed the fact that smoking is
     dangerous or addictive.
          And gentlemen, you'll see on the verdict form
     that they have to prove that he relied on what the
     companies did.  If he had relied, the answer to
     that would be totally different.  But the answer
     was he never relied on anything.
          Were any of his smoking choices impacted by Reynolds?  His decision to start, no.  We know why
     he started, because he saw his father smoking and
     he wanted to do the same thing.  Brand selection,
     no.  He smoked Kool because his older brothers and
     everybody he hung out with smoked Kool.
          Decision to continue, no.  He decided to
     continue because he enjoyed it and he wanted to and
     he didn't want to quit.  Decision not to quit, same
     thing.  The reason he didn't quit and he never
     tried to quit was because he didn't want to because
     he enjoyed it.  Nothing Reynolds did had any
     affect.
          And this is on the same thing we just talked
     about, did he ever refer to tobacco statements?
     Did he ever dispute it was hard?  Did he ever refer
     to the Tobacco Industry Research Committee TIRC,
     CTR, TI, no.  Did he ever dispute the validity of
     the warnings, no.  Did he ever blame anyone else
     for his smoking?  Even after he was diagnosed with
     cancer did he blame anyone else for his smoking?
     No.
          He was a man that made a choice and he lived
     by that choice.  And he didn't complain when the
     choice turned out not to have been in his best
     interest.  He didn't complain.  He recognized it. He took the risk and he accepted that.
          He accepted it so strongly that he refused
     to remember even to see if he a treatable curable
     type cancer or to have any treatment.  That's how
     strongly he felt about the decisions that he made
     because they were his decisions.  Nobody influenced
     those.
          Can I have the ELMO, please.
          Ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is
     overwhelming.  Michael Johnson didn't smoke because
     he didn't know the dangers, he knew all too well
     and all too personally.  He didn't quit because he
     was influenced by something Reynolds or anyone else
     said.
          He didn't quit because he didn't want to.  He
     was fully informed, he made the choice.
     Concealment was not the legal cause of his death
     and I would say you should mark no on questions
     seven and eight.
          Now, I said I was going to skip damages and
     come back to them because I wanted to talk about
     all the areas that were related to the liability
     determination first.  But I do want to talk to you
     for a while about damages.  And on the verdict form
     questions five and six, you're going to be asked how much you believe should be awarded for
     compensatory damages for Mrs. Robinson and for
     Michael Johnson, Mr. Johnson's son.
          Now, when you consider this you're going to be
     told in the jury instruction any damages you award
     must be fair and just in light of the evidence.
     Now, you heard from -- during the first part of
     closing from plaintiff's counsel that they are
     going to ask you to award $10 million to
     Mrs. Robinson and to Mr. Johnson.  $10 million
     each.
          Ladies and gentlemen, that is so far out of
     touch with reality that it's hard to know how to
     explain.  And I want you to keep in mind the way
     Mr. Gary kept talked about.  He kept saying ten
     million might not be enough.  He was talking about
     youth marketing.  He was talking about things the
     company had done and he kept saying 10 million
     might not be enough.
          Compensatory damages are designed to make a
     person whole for their loss.  Compensatory damages
     are not punitive damages.  We'll talk about
     punitives.  But Mr. Gary, for whatever reason,
     totally confused the two together and made it sound
     like the amount of compensatory damages that you award has something to do with what you think of
     Reynolds conduct in general.
          And that's nonsense, that's not the law.  The
     law is, you think about what the relationship was
     that was lost, and you put a fair and just amount
     on that.  And folks $10 million is absurd.
          Let's talk about the evidence.  The one
     thing -- ladies and gentlemen, it's inevitable,
     everyone has sympathy for someone who suffers a
     loss.  All of us in our lives at some time suffer a
     loss.  And when you know someone -- even if you
     don't know someone and you know they suffered a
     loss it's natural to feel sympathy.  It's what
     makes you a human being to have empathy and
     sympathy, that's natural.
          But the law says the amount that you award in
     damages can't be based on that sympathy.  It can't
     be:  I feel bad for what happened and here, let me
     try and make you feel better.  That's not what it's
     about.  It's about how do you put -- and frankly
     it's tough, but how do you put a dollar amount on
     the loss of relationship they had?
          And it's not abstract.  It's not relationships
     in general, it's this relationship.  I told you
     during jury selection that it's a difficult thing to do and it's a difficult thing to talk about.
     Because some of the things that come up aren't the
     kinds of things that are discussed in public or
     outside your family or your friends.
          And it's not by choice that we have to talk
     about it.  Mrs. Robinson is asking you to give her
     $10 million.  And it's fair to talk about the
     nature of the relationship that she had and whether
     that makes any sense at all.  And unfortunately,
     that's what we have to do.
          And again, what they're seeking, the damages
     they're seeking are loss of companionship and
     protection and mental pain and suffering for Mrs.
     Robinson, and the same thing for Michael Johnson.
     That's the nature of the damages they want you to
     award.  I want you to think about whether or not
     this $10 million request makes any sense in the
     context of the nature of their relationship.
          Dr. Giakas told you that there were problems
     within that relationship before Mr. Johnson died.
     Remember Mark Johnson was on the stand and he was
     asked were there problems, and he said I heard
     rumors that there was discord.  And then you saw
     the evidence of that, that there were significant
     problems in that relationship. Walter Johnson testified to you, he said that
     Michael asked his mother to get their wedding rings
     back and not to give them back to Mrs. Robinson
     after he died.  That's a sign that there's a
     problem.
          She didn't go with him to watch the final --
     he wanted this very important -- his last
     statement, his legacy in a way, to make this speech
     that was going to be on TV.  And he asked her to go
     and she said no, even though he invited her.
     That's a problem.  When she knew he was dying and
     he asked her to go do this one act and she wouldn't
     do it.
          She didn't receive counseling after his death,
     we don't know what happened there.  We do know that
     a month after Mr. Johnson died she met Mr. Robinson
     and eventually they got married.  And fortunately
     for everyone they've been married for over 14
     years, have a strong and happy marriage.  And you
     can consider that in terms of what effect did it
     have on her life and what effect is it having on
     her life going forward?
          Now, I want to talk about -- because one of
     the things you have to do as jurors is, you have to
     consider the testimony on a lot of these issues from a lot of different witnesses.  And one of the
     ways you do it, even though sometimes you do it
     subconsciously, is you weigh how strongly you
     believe in the credibility of the testimony you've
     heard.
          Whether there are any doubts or whether you
     can take it verbatim and believe it or think about
     well, what's influencing this.  You do it with
     experts and you do it with fact witnesses.  And the
     instruction you're going to get tells you that you
     ought to consider the frankness or lack of
     frankness from the witness, any interest the
     witness may have in the outcome of the case, and
     the reasonableness of the testimony.
          And I'm going to tell you right now that I
     think that there are things that you saw in this
     courtroom that ought to give you pause about how
     you evaluate the request for $10 million from Mrs.
     Robinson.
          Remember on direct when she testified,
     Mr. Gary was asking her questions and he asked her
     did you have to move -- did you lose your house
     because Michael couldn't work anymore, is that why
     you lost your house?  And she said yes.  It was
     because he was sick and couldn't work anymore and that's why we lost the house.
          Remember on cross-examination, the house was
     foreclosed on in May of 1995.  Mr. Johnson wasn't
     diagnosed as having cancer until October of 1995,
     five months afterward.  Mr. Johnson was still
     working at the time.  And the document also said
     that there hadn't been payments made on that house
     for two years by that point.
          But she wanted you to believe it was all
     because he was sick and couldn't work.  That's what
     they told you on direct.  And it turned out to be
     absolutely untrue.  I asked about whether they were
     living together in July of 1995.  Remember there
     was a medical record and the medical record said he
     doesn't have a phone so we have to call his
     ex-wife?
          So I said were you guys living together at the
     time?  Oh, yeah.  This was -- the Social Security
     record where she was completing the form to get
     assistance because of the three kids and she filled
     it out.  That's her signature and that's her
     writing on top.
          And in July of 1995 she wasn't living on Poppy
     Street with Michael, she was living in Silver
     Creek.  Is it possible she just got mixed up and forgot?  The last year of her husband's life you
     don't remember whether you're living with him or
     not?
          Then let's talk about the last couple of
     months of his life.  Mrs. Robinson on direct said,
     did you see each other every single day?  Every
     day.  Did you see each other every night?  Every
     night.
          Walter Johnson was brought back from Korea.
     He was in the United States Army and he was serving
     in Korea.  And he was brought back for the last
     basically two months, month and a half, two months
     of Michael's life to be with him.
          And Walter Johnson came back for that purpose
     and he was there every day.  He said he was there
     and you can decide -- maybe you don't believe him.
     I can't imagine what interest he would have in not
     being completely forthright about this.  But he
     said he came home from Korea to be with his brother
     and he was with his brother every day, and what did
     he say?  I may have seen her once or twice.
          You have the testimony from two witnesses, you
     have to decide how to evaluate it.  Then, same
     issue, you see him every day, every day, every
     night.  Michael Johnson, Mr. Johnson's son said, while he was visiting his father those last few
     months, the only time that he saw -- and that was a
     number of weeks that this went on.
          The only time she -- he saw Mrs. Johnson was
     when he was dropping his half brother Terence off.
     And when she did do that, she just dropped Terence
     off and didn't even come in.  That was Michael
     Johnson's testimony.
          Then we heard this story of this wonderful
     last day that they spent together.  She went by,
     they had lunch, they watched TV, they laughed.
     Now, Walter Johnson said, she wasn't there that
     day.  He was there, Mark, John Fitzgerald were
     there until Michael died and they called and Mrs.
     Robinson came.
          You have to decide who you believe.  But they
     both can't be true.  It cannot be that Walter said
     she was not there and she says she was.  You have
     to decide and think about who has the interest in
     the case.  Who stands to benefit and get -- try and
     get $10 million.
          Then we have the issue of how they had a great
     marriage.  And we talked about the discord.  Walter
     said that Michael said he had moved out.  Michael
     said he had asked for the rings back and don't give them back.  Dr. Giakas told you about some of the
     other comments that were made.  And we don't need
     to review those, but those comments that came from
     these other witnesses certainly reflect anything
     than the idyllic marriage that was described to you
     on direct.
          Now, there's been a big deal made about oh, my
     goodness those were witnesses that were deposed by
     the defense.  We got the name list of the family
     members from Mrs. Robinson.  She said that they had
     information related to Michael's smoking history
     and the issues in this case.
          So, yes, we did take their deposition.  And
     guess what, plaintiffs were at every single one of
     those depositions.  We asked questions, the
     witnesses gave answers.  We didn't make it up.  We
     didn't say hey isn't it true?  They told us, we
     didn't know going in.  But they were there and they
     said well, you didn't ask direct questions, they
     could have asked any question that we did or
     anything that they wanted to.
          So this nonsense that it's all because they
     are our witnesses, they are family members, they
     are Michael Johnson's family members or they are
     Mrs. Robinson's family members.  They're the ones that said these things.  We didn't make them up.
     But we're not the one asking for $10 million, they
     are.
          I can't tell you what number, if you get that
     far on the verdict form, I can't tell you what
     number to put in.  That's up to your sense of
     justice, that's up to your sense of commonsense,
     frankly.  But, ladies and gentlemen, $10 million
     makes no sense whatsoever.
          And do not buy into this appeal to passion and
     anger and say $10 million is not enough.  What
     you're supposed to do is make them whole for their
     loss, we'll talk about the other stuff.  But all
     that is is generating is trying to distract you and
     trying to make you angry to get you to write as big
     a number on a piece of paper as you can.  Don't let
     that happen.
          Now, let's talk about the issue of punitive
     damages.  Question 9, under the circumstances of
     this case state whether punitive damages are
     warranted by clear and convincing evidence against
     R.J. Reynolds.  I want you to -- I want you just
     for a minute to think about this phrase, the
     circumstances of this case.
          Everything -- virtually everything you heard yesterday when they were talking about punitive
     damages and getting all worked up was they talked
     about the world.  How many people in the world
     would die in this century.  They talked about the
     whole country, they talked about all kinds of
     things except Michael Johnson.
          Ladies and gentlemen, you answer this question
     based on the circumstances of this case.  And
     remember you're not trying the Engle class action
     again.  You only award punitive damages if you find
     that some conduct that was a legal cause of
     Mr. Johnson's death rises to the level that the
     instruction tells you.
          It is not an abstract, is there something
     about tobacco companies that you don't like?  This
     isn't the standard.  You are not legally allowed to
     award punitive damages because you don't like
     something if the evidence isn't that it was a legal
     cause of Mr. Johnson's death.
          And I might add --
          MR. ACOSTA:  Misstates the law.  I have an
     objection to that.
          THE COURT:  Jurors step out for a moment.
          (The jury withdrew from the courtroom and the
following further proceedings were held:). THE COURT:  Jury is out.
          MR. ACOSTA:  Your Honor, Counsel is arguing in
     phase one what is reserved for phase two.  And he's
     arguing that they can only award punitive damages
     for damage done to Michael Johnson, that's not for
     this phase.  And I think that that was a total
     mischaracterization of the law.  It needs to be
     rectified.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Baringer.
          MR. BARINGER:  First of all, it's almost
     amazing to hear them say that I was arguing phase
     two compared to what they did yesterday.  But
     number two, all I was saying is to consider
     entitlement to punitive damages, it must be the
     same conduct that injured Mr. Johnson.  It has to
     be related.  That's constitutional law, that's very
     simple.
          I didn't say anything beyond that.  And I
     acknowledge that they could consider others if it's
     the same conduct.  But they can't -- you can't in
     abstract say hey, I don't like X.  It had nothing
     to with Mr. Johnson but I'm allowed to award
     punitive damages on it.
          There's a causal nexus that's required and
     the -- it's either Williams or State Farm make it absolutely clear, there must be a causal nexus
     between the conduct that injures the party and
     other people that may have been affected by it as
     well.
          And I think --
          THE COURT:  Then make that point and let's
     move this along with that clarification.
          Objection overruled.
          Call in the jurors when they're ready.
          (The jury resumed its seat in the jury box and
the following further proceedings were held:).
          THE COURT:  Counsel, you may continue with
     clarification.
          MR. BARINGER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          I was explaining that there must be a
     connection between the conduct that injured -- that
     you believe injured Michael Johnson and the conduct
     that you believe perhaps would warrant -- awarding
     punitive damages is.
          In other words, if you find that there is some
     conduct that you don't like but it had nothing to
     do with Michael Johnson, that can't be the basis
     for awarding punitive damages.  If you find there
     is conduct that injured Michael Johnson you can
     consider that same conduct's effect on other people.
          But the point is:  You cannot take things that
     were not the legal cause of Mr. Johnson's death and
     say I think they should be punished and I'm going
     to award punitive damages on that basis.  Let me
     give you a quick example.
          Low tar or light cigarettes, let's say that
     for whatever reason you really didn't like that
     they put cigarettes out and called them low tar or
     lights.  Well, Mr. Johnson never smoked one.  So
     you couldn't award punitive damages on that basis
     because there's no connection.  If there was
     conduct, if there was something that you believe
     did harm him, and it affected others you can
     consider that.
          But when -- when they're talking about all
     these things, when they're talking about running
     ads in the 1930s, when they're talking about low
     tar, when they're talking about things that never
     had any impact on Mr. Johnson.  No matter how mad
     they may make you when they're talking about it,
     that cannot be the basis.  The law says you cannot
     do that.  And I'm absolutely confident that you
     will follow your oath and follow the law, no matter
     how much they try and make you angry. Let's talk about clear and convincing
     evidence.  Remember on regular -- on all the other
     areas the standard -- the burden of proof for the
     plaintiff is more likely than not.  You know, the
     51/50 sort of balance.
          Clear and convincing evidence has to be more
     compelling and persuasive than the more likely that
     the not scenario.  Clear and convincing evidence is
     evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in
     confusion and of such weight that it produces a
     firm belief or conviction without any hesitation
     about the matter in issue.
          So when you get to this question, when you get
     to the question of whether or not we should have a
     punitive damages stage, whether they're entitled to
     a possible award of punitive damages, think back to
     the underlying conduct that you may have found
     wrongful.
          And it's -- you have look at the evidence
     again.  You have to say well, maybe it was a very,
     very tough decision for you and you were leaning
     back and forth.  And you finally said okay I think
     maybe that was a legal cause of his death.
          That kind of -- that kind of certainty isn't
     good enough.  That wouldn't -- that wouldn't satisfy the clear and convincing standard.  It's a
     much higher standard of proof.  It's the highest in
     civil law.
          And remember, punitive damages can only be
     awarded to the estate of Mr. Johnson.  Those
     damages are in addition to damages that fully
     compensate Mrs. Robinson or Michael Johnson for
     their loss, so it's on top of that.  And punitive
     damages can be awarded only for concealment or
     agreement to conceal, if that was a legal cause of
     Mr. Johnson's death.
          And remember that goes back to this
     distinction between unintentional authorities where
     if you do comparative fault and you assign a
     percentage of fault to Mr. Johnson, that will
     reduce your damages award.  Unless you get --
     unless you say "yes" on concealment and agreement
     to conceal.  The other impact, if you're saying
     "yes" on concealment and agreement to conceal is,
     that's the only way you get to the punitive damages
     question.
          In other words, if you say "no", if your
     answer on the question on concealment was "no", if
     your answer on the agreement to conceal is "no",
     you don't get to the punitive damages question at all.  It's only for intentional conduct.
          There's one other thing I want to you keep in
     mind.  The Engle findings do not establish that the
     plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages.  You
     heard all about the findings yesterday.  I suspect
     you'll hear all about the findings again.  And the
     suggestion is that the mere fact that there is a
     finding that says, for example, they concealed
     information, that warrants punishment.
          This is not true.  The finding itself does not
     mean that you have to answer "yes" on question
     number nine.  You have to decide whether or not
     that concealment affected Michael Johnson and you
     have to consider whether it rises to that clear and
     convincing level.
          The point is:  Do not buy into the notion that
     the finding answers the question.  Just because
     there's a finding means you must answer "yes" on
     that last question.  That's not what it means at
     all.  You have to evaluate the evidence.  You
     consider the finding, it's a fact just like any
     other facts that you decide no more no less.  But
     it doesn't answer the question of whether there
     should be punitive damages.
          And I want you to think about this in the overall context, they're going to talk about things
     that they said that they believe Reynolds did
     wrong.  And they're going to -- and you heard it
     yesterday.  They kept saying, you have the power to
     stop it, you have the power to prevent it.
          What you have the power to do is decide if the
     conduct that harmed Michael Johnson, if you decide
     that was a legal cause of his death, you have the
     power to decide whether to consider punitive
     damages.  But you don't consider it in a vacuum.
          You don't only consider the things that may
     have bothered you that you may have thought were a
     legal cause.  You have to consider the totality of
     the evidence that you heard.  And I'd suggest that
     you need to consider some of the other evidence
     about the conduct in this case not just the things
     that they want to yell about.
          For example, you heard about Larsen, Haag and
     Silvette.  Remember part of their pitch here is
     that Reynolds knew all kinds of stuff and didn't
     share it or the -- the work done by the Tobacco
     Industry Research Committee wasn't any good and so
     they weren't sharing the information, they weren't
     doing what they promised.
          But remember Larson, Haag and Silvette, it was an encyclopedia of all the smoking and health
     research as of 1961, all of it, all the of the
     published research.  It was cited in the 1964
     Surgeon General.  It was funded by a grant from
     TIRC.  It had an entire chapter devoted to nicotine
     and its effects on the body, talking about
     pharmacological effects and addictive properties.
          So TIRC funded it, they gave it to the Surgeon
     General.  And remember they said they never wanted
     to acknowledge the roll of nicotine.  They never
     wanted anyone to know.  They provided it to the
     Surgeon General's committee.
          Then, you heard a lot about design.  You
     heard -- you heard about ingredients, you heard
     about filters and things.  But here's what --
     here's what you also heard, and this is from
     Dr. Benowitz and Dr. Proctor.  Reynolds spent over
     a billion dollars on research to make cigarettes
     less hazardous.  And folks that includes the
     nicotine research they did on trying to see if they
     could alter pH so that they can make a cigarette
     that satisfied smokers but lowered exposure to the
     dangerous components.
          They reduced polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons,
     carcinogens, they lowered them.  They significantly reduced nitrosamines, remember the big board they
     had with all the carcinogens and they talked about
     tobacco specific nitrosamines with Dr. Feingold.
          Reynolds significantly reduce them.  They
     weren't completely oblivious, they weren't sitting
     there doing nothing about trying to deal with the
     risk, the way they were suggested that all they
     cared about was money.  They spent billions of
     dollars on research trying to do this.
          And remember about the carcinogens.  One of
     the big topics they talked about R.J. Reynolds
     discovered over 50 percent of the chemicals in
     cigarette smoke and identified them for the world
     to know.  If they want to complain about Reynolds
     you need to consider the positive things that
     Reynolds did along the way.
          Let's talk about CTR.  They told you it was
     all a front, it was all a sham.  Dr. Proctor
     admitted awarding more than $500 million
     independent scientific research projects.  The
     scientists decided what to research and what to
     write.  They funded projects that resulted in more
     than 7,000 published scientific or medical reports.
          More than 600 of those articles were cited in
     the Surgeon General's report.  Dr. Proctor said well a lot of it wasn't directly related to smoking
     and health.  How does -- how do they get 600
     entries in the Surgeon General's reports on smoking
     and health if it has nothing to do with smoking and
     health?  Doesn't make sense.
          They funded over -- they funded ten noble
     prize winners.  The point of that wasn't that they
     got the noble prize for their work here, but that
     was the kind of quality of scientists that they
     were funding.  And they funded research in
     universities nationwide.
          Ladies and gentlemen, when you consider the
     evidence, when you think about this whole question
     of punitive damages, think about what conduct you
     think it is that harmed -- that caused
     Mr. Johnson's cancer and death.
          Overwhelmingly the conduct that did it was his
     choices.  His choice to ignore warnings from every
     source that he encountered.  His choice not to quit
     smoking when he had the ability to do that, as they
     admit.  Overwhelmingly it was his choices that were
     responsible.
          Now I ask you to consider the conduct.  And
     when they talk about conduct I want you to think if
     they've proven if there's a link between that conduct and Mr. Johnson's choices, his decisions,
     they have to provide the link.
          I think, in fairness, when you take a look at
     all of that and the context of the efforts that
     Reynolds made to reduce the hazards of cigarettes
     over the years, money that they spent on research,
     the money that they spent on publication or
     advancement of science means you should answer "no"
     to question number nine.
          You've been incredibly patient.  And it's
     always virtually impossible to sit and appear
     interested, let alone be interested, when someone
     is talking to you for three hours.  And I very much
     appreciate how hard you have worked and the
     attention that you have paid.
          And I want to leave you thinking about this:
     They didn't prove that Mr. Johnson died because the
     dangerous and addictive nature of cigarettes were
     unknown to him.  He knew it, he knew personally.
     He knew it, if nothing else, than what happened
     with his father and when it happened.
          He knew that it could cause cancer.  He knew
     that it could be difficult to quit.  Their
     concealment claim utterly fails.  They didn't prove
     he was addicted and could not quit.  Remember all of the testimony, he had the ability to quit.
     Their own expert told you he had the ability to
     quit.
          And virtually everyone that knew him told you
     he didn't want to quit.  And Dr. Feingold's model
     of addiction causation, it all continues unless you
     choose to break the chain.  And then it does --
     addiction does not have to cause disease, it is not
     inevitable.
          Michael Johnson had the power and the ability
     to stop that chain.  He chose not to do it.  That
     was the legal cause of his death, was the fact that
     he chose not to protect his health and that was his
     right and I'm not criticizing it.
          Finally, they didn't prove that he had primary
     lung cancer caused by smoking.  What was the
     biggest reason?  We don't know the answer to that.
     Michael Johnson, exercising his absolute right,
     chose not to have tests that would have answered
     the question.  He didn't have the additional
     biopsy, he didn't have the additional radiological
     work on his abdomen and he didn't have the blood
     tests.
          All of the information that could have
     answered that question we don't have.  So you have to make the best with what you do.  And the
     plaintiffs can't meet their burden of proof that he
     had primary lung cancer.  And you've heard all of
     the evidence and all of the doctors online.
          Ladies and gentlemen, this is about justice,
     this is about doing the right thing.  It is a just
     and fair result when you return a verdict in favor
     of the defendant when the plaintiff fails to meet
     their burden of proof.  And no matter how much you
     may sympathize with them for their loss that does
     not make up for proof that R.J. Reynolds did
     anything that was the legal cause of Mr. Johnson's
     death in 1996.
          And I'm going ask you to bring back a verdict
     in favor of R.J. Reynolds.  Thank you all very
     much.
