                       -   -   -           CLOSING ARGUMENT
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Good afternoon, jurors.  You're
     almost there.  Certainly appreciate your patience
     throughout this process.  There's been a long
     process and watching you throughout, and I've seen
     a -- I get the faces, and we appreciate your
     patience in spite of -- if you would bear with us a
     little longer, we're almost there.
          These are closing arguments.  We're going to
     sum up our case and the defense will do rebuttal
     and we'll do a rebuttal.  I just want to talk to
     you.  I think you've seen a lot of documents.  I
     think you've seen a lot of exhibits, heard a lot of
     expert testimony.
          This is just time we have a dialogue.  This is
     one of only opportunities we have to do that.  I
     want to start out by telling a story my grandfather
     telling when he would take me fishing.  It was in
     an old town in Mississippi way back in the day.  A
     small town, quaint town, no paved roads, no traffic
     lights, just dirt roads.  As we say, country.
          And people will come in from what we now call
     a suburb from the country-country into town on
     weekends.
          It was a kind of a strip and there was a bar and a general tavern.  There was a church, a bank,
     and people would come in and shop, grocery shop,
     post office, et cetera, every week.
          And every weekend, there would be this
     gentleman who come clean, creased, clothes ironed,
     Seersucker suit, and he would walk into town.
          People would stop him no matter where he went.
     "Hey, man, it's good to see you.  How you been?
     Thank you for that nice gesture last week.  How you
     been doing?  It's great to see you.  How is your
     family?  How is the wife and how is the kids?
          And every week there would be this guy, a
     little haggard, clothes a little droopy, used to be
     white, now they are brown, sitting in a tavern
     having a burger.
          And he would see this gentleman in a
     Seersucker walk into town and everybody loved him
     and everybody reacted to him and he wondered why is
     everybody reacting to this guy in the Seersucker?
          So one day he says, "You know what, I'm going
     to go talk to him."  His name was Truth.  And so
     Lie got up out of the tavern, walked over across
     the street and said, "Truth, I just want to talk to
     you.  Man, how you been?
          "Good. "Good.
          "It's good to see you.  How you been?
          "Great.  Well, I want to talk to you."
          Truth, said, "Well, listen, I promised my wife
     I was going to be back home before dinner.  So I
     got two miles to walk but you're welcome to walk
     with me.  I've got to be on time because I want to
     keep my word."
          Lie says, "Fine, I will walk with you."
          They truck out of town.  They are walking down
     this dirt road.  They walk about a mile and a half
     and then Lie says, "You know, Truth, I'm tired,
     man, let's take a break."  Truth says, "Okay,
     there's oak tree just up the way next to the lake."
          They take a break and they walk over to this
     oak tree and they sit down under the oak tree and
     it's hot.  It's Mississippi.  It's sweltering heat.
     They are sweating.  They take off their suit, go
     down to just, as they call them, dungaree shorts
     and T-shirts.  Take a nap.
          And Lie says, "You know, this is an
     opportunity for me to change my image.  This is an
     opportunity for me to be loved.  I'll bet it's
     Truth's clothes.
          So Lie takes Truth Seersucker suit, puts it on, walks back into town.  Truth wakes up, looks
     around, "Wow, Lie struck again."
          So at that time, Truth has an option.  He can
     either walk on as it is or put on Lie's clothes.
     And Truth decided that rather than to go home
     cloaked in a lie, he'd rather go home in the naked
     truth.
          And, ladies and gentlemen, I tell that story
     because that's, in essence, what we've been dealing
     with over the last few weeks:  Truth and lie.
     Truth:  A company must not needlessly endanger the
     public.  A company, any company must not needlessly
     endanger the public.
          It's America.  You can be -- grow as big as
     you want, make as much money as you want, but you
     cannot do so by needlessly endangering the public.
     You can't put profits over the safety of people.
          And when a company, a tobacco company,
     manufacturers a cigarette that's defectively
     addicts and causes harm to smokers, that company is
     responsible for the harms and losses of affected
     smokers.
          Moreover, ladies and gentlemen, when a tobacco
     company lies, conspires, and defrauds the American
     public and the American government to conceal the addictiveness and the harmful effects of deadly
     chemicals put in its cigarettes, that company must
     be punished with punitive damages.
          Let's talk about what we have in this case:
     Truth and lie.  You know, it's probably most
     appropriate that we start with just some of the
     habitual inconsistencies we've seen throughout this
     trial.
          And I want to start with damages which kind
     of -- it's probably unconventional, but let me just
     make one more analogy.  There was a saying that
     saying a drowning swimmer has no allies.  A
     drowning swimmer will pull on anything or anyone to
     get their head above water.  They'll throw anyone
     down just to save themselves.  A drowning victim
     knows no allies.
          Tobacco, ladies and gentlemen, is a drowning
     victim.  And they've spared no expense, nor
     exercised any discretion in pulling down anyone
     inside or outside of this courtroom to preserve
     what?  Their money.
          If you think about over the last few weeks,
     they have been misleading you consistently with
     nonevidence or half evidence.  No evidence or half
     evidence. And I think it was mostly immediately
     highlighted not only today but yesterday.  You
     know, in the South, we take reputation very
     seriously.  And if you reflect back on yesterday,
     Dr. Giakas came in and not only challenged but
     directly attempted to destroy the virtue of a woman
     by asserting that she would engage in infidelity
     while her husband was on his deathbed.  How low can
     you go?
          Moreover, if you're going do make such an
     accusation about a lady, especially in this
     community, it's generally appropriate to do so face
     to face, at least offer her the opportunity to
     confirm --
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.  This is
     improper argument.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Rephrase.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Members of the jury, yesterday
     Dr. Giakas accused Mrs. Robinson of basically
     cheating on her husband.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection; mischaracterizes the
     evidence.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Rephrase.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Said that she was pregnant from
     her husband at a time when her husband couldn't have marital relations.
          Members of the jury, a few days before that
     they had Mrs. Robinson right there on the stand.
     They could have cross-examined her on any issue
     face to face.  They didn't.  They waited.  They
     back-doored her with an expert witness.  A drowning
     victim has no allies.
          We saw a series of mischaracterizations of
     testimony.  You recall that in addition to
     Ms. Robinson, they attacked her on not being
     familiar with her husband, not knowing the name of
     his business.  They attacked her on leaving the
     funeral early.  They attacked her on rarely being
     home for the evenings.  And that was the basis of
     one of their expert's opinions.
          But if we look at the evidence, the evidence
     shows that she was home most evenings.  He worked
     sunup to sundown, which means they were together at
     sundown.  They deep-fried chicken and rice all the
     time.  It was a staple meal.
          She couldn't have left the funeral early
     because she rode in the funeral car with the rest
     of the family.  The testimony is that she said, "I
     wish he would die."  The testimony was, "I was
     pregnant" -- she told someone she was pregnant when he was on his deathbed, but the evidence showed
     what?  Documentation of what conversation?  What
     did the evidence show?  The evidence showed she had
     a tubal ligation in 1992 so she couldn't have been
     pregnant.
          The evidence showed, ladies and gentlemen,
     that Mrs. Robinson was accused of not wearing a
     ring and giving the ring back to Mrs. Johnson,
     Mrs. Hazel Johnson, had her ring on every day.  Had
     her ring on every day.  She's been in court.
          The evidence has been wholly inconsistent with
     the half truths.  Why do we get the half truths?
     Through depositions.  We saw that in about 19
     depositions were published on the screen yesterday.
     Nineteen of them.  All taken by who?  The defense.
     All of them asked questions.
          Mrs. Robinson testified that in the deposition
     not only did she feel badgered and threatened but
     it lasted three days.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection; misstatements the
     record.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  The deposition lasted three
     days, that the same question was asked five
     different ways.  The expert comes in and says he relies on his deposition testimony to come to his
     conclusions.  He published an opinion that said,
     what, he challenged Michael Johnson, Jr.'s
     relationship with his dad.
          He said -- he led you all to believe based on
     his opinion that he published on the screen that
     Michael really didn't have a relationship with his
     dad until 1992.
          But in reality, the deposition testimony
     showed that Michael Johnson lived with his dad for
     the first five years of his life, and after that,
     he still went fishing, they still hung out
     together.  They still went down to the pier.  They
     still had a viable relationship.
          They took one question out of a deposition,
     flipped it.  The one question was:  When did you
     first have a pattern of visitation with your dad?
     That was in 1992.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection; misstates the
     testimony.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  That was in 1992, ladies and
     gentlemen.
          And that's been consistent, we get half truths
     and then ask you to make conclusions off of half truths.
          Members of the jury, why would a company go to
     such lengths, make some accusations, present
     evidence in such a fashion?  Money.  Money.
          Yesterday's demonstration or attack on the
     Johnson family was an undergird attempt to convince
     you to lower a number on pain and suffering.
          One of the elements you're going to have to
     judge this case on when you get to damages is pain
     and suffering.  What is the pain and suffering of
     Mrs. Robinson and Mr. Johnson that's fair?  You
     have to evaluate the evidence as it comes in to
     determine pain and suffering.  That's fair.
          But you're entitled to get both sides of the
     story.  And the challenge here is that they would
     throw this family under the bus, give you only half
     the truth.  We have to try to bring out the other
     half of the truth on cross-examination and then
     expect you or ask you at some point to zero out
     this family on pain and suffering.
          A drowning victim knows no allies, but a
     drowning victim can maintain his honor.
          What also is shocking about this, ladies and
     gentlemen, is if we stop, just pause and think.
     Sometimes you watch so many commercials, you get caught up in the TV show.  If we just pause and
     think what's really happening, like what's
     subconsciously is going on here, what is the
     subconscious theme here?
          The subconscious theme, the defendant, tobacco
     company's presentation is, "We're a new company.
     The smokers got to accept some responsibility.
     We're a new company.  We're different.  Yeah, the
     plaintiffs have shown you all this evidence.
     You've been here for weeks.  You've seen all these
     documents.  You've seen all these videos but
     they're from the '60s and '70s and '80s.  This is
     Jetson's time.  We're current.  This is" --
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.  This is
     Phase 2 argument and there's been no evidence on
     this issue.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  So, ladies and gentlemen, part
     of what you've got to consider is the authenticity,
     their credibility, not only of the presentation,
     not only of the witnesses but the presentation of
     the evidence.
          So here as a company, that's basically trying
     to sell you that we're a new company, that we're
     different, that we've changed.  We are honest.  We no longer conceal.  We don't abide by those rules.
     We no longer subscribe to the Teague documents.
          But, in essence, that's what they're doing.
     Because if you just evaluate the presentation of
     evidence to you, how often did you receive half
     truths?  How often did you see an objection where
     we had to say, Will you please read the rest of the
     sentence?  How often did we have to raise the other
     half of the deposition testimony?
          How often did they come to you and make one
     evaluation and then we have to bring somebody back
     in to give the other half of the story?  And that's
     litigation; two sides to every story.  But if
     you're going to present it, present all the truth.
          Maybe this company really hasn't changed.
     Maybe the only thing they understand is money.  And
     maybe the only way to get them to understand is to
     punish them.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection.  Your Honor, may we
     approach?
          THE COURT:  Jurors will step out, please.
               (The jury withdrew from the courtroom and
the COURT:  Jurors are out.
          MR. BARINGER:  Your Honor, he's arguing punitive damages.  He's not just talking about
     entitlement, he's talking about Phase 2 issues.
     He's talking about -- he's anticipating a defense
     that hasn't been put on.  This is all improper.
     This is ignoring which phase of the trial we're on
     and trying to try Phase 2 right now.  And it's
     inappropriate and it should be stopped.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Chestnut?
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Yes, Your Honor.  I've not made
     any mention of wealth or value of this company.
     I've not made any reference to their net worth or
     money.  I've not asked for money, Your Honor.
          Part of what we have to prove, the burden is
     on us, is to get to the punitive damages stage.  So
     I think I'm entitled to argue that punitive damages
     are entitled, and that's all I've argued.
          THE COURT:  Well, your point is a fine line of
     semantics.  The issue here is whether this jury
     should, from the evidence, conclude that you're
     entitled to receive punitive damages, and that
     could result in punishment if they get there.
          So let's do the first and you can save the
     last -- rest for later.  So you can talk about how
     the evidence may establish your entitlement and get
     to it appropriately, please. MR. CHESTNUT:  Understood, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Thank you.
          Call the jurors when they're ready, please.
               (The jury resumed its seat in the jury
box and the COURT:  Counsel, please continue.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  So, jurors, you've seen a lot
     of evidence, and you have to evaluate not only the
     credibility of the evidence, credibility of the
     witnesses.  And honestly, ladies and gentlemen,
     sincerity as well.  I assert to you that there's
     been a lack of sincerity among the tobacco company
     for years.
          And one of the things we have to be conscious
     of is today's environment is wholly distinct from
     the way it was when Michael Johnson was alive.
          When Michael Johnson started smoking in the
     1970s, the awareness about the harmful effects of
     tobacco was not known.  And that wasn't by
     circumstance, that was by design.
          And we've shown you documentation where
     tobacco deliberately conspired among themselves --
     to conspire, multiple people are getting together
     to commit an act.
          Multiple tobacco companies got together and said, "Listen, our -- our products are addictive,
     and they're harmful."
          Now, let's just break this down a little
     further.  What's most shocking about tobacco is the
     chemicals that are in the cigarette.  Americans
     didn't know that the chemicals -- there were so
     many chemicals in the cigarette.  Yes, tobacco has
     nicotine.  Nicotine is addictive.  But if you
     recall the documents, what happens?  Nicotine
     travels too slowly to the brain, they want to speed
     it up so they can free base, so smoke is free base.
     They get the nicotine kick as you saw in the
     documents.
          What causes the nicotine kick?  Well, that's
     where the ammonia, carbon monoxide, rat poison,
     arsenic, all these fatal chemicals that are in the
     cigarettes are put in the cigarettes to help
     accelerate the nicotine to speed it up so the
     smoker gets a kick.
          So yesterday, we saw this chart, it had like
     methamphetamines, they were decreasing bars.  And
     at the end was nicotine.  And it shows the
     effectiveness of nicotine.
          Again, ladies and gentlemen, if you recall
     that chart, that was a half truth.  What are we really saying to you?  We're saying, yes, nicotine
     is addictive, but what's most harmful in nicotine
     cigarettes are the chemicals they put in there to
     accelerate the affect of it so that people continue
     smoking.
          We're not suggesting to you that nicotine
     causes cancer.  Battery acid causes cancer.  Carbon
     monoxide causes cancer.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection; misstates --
          THE COURT:  Rephrase.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Battery acid can be deadly.
     Ammonia can be deadly.  And we've shown you the
     documents.  We've shown you the formulas.  I don't
     want to pour back through them, but I want to tie
     this together for you.  These harmful effects are
     what's killing people.  These harmful effects are
     what the tobacco company realized they needed in
     cigarettes to accent the high and accelerate the
     high to keep people buying cigarettes.
          That's highlighted by the fact that when there
     was a suggestion about Nicorette gum, nicotine gum,
     we saw a document that referred -- that referred
     back to Pavlov's dog, that they had done a lot of
     research, tobacco research, this part of the
     conspiracy, they were working all together. And Pavlov's dog said what about the lever?
     This rat, that the rat has food and presses the
     lever and gets the food and then it -- and then
     ultimately it begins to naturally press the food
     expecting -- press the lever expecting a reward,
     which typically was the food.  And that same
     document said the smoker is the same way.
          So they were reluctant to give up cigarettes,
     even though they knew they were killing people and
     the gum wasn't because the gum didn't have the
     harmful chemicals to accelerate the nicotine kick.
     But the gum had two problems, right?  One, it
     didn't have the lever, the psychological effect.
          What was the other problem?  The FDA.  The gum
     would have been regulated by the Federal Drug
     Administration, and then they didn't want to be
     regulated by the Federal Drug Administration.  Why
     is that?  Because that higher level of scrutiny
     would have exposed decades earlier these harmful
     deadly chemicals, the list of which we've shown you
     over and over again.
          So they didn't want the public to know about
     these chemicals.  Now, I'm going to talk about the
     Surgeon General's warning.  There's a difference,
     ladies and gentlemen, between saying that cigarettes can be harmful to health and cigarettes
     have nail polish ingredients, hair dye ingredients,
     rat poisoning ingredients, rubber cement
     ingredients, lighter fluid ingredients.  That's a
     different type.
          So when we asked about personal accountability
     and that theme was presented to you about personal
     accountability of smokers, not only factor in the
     time and the reality in the '70s and '80s, early
     '80s, but also just think about overall.  What if
     we bring it present day forward?
          It kind of reminds me of the banking industry.
     The banking industry, toward the late '90s, were
     making a lot of money.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Improper argument.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  May I respond, Your Honor?
          THE COURT:  Finish your argument, Counsel.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  The real estate.  The real
     estate boom.  Wall Street is doing well.  Banks are
     doing well.  And then the real estate bubble
     bursts.  Now, Wall Street was driving that real
     estate bubble, banking was driving that real estate
     bubble, but the moment the bubble burst, who was to
     blame? All the sudden, it was Middle America.  Middle
     America for living beyond their means.  Middle
     American, individual Americans for taking mortgages
     and buying houses that they knew they couldn't
     afford in the first place, for being fiscally
     irresponsible, and now they can't make their bills.
     But who created the environment?  The bankers,
     mortgage companies.
          And some of big banks even bet on the bust, so
     they made money on the bubble growing --
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.  This is
     irrelevant.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Move along, Counsel.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Why is that relevant, ladies
     and gentlemen?  Because the same model works for
     tobacco.  Why is it even more relevant?  Because
     what did we see in the presentation of evidence?
     The same big corporations not only employ the same
     strategies, they employ the same people.  Some of
     the experts --
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.  This is
     irrelevant.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  May I make --
          THE COURT:  Counsel, finish up.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  We had an expert on the stand, Dr. Bennett, who said not only had he testified for
     tobacco in defense, he'd also testified for Ford in
     defense.  He'd also testified for a pharmaceutical
     company in defense.
          And he also said, what?  In all of the cases
     he's testified in trial at, not once has he ever
     found that the company, for whom he was testifying,
     was at fault.  Which means what, by implication?
     That the person, the plaintiff who was suing, was
     at fault.
          That's exactly what the banking industry did.
     When the bubble burst because they --
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Improper argument.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Move along, Counsel.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  So, ladies and gentlemen,
     sometimes we have to consider the environment
     that's created.  And then consider the options that
     are there for people.  And then consider if a
     company is really changed.  If from -- if it's
     really a new day.  If they're really accepting
     fault.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection; same issue.
          THE COURT:  Counsel.  Keep moving. MR. CHESTNUT:  If they've really turned over a
     new leaf, if accountability is ultimately what's
     important, then why isn't the corporation accepting
     responsibility?  Why are they taking --
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Your Honor -- thank you.
          So let's talk about lack of corporate
     responsibility and let's look at the evidence as it
     is.  I'm going to briefly go through the evidence
     as we're talking about credibility and
     accountability.
          Ladies and gentlemen, one of the things we
     have to prove is that Michael Johnson died of
     primary lung cancer.  There's been a lot of
     argument about the evidence.  We say it's primary
     lung cancer, they say it's not.  Then what is it?
     What is it?  It's got to be something.  But they
     haven't told you what.
          Yes, there was -- there's been this assertion,
     but never really directly stated, but there has
     been this air, it's like perfume spray in the air
     about testicular cancer just casually thrown up.
     What do you know the first most important thing
     about testicular cancer, the risk of developing testicular cancer doesn't increase by smoking.  But
     guess what, the other cancers do.
          So breast cancer, colon cancer, pancreatic
     cancer, stomach cancer, lung cancer, all these
     cancers if you smoke it increases the risk of you
     contracting that cancer.  But testicular cancer, it
     doesn't.  It's pretty smart, isn't it?  It's pretty
     smart.
          The one cancer they choose to inject in this
     argument doesn't have an elevated risk from
     smoking.  You know what it also doesn't have,
     there's been zero cases of testicular cancer
     metastasizing to a Pancoast syndrome at the apex of
     the right lung.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection; misstates the
     evidence.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Your Honor, Dr. Feingold
     testified on direct exactly to that point.
          THE COURT:  Jurors, step out a moment please.
               (The jury withdrew from the courtroom and
the COURT:  Counsel, you can argue reasonable
     inferences from the evidence.  There was
     conflicting evidence.  You can argue which one to believe, but you can't say there was none.
     Remember your evidence.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Understood, your Honor.  And
     I'm asking the court not -- I'm just asking for --
          THE COURT:  Just listen to your evidence and
     argue reasonable inferences and what the jury
     should do with it.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Your Honor, but I don't want to
     make a misstatement.  How should I best phrase it?
     That's what I'm trying to do.
          THE COURT:  I'm not here to tell you -- there
     was -- you heard the evidence.  Or were you here
     during all the evidence?
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Understood.
          THE COURT:  And there was conflicting
     evidence.  You know, there's some you can argue
     reasonable inferences, but don't ignore the
     evidence.
          MR. BARINGER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
               (The jury resumed its seat in the jury
box and the COURT:  Objection sustained.
          Counsel, rephrase.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Thank you.
          So one of the major issues that we have to establish as plaintiffs is that the lung cancer at
     the top of the apex of Mr. Johnson's lung was
     primary, was origin, began there.  Not that it
     began somewhere else and metastasized.
          Now, Dr. Feingold came today.  And when he
     testified initially he told us a few things I just
     want to remind us.  One, Dr. Feingold testified
     that he has seen no cases in the thousands that
     he's reviewed as a pulmonologist, which is a lung
     cancer specialist, of cancer metastasizing,
     spreading from the testicle to the lung causing
     Pancoast tumor.
          Metastatic cancer -- and we heard a lot about
     that from Dr. Bennett.  Metastatic cancer can show
     up in the lung and the lung is one of the most
     susceptible organs to cancer.  But when it's
     metastatic Dr. Feingold testified it looks like
     snowflakes.  But if you recall that not only the
     demonstration he had physically there, but the
     demonstration he had on the screen here was that
     this was one huge tumor, possibly with one with a
     second one right under it.
          It wasn't snowflakes, it was a blob.  That's
     major.  Because the blob is consist with Pancoast
     tumor.  Now, how do we know that it's Pancoast tumor and how do the doctors confirm it?  Well, the
     doctors confirmed it by symptomology.
          What were the symptoms?  Mr. Johnson wasn't
     sweating on the right side of his face.  Why wasn't
     he sweating on the ride side of his face?  Because
     this big blob at the top of his lung was
     also hitting nerves and it was hitting back on
     backside.  And remember it spread to the T3
     vertebrae, starts in the lungs and spreads back and
     causes right arm pain.
          And this is important because they had
     Dr. Bennett come in from Montana and throw every
     Pensacola doctor under the bus.  Clearly, somebody
     doesn't hold Pensacola in a high esteem, or at
     least the medical profession.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Sustained, rephrase.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Dr. Bennett says all the
     Pensacola doctors got it.  The chronology of his
     treatment is where?  He starts off going --
     Mr. Johnson goes to a general physician, and the
     general physician refers him to a neurologist
     because he thinks it's a nerve, perhaps.
          And the neurologist says -- takes the
     symptomology and conferred with Dr. Feingold.  And Dr. Feingold said, I looked at this case for three
     seconds and automatically knows this is lung
     cancer.  Because what?  Because this guy is a 20
     year smoker.
          When you take the totality of circumstances:
     20 year smoker, no sweating on the right side of
     the face, eyes kind of drooping, right arm pain in
     his armpit, that's consistent with Horner syndrome.
     Horner syndrome is a subset of Pancoast tumor,
     Pancoast tumor is lung cancer, lung cancer is --
     excuse me, the leading --
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection; misstates the
     evidence.
          THE COURT:  Sustained, rephrase.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  According to Dr. Feingold, the
     leading cause of lung cancer, smoking.  So when you
     have a 20 year smoker, Pancoast tumor, odds are
     this is the primary, not the testicles.
          Now, today, we heard testimony about
     Lance Armstrong.  Dr. Feingold came back and
     testified to what?  The other day they suggested to
     you, very softly, that Lance Armstrong had
     testicular cancer that metastasized, that spread to
     the brain and to the lung, but he didn't have
     symptoms. And the inference was since Lance Armstrong
     lived strong, could ride his bike without symptoms
     of testicular cancer, clearly Mr. Johnson could
     have had testicular cancer, not known it, and then
     it spread to his lung when the primary -- so really
     the primary was his testicles, not the lung.
          What did Dr. Feingold come and clear up today?
     He said it doesn't happen that way.  Dr. Feingold
     said testicular cancer, you don't see it go from
     the testicle to the top of the lung and cause a
     Pancoast tumor.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection --
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. BARINGER:  -- mischaracterizes the
     testimony.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Thank you.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Ladies and gentlemen, then you
     saw cross-examination of Dr. Feingold with a
     New York Times article.  Dr. Feingold was relying
     on a medical-published journal from the
     National Institute of Health.
          And so as we evaluate this evidence, as we go
     through this process, I also want to highlight or
     underscore one other thing, and that is, evaluate
     the credibility of evidence that had been presented to you.
          We've given you an answer.  We've shown you
     more likely than not the origin of this cancer was
     the apex of the lung.  They haven't shown you what
     more likely than not, it wasn't.  The mere
     assertion that it was metastatic without further
     proof fails.
          Who passes a test by saying what the answers
     aren't?  You've got to circle the right answer.  If
     you went to the ACT and circled what wasn't the
     answer you would not do well on the ACT.  You can't
     just win by saying what is not.  Unless you can
     prove what it's not.
          I encourage you all to hold them to that
     challenge.  If it's not -- if lung cancer isn't the
     origin of the cancer, show me what is.  And if they
     don't, then I think you have to side with us.  That
     more likely than not the apex, the origin, the
     primary of this cancer was Mr. Johnson's lung.
          The next issue was:  Was it curable?  Well,
     most of the witnesses you heard on both sides have
     to admit Stage 4 lung cancer isn't curable.  It's
     Stage 4.  We saw -- we saw medical records, ladies
     and gentlemen, that -- I think record 22, they were
     calling in hospice.  Once hospice comes in it's a bad state, you're not coming back from that.
          Now, there's going to be an argument, and I
     want you to be ready for it, there's going to be an
     argument, more likely than not, that because
     Mr. Johnson elected not to undergo chemotherapy or
     radiation he prejudiced his treatment and therefore
     we can't know what the primary is of the lung.
     But, yes, we can.
          Now, Dr. Feingold testified that technology
     wasn't in '96 what it is today, but what do we have
     to suggest that it was primary cancer?  We've got
     biopsy, lung aspiration, we have CT scans showing
     it, and we have the symptomology, and we have
     medical records going all the way through.
          You know what's most important?  Even
     Dr. Bennett had to confirm that doctors basically
     take the totality of circumstances at time of
     death.  Well, Dr. Boatwrite, on the death
     certificate, says:  Non-oat cell carcinoma of lung.
     So by the end of this, Dr. Boatwrite has conferred
     that lung cancer killed Michael Johnson.
          Three days before that he matured in his
     decision to say, you know what, I don't know if
     it's primary, but it's probable.  Probable.  Which
     means it's probably.  Which means, more likely than -- likely than not that his lung cancer was a
     primary.  But they haven't shown any other doctors
     who say the opposite, it probably wasn't.  Not that
     was there then.
          So here's the dichotomy, right?  All of the
     experts that have come into the courtroom to
     testify to you for the defendants that challenge,
     the primary origin of lung cancer, that challenge
     Dr. Torres, that challenge Dr. Gerhardt's findings,
     that challenge Dr. Boatwrite's findings, all of
     them had to rely on what?  Dr. Torres' findings,
     Dr. Gerhartd's findings, or Dr. Boatwrite's
     findings?
          So now how is it that you can maintain
     credibility by challenging the findings of the
     doctors who you're basically insinuating weren't --
     didn't have conclusions in the first place?  If
     they got it wrong in the first place, why would you
     rely on their records?  That's what they're doing.
     That doesn't add up.  More likely than not, this
     was the origin of the cancer.
          Would the chemotherapy have cured the disease?
     Evidence shows it wouldn't have.  It was Stage 4.
     It wasn't curable.  Could he have learned it
     earlier? No, it's not uncommon for you to be
     symptomatic at Stage 4 of primary lung cancer with
     a Pancoast symptom.  All chemotherapy would have
     done was prolong the inevitable with more
     suffering.
          And Michael Johnson has seen his dad suffer,
     he didn't want to go through it.  Michael Johnson
     died drowning on his own blood because the tumor
     had gone into blood vessels causing him to cough up
     blood and die a violent death.  He didn't want to
     prolong that life.
          He was living in his mom's house suffering
     with cancer every day, dealing with family issues,
     trying to get the family back together, but he knew
     it was inevitable.  The chemo wouldn't have helped.
          So the next question you have to answer is:
     Was Michael Johnson addicted?  Was he addicted to
     smoking?  You heard evidence of this, quitting in
     and of itself isn't a sole determination of
     addiction.
          We heard from Dr. Giakas yesterday who said he
     used the DSM-V to diagnose the addiction.  Now, you
     recall we brought in an expert to deal with
     addiction as well.  That expert employed the
     Fagerstrom test.  The Fagerstrom test Mr. Johnson scored basically an addiction score.
          And this DSM-V he still scores an addiction
     score.  It's funny how their experts casually would
     buy into the study, and then they wouldn't.  Kind
     of the same thing with the depositions, they'd buy
     into a deposition testimony of a witness who they
     thought was adverse to us.
          And then we pull out quotes of deposition
     testimony that was beneficial to the plaintiff,
     then all the sudden they disown the witness.  You
     can't have it both ways.  But let's take their test
     and go through it again.
          There was an argument yesterday that this
     isn't the test.  What this clearly says:  At least
     two of these are manifested then that shows a
     pattern of tobacco use disorder.  And tobacco use
     disorder is what we basically have to prove, that
     Michael Johnson had a tobacco use disorder.
          This is the criteria.  I just need one, I'm
     going to pick out three or four of them to show you
     that the evidence meets this and let you come to
     your own conclusion.  Obviously, anyone smoking
     20 packs a day -- 20 -- a pack a day of 20
     cigarettes a day and towards the end of their life
     having two to three has a craving or strong desire for use of tobacco.
          They smoke within 30 minutes of getting up,
     that's a qualifier for tobacco use disorder.
     Ms. Robinson testified sometime before Mr. Johnson
     would get to Crispy Cream he was reaching for a
     cigarette, first 30 minutes he got up.  Recurrent
     tobacco use resulting in a failure to fulfill major
     role obligations at work, school or home.
          Members of the jury, Ms. Robinson testified
     this gentleman would get up out of his bed at night
     to go smoke a cigarette.  He used to smoke in the
     designated area in the house, would have to leave.
     He was an alongshoreman.  There were
     restrictions -- you heard evidence, he was an
     alongshoreman there was restrictions against
     smoking while --
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, there is no such
     evidence.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Important social, occupational,
     relational activities are given up or reduced
     because of tobacco use.  There is evidence that
     Michael Johnson wouldn't ride certain cars with
     people.  For instance, he wouldn't ride with
     Walter, his brother, because Walter didn't allow smoking in the car.  He would end up driving his
     own car.  He wouldn't go to -- at Walter's house,
     he couldn't smoke.
          He would go outside at family events to go
     smoke.  That's the point.  Recurrent tobacco use in
     situations in which is physically hazardous.  He
     continued to smoke in the house with oxygen tanks.
     He continued to smoke after he was diagnosed with
     Stage 4 cancer because of -- because of smoking.
     It's the same thing.
          Tobacco use is continued despite knowledge of
     having a persistent or recurrent physical or
     psychological problem.  Stage 4 lung cancer is a
     physical problem, I promise you.  And he continued
     to smoke after he had done it.
          Tobacco is often taken in a larger amounts or
     over a longer period than what it was intended.
     That was the first point.  That was a major point.
     Why is that important?  We showed you in repeated
     deposition testimony as evidence that he tried
     repeatedly to quit.
          Mark Johnson, his twin, came in and testified
     about the time on the beach when he tried to quit.
     Mrs. Johnson came and testified he tried to quit
     and couldn't, said I'm trying and trying. Mrs. Hazel Johnson, his mother, came in and
     testified and he said, Mom, I'm trying to quit.  It
     ain't as easy as you think.
          And there was testimony about Michael Johnson
     who talked about the gum.  He tried to use the
     nicotine gum, it didn't work.  And that he tried
     quit for a few days and about four days later he'd
     be smoking again.
          Now, let me show you some additional
     testimony, ladies and gentlemen.  The DSM-V, which
     was used, talks about prevalence among daily
     smokers, half of them have quit.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection.  Your Honor, this is
     not in evidence.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Your Honor, the DSM-V we went
     through thoroughly.
          THE COURT:  Move along.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  This is what Dr. Giakas relied
     upon in coming to his conclusions.  I also want to
     show -- because, you know, you're going to hear
     some testimony about -- should have quit, should
     have quit, should have quit, because your daddy
     died in 1979, and he died because of smoking.
          But you see that genetic factors contribute to
     the onset of tobacco use about 50 percent.  I was reading and developing tobacco use and tobacco use
     disorder with a degree of hereditary to that
     observed with the other substance use disorders
     about 50 percent.  Some of the risk to tobacco --
     specific to tobacco, some in common with
     vulnerability to developing any substance use
     disorder.
          So there's a genetic predisposition, ladies
     and gentlemen, according to the DSM-V, to tobacco
     smoking disorder.
          And one other thing, in 1977, when
     Mr. Johnson's dad developed lung cancer from
     smoking and died in 1979, Michael Johnson had
     already been smoking.  He had been smoking for
     years.  Dr. Feingold told us if you had a threshold
     of about eight cigarettes in a day, you're
     basically going to get addicted.  You're addicted.
     If you smoke eight cigarettes a day, according to
     Dr. Feingold, you're addicted.  Some will be able
     to stop, some won't.  But there's a genetic
     predisposition that encouraged an additional hurdle
     to quitting.
          Ladies and gentlemen, the evidence more likely
     than not shows that Michael Johnson was addicted to
     smoking cigarettes.  He smoked Kool cigarettes.  We showed you that Kool cigarettes were produced by
     RJR.  We also showed you that RJR targeted Kool
     cigarettes to who, minorities?  And who else, high
     schoolers, it was Newport and --
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.  Newport
     is not a Reynolds product.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  May I continue Your Honor?
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  Move along.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Now, there's going to be a lot
     of -- you know, a lot of this is kind of like a
     catfish in the water.  Well, if there's a catfish
     in the water, it tries to muddy it up and confuse
     you.  Don't become confused by catfish information.
          What do I mean by that?  So back to the
     conspiracy.  A lot of tobacco companies have
     acquired each other.  You may hear argument that
     RJR didn't know this cigarette, didn't produce that
     cigarette.  But they bought the companies that did.
     When you buy the company you assume responsibility
     for them.
          RJR is responsible for Kool cigarettes.  They
     targeted high schoolers, kids.  And Dr. Proctor
     himself testified African Americans were a target
     of the cigarette industry market.  And the
     documentation of is extensive.  Mr. Gary is going to get in that as well in his closing.  But one of
     the things we also want to underscore is that we're
     not arguing that it was just isolated to African
     Americans.
          The smoking and marketing plan was
     comprehensive, and it was -- as Dr. Proctor
     testified, it was almost like a marketing model.
     They're the pioneers of marketing, tobacco
     companies were.
          And so they targeted specifics, not only to
     gender, but they had some products targeting women,
     some products targeting men, some products
     targeting African Americans, Hispanics, Asians,
     every market sector they would target to get into
     the psychology.
          And then they targeted children.  And why did
     they target children?  There's evidence and there'
     documentation that show tobacco that opined they
     killed an entire generation.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Sustained, rephrase.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  They needed new customers, who
     better than to market to than a teenager?  Why is
     teenagers in the '70s so important?  And why have
     teenagers in the '90s have been targeted so much about truth, the campaign truth and about tobacco?
          And why are people who grew up in the '90s and
     2000s so aware of the harmful risks of tobacco?
     Because they were targeted as teenagers to correct
     the past marketing to teenagers in the '70s.
          And what was that about?  Teenagers are
     susceptible.  So a lot of the marketing you saw
     about cigarettes was to be cool.  Teenagers want to
     be cool, so then they fall into smokers.  Well,
     your brain isn't fully developed, the receptors
     aren't fully developed.  So if you develop habits
     as a teenager, you're likely to maintain them.
          There's statistics in evidence that show most
     smokers were daily smokers -- many daily smokers
     started smoking before the age of 21.  If you start
     after 21, the risk of becoming addicted drops of
     significantly.
          So teenagers were the prime market.  They're
     susceptible, their brains are still developing,
     they're going to become addicted to cigarettes and
     they will probably be lifelong clients.  Nicotine,
     ladies and gentlemen, was addictive.
          Now, how did they market to teenagers?  You
     know, we saw videos and movies and the premise
     behind the videos was what?  Defendants showed you videos, one was James Bond, another movie they
     showed was -- Lethal Weapon.  Murtaugh and Riggs.
          And they said people clearly were aware that
     cigarettes were a risk, because why?  Because in
     the movie, in James Bond, the guy said sure you can
     have a cigarette, it's going to kill you.  It's
     going to kill you.
          Let's just step back and pause and think about
     the subplot.  A lot of movies and a lot of books
     have sub plots and themes.  The villain gave James
     Bond a cigarette and says it will kill you.  That
     was James Bond in like '78.  James Bond what made
     like five more movies since then.  He survived that
     movie.
          Because he survived that movie that makes him,
     what?  The hero.  He's the protagonist in the
     story.  The antagonist gave him the cigarette.  The
     antagonist was the one that was saying smoking is
     wrong.  But who is the hero, who do kids want to
     grow be like?  James Bond, because James Bond
     survived in the next movie.  That antagonist or in
     the next movie, or the movie after that or the
     movie after that.
          It's same thing with Murtaugh and Riggs in
     Lethal Weapon.  Riggs smokes a cigarette.  Murtaugh give him a cigarette.  This is going to kill you.
     But it didn't.
          In fact, he's like bionic man.  I mean, this
     is the only guy that can escape, he's underwater
     and he's got chains around him and he dislocates
     his shoulder on his own, and gets out and then
     survives, and then he's on three more movies.  He's
     still surviving.  He was a, what, hero in the
     movie.  He was the protagonist.
          So the subplot or subtheme to teenagers who
     aren't quite old enough to really challenge
     reality, even though they challenge their parents a
     lot, is what?  That these people are cool and they
     survive.  So you can be cool by smoking and still
     survive.
          That wasn't antismoking commercial.  That was
     a pro smoking commercial.  And that's what we want
     you to remember throughout these arguments, is that
     everything that's sold to you on the surface isn't
     always what they're selling to you.  Step back,
     question, and question the under theme.  Because
     these are very sophisticated companies.  They spend
     a lot of money on marketing.  They spent a lot of
     money, understanding how the human minds works.
          We saw it back Pavlov's dog and that was back in '70s.  So they were studying human minds to
     condition them to want cigarettes.  Just like
     they've studied the human mind to condition them on
     how not to hold tobacco at fault for what they
     obviously are doing.
          We showed you evidence that in the late '70s
     and early '80s the healthcare costs of tobacco,
     billions of dollars.  The cost of time missed at
     work --
          MR. BARINGER:  There's no evidence and that's
     irrelevant.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  We showed you a study.
          MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  There's evidence.  And if you
     look for it, you'll find it notwithstanding what
     anyone else tells you.
          Ladies and gentlemen, there's also evidence of
     the time it costs the economy from the time missed
     from work that people missed --
          MR. BARINGER:  Same objection, Your Honor.  No
     evidence and irrelevant.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. CHESTNUT:  Members of the jury, subscribe
     not to a blank picture because of the frame.  Just because they box it up, make it really pretty
     around the frame doesn't mean it's a Picasso.  It's
     not.  See through it.  See the truth.  Think about
     the amount of evidence that was presented to you
     from our side and the amount of evidence you saw
     from their side.  Compare half week's of evidence,
     three days of evidence.
          We have the burden to prove to you more likely
     than not, but they really haven't proved to you
     that they didn't.  They didn't prove to you that
     there wasn't marketing.  There didn't prove to you
     that there wasn't addiction.  They didn't prove to
     you that this wasn't a mass conspiracy to defraud
     the government.
          How did they defraud the government?  They
     lied.  Each CEO, we showed you, passed a mic in a
     congressional hearing in 1994 and lied to the
     government, in '94.
          And then we contrasted that with documents
     back from '68 where they said they knew internally
     that not only cigarettes were addictive and not
     only did they have chemicals that were killing
     people, we should up it because it will up our
     market share and up our sales.
          And they were afraid that there were other products in the marketplace that were more potent
     and they would outpace them in the marketplace.
          Ladies and gentlemen, do not subscribe to the
     picture because of the frame.  Thank you.


         MR. ACOSTA:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.  I'm
    going to talk to you for a little while and then Mr.
    Gary will talk to you.  My job is to help you answer
    any questions that you might have, and I'm going to
    do that by going over some of the evidence and a
    little bit of the jury instructions and a little bit
    of the verdict form with you.
         I know that some of this might seem repetitive.
    I'm going to try to avoid doing that, and just go
    into some things that we either haven't talked about
    or that I think that may need some emphasis. There is a lot of documents that have been put
    into evidence in this case, over 200 company
    business records that were kept in their file
    cabinets a long time ago.  Those records contain a
    lot of evidence, and contain the things that I'm
    going to tell you.
         If I tell you something that you didn't hear on
    the witness stand or you didn't see on the screen,
    it's going to be in those documents.  The things
    that you wrote -- you've been taking great notes.
    We've watched.  You've taken good notes.
         If you have something in your notes that's
    different from what I say and you remember it
    different from what I'm telling you, go by your own
    recollection.  I'm not giving you the evidence right
    now, I'm just showing you what the evidence was in
    the trial.  That's what this is all about.
         The first thing I want to tell you, if we go to
    the first slide I've got, the tobacco companies,
    Reynolds and the others, they've never come clean
    about what we've proven in this trial.  They never
    have.
         RJR, that's Reynolds, has never admitted --
    they've never admitted this.  And you might remember
    Dr. Proctor was on the witness stand.  He's the guy from Stanford, the professor from Stanford,
    historian of science.  He says millions -- they have
    never admitted millions of people have died from
    smoking.  They haven't admitted that.
         They have never admitted that they're marketing
    targeted kids.  They haven't admitted that.
         They've never told the public that the TIRC,
    CTR research -- that's this organization that they
    created as a front and a sham to protect them.
    They've never told people it was a public relations
    tool.  They have never admitted that.
         They've never admitted lying to the public.
         They've never admitted making cigarettes more
    addictive.  And they have.  We've proved that they
    have.
         And if you read -- there are Surgeon General's
    reports in evidence in the case.  They're big thick
    books, but there's chapters on addiction.  If you
    just read the first page of the first chapter of
    addiction in the 2010 Surgeon General's report it
    will tell you a lot of what you've heard in this
    case.
         The 1988 Surgeon General's report is in
    evidence in this case.  You can read the different
    definitions of addiction that are contained in that report.
         That sheet that showed what -- actually there's
    a couple of sheets that show what RJR, Reynolds'
    position was on addiction.  To them if it was hard
    to quit it was addictive.
         Think about going back in the 70's, 80's, 90's.
    What did addiction mean back then?  This happened
    18 years ago.  What was addiction back then?
         DSM-5 wasn't around back then.  I'll tell you
    that.
         They've never admitted that they assured
    smokers that smoking was safe.  And they did that.
    They assured people that smoking was safe for years
    and years and years.
         Michael Johnson's father smoked.  He saw that
    stuff.  People saw that stuff.
         More people smoked back then than -- so many
    more people smoked than do today.  70 percent of men
    smoked back in the 50's and 60's.
         They've never admitted lying to the public,
    lying to congress.  They've never admitted that.
         They've never admitted that their filters and
    their low tar or light cigarettes are not safer.
    And they're not safer.  They knew they weren't
    safer.  It's all in those books.  And it's in some -- you've gotten hints of that from the testimony in
    this case.
         They say that we don't make a safe cigarette
    and that it's risky and dangerous, but they've never
    admitted they were unreasonably dangerous.  That had
    to be proven in the Engle trial.  That's why we have
    those findings.
         They denied that cigarettes were addictive, and
    they denied that they were dangerous, unreasonably
    dangerous.  They denied that they caused cancer
    until 2000.  They denied it.  But they expect you to
    think that Michael Johnson should have known.
         They saw all that stuff in the newspaper and in
    the magazines and all the articles.  They had all
    that stuff.  Why didn't they believe it?  They
    didn't believe it because -- they actually did
    believe it, but they didn't want to tell people that
    they believed it because if they did they'd be
    admitting there was something wrong with their
    cigarettes and this whole world would have changed.
         Things would be a lot different if back in the
    1950's they told the truth about what they knew and
    what they had done in their own research
    laboratories.  They represented to the world that it
    was safe to smoke, and they created a controversy that killed millions of people.
         These are bad companies.  In fact, it doesn't
    get much worse.
         They never admitted that addiction causes death
    and suffering.  You saw Dr. Gentry.  His deposition
    was played for you.  He's the vice president at
    Reynolds, senior vice president in charge of
    sciences, on the leadership committee, and he
    testified, well, addiction doesn't cause disease.
         Well, if addiction doesn't cause disease we
    wouldn't have an Engle class action.  We wouldn't
    have the criteria that you have to meet.  There
    wouldn't be anything like that, because the Engle
    case found that addiction does cause disease.
    That's why we have to show you that it caused it in
    Michael Johnson.
         But they refuse to this day to admit these
    things.  They're not a changed company.  They're the
    same old R.J. Reynolds that just thinks of an excuse
    and a way to continue to market its products --
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. ACOSTA:  -- to kids, to minorities, and
    they do it in a very sophisticated way.  It's one of
    the wealthiest, most powerful industries in this country.  And that's how they do it.
         I mean, they spend the money to do it.  A lot
    of money.  We showed you, and I've got it on these
    slides.  I've got a lot of stuff on here.  We're
    going to have to go through it quick like in the
    opening because we never have enough time to talk
    about everything we'd like to.
         But in 1981 they spent a billion dollars on
    advertising, and that's in dollars that are over
    30 years ago.  I mean, a billion dollars in
    advertising.
         And then you saw a few letters where they boast
    about spending 120, 160 million on research for
    30 years.  But they spent a hundred billion on
    advertising.
         It's the advertising that overwhelms.  It isn't
    like something that we're always that conscious
    about, if you see it, you buy it, that kind of
    thing.  That wasn't even the purpose of the
    advertising.
         You saw Robert Heimann from the 1980's, a sort
    of yellowish TV picture from a video deposition that
    was taken in a case in Mississippi.  He was the
    president and CEO of the American Tobacco Company,
    and he said that advertising works, we couldn't sell cigarettes if it wasn't for advertising.
         And as their advertising dollars went up, their
    sales went up.  Kool was on the chart.  It was
    number five in the whole country.  And there were
    lots of brands of cigarettes.  Kool was the number
    five.
         This company, and the other -- this company has
    never admitted forming a conspiracy to hide the
    hazards of smoking.  It's never admitted destroying
    documents to win lawsuits.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection.
         MR. ACOSTA:  They want to fight that.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection.  Your Honor, may we
    approach?
         THE COURT:  Jurors step out a moment, please.
         (The jury withdrew to the jury room.)
         MR. BARINGER:  Your Honor, there is no evidence
    that -- they have documents where there is talk
    about possibly destroying documents or getting rid
    of research reports.
         There is nothing, and they didn't put -- Dr.
    Proctor didn't tie it into winning lawsuits, and to
    suggest that in this context in the middle of a
    lawsuit is inappropriate.
         They can talk about what Dr. Proctor said about documents, but accusing Reynolds without evidence
    and without laying the foundation -- you'll remember
    Mr. Beach's argument on spoliation.  They never met
    that, and they can't argue this.
         And, frankly, Your Honor, this entire pitch
    about they didn't accept responsibility or they
    didn't do it is an improper argument.  You cannot
    seek to punish a defendant for not admitting fault,
    and that's exactly what they're doing here.
         THE COURT:  Counsel.
         MR. ACOSTA:  Yes, Your Honor.  I guess there's
    two things.  On the documents, Dr. Proctor testified
    in the case, in this case that documents were
    destroyed.  He testified that they wouldn't admit
    that cigarette smoking was harmful or dangerous,
    because if they did they would go out of business.
         I mean, all of these things that I'm arguing
    are either in those documents, the documents in
    evidence, or it came from the witness stand.
         So, you know, I just disagree with him.  As far
    as them admitting these things, I'm not -- I'm
    talking about to the public, and I thought I made
    that pretty clear that they've never admitted to the
    public that they do these things.  And I think that
    that's reprehensible. THE COURT:  You need to crystalize your
    argument.  Objection overruled.
         Call the jurors when they're ready, please.
         (The jury returned to the courtroom, was seated
    in the jury box, and the following further
    proceedings were had.)
         MR. GARY:  Your Honor, while the jury is coming
    out -- that's okay.
         THE BAILIFF:  Jury is seated, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Objection is sustained.
         Counsel, please rephrase.
         MR. ACOSTA:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         All right.  You might remember the last thing
    that Dr. Proctor testified about when I was asking
    him questions.
         MR. BARINGER:  Your Honor, can we take this
    down?  That was the objection.
         THE COURT:  Please pull it down.
         MR. ACOSTA:  He talked about what this company
    and the other companies have refused to admit to the
    public.  That's what I'm talking about.
         Happily for the industry we have nicotine.
         They addicted kids to the most harmful drug in
    the world.  That's what they've done.  They've
    manipulated nicotine through additives to make cigarettes more addictive, and then they played down
    the role of nicotine.  They didn't want people to
    know what it did.  That's in some of these
    documents, this crucial role of nicotine.  You saw
    these during the trial.
         Happily for the industry nicotine is both
    habituating and has these physiological effects.
         They knew all that in the early 70's.  They
    knew it before that.  I'm going to show you one from
    '59.
         They put ammonia in it.  All these documents
    are in evidence that you can look at.  There is a
    reason they put ammonia in it, because it makes free
    base, like you've heard.  They do that to make it
    more addictive.  That's why it's done.  If you read
    these Surgeon General reports you're going to see it
    in there too.
         Here's more proof of it.  These are all
    documents that are in evidence, where they raise the
    pH to increase the nicotine kick.
         Let me go back to this slide.  They were
    designed to hook kids.  They wrote school children
    and told them smoking would not hurt them, and they
    started doing it in 1963.
         RJR market research shows most smokers begin smoking at age 13 to 17.  They know when people
    start smoking.  They keep track of that, and they
    design cigarettes and advertising to cause new
    smokers to start smoking.
         Here is one of their planning memorandums.
    Some thoughts about new brands and cigarettes for
    the youth market.  You may remember seeing that.
         If our company is to survive we must get our
    share of the youth market.
         These are the letters.  They're in evidence.
    They go from 1963 to 1990.  They're basically form
    letters that they send to schools to tell the kids
    there is nothing wrong with our cigarettes.  We've
    been trying to find something wrong with them, which
    they did, but they lied about it.  They said we
    haven't found it.  But they had.  Things would have
    been a lot different if they had admitted it.
         There is a survey that's in there, it's a big
    thick one.  It's from the HEW, a United States
    agency, and one of the elements, or one of the
    surveys asked people back in the 60's, '66, I think,
    what will it take for you to believe that cigarettes
    are harmful?  And most people said, when the
    cigarette companies tell us.
         It wasn't the government.  They wanted to hear it from the cigarette companies.  And they wouldn't
    tell them.
         This shows some of their marketing to kids.
    The one on the right talks about high school
    students.  The one on the left, I don't know if you
    can see that, but there it goes down to age 12.
    They're taking numbers on kids down to age 12.
         Just wanted to show you that just so you would
    see that there is stuff like that in these
    documents.
         Addiction invalidates the choices that people
    make.  13- and 14-year-olds are not fully informed,
    and they weren't informed that smoking was
    addictive.  They're not responsible enough to make
    choices.  They're too young.  Once addicted they
    can't just choose to suddenly stop.  They didn't
    know that.  That's in the 1967 FTC report.  These
    are government reports where the Federal Trade
    Commission studied this stuff.
         One of the most power -- it's one of the most
    powerful addictions in the world.  You know, we
    don't think of it because you see smoking all over
    the place and you get conditioned to think, well,
    that's just normal activity.  That's what people
    used to think.  But it's a very powerful addiction. You know, Mr. Chestnut, told you about that bar
    chart.  You might remember it.  It had amphetamines
    at about 1000 percent and nicotine at 90 percent at
    the other end in terms of the dopamine release.
         Well, people don't take amphetamine 20 times a
    day.  When you smoke, and you smoke 20 cigarettes a
    day, you're getting eight puffs a day, so you're
    getting that spike repeatedly time after time after
    time.  You don't get that with those other drugs.
    They have one big boost and it lasts awhile.  Nobody
    injects heroin 20 times a day, or -- or eight --
    times eight for eight doses.  It doesn't work that
    way.
         RJR knew the choice was lost to smokers even
    before Michael Johnson was born.  This is a 1959
    document.  It's 8599.  That's the exhibit number in
    the lower left there.  And basically this says, we
    need to provide the optimum amount of nicotine, the
    amount that's required by the smoker.  They knew
    that the smoker required nicotine.
         Long before this time they knew how to take all
    the nicotine out of the tobacco.  Easy to do.  But
    they manipulate it and control it.  And this talks
    about in the 50's how they had to make sure that the
    smoker's requirement for nicotine was met.  That was one of their criteria.
         It also says that we've got all these
    polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in the tobacco, and
    we can't remove them.  At the bottom that's what it
    says.  We can't remove them.
         But they told the public, they told them over
    and over again -- you might remember, in '71, we
    showed a very short clip of a man on Face the
    Nation, it was in color, there were three panelists,
    and they were asking the man in charge of the
    Tobacco Institute at the time, I think it was Howard
    Cullman, and he says cigarettes are not injurious to
    your health, if we find anything in the smoke that
    we can -- that's causing harm we're going to get rid
    of it.  Then he says, you know, some women would
    like smaller babies, because he was questioned about
    how smoking can affect pregnancy.
         So they continued that to keep this controversy
    going.  And it worked.  It worked for a lot of
    people, especially for smokers, because people are
    addicted.
         Who are they going to believe?  Are they going
    to believe the maker of the product, or are they
    going to believe somebody else?
         The government made them put the warning on. They were forced to put it on.  They didn't want the
    warning on there.  They fought that.
         I wanted to show you this.  This is in
    evidence.  This is a Philip Morris pamphlet that
    came out in 2002, and it has inside of it statements
    from the FDA on addiction, and it's -- there's a
    copy of it in evidence.  You won't see a blue one.
    I think you'll see a black-and-white copy, but it
    says:  According to the U.S. Food and Drug
    Administration, 87 percent of people who smoke
    cigarettes every day -- that's how many smoke
    cigarettes every day -- nearly two-thirds of smokers
    have their first cigarette within the first half
    hour after they wake up.  In one study, 84.3 percent
    of those who smoked a pack or more a day had
    unsuccessfully tried to reduce the number of
    cigarettes smoked.
         In other words, almost all the people that
    smoked a pack a day, many of them could not reduce
    the number.
         A smoker who makes a serious attempt to stop
    smoking has a less than 5 percent chance of being
    off cigarettes a year later.  Each year in the
    United States 15 million people try to quit smoking,
    but less than 3 percent have long-term success.  In one study 70 percent of current smokers reported
    that they would like to completely stop smoking.
         This is what another cigarette company said
    after the Engle trial.  Reynolds hasn't done
    anything to help people stop smoking.  This company
    hasn't done anything.
         Michael Johnson, when he was 23, chose to quit
    smoking.  That was his choice.  Now he's a man.  He
    chooses to quit smoking.  He chose over and over
    again.  You heard his -- Michael Johnson's mother
    say, every time I told him about his dad he would
    say, Mom, I'm trying to stop, I just can't quit.
         You know, this was -- that was going back.
    That's a long time ago, 30 years ago -- 20, 30 years
    ago this stuff happened.  You know, and then people
    are asked today about what happened 20, 30 years
    ago, memories fade.  It's difficult to remember
    every single detail, but she remembers that.
         And Mark Johnson, his twin brother, he
    remembers that one specific time in 1983.  That's
    when he was 23 years old.  You know, that doesn't
    mean that he didn't try to quit smoking other times,
    just because these people remembered those times.
         He had over a hundred -- a million doses of
    nicotine.  And Reynolds and the other companies, they knew what choice meant.  They knew it was
    defeated if you were addicted.
         And I wanted to show you this, and I'm going to
    show you that document again about -- about
    defeating addiction.
         This is another Philip Morris brochure to help
    kids stop smoking.  Reynolds doesn't have anything
    like that.  You can't really read this very well,
    it's kind of small, but what this says, I'm going to
    read it up close, it says -- oops -- it said:  What
    you can say to your kids if you're a smoker and
    you're trying to get your kids to stop smoking.
    Philip Morris says tell them, I smoke, but then I
    tell you not to.  Doesn't that seem inconsistent?
    Then Philip Morris advises, don't be afraid to admit
    that you might have made a different choice had you
    understood then what you do now.
         Philip Morris is saying people back then didn't
    know what they know today.  So when they talk about
    what everybody knew, here is another cigarette
    company in 2002, 2003, when this came out, admitting
    that people didn't know.
         Compare this with what Dr. Giakas said.  There
    they talk about addiction.  It says, addiction, the
    younger people are when they start smoking the more likely they are to become strongly addicted to
    nicotine.
         That's a cigarette company saying that.
         Symptoms of addiction, paren, in parenthesis,
    having strong urges to smoke, feeling anxious or
    irritable, or having unsuccessfully tried not to
    smoke, can appear in teens and preteens within weeks
    or only days after they become occasional smokers.
         That's how susceptible young adolescents and
    teenagers are when it comes to tobacco.  Their
    brains are not developed yet.
         You saw that very long deposition of Dr.
    Benowitz.  I know it was long.  But he's the one
    that was the senior editor of the '88 Surgeon
    General's report.  When you see it you'll know that.
    In fact, I think it was admitted in opening that he
    was the world's foremost expert on addiction to
    nicotine.
         Now, I want to switch for a second to the
    cancer thing just so you'll understand.  Dr.
    Boatwright isn't on anybody's side.  I sat up there
    and pretended to be Dr. Boatwright and they asked me
    questions.  This was his testimony.  Oops.  When he
    was asked, he said this is probable primary lung
    because of the cavitating CT of the chest, the pathology report, and his long cigarette history.
         That was testimony that you heard.  If that
    doesn't clench the did-he-have-cancer question, what
    would?  I showed you these slides before.  There's
    like over 15 references to probable lung cancer in
    his medical records.
         Greed was RJR's choice.  They had choices too.
    Choice isn't just about individuals, and it just
    isn't about individual responsibility.  Corporations
    have responsibility too.
         Who is the expert making cigarettes, the smoker
    or the company that makes them?  Who has a big
    scientific lab to figure all this stuff out about
    smoking, the cigarette company or the smoker?  Who
    hires all these marketing people and advertising
    people to sell their products, and it's
    sophisticated stuff that costs a lot of money, the
    smoker or the cigarette company?
         They have a responsibility to people.  In fact,
    they said in 1953, we take the position that the
    health of the smoker is paramount to every other
    interest in our business.  That was not the truth.
    They didn't do that.  They put their profits ahead
    of the health of smokers.
         They're the ones that chose to deny the truth about smoking and lung cancer.  They chose to deny
    the truth about nicotine addiction and what it
    causes.  They chose to manipulate nicotine.  RJR
    chose to market to kids and black Americans.  RJR
    put money ahead of the truth and ahead of the health
    of millions.
         This is from 1963:  Moreover nicotine is
    addictive.  We're in the business of selling
    nicotine, and addictive drug.
         This is another document you were shown, and it
    shows how Kools were -- when they're free based with
    urea what happens?
         This is research that Reynolds did in the 70's,
    and you can see these little diagrams down there.
    They had -- they had learned that the molecule shape
    of nicotine is the same as the molecule shape for
    opiates, which is heroin.  Right?
         Now, today they still say, oh, nicotine
    addiction is totally different.  It's ridiculous
    that it has anything to do with heroin or cocaine
    addiction.  It's more like caffeine.
         Well, some of the effects are certainly a lot
    more like caffeine, but it's not the same trying to
    quit.  People switch from caffeine drinks easily,
    but not cigarettes. Cigarettes are very difficult to quit because
    of this molecule that locks in your brain, makes
    permanent neuro pathway changes, and they knew that
    in the 70's.
         What did they tell the gov- -- they tell the
    government things.  The government has to listen to
    them.  The government has to listen to everybody.
    It has to listen to them.  And they spend a lot of
    money making them listen, and what do they tell
    them?  They don't tell them this stuff.  In fact,
    they said, you know, if it proves to be something
    that might hurt us from a legal point of view we've
    got to hide it or discontinue it.  That's what they
    did.
         This is a letter from Senkus to Crohn.  He's in
    the legal department.  This is the letter that talks
    about destroying documents.  It's in evidence.  You
    can read it.
         This is an analysis of the negro market, and it
    covers just about nine documents in evidence.
    They're in the 3900 group that talk about how they
    marketed to blacks over time, and they said
    disparaging things.  The lower economic status of
    the negro does not allow direct comparison of
    coverage levels achieved with the -- with them versus those among the white population.
         I mean, you have to read these things to see
    how they were figuring out how they were going to
    get more sales to this group of people, knowing what
    their cigarettes were doing, and knowing that they
    were denying all the health harms that could go with
    it to take advantage of people.  That's what they
    did.  They took advantage of people.
         This is after -- this is when the Surgeon
    General's report comes out in 1988.  It's a press
    release from The Tobacco Institute.  They deny that
    it's addictive publicly over and over.  It wasn't
    just the CEO's going to congress and raising their
    hands swearing to tell the truth and not telling the
    truth.  They advertised it.
         RJR wanted to keep smokers from quitting to
    make more money.  They never did anything to help
    smokers quit.  They lied to smokers, and then they
    tell you that Michael Johnson should have believed
    John Quincy Adams instead of them.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection.  Your Honor, may we
    approach?
         THE COURT:  Jurors step out a moment, please.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
         MR. ACOSTA:  May it please the court? Okay.  You've seen this.  I wanted to show you
    the exhibit number so you could find it after you
    take all the exhibits back into the jury room to
    deliberate, and the exhibit number -- oops -- the
    exhibit number up there is 1773, and this is the
    study in 1982, report about it from Dr. Teague, who
    was a director of science at Reynolds.  You know,
    he's been there since 1953, he's a Ph.D.
         He was a director there, and he wrote that most
    people want to stop, and most people can't.  He knew
    that.  And then what -- their reaction was, well,
    let's see what we can do to keep them smoking, or
    we're going to have to go out of business, or we're
    going to have to find some other kind of product to
    sell.  But that's the way Reynolds worked.
         And they hired senators and congressmen to do
    their bidding.  You know, tobacco companies spent
    bags of money, and they were killing people.
         Their pervasive advertising overwhelmed the
    little warning labels on the packages.  That was a
    letter to a senator.
         I'll go through some of these quickly.
         This is that FTC report from 1981.  But the
    warnings were completely ineffective, and they knew
    it. This is the 1957 FTC report, and what does it
    say?  It says there's virtually no evidence that the
    warning statement on cigarette packages had any
    significant effect.  That's in 1967.  So they
    changed it in 1970, and in 1981 they changed it
    again.  This is the 1981 FTC report.
         You heard this morning counsel read from the --
    a letter from Elmo Roper.  He worked for the Tobacco
    Institute.  He had his own company, but he did work
    for the cigarette industry.
         But there's another letter in evidence that you
    can look at that shows from one of their people from
    Philip Morris, who hired Roper, that says that all
    their figures were accurate.
         But anyway, the FTC says that -- this thing is
    skipping on me here -- the current warning is
    ineffective.  They knew that it wasn't -- it wasn't
    causing people not to smoke, not to start.
         And Michael Johnson -- this is 1981, two years
    later he's trying to quit though.  So he's starting
    to get it, but now he can't.  He's been smoking for
    ten years.  And Dr. Benowitz said anybody that
    smokes a pack a day for ten years it's highly likely
    they're addicted.  You might remember that from
    Benowitz's testimony. I'm not going to go through all of these again.
    This is questions you've got to answer.  I mean, is
    it more likely he was addicted to smoking, was he
    not addicted?  Is it more likely that addiction lead
    to lung cancer, or did he die from some unknown
    disease not caused by smoking?  The bottom line from
    both Dr. Bennett and Dr. Harris was we don't know.
         These were slides that I showed you earlier.  I
    need to talk about this for just a second, because
    we have to prove that there was reliance on the
    concealment.
         You know, people trust companies to tell them
    the truth.  When you buy a product -- when a person
    buys a product they expect the company to tell you
    the truth about the product.  If it's addictive, you
    would expect them to tell you it's addictive.  If it
    causes cancer, you would expect the company to tell
    you that it causes cancer.
         And you buy the product.  Well, you buy it
    relying on the company to tell you the truth,
    because if they did tell you the truth you might not
    want to buy it.  But they didn't.
         But that's reliance.  So when you see the
    reliance question that's what we're talking about.
    He didn't have to see an advertisement and rely on it.  That's not what we're talking about.  That's
    what the -- that's what the defense wants you to
    think we're talking about, but we're not.  We're
    talking about the fact that they didn't tell the
    truth about their product, and when you don't tell
    somebody that their product causes disease, causes
    cancer, and really does, and they know it, and it's
    addictive, and you don't tell them, and you buy the
    product, that's reliance.  And you can infer that
    from all the evidence in the case.  You can infer
    that people relied.
         Well, of course Dr. Heimann, their own -- the
    CEO of American says that they expected people to
    rely on them.  And one of the findings talks about
    how the companies expected them to rely to their
    detriment.  That's one of the findings.
         How much can you blame Michael Johnson for
    assuming a risk that the company said didn't exist?
    That's where we come to this comparative fault issue
    where you're going to get an opportunity to assign a
    percentage.
         In the beginning Mr. Gary told you that you we
    would accept 10 percent, 5 percent of the blame for
    Michael Johnson.  Maybe after 1982 he should have
    tried something harder to quit.  He didn't do it, you know.  But you get to assign a percentage, and
    that's because we have accepted some of the blame.
    But we expect you to assign the vast majority of the
    blame on Reynolds.
         Reynolds is Brown & Williamson, Brown &
    Williamson is American.  They're all the same
    company through mergers.  Brown & Williamson made
    Kools.  Now Reynolds makes them.
         I just have to mention this briefly.  You know,
    I want to make this analogy.  There's a suggestion
    that she remarried, so that's a replacement part for
    the husband she lost.
         You know, if a person loses a child and then
    the family has another child, is the new child a
    replacement for the one that died?  No, no.  When
    you lose somebody, you lose somebody.
         And humans have -- I mean, what we're looking
    for is the value of the life that she lost, the
    value to her of that life, the value to Michael, his
    son, Michael Johnson's son.  He's referred to as the
    son in the jury instructions so you don't get
    confused, so we don't get confused.
         But this is a case about them and about their
    loss and about the value of this man, Michael
    Johnson, a good man. $10 million is not too much to put on his life
    for each of them.  That's not too much.
         I want to go through these jury instructions
    very quickly.  It will take me about five, ten
    minutes, and then I'm probably going to sit down and
    let Mr. Gary finish up.
         Can we get Page 10 up there real quick of the
    jury instructions?
         It's not very big.  I'm going to skip Page 10.
    This just outlines what the proof needs to be.  One
    of the things I want to point out --
         Let me have the ELMO.  I'll just put it on
    there.  Oh, we got it big.  Can we go to the next
    page?
         He's going to tell you that we have to prove
    our case by the greater weight of the evidence.  And
    you might remember, going all the way back to jury
    selection, there was issues about, well, if you win
    the game by one point you win.  51 percent is
    enough.
         It's more probable than not.  That's our burden
    of proof.  The greater weight of the evidence is
    more probable than not.  We don't have to prove
    beyond a reasonable doubt.  We don't have to prove
    100 percent.  We have to prove 51 percent. We do have to make it to 51 percent.  But it's
    more probable than not.  That's our burden.  So
    please just hold us to that burden.
         And the greater weight means the more
    persuasive and convincing force and effect of the
    entire evidence.  And that's what that means, of all
    the evidence who has the more persuasive and
    convincing force of the evidence in this trial?  You
    have to decide is it the plaintiff that has the more
    persuasive and convincing force of all the evidence,
    or is it the defense.
         Let's go to the next page.  This is the legal
    cause instruction.  There's basically two
    instructions, and the first part of it is the --
    says that a legal cause of death, if it directly and
    in natural and continuous sequence produces or
    contributes substantially.  It doesn't have to be
    the only cause to producing the death, so that it
    can be reasonably said that but for the addiction
    the death would not have occurred.
         Well, Dr. Benowitz said people don't get these
    diseases but for the addiction to nicotine.  People
    don't get -- if you remember, early on a chart we
    showed where before 1900 people didn't get lung
    cancer.  They get it from smoking cigarettes. People don't smoke 20 cigarettes a day for
    20 years or more without being addicted to nicotine.
    It just doesn't work that way.  Some people might
    not want to admit they're addicted, but they're
    addicted.
         But there's a second part to this, and this is
    important that you understand this:  In order to be
    regarded as a legal cause of death addiction to
    Reynolds cigarettes containing nicotine need not be
    the only cause.  Such addiction may be a legal cause
    of death even though it operates in combination with
    the act of another, the acts of Michael Johnson, or
    some other cause, if such other cause occurs at the
    same time as the addiction and the addiction
    contributes substantially to producing such death.
         Now, let's say that five people each put a
    little bit of poison in a glass and somebody takes
    it and dies, and then you bring a lawsuit against
    just one of them, and that one defendant says, well,
    I only put a little bit in there.  It wouldn't have
    been enough to kill you.  Well, if it was a
    substantial contributing cause that's sufficient.
         You could say, but for that little bit the
    person wouldn't have died.  You don't have to
    satisfy the first one if you satisfy the second one. So if you think there is something, one of
    these issues or elements that -- that you think,
    well, I can't say that but for that that would have
    happened, you can say -- you can say that it was a
    substantial contributing cause.  All it has to be is
    a substantial contributing cause and you should find
    in favor of the plaintiff.
         And it goes with everything else, whether it
    was a substantial contributing cause in terms of the
    reliance issue, whether that would have made a
    difference.
         I'm almost done.  Okay.  Let's go to Page 20,
    if we could.
         MR. CHESTNUT:  Your Honor, may we have a brief
    restroom break?
         THE COURT:  All right.  We'll take a brief
    restroom break for five minutes.
         (The jury withdrew to the jury room.)
         THE COURT:  Recess for five minutes.
         (Short break.)
         THE BAILIFF:  Remain seated.  Circuit court is
    reconvened.
         THE COURT:  All right.  I think we have
    everyone back.
         Counsel, I want to make sure everyone gets together with the clerk to ensure that all the
    exhibits that have been introduced are properly
    identified to go back.
         THE CLERK:  They did.
         THE COURT:  You did.  Thank you.  Strike that.
         Ready to resume?
         MR. GARY:  We're ready, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Call the jurors when they're ready,
    please.
         (The jury returned to the courtroom, was seated
    in the jury box, and the following further
    proceedings were had.)
         THE BAILIFF:  Jurors have been seated, Your
    Honor.
         THE COURT:  Counsel, please continue.
         MR. ACOSTA:  I was going through the jury
    instructions with you and then I remembered I saw
    this board that we didn't -- we need to show you
    again, because this is from Dr. Feingold.  You might
    remember he was here today of course.
         But these are all the questions.  He's answered
    the questions for you that will be on that first
    part of the verdict form that Mr. Gary is going to
    go over with you after I'm done.
         But I wanted you to see that Michael Johnson was addicted to nicotine, he had primary lung
    cancer, he died from primary lung cancer.  The
    addiction was a cause of the lung cancer.
         By the way, if you look at those Surgeon
    General reports, around page 45 of the 2004 Surgeon
    General's report you'll see a chart and some
    discussion about what happens when you stop smoking
    and how long the risk remains afterwards.  You'll
    see it's about 50 percent of what it would have been
    had you continued to smoke.  And it goes up with
    time as you age.
         You'll see that there's two charts in the 2004
    and the 2010 report in the cancer sections that show
    how addiction is a cause of lung cancer.
         Now, going back to Page 22 of the jury
    instructions.  This particular instruction is the
    one on reliance, and I'm just going to read this.
    There's really no way to see it unless your eyes are
    a lot better than mine.  It says:  Plaintiff need
    not provide direct evidence of Michael Johnson's
    reliance on any specific statement or concealment by
    R.J. Reynolds or its co-conspirators.  Plaintiff
    need not prove that the statements made by the
    company were relayed directly to Michael Johnson if
    their content reached him through other sources. You may instead infer Michael Johnson's reliance on
    such statements or concealment.
         So I wanted to make sure that you understand
    that you can infer from all this evidence, according
    to these jury instructions, that when he bought
    those cigarettes he was relying on them to tell him
    the truth.
         I wanted to point out the one on 24, page 24.
    This is an instruction that talks about the warning
    labels that were there.
         We don't have a claim that there should have
    been something different on a warning label.  We're
    precluded from doing that.  But we do have a claim
    that the warning label is ineffective all the way
    through, and that they should have given this
    information in other ways, which they have done.
         They could have put package inserts in there.
    They could have put press releases out.  They could
    have gotten this information out to people a lot of
    different ways.
         And this instruction says the fact that these
    warning labels complied with federal law does not
    preclude a finding of liability for the plaintiff's
    claims.  In other words, we still get the claims
    that we've made, you can still consider the evidence for the things that I've told you and argued about
    this afternoon.
         The last one I want to mention is the one on
    page 25.  This is the intentional misconduct.  We're
    asking that you determine whether or not punitive
    damages are warranted.  That's all we do in this
    part of the case.  If they're warranted.
         And they're warranted when there is intentional
    misconduct and the defendant had actual knowledge of
    the wrongfulness of the conduct and there was a high
    probability of injury or damage to users of its
    products.  Despite that knowledge it intentionally
    pursued that course of conduct.
         One out of two people get fatal diseases if
    they smoke cigarettes.  What they did was
    deliberate.  They should be punished.
         That's all I'm going to say for right now.
    Thank you very much.


         MR. GARY:  Your Honor, may I take a minute?
    You don't have to send them out.
         Please the court.  Good evening, members of the
    jury.  I know it's getting late and you've been here
    a long time.  As a matter of fact, you've been here
    a lot of days.  A lot of days.  And I want to take a moment just to say thank you.
         Thank you.
         Jury service is not easy, and it takes a lot
    out of your life.  But I say thank you because you
    all have answered the bell.  We started some 24 days
    ago, and you've been here, and on behalf, starting
    with the head of the courthouse, Judge Terrell, and
    all the lawyers, and for sure my client, I just want
    to say we're proud that we had eight people that
    didn't even waiver in accepting their responsibility
    to do the right thing.  So for that we are grateful,
    members of the jury.
         And then I want you to know that I feel good
    about the fact that you've been here, you've given
    your undivided attention.  I've seen you taking
    notes.  You are interested.  You are into this case.
    And no matter what happens, nobody can challenge
    your service, because you've given it 110 percent.
         And I want to just take a moment to say on
    behalf of my clients, both of them, they wanted me
    to make a special effort to say thank you.  It's
    been a long journey for them.  It's been 18 years
    and more.
         But they never lost faith in you.  They could
    have thrown the towel in, because it's been a many dark days and a lot of dark hours.  But they knew
    that one day -- they knew that one day justice is
    going to rise, and that's this day.
         This is judgment day.  And it's judgment day
    for a defendant that has killed a lot of people.
    They have, members of the jury.  They have flat out
    killed a lot of people, and they've gotten away with
    it.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.  Improper
    argument.
         THE COURT:  Jurors step out a moment.
         (Jury withdrew to the jury room.)
         THE COURT:  The jurors are out.
         MR. BARINGER:  Your Honor, it's totally
    improper argument.  He can talk about people dying
    of smoking-related diseases, but there's been no
    finding on -- when he talks about killing he's
    analogizing it to criminal activity, and he said
    that they got away with it.
         Suggesting that they got away with a crime is a
    far different matter than saying that their product
    is associated with 400,000 deaths a year.
         But he has crossed the line.  He's saying --
    he's analogizing it's criminal, and what he's doing
    is he's saying that all those people would have had a legal finding that Reynolds' wrongful conduct
    resulted in their death.
         It's one thing to say someone dies from a
    smoking-related disease.  It's quite another to say
    that the company killed all of those people that
    died from smoking-related diseases.
         It's designed to inflame the jury.  It's
    designed to incite passion, and it is clearly,
    clearly improper argument.
         THE COURT:  Mr. Gary.
         MR. GARY:  Your Honor, I think there's
    testimony from Dr. Proctor saying 880 people -- I
    mean, 480,000 people die every year, and the deaths
    could have been avoided.  They didn't have to die.
    That's the testimony coming from the witness stand.
         THE COURT:  I understand.  The language does
    infer some other suggestions.  So you certainly
    won't be able to say that.
         MR. GARY:  I can change it.
         THE COURT:  But let's move it along.
         Objection overruled.
         Govern yourself accordingly.
         MR. GARY:  All right.  Thank you.
         THE COURT:  Call the jurors when they're ready,
    please. (The jury returned to the courtroom, was seated
    in the jury box, and the following further
    proceedings were had.)
         THE BAILIFF:  The jury has been seated, Your
    Honor.
         THE COURT:  Counsel, please continue.
         MR. GARY:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         As I was saying, members of the jury, and you
    don't have to take my word for it, our
    responsibility was to produce the evidence through
    witnesses and documents.
         You saw Dr. Proctor, and I know you've got to
    remember Dr. Proctor, because he was -- he told the
    truth.  He didn't lie.
         They've been lying for years and years and
    years.  They are flat out liars, and they know it.
         800 -- I mean, 480,000 people dying every year
    because of their foolishness, their greed.  Money
    hungry.  Money-grubbing people.
         Now, you make a choice, and it's your choice.
    That's all right.  I'll live with that.  But when
    you withhold, when you refrain from telling the
    truth, and you flat out lie to people to get them
    hooked so you can make more money, that's not right,
    and you know it's not right.  Nobody's pleased with that.  God's not pleased with that.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. GARY:  It's not right, members of the jury.
    How many more are going to have to die?  How many
    more are going to have to go down?  How many more
    are going to have to die?
         This is serious business, members of the jury.
    This is about saving lives.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. GARY:  And we talk about the damages for
    the loss of the life of Michael Johnson.
    30-some-odd years old.  Gone.  Be here no more.
         $10 million for each one of them may not be
    enough.  $10 million for each one of them, his son
    and his wife, may not be enough.  10 million for
    each may not be enough.
         When is it going to stop, members of the jury?
    When is it going to stop?
         You know, Dr. Proctor was probably one of the
    most credible witnesses that took the stand.
         If we don't do something we're on a course of a
    billion people from cigarettes worldwide.  A billion
    people in this century.  In this century.  They've got to be stopped.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. GARY:  They've got to be stopped, and
    you've got to do it now.  You may not get the
    opportunity ever again.
         And I know they have the money, they have the
    power, and they have the influence.  But they don't
    have the power that you have.  You have a lot of
    power members of the jury.  Don't you take it
    lightly.  You have the power to see wrong and make
    it right.  You see suffering, and you can stop it.
         You can bring major corporations to their knees
    when you catch them wrong a billion people going
    down.
         Nobody, nobody -- and we've been fighting this
    case for a long time.  Nobody stand up for these
    people.
         Oh, yes, you seen the doctor the other day.
    They paid him 80-something thousand.  His bill is
    probably going to be over $100,000.  They can do it.
         Maybe they'll beat us down.  I tell you what, I
    won't go down without a fight, and you can believe
    that.
         Ten thou- -- $10 million each for the loss of a young man that was a good man, and you know he was a
    good man.  Everybody in this courtroom, even the
    defense said opening statement that he was a good
    man.
         Sit down and took time and painted a portrait
    of the president.  He was just 19 years old.  He
    could have been out doing anything, but he was
    putting his time in.
         And you heard Cynthia.  Her family, they grew
    up serving their country, serving their country.
    Some 30 years, some 35 years.  Her brothers
    fighting.  Fighting for America, fighting for
    justice, fighting for Old Glory.  There she is up
    there.  Fighting for her.
         You have a rare opportunity, members of the
    jury.  You can get it right.  You can get it right.
    They've got influence.  Oh, yeah, over Washington
    they've got influence.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. GARY:  But you can make it right, and I
    know you're going to do that, members of the jury.
         And let me tell you something.  If you decide
    $10 million for each one of them is not enough you
    can change that.  You make that call. Talking about how powerful they are.  Let's see
    what the historian says.  Dr. Proctor again.  What
    he said:  This is one of the most powerful
    industries in the United States.  They have many
    powerful friends in congress.  They manipulated
    congress.  They paid people.  They paid doctors.
         Members of the jury, if Mr. Johnson -- if you
    want to say he was wrong, at least let's have a fair
    fight.  All I want is a fair fight.  That's all.
    It's not a fair fight with these people.  You can't
    match them.  But your verdict can say no more.
         Eight people, ordinary people in Pensacola,
    Florida.  Not a big fancy town, but you can change
    history.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. GARY:  You can do it, members of the jury.
    You can do it.  You can do it.
         Talking about influence.  Anyone's got to be
    thinking of a product that's killing people by
    almost a half billion people a year -- almost a half
    million.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.  Can we
    approach?
         MR. GARY:  I'm sorry, Your Honor.  Almost a half million people a year.
         MR. BARINGER:  This violates -- this violates
    Williams and State Farm talking about worldwide.
    That is not what this case is about.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. GARY:  Well, let's take -- let's take the
    480,000 that are killed in America by their
    foolishness.  And that's what it is.
         Somebody's got to stand up to them, and it's
    going to be you.  It's going to be you.  It's going
    to be this jury.
         They're talking about the warning, the warning,
    because they want to set everybody up.  Well, if you
    had a warning then -- look, if you're going to put a
    warning on a product, tell me what it will do to me.
    Don't fool around with it.  This is important.
         These cigarettes are killing people, members of
    the jury.  They're killing them by the hundreds of
    thousands.  This is not a toy.  This is not like you
    have a bad toy in the kitchen and your child may get
    hurt.  They're killing people, and they know they're
    doing it.
         You think they're going to stop?  No.  You
    think $10 million for each one of them is going to
    stop them?  No.  And we'll talk about punitives later.
         Members of the jury, this is the point.  We
    talked about this even in jury -- if you're
    informed, you know what you're doing, it's your
    fault, Mr. Johnson's fault.  But don't lie to him.
    You lie to him, and then you blame him for believing
    your lie.  Now, you tell me what is that?
         That's why, members of the jury -- and he was a
    good man.
         Members of the jury, these people have lied,
    they've lied, they've lied, they've lied, they've
    lied, and they've lied, and it's going to catch up
    with them.
         Now, members of the jury, let me say this.
    This is where it's out of bounds.  You're a woman,
    you're a man, we're adults.  Pick on me, it's okay.
    I accept it.
         They increased marketing to who?  The kids.
    The kids, members of the jury.  They're marketing --
    and what did Dr. Proctor say about what they were
    doing and did they know what they were doing?
         It's my opinion that the industry was lying to
    their public relations people putting all this stuff
    out there.  Going after the kids.  Going after the
    kids. Well, even Mr. Baringer said -- in opening
    statement he said, yes, choices do have to be --
    what -- informed, in the sense that you have to
    know.
         Well, you can't lie to people.  You can't lie
    to people.  Even he admits that you can't do it, and
    then say, well, you should have known, or it was in
    Reader's Digest.
         How many people even read Reader's Digest?  Why
    didn't they get on TV and say, look, it's cancerous,
    we know it's cancerous, we know it will kill you,
    but if you smoke it anyway -- then if I smoke it
    then it's my fault.  Blame me.  But then don't get
    up there and mislead people.
         Why do you think you've got the Engle findings?
    That's from -- the Supreme Court put their stamp on
    it, said these people were conspirators, they were
    liars, and they were doing fraudulent stuff.
         That's why I say, members of the jury,
    $10 million for each one of them, and this boy lost
    his life -- lost the enjoyment of life, everything,
    he'll never be able to do nothing with his father.
    How much is that worth?  How much is that worth?
         $10 million for each one of them may be
    peanuts, and it is to these folks. MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.  He's
    distorting the law and the legal standard for
    compensatory damages.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. GARY:  Let me get to the point, members of
    the jury.  Let me tell you, when he went after our
    kids -- when they went after our kids that's out of
    bounds.
         They're talking about, well, he should have
    known, he should have known that cigarettes would
    kill you.  Well, even President Kennedy in 1960, he
    didn't even know.
         He was the president of the United States.  And
    you heard Dr. Proctor say it.  He was president of
    the United States, and he didn't even know that
    smoking was cancerous and it would kill you, because
    they were hiding it, sugar-coating it.
         Let's just talk about our kids for a second.
    This is really important.
         When you market -- when you go after our babies
    that's out of bounds.  We're adults.  Fight us.  Do
    it to us, but not to our children.
         And they lied.  Dr. Proctor told you that they
    went after our children like gangbusters.  What did
    they say?  And you probably remember it.  What did they say was our future?  The high school students.
    And that's about as low as you can get.  You can't
    get no lower than that.  Fight a fair fight.
         Doctor told you about the brain of our children
    are not like ours as adults.  They will fall for
    anything.  They go for it.
         That's why these people with their money and
    their power, billions and billions and billions of
    dollars, they went after them.  Our kids.
         Think about the little five-year-old that wrote
    to them and said, look, you're going after us by
    creating candy cigarettes.  You know they knew what
    they were doing.  And they even talk about putting
    nicotine in bubble gum.
         They've got to be stopped.  What would you do?
    What you going to do?  What you going to about it?
         Members of the jury, it's not a fair fight with
    the kids.  Think of a weightlifter.  It's not fair
    if you are a 250-pounder and take on a 75-pounder.
    It's not right, and you know it's not right.
         They don't put heavyweight champions in the
    ring with bantamweights, but that's what you're
    doing when you're going after our children.  They're
    innocent, members of the jury.
         Are you going to say that they should make an informed choice at 13?  If you say that let's pack
    up and get out of here.  It ain't no justice.  And
    I know you're not going to say that.  I know you're
    going to do the right thing.  You're going to stand
    up and just do the right thing.  That's all.
         It's judgment day.  It's judgment day.  They
    ain't fighting a fair fight.  And how is it they're
    going to ever get up here and tell you that they
    didn't go after our children like gangbusters?
         Members of the jury, they want to talk about
    the warning, that the warning should be enough to
    deter you from smoking.
         How can they say that when they are doing 100
    billion viewings of cigarette advertising on TV?
    That's within a year.  How is anybody going to get
    around our heros, she-roes, people we look up to,
    people on the evening news sitting there smoking a
    cigarette in their mouth, and they tell you some
    little measly warning on the back of a pack of
    cigarettes is going to take care of the problem.
    It's your fault.
         Members of the jury, they went after kids.
    Read it.  That's what Dr. Proctor said.  You read
    it.  Did they market to -- they didn't say young
    adults.  Kids.  Kids. How many of these kids -- they went after these
    kids.  How many of these kids saw these ads.  Well,
    lots of kids.  Not adults, not young adults, but
    kids.  Millions of kids.  They don't -- they don't
    -- they don't want to get in a fair fight.
         I'm an adult.  Fight me.  Fight you.  But not
    our children.  You get them at age 10, 11, 12, 13.
    These people went out to the schools.  They said,
    well, where do we find them?  Their research groups
    in -- in -- in half of the cities in this country,
    they went out like gangbusters.  They said, well, we
    don't know where to find them.
         You'll see it in the records.  It's in the
    print.  This is evidence.  You're going to get it.
         Say go to the schools, go to the parks, go to
    the playground, go to the water fountains where the
    little kids hang out at and get them.
         That's what they do.  That's what they did.
    Sure.  You think they're going to get up here and
    say, well, when Michael was 13 he didn't call the
    defendants, he didn't call us and tell us -- what is
    he going to do at 13?  What kind of phone call is he
    going to make?  What kind of Reader's Digest you
    supposed to expect him to read at 13, at 12, at 10,
    at 9?  They know what they're doing.  They just do it, and they get away with it.
         Well, the buck stops here.  You ain't going to
    go for it, members of the jury.  You ain't going to
    go for it.  They ain't going to pull this on you.
         And this is -- this is -- remember, they talked
    about the money bags?  It's all about money.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
    Irrelevant.  Not in evidence.
         THE COURT:  Link it to your point, Mr. Gary.
         MR. GARY:  I will, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Get to it.
         MR. GARY:  Read the top person's in the
    country -- what's the name of the gentleman?  The
    Surgeon General's report.  This comes from the
    Surgeon General's report.  That's the evidence.
    That's -- it's in evidence.
         We spend $96 billion a year.  96 billion.
         Do you think it's coming out of their pocket?
    No.  You think about it.  That's what we spend.
         Members of the jury, and it ain't just -- they
    could do something else.  They could tone it down.
         Now, this is the point I really -- I was going
    to do this on direct.  In their documents.  Look for
    it.  You know what they say?  Well, we could make a
    safer cigarette, but it will cut down on the money. We could make a safer cigarette, but we just won't
    make as much money.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection.  Misrepresents the
    record.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.  Rephrase.
         MR. GARY:  They say if we wanted to we could
    make a safer cigarette.
         MR. BARINGER:  Same objection, Your Honor.
    Mischaracterizes the evidence.
         THE COURT:  Get to your point, Mr. Gary.
         MR. GARY:  Thank you, Your Honor.  Thank you.
         We could make a safer cigarette.  Did they do
    it?  No.
         But they said, we got a good thing going here.
    We got be able to snow the jurors.  We've got a big
    legal team.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. GARY:  That's the way they look at it.
    $96 billion annually.  96 billion on -- this is our
    government picking up this tab for cigarette
    smoking-related illnesses.
         Where does it stop?  That's why you have
    punitive damages.  Not only just for them, but other
    cor- -- you could deter other corporations.  You can make a wrong right.  You can make a difference.  You
    have to be bold, but you can do it.  You can do it.
         Members of the jury, I'm getting pretty close
    now, but I do want to talk about this, because this
    is near and dear to me.  Give all the right to this
    want.  I just want to talk to you.  I just want to
    talk.
         You heard Cynthia talk about her brothers and
    her daddy put it on the line for this country.  Some
    of them were lucky.  They made it home.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection.  Your Honor, this is
    completely irrelevant.
         THE COURT:  Counsel, take it down.
         Get to your point and move along.
         MR. GARY:  You're going to see --
         THE COURT:  Take it down, please.
         MR. GARY:  You're going to see a letter from
    the Veterans Administration of Foreign Affairs.
    It's in evidence.  You don't have to take my word.
    You're going to see a letter, a letter from them to
    Reynolds saying in essence you sucker punched us.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection.  Your Honor, this is
    irrelevant and intentionally prejudicial.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
         MR. GARY:  Thank you. Members of the jury, you'll have this evidence
    back there with you, but I wanted to just confirm
    what I was saying.  It says -- and this is a letter
    to the American Tobacco Company, that's now
    Reynolds, and the Veterans of Foreign Wars was
    saying to them, tobacco people:  For the information
    of all of the members of this post we would like to
    know more about the recent scare the American
    Medical Association gave the people of this country
    that cigarettes cause cancer.
         They thought it was just a scare.  They thought
    it was a joke.
         We all remember that during World War II we
    were given all the cigarettes we needed, and many
    young men and women started the smoking habit who
    had never smoked before, and who had never intended
    to smoke.
         They didn't even intend to smoke, members of
    the jury.  And I could go on and on about this, but
    the point I was making is that while they were
    fighting for their country, they dodged the bombs
    and bullets and they made it home, just many of
    them.  They were writing that letter because they
    were wanting to know.  Some of them were sick.
         You get that letter and you read the whole letter.  Some of them were sick.  They was having
    problems.  And they said to Reynolds, you know, tell
    us what's going on?  Y'all said that these
    cigarettes were safe, and they're not.  Write us
    back at least.
         Well guess what?  They never got even a
    response.  They didn't even get a response.  Now
    here they are, they've gone to war, they have fought
    for their country.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection.  Your Honor, this is
    far beyond --
         THE COURT:  Move along.
         MR. GARY:  They come home to die from cigarette
    smoking.
         Cynthia Johnson Robinson, born into a family of
    10 or 11 children, two-room shack and outdoor
    toilet.  You may say $10 million, because she's poor
    she's bound to try to win it.  Whatever you want to
    say, because that's what they're going to do.  They
    run a smear campaign.  That's what they do.
         Members of the jury, you notice even when she
    was on the witness stand they didn't ask her about
    this garbage.  They didn't say a word.
         They took three hours of deposition.  They
    didn't say a word.  You know why?  Because they sneak up on you.  They ambush you.  That's the way
    they do business, and they get away with it because
    they have got the money and power to do it.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. GARY:  They took all of those depositions.
         Let me ask you this.  Why didn't they bring
    those people in here?
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. GARY:  Members of the jury, I would like to
    think if there was any truth to any of that
    garbage -- and that's what it was, garbage -- they
    would have at least been big enough to face their --
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. GARY:  Good woman.  Good marriage.
         Where were they when he was dying?  Think about
    it.  Who was there the morning of his death?  Who
    took him to the doctor?  Who took him to his doctor
    appointments?  Who was there through the thick and
    the thin when they didn't have -- when they got
    evicted, when they got foreclosed on, who was there?
    When he was sick and couldn't work who was working?
         Then they try to put her down.  That's not right.  You know it's not right.  This lady, all
    she's done all her life, she still to this day,
    working some 20-some-odd years almost, maybe 30, I
    forget the exact number she said, some 20-some-odd
    years working taking care of the handicapped.  And
    she did it with no pay.  And then they come in here
    and they try to smear her.  And it's not right.
    They ambushed her.  Good woman.
         What is this world coming to?  Grew up in the
    church.  Said, my mama taught me to tell the truth.
         They don't tell the truth.  And I'm not talking
    about the lawyers.  I'm not talking about the
    lawyers, members of the jury, even though I'm
    pointing at them.  I'm talking about Reynolds, the
    defendant in this case.
         They're liars.  And that's why our Supreme
    Court told them they were liars.  That's why the
    judge read you those instructions and said you don't
    have the option to agree or not agree with those
    instructions.  They got busted.  They are liars.
    And they misinform people, and they gave false
    statements, and they withheld information that could
    have saved lives, and they didn't do it.  And it was
    all about a buck.  It's a shame.
         Thank you for just entertaining me, members of


         MR. CHESTNUT:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
         THE JURORS:  Good afternoon.
         MR. CHESTNUT:  This is rebuttal argument so
    this will be me responding to a lot of Mr. Gary's --
    a lot of comments by -- that you just heard by the
    defense attorney.  We've got a long way to go,
    short time to get there.  So I'm going to get right to it.
         First question is:  Did Michael Johnson have
    lung cancer?  Ladies and gentlemen, the defense
    asserted that perhaps he didn't and we didn't meet
    our burden.  But I'm going to remind you that not
    only did we met our burden, we overwhelmingly met
    our burden.
         Now, before I get into this, I want to talk to
    you about this board, this is a flip-flop.  There
    will be a number of points I'm going to bring up to
    you -- to you through this rebuttal that's going to
    discuss flip-flop because that's what the defense
    has done.
         And I don't know if anybody's familiar with a
    flip-flop you get at a restaurant.  So sometimes
    when you get a sweet tea and a lemonade, some people
    call it an "uptown."  Some people call it an Arnold
    Palmer.  Some people call it a flip-flop.
         Well, I'm going to point out a number of
    flip-flops from the defense because what happens
    when you put the sweet tea on top of the lemonade,
    you've got two drinks.  You stir it up.  You can't
    tell the difference.  You just stirred it up.
         So our evidence has been very explicit.  It's
    been very direct and they're trying to confuse you. Legal cause, did Michael Johnson have lung cancer?
    Absolutely not.  Absolutely he did.  Was it the
    primary location?  Absolutely, it was.  Did we have
    the burden to show you that?  Yes, we do and we did.
         Now, today -- can we have our first letter
    board?
         Today defendants want to come in and -- and
    try -- the next record -- and win over -- can we
    highlight?  Thank you.
         Win over your affection by saying that
    Dr. Boatright was never really sure.  Dr. Boatright
    consistently said unknown primary.  But, now, you
    recall three days ago, they paid Dr. Bennett to come
    all the way from Montana and throw out not only
    Dr. Boatright but every other Pensacola doctor under
    the bus.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.  That
    mischaracterizes --
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         Rephrase.
         MR. CHESTNUT:  Unknown primary, most likely
    lung cancer.  This shows that Dr. Bennett -- excuse
    me -- that Dr. Boatright told that the primary
    location was lung cancer.  Now, Dr. Bennett came in,
    the defendant's expert, he testified that it probably wasn't and still was unknown, that
    additional testing would have confirmed lung
    cancer.
         If you'll go to the death certificate.
         Now, defendants kept saying that we can't know
    the primary location of lung cancer because
    Mr. Johnson opted out of additional testing, but we
    know a couple things.  One, by this time,
    Mr. Johnson has Stage 4 lung cancer.  It's not
    curable so chemotherapy and radiation will make no
    difference.  The only additional testing is to
    confirm what Dr. Boatright already knows, his
    oncologist.
         And -- and let me just highlight this, ladies
    and gentlemen.  Sometimes -- you know what?  Here it
    is.  I've got two pens here, one pen here.  And my
    kindergarten teacher used to do this.  You put it
    together, it's three.  We didn't need a calculator
    to confirm that because sometimes you can use
    circumstantial evidence.  Sometimes it's common
    sense.  Two pens -- two markers and one pen equals
    three.  You don't need a calculator to confirm that
    this was non-oat cell carcinoma of the lung.
         Also Dr. Bennett had to give up that Mr. --
    that Dr. Boatright could have qualified, if he was not confident in his conclusion, that lung cancer
    was the origin.  If it was not the primary, that
    means the -- the lung cancer started somewhere else.
    If it started somewhere else, he would have modified
    or qualified the death certificate.  He did not.
    That means more likely than not, which is our
    burden, non-oat cell carcinoma of the lung was the
    primary cause of death of Michael Johnson.
         Now, we -- let's just talk about Dr. Bennett a
    bit because he -- he raised three points, and I want
    to go through that.
         I'll come to the ELMO.
         So we've already dealt with the pathology, that
    the pathology doesn't determine the primary location
    because we've confirmed that the circumstantial
    evidence, symptomatology, does.  What is
    symptomatology?  Pathology isn't the only way to
    determine whether lung cancer was a primary
    location.  Symptomatology can.  What was the
    symptomatology?  Symptomatology confirmed Pancoast
    tumor.  Pancoast tumor is isolated to the lung and
    is caused by what?  Smoking.  And Dr. Feingold said
    that and Dr. Bennett had to -- had to -- had to
    agree to it.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, mischaracterizes the testimony.
         MR. CHESTNUT:  So --
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. CHESTNUT:  -- Pancoast tumor causes pain
    under your right arm, no sweat on the right side
    of the face and droopy eyes.  Mr. Johnson had all
    of those.  Symptomatology confirms primary lung
    cancer.
         Characteristics of lung cancer.  The masses
    indicate metastatic disease.  Dr. Feingold came in
    and testified a couple things.  One, when -- when
    cancer metastasizes to the lung from somewhere else
    in the body, it's like snowflakes.  We showed you.
    Up here, we showed you a picture of a Pancoast
    tumor.  The Pancoast tumor occupied -- it was half
    of his lung.  It was the entire top side of his
    lung.  So if the cancer metastasized from somewhere
    else in Mr. Johnson's body, there would have been
    snowflakes on the CT scan.  But we showed you a CT
    scan of what it looked like and it was the top half
    of the limb, so -- of the lung -- excuse me.
         So, number two, we can throw that out as well
    because the characteristics confirm that lung is the
    primary location of cancer.
         Lastly, ladies and gentlemen, we didn't hear this today, but before Dr. Feingold came back for
    rebuttal, there was this insinuation that the lung
    cancer metastasized from Mr. Johnson's testicles,
    and they used the Lance Armstrong analogy.  I think
    we understand that there's no way that this cancer
    could have gone undiagnosed in his testicles and
    then metastasized to the lung without it being
    noticeable in the testicles.  So strike two is out.
         And without knowing the primary location of
    Mr. Johnson's cancer, you cannot determine the
    cause.  Well, we just proved the primary location of
    cancer, so now we can confirm that -- that he was
    the cause.
         Now, let's just talk a little bit more about
    Dr. Bennett.  And, ladies and gentlemen, sometimes,
    again, on the flip-flop, we've got to evaluate the
    credibility of witnesses.  Because Dr. Bennett also
    said, well, because Mr. Johnson elected not to have
    additional testing, we could exhume him and I could
    perform an autopsy, and that will determine whether
    it was metastatic or primary cancer.  Dr. --
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         MR. CHESTNUT:  Dr. Bennett didn't know --
         THE COURT:  Excuse me.
         MR. CHESTNUT:  And you recall -- THE COURT:  Grounds?
         MR. BARINGER:  There's nothing -- that
    misstates the record.  That's not true.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. CHESTNUT:  Thank you.
         Dr. Bennett did not grow up in a funeral home.
    So you'll recall, we walked him down of what happens
    to a body.  And he ultimately had to agree and admit
    that digging someone up 18 years later in Pensacola,
    Florida, where it's hot and moist, he wasn't going
    to get enough evidence because there wasn't enough
    of Mr. Johnson left to get the evidence.
         So, ladies and gentlemen, evaluate the
    credibility of the witnesses presented to you by the
    defense.  There's been a lot of flip-flop.
         Next, ladies and gentlemen, the second question
    is:  Was Michael Johnson addicted to cigarettes
    containing nicotine?  Well, we've established one.
    I put a star because it's, to me, abundantly clear.
    Was he addicted?  Now, we've heard a lot of evidence
    about addiction, and most of what you heard from the
    defense was about quitting.
         Now, again, ladies and gentlemen, I want to
    talk about flip-flop, credibility of evidence.
    We've heard a lot about these depositions.  We've heard a lot about the 19 depositions that were
    taken.  Ladies and gentlemen, excerpts were taken
    from these depositions and they're misleading.
         So look at this.  It says most people who knew
    Mr. Johnson were not aware of any effort to quit.
    You see here, sister-in-law, Jessica Brenson,
    option.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.  This
    isn't in evidence.
         MR. CHESTNUT:  What is not in evidence?
         MR. BARINGER:  That -- that evidence.
         MR. CHESTNUT:  Your Honor, every --
         THE COURT:  Go ahead.
         MR. CHESTNUT:  Their expert, Mr. Giakas --
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. CHESTNUT:  Thank you.
         Mr. Giakas used these depositions to come to
    his conclusions, which is exactly what I want to
    challenge, are his conclusions, because Mrs. Audrey
    says directly -- let's just read page and line.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
         MR. CHESTNUT:  Okay.  Thank you, Your Honor.
         So, ladies and gentlemen, we were discussing
    efforts to quit.  And that's important because
    really quitting isn't about -- isn't what is really
    before you.  Smoking is what's before you.  Well, let's talk about addiction and the nicotine
    addiction and the addictive effects on Mr. Johnson.
         Now, Mr. Giakas -- Dr. Giakas repeatedly relied
    upon deposition testimony in finding that
    Mr. Johnson wasn't addicted.  Now, first of all,
    let's just look at Dr. Giakas, who, he's come down,
    Yale-trained, board-certified psychiatrist.
    However, ladies and gentlemen, he doesn't treat
    smoking cessation cases.  He said that.  And -- and
    I said -- I believe him.  You know why I believe him
    on that point?  Because I don't know many crack
    addicts or smoking addicts who could afford
    350,000 -- $350 per session and $120 for every 15
    minutes.  And we know that smoking -- smokers --
    RJR, they target who?  The poor and the uneducated.
    So there probably aren't a lot of people in his
    hometown that can afford to pay him what RJR has
    paid him to consult on smoking.
         Secondly, ladies and gentlemen, Dr. Giakas says
    that he relied on deposition testimony of Verdell
    Salter, amongst others.  But Mrs. Salter said in
    deposition, contrary to what he presented, and I
    impeached him on it, that Mr. Johnson tried to quit
    four or five times, that he used the nicotine gum.
    Now, they say, well, nicotine gum wasn't even out in the '80s.  It was out.  You just had to have a
    prescription for it.
         His sister-in-law, Mrs. Brenson, we went
    through that deposition.  She said he repeatedly
    tried to quit.  He was trying to quit for his wife.
    He loved his wife, but he just couldn't.  She
    testified that it was -- smoking interfered with
    their way of life because smoking cigarettes -- he
    had to buy cigarettes.  They were expensive.  So
    every time he'd go to the store and buy Pampers,
    he'd buy cigarettes, that adds up.  That was a
    reason for him quitting.
         That goes back to the DSM-5 about interfering
    with your daily life.  The same criteria that
    Dr. Giakas tried to use to say that Mr. Johnson
    didn't qualify for addiction, we have evidence that
    shows he did.
         So here's what happened.  Why don't we
    compromise, ladies and gentlemen?  They have
    experts.  We have experts.  What if we just use
    common-sense experts, the people who knows the best?
    Because Giakas told you he'd never Mr. Johnson,
    never met Mrs. Robinson, never spoke to them, never
    interviewed them.
         He said he used the DSM-5, but we went through the criteria.  And most of the criteria, he had to
    agree there was evidence to support that -- that Mr.
    Johnson met the criteria.  And there was only two
    out of the 11 that he had to meet.  We established
    that he met two out of the 11.  He didn't even use
    the Fagerstrom.  So he only gave you half of the
    evidence.
         But why don't we just use common sense?
    Mrs. Robinson, who knew Mr. Johnson better than
    Mr. Giakas ever would, better than most of would, he
    knew -- she knew Mr. Johnson for the challenges he
    could and the challenges he could not overcome,
    loved him through it anyway.
         She said firsthand, but before we go to what
    she said, which was that he was addicted, I'd like
    to also add another credential on to her.  In the
    midst of dragging her through the mud and her
    reputation, defendant said that her first husband
    she divorced because he was a crack addict.  Well,
    who better than -- than Mrs. Robinson to tell you to
    be able to evaluate an addict?  So if she says her
    husband's addicted, he's addicted.  We can discount
    the experts.
         His brother, Mark Johnson, came in and sat
    right there, testified.  Even though he's lost a father and a brother to smoking, he's still smoking.
    He's been through smoking cessation.  He's been
    through the gum at the VA.  He went through
    counseling at the VA, the patch.  He still hasn't
    been able to quit.  He said, "I'm addicted.  My
    brother was addicted too."
         Common sense.  The people who know Mr. Johnson
    best said he was addicted.  His sister-in-law, who
    they listed on this -- let me just show you.  They
    said most of the people who knew Mark -- Mr. Johnson
    said he didn't quit.  I can't find the spot right
    now.
         And they list Mrs. Brenson.  Well,
    Mrs. Brenson -- Mrs. Brenson testified in deposition
    that he did, that she knew he was trying to quit.
    They told you the opposite.  That's a flip-flop,
    deliberately misleading you, ladies and gentlemen.
         So the next cause:  Was addiction a legal cause
    of Michael Johnson's lung cancer?  Now, here's what
    we've learned about cigarettes, tobacco and smoking,
    and what have they done overall to people.  Ladies
    and gentlemen, they did the research in the market
    to know that nicotine causes addiction.
         They didn't educate the public on the chemicals
    that were in the cigarette.  The cigarette companies knew that these were deadly chemicals, naphthalene,
    rat poison, benzene, carbon monoxide, ammonia.  And
    they said they put in the ammonia to get a nicotine
    kick, to freebase.  That's the same thing that's
    done to crack cocaine, freebase.  They added these
    additives, knowing it was going to cause cancer,
    knowing that it was going to cause -- due to
    addiction, knowing that the more you're exposed to
    this, the higher risk of causing cancer, i.e., the
    higher risk of you dying from cancer.  And they did
    it anyway.
         So let's talk more about causation as it
    relates to Mr. Johnson.  Now, there was a lot of
    talk about choice.  And, members of the jury,
    there's a difference between a choice and an
    informed choice.  And if we really just pause and
    think about it -- because, again, this is a
    flip-flop.  This is an attempt to deceive.
         Well, what do you mean by that, Mr. Chestnut?
    Well, let's just think about the system as a whole.
    There's a juvenile court.  Then there's an adult
    court.  What does that really say about our system?
    That juveniles are held to a different standard than
    adults because juveniles don't have the same level
    of information or life experiences as adults. They're kids.  So information affects choices.  It's
    the same reason we go to school and get education.
         So different people are held to different
    levels of standards.  The experts that came in here,
    not only were they doctors, they were
    board-certified, which means they had more
    information, which means they're supposed to make
    better health-care choices.  Be it a pulmonologist,
    they can make a better choice about lung problems --
    lung cancer.  An oncologist can make a better choice
    about cancer itself.  A cardiologist can make better
    choices about the heart because they are informed.
    They receive the information.
         Now, let's consider choices between tobacco,
    RJR, and the information they had about all these
    chemicals and what Michael Johnson had.  There's no
    comparison.  So to blame Michael Johnson on a choice
    to say he chose to smoke, to smoke in lieu of?  No,
    because by the time he really got the information
    that could break or make an informed decision, he
    was already addicted, and we've shown you the
    evidence of that.
         Moreover, ladies and gentlemen, this goes to
    the -- to the -- basically the conspiracy, the
    intentional and deliberate effort of this company to not only addict consumers, but they knew they were
    going to kill them.  And now they come in and woe us
    down as if they're repenting, but they're not.
    They're not because the first thing of repenting is
    what?  Admission.  They haven't accepted any
    liability.  They couldn't make it in any church with
    this argument.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. CHESTNUT:  Members of the jury, nicotine is
    a nec- -- nicotine is necessary in cigarettes for
    addiction.  These drugs are not.  And we showed you
    the documents that showed that -- that -- that told
    you that tobacco specifically contemplated putting
    these chemicals that are deadly in the cigarettes to
    accelerate the effect.  That's causation.  That's
    deliberate.  That's intentional.
         But where is the conspiracy?  Well, then they
    had this research institute, and they tried to tell
    you that this research institute, the theory behind
    it was to learn about the health effects and try to
    protect the public.  No, no, no, no.  See, it's a
    flip-flop.
         The research institute, if you look at the
    documents, was not designed to address the health concerns about these drugs; it was designed as to
    how to counterspin, how to countermarket the health
    concerns, meaning they knew that the information was
    going to come out.  They knew they were going to be
    exposed, like that letter we showed you from the
    Veterans Administration, where the Veterans
    Administration said, you gave all these cigarettes
    to our soldiers.  Now they're coming back addicted
    and sick.  You said they'd be respected.  You didn't
    tell us that they were killing -- they were going
    to -- that they were going to kill people.
         So this research institute get together and
    say, hey, man, they're going to catch on to what's
    going on.  We've got to figure out how to spin it.
    So what do they do?  They inundate the market with
    misinformation.
         Now, you heard the argument about choice.
    Well, Michael Johnson saw his dad die of lung
    cancer.  Ladies and gentlemen, let's just stop a
    minute.  Stop.  When you can inundate -- marketing
    is about impressions.  The more impressions you get,
    the more you can condition the consumer to do what
    you want them to do, to buy their brand, to go to
    the store, et cetera, et cetera.  We showed you
    evidence that tobacco inundated the market, that at one point, tobacco had more billboards per capita in
    the United States than any other person.  They were
    killing -- except for commerce, nobody else could
    get in.  Okay.  We want to advertise too.  They
    can't get it.  Tobacco owns everything.  They
    inundated the market.
         Two, marketing at that time was different.  So
    marketing today has evolved.  Today, you can't turn
    on a TV for three minutes without seeing a lawyer
    commercial.  In 1975, lawyers didn't advertise on
    TV.  They couldn't.  Today, you see TV commercials
    four or five times in a program, but that's evolved
    into what?  Paperclip and Google.
         So we have to retro back to time.  What was the
    marketing for Michael Johnson's time, for his life?
    What was current then?  It was grassroots
    organizing.  It was relationships.  Well, what do we
    know about that?
         We know that tobacco deliberately went to
    Hollywood.  They made sure that celebrities were
    smoking in movies.  They made sure that Walter
    Cronkite was smoking on the evening news.  Leaders
    were smoking.  The pastor at the Catholic church was
    smoking.  The nuns were smoking.  The teachers in
    school were smoking.  It was grassroots advertising. That is advertising.  It's just a different
    employment of money.
         Now, the dad, you saw your dad.  You knew that
    there was a risk of dying.  But we also know this,
    ladies and gentlemen, that children are
    impressionable.  At this time, Michael Johnson's 13.
         You know, it reminds me of grand theft auto.
    No matter how many times your mom or dad tells you
    not to be violent, don't go steal, if a kid comes
    home every day and for four hours plays grand theft
    auto, the risk of them becoming violent increases
    exponentially, so much so that grand theft auto was
    banned.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. CHESTNUT:  Members of the jury, a parent
    can't compete with the marketing dollars of big
    tobacco.  So choice really is not an issue here.
    It's a flip-flop.
         What's the total fault?  At least, ladies and
    gentlemen, 90 percent to RJR, at least.
         Let's talk about damages briefly.  Let's talk
    about damages briefly before we go forward.  Now,
    the judge will instruct you to check -- to start
    off, total amount of damages.  Let's talk about the characterizations.  So they've raised all these
    issues about Mrs. Robinson and what was and what
    wasn't, and we addressed a lot of that yesterday,
    ladies and gentlemen.
         But before I do that, let me just deal with one
    other issue and that is on the warning because
    defendants dealt with warnings and the warnings that
    were on tobacco cigarettes.  Again, warnings, the
    warnings on the cigarettes, were no comparison to
    the amount -- to the billions of dollars that
    they've spent over time in advertising.  How do we
    know that?  We showed you the Federal Trade
    Commission report that said less than 3 percent of
    smokers read the warning placed on cigarettes, less
    than 3 percent.  The warnings deliberately were not
    effective, and they were worded in such a way as to
    discourage it.  And that's what the Federal Trade
    Commission found.
         As to damages, so we've talked about
    Mrs. Robinson and --
         How much time, Your Honor?
         We talked about Mrs. Robinson.  They went
    through a checklist on damages for Mrs. Robinson
    that just aren't true, ladies and gentlemen.  First,
    they say, well, Mrs. Robinson gave her ring back to her husband.  Well, she just gave me the ring, her
    wedding ring, right here.  She wore it today.  Here
    it is.  So if what they're saying is true, she
    wouldn't have it here today.  Mrs. -- let me make
    sure this gets back to her.
         Moreover, ladies and gentlemen, they attacked
    Mrs. Robinson about the foreclosure, and I think
    that's a major point because they're attacking her
    credibility, saying she's lying.  And clearly the
    defendants have never had hard times.  Because
    anyone who's been through hard times, who's had to
    endure a foreclosure, would know the foreclosure may
    been have initiated in 1993, but they don't knock on
    your door and kick you out in 1993.  It was fully
    plausible, that is, 1995, before the eviction was
    actually effectuated.  It's not -- this isn't a
    reflection on her lying.  This is a reflection that
    they've spent so much money on cigarettes, they
    don't know about hard times.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.  No predicate.
         MR. CHESTNUT:  I think that's my time.  Thank
    you.


         MR. GARY:  Please the Court?
         Good afternoon.
         THE JURORS:  Good afternoon.
         MR. GARY:  Members of the jury, we've come down
    to the end of this trial.  I said it before.  I want
    to say it again.  Thank you.  It's been great for
    this case, our clients, this Court and everybody
    associated with the judicial system.  Your presence
    is what it's -- it's all about.  And because of you
    -- and let me just say this:  While we've benefited
    from your service, you're going to benefit from
    this.  I've watched -- in years to come, y'all are
    going to know each other.  You've made relationships and you've made friendships here that will last way
    beyond this trial, I guarantee you, because you've
    spent a lot of time together, and you're going to
    benefit from it.
         And, members of the jury, I just, you know --
    and I -- and -- and let me tell you something.  I
    know you're not going to fall for what you've heard
    today.  You're not going to fall for that because
    that's a distortion of the facts in the worst way
    that you could ever even think about in a trial.
    They distorted the facts and we've proven our case
    by a greater weight of the evidence.  We've proven
    our case by clear and convincing evidence.  There's
    no question about it.
         These people -- and I told you yesterday and,
    yes, he -- he made a point to say it, but they are
    liars.  That's what they are.  They said there was
    no connection between what happened to Mr. Johnson
    and what they have done.  Well, they got busted by
    the Supreme Court.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         MR. GARY:  Judge Terrell didn't --
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. GARY:  You have the Engle findings and I
    want you -- he's claiming that there's no connection between what they've done and Mr. Johnson.  Well, he
    bought their cigarettes.  They put them out there.
    They put them in commerce.  They put them on the
    market, and let's see what the Engle -- Engle
    findings say about that.
         This is the law that you must follow.  This is
    not Willie Gary's law.  This is -- this is the law.
    Is that a connection?  The cigarette companies
    placed cigarettes on the market that were defective
    and not just dangerous, unreasonably dangerous.
    That's the law.  And they don't even want you to see
    a connection.
         If he bought their cigarettes and they -- they
    don't even question that.  That is the connection
    for punitive damages.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection --
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. BARINGER:  -- inaccurate.
         MR. GARY:  That is the connection for punitive
    damages.  And, members of the jury --
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.  May we
    approach?
         MR. GARY:  Let -- let me --
         THE COURT:  Jurors, step out a moment, please.
         (Jury excused.) (The following proceedings were held in open
court outside the presence of the jury:)
         THE COURT:  Jurors are out.
         MR. BARINGER:  Your Honor, he -- he's talking
    about the design defect finding, which is an
    unintentional tort, and as was established before we
    started this case, they cannot get a punitive
    entitlement on the unintentional tort.  He's now
    just told the jury that they can consider this
    finding for punitive damages, which is absolutely
    wrong as a matter of law.  Now, he's confused them
    and they don't understand the difference -- what
    evidence applies to punitives or not.
         THE COURT:  Mr. Gary?
         MR. GARY:  It's a fact they can consider,
    Your Honor.  It's a fact --
         THE COURT:  Well, the purpose -- if it has
    applied to the unintentional torts and intentional
    torts is what gets you the punitive damages.
         MR. GARY:  Right.
         THE COURT:  That's not what this is about, the
    slide you just put up.
         MR. GARY:  The -- the Engle --
         THE COURT:  Engle findings are what they are,
    but they're applicable to what they apply to.  This does not apply to punitive damages.
         MR. GARY:  Okay.
         MR. BARINGER:  I'd like that clarified.
         THE COURT:  Intentional torts are the only
    things that are the hook to get you to punitive
    damages.
         MR. GARY:  Okay.
         THE COURT:  They can consider all the evidence,
    but just be clear.  Don't confuse --
         MR. BARINGER:  Your Honor, I would like that
    clarified either by the Court or Mr. Gary.
         MR. GARY:  I -- I can do it, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Well, we'll clear it up.
         Call the jurors when they're ready, please.
         (Jury present.)
         (The following proceedings were held in open
court in the presence of the jury:)
         THE BAILIFF:  Jurors have been seated,
    Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Members of the jury, intentional
    torts are a finding that is required prior to any
    determination of whether punitive damages should be
    awarded.
         With that clarification, Counsel, please
    continue. MR. GARY:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         And can you put that back up for me just a
    second, please?
         Members of the jury, you -- you -- you-all
    have -- you've had the opportunity to see the
    Engle findings, one after another, over and over and
    over again.  And -- but that's the law.  That is the
    law.
         And let me just say this, members of the jury,
    the argument that you just heard is playing on your
    intelligence.  And let me tell you the reason why.
    They're playing games with you.  They're playing
    games with you to say that this -- to say that
    Michael didn't have lung cancer is a joke and you
    know it.  There's a -- a mountain of evidence that
    proves that.  There's no question about that.
         To say that he wasn't addicted, one to three
    packs a day, that's 20 to 60 cigarettes a day for 20
    years.  And he comes up here -- and I don't know how
    he did it with a straight face -- to say that
    Michael wasn't addicted.  You don't have to check
    your common sense at the door.  He got up here and
    stomped and raged about he wasn't addicted.  Now,
    that's not -- you know he was addicted.  And it
    ain't just about whether he was addicted and couldn't quit.  That's not the law.  See, the law is
    whether he was addicted.
         And the Engle findings say that nicotine in the
    cigarettes causes what?  Addiction.  There's no
    question about that, members of the jury.  But
    they -- that's -- that's playing on your
    intelligence, and I know that you won't stand for
    that.  They -- he distorted the truth in a way like
    you wouldn't believe.
         And they want to talk about a million
    dollars -- $10 million for Mrs. -- Cynthia Johnson
    Robinson is outrageous.  How can he say that?
    Losing your husband, losing -- they -- they killed
    him.  They did it.  And then he waltzes up here and
    acts like that's -- they spend billions of dollars,
    not 10 million, not 20 million, billions of dollars.
    He said it, advertising to who?  Our children.  And
    then he comes up here to say $10 million to her is
    outrageous.  But that's their MO.  That's the way
    they deal with this, members of the jury, because
    they're experienced at it.  Let me show you the
    reason why.
         This is one of their documents.
         Do we have that for the big screen?  If not,
    that's okay. This is one of their documents, members of the
    jury.  They have plotted and planned about what a
    jury might do or what a jury might not do.  They've
    got the money.  They've got the power.  That's what
    they do.  And this document here, a jury might,
    whether instructed or not, operate on the theory of
    comparative negligence.  That's the percentage.
    Now, listen to this.  That's the percentage that he
    talked about.  And my partner told you it should be
    at least 90 percent on the defendants because they
    put a product out there that they knew was killing
    people.  They flat-out knew it.  And you need to say
    enough is enough.  They killed enough people.  Take
    the job away from the grave diggers.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor, improper
    argument.
         THE COURT:  Rephrase.
         MR. GARY:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         They are betting on the fact that they're going
    to snow you.  That's what they're betting on.
    They're going to snow you either on the liability,
    or they're going to snow you on the value of the
    loss to this young man, his father, and this lady,
    her husband, based on the billions that they spent
    on advertising to get kids hooked. Think about it.  He was 13 years old when he
    started smoking.  And he said, well, he didn't call
    Reynolds.  What did Reynolds do to start him to
    smoking?  They were doing billions and billions and
    billions of advertising spots on television,
    everywhere, all over the place.  Then they want to
    blame it, of all people, on his daddy.  His daddy
    was a smoker.  Well, they killed his daddy.  That's
    what this is all about.  That's what the Engle
    findings are all about.  And they want you to just
    disregard those.
         And it goes on to say the jury, true, the
    value, Mr. Johnson was negligent in smoking a
    product he knew was dangerous and stop there.  We
    didn't come in here slipping and sliding and lying
    to you about that like they have.  We said he had
    some responsibility.  We admitted that.
         But then they go a step further to say, but he
    was lured by whom?  The seller.  And the seller's
    what?  Negligence was the greater -- in failing to
    make his product safe.  They could have made it safe
    and they didn't.  And you've seen documents that
    said that.  They could have made it safe.
         We asked Dr. Proctor could -- 480,000 people
    that died last year, could those lives have been prevented?  And he said yes.  They had the
    wherewithal to do it, and they didn't do it because
    they were concerned about large money backs.  They
    said, let's keep them hooked; let's keep them
    smoking; let's laugh at them and then let's get
    bigger money back and carry the money to the bank.
    Now, you saw that.
         Here's another.  They've been -- they are way
    ahead of the game, members of the jury.  They --
    they -- they study how you're going to deal with
    this.  They plan and plot on how they're going to
    get to the jury to go for this thing about, well, we
    were investing money -- we were investing money in
    the research.  They invested money in the research
    that was going to do what they wanted to do, sell
    more cigarettes.  And when those people -- and y'all
    saw it -- that they gave money to didn't -- if they
    didn't use it or didn't write the reports that they
    wanted, they cancelled the donations.  Their grants
    were cancelled, cut off and terminated.  And I don't
    have time to go back into all of those now but you
    know it.  You've seen that.  These people were all
    about making a dollar on the backs of poor people,
    the least of these.
         How can we build our profits?  Here it is right here.  It's clear.  The logic may be in the minds of
    the jury.  Yield to the emotions and reactions
    that -- let me start again.
         But the logic might, in the minds of a jury,
    yield to the emotional reaction that it is knowledge
    that was available to the seller.  It was up to him,
    the seller.  He has the means to do what?  To make
    the product safe and they didn't.  They chose to
    make money.  They chose to make money, members of
    the jury.  And enough is enough because they're
    thinking that they still can get away with this.
    You can shut them down.
         And then they get up here and say, here's the
    death of a young man that has done nothing but the
    best he could, two or three jobs, went out to
    California, got a degree in -- as -- as an artist,
    came back home, started a business, playing by the
    rules, working hard, taking care of his family, two
    or three jobs.  Then they come in here with a bunch
    of dirt.  And that's the way they do these cases.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. GARY:  They get people like the experts
    they put up there, that he -- that he had been paid
    $80,000, and it didn't include his trial time, which was surely going to quick him over 100 grand or
    more, to say what he was saying.  They drag out all
    of this dirt and couldn't even face her with it,
    didn't even ask her a question about it before you.
         But that's the way they do business.  That's
    the way they get by and they keep on doing it.  And,
    members of the jury, you have the power to bring
    them to their knees and you can do it.  We have
    proven a case that warrants punitive damages.
    Enough is enough.  Put this lady down.
         Members of the jury, nobody's perfect.  None of
    us are.  And in a marriage, if you haven't had some
    problems, just keep on living.  Keep on facing
    life's obstacle courses.  You're going to have some
    problems.  You're going to have some ups and downs.
    But they had a good marriage.  They loved each
    other.  They were with each other.
         On the morning -- where was Reynolds on the
    morning when he died from drowning in his blood?
    They were out there selling cigarettes, tracking
    down children.  And in -- and if I get a little
    upset, please forgive me.  Trying to -- from my head
    and right to my heart, but this is not right.
         Then he gets up here and says, he just wasn't
    even addicted.  How on God's earth could anybody say it and look you in the face with a straight face?
    You know it's not right.
         Then he's going to say he didn't have lung
    cancer and brought someone in here who's going to
    talk about he didn't -- he didn't -- he didn't deal
    with Lance Armstrong, that issue.  You know why?
    Because they had a witness up there, a high-priced,
    high-paid witness, running off at the mouth, just
    saying whatever he wanted to say and ended up
    saying, he knew that lung -- Lance Armstrong
    didn't have any issues or didn't have any -- any
    symptoms.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.  That's
    not correct.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. GARY:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         He said he didn't have any symptoms of his
    testicle problems, his cancer, because that's --
    guess what?  They're just trying to prove that they
    don't want you to find that they are at fault.  And
    they'll say anything and they'll do anything and
    it's not right.  And you know it's not right.  Going
    to get up here and say, Lance Armstrong, oh, he got
    through this.  The -- the cancer went all the way to
    his brain and he didn't have any symptoms.  And that was a flat-out lie.  And they're used to lying.
         You saw that article.  Lance Armstrong had
    symptoms long before it was diagnosed.  His
    testicles were three times the size of a golf ball.
    He was having pain and -- and -- and he will take
    the stand, highly paid expert, under oath and make
    that statement about Lance Armstrong and didn't know
    what he was talking about.  But that's what they do.
    That's what they do because they -- they gamble.
    They gamble on the -- on the -- on you buying their
    story.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         Rephrase.
         MR. GARY:  Members of the jury, $10 million.  I
    say it without hesitation.  I say it without any
    reservation for the loss.  Michael lost his daddy.
    She lost her husband.  She lost her husband, one
    that she -- she was the one -- where were they on
    the morning when he drowned in his blood?  She was
    there.  The same lady that has worked one job for 21
    years, 8:00 to 5:00, then going back, working free
    to take care of the elderly and he said that her
    loss is not worth it.
         Members of the jury, this ain't about whether you're rich or poor, whether you -- it ain't about
    that.  It ain't about how big you are.  Ain't about
    whether you're black or white.  Ain't about none of
    that.  It's about justice.  She's no Beyonce.  She's
    no highfalutin person.  But would he have said that
    if it was the same situation?  No, he wouldn't have
    and you know he wouldn't have.
         She's proud of her lot in life.  She's just a
    person that's taking care of elderly people,
    handicapped kids.  She don't even get paid for it.
    She does it because it's in her heart, and they get
    up here and drag her through the mud.  It's a shame.
    They should be ashamed of themselves.
         You'll get it back there.  The day before he
    died, somebody had to take him to the doctor.  Who
    was there?  She gets up 4:00 -- 3:00 or 4:00 o'clock
    in the morning to get on a bus, a handicap bus, to
    take kids that can't -- that -- that she has to --
    and her job is -- is an aide on the bus, just to
    buckle them in.  They can't even fasten their seat
    belt.  She's been doing it 21 years and she loves
    doing it.  Now, that don't make her a big-time star.
    But I tell you what, it makes her an all-American
    citizen.
         And, members of the jury, this ain't about your lot in -- in life.  He's talking about it's
    ridiculous, $10 million.  It's not ridiculous.  It
    may not be enough.  I said it before and I say it
    again.  And you make that call.  Where were they?
    Where were they when she was there, providing for
    him?  And then they -- they stoop low enough to make
    Michael Johnson -- now, listen to this -- a deadbeat
    dad.
         That man that they had paid all that money --
    and what was his name? -- 80-some-odd thousand
    dollars --
         MR. CHESTNUT:  Giakas.
         MR. GARY:  Giakas.
         -- that man would say anything for anybody as
    long as he could stuff his pockets.  He get -- he
    get $100,000 for just coming in here.  When he said
    all of this -- I mean, it's ridiculous.  And then
    counsel's going to stand up here and say, what was
    his criteria for someone losing a father.
         THE COURT:  Five minutes, Mr. Gary.
         MR. GARY:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         If someone loses a father -- and you heard
    Michael testify.  My daddy, to me, my daddy thought
    I was his pride and joy.  Y'all heard him say that.
    You heard him.  And you're going to -- now they're going to come up here with a bunch of dirt and
    garbage and make him a deadbeat dad?  They ought to
    be ashamed of themselves.  They ought to be ashamed.
         Michael told you, said it was around
    Christmastime.  Now, this hired expert got up there
    and told you as -- as if the man hadn't seen his
    child for ten years.  Why would he do that in front
    of this boy, who's nothing but a hardworking kid?
    They do it because why?  They want to dunk and dodge
    responsibility.  They told you that they have zero
    responsibility.  Can you believe that; tobacco will
    say they had no responsibility?  Of all the -- all
    the people that they have killed?
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         Rephrase.
         MR. GARY:  His daddy was in tears on Christmas
    day because he didn't have the money to buy him the
    present that he wanted.  I think he said it was a
    dirt -- go -- a go-cart, a go-cart.  He gave him a
    skateboard and he said, I could see my daddy's face,
    how difficult it was.
         Members of the jury, he loved his daddy.  His
    daddy loved him.  And -- and that's a lot that -- to
    do this to this boy, in his face, talking about his dad.  In essence, his dad was a deadbeat dad, but
    the $100,000 paid expert, they can't -- the guy
    said, look, even the defendants, if he didn't give
    them the opinion that they wanted, they'd kick him
    to the curb.  That's the way they do business.
         Well, members of the jury, these people -- this
    case is about Reynolds and their lying.  And they
    want to say it's not, but it is.  You listen to the
    judge's instructions.  It is about their lying.  And
    I want to say this:  The lie they told to Congress
    that nicotine wasn't addictive, there's documented
    evidence in their files, 10, 15 years before that,
    that they had, behind closed doors, admitted that
    nicotine in their cigarettes was addictive.  And
    they jumped on -- they went straight up to
    Washington, DC, raised their right hands and swore
    before God to tell the truth, nothing but the truth,
    so help you God.  And they lied.  They lied through
    their teeths.
         And this case warrants punitive damages.
    You've got to say enough is enough, no matter how
    big you are, how much influence you have, how much
    power you have.  It really doesn't matter.  You've
    got to do the right thing.  At the end of the day,
    we're all in this together.  We're all American citizens.  We pledge our allegiance to the same
    flag.  They don't get no free ride to keep killing
    people.
         MR. BARINGER:  Objection.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. GARY:  Thank you, members of the jury.
