MR. FASI: May it please the Court, counsel and Mrs. Ruffo and, more importantly, ladies and gentlemen of the jury.
I want to start out by telling you, on behalf of Mrs. Schultz and I, and really on
about, and let's talk about other things in the hopes that you are taken off track.
So what I want to do with you right now is just review some of the things. I do not intend to talk as long, I hope, and so I made this board here, and I'm going to explain this with you piece by piece.
And basically what the theme here is, and we're going to go into this in detail, because this is really important. It's Mrs. Ruffo's choices are the legal cause in this case, and we're going to go through that step by step.
You remember we said, and you heard in this courtroom, she enjoyed smoking. There is no dispute about that.
She knew that smoking was dangerous. No dispute about that.
She had the ability to quit whenever she wanted to, according to her doctor and according to her, and we'll explore that in a minute.
She never gave a thought to quitting before 1990. Now, an interesting statement that Mr. Kaiser said, and I want you to remember this, he said she accepts
behalf of all the attorneys in this case, to thank you.
Make no mistake, what you have done here, almost three full weeks, has been public service. And there are not many people who can say they actually gave of themselves for public service.
In the old days, when there was a draft, that was public service. Some people go into public service, but not many people can do that. And not only have you done it, but you've been here on time. We never had to wait for you. It was actually the other way around.
You paid attention. Truly amazing to watch people pay attention, because I think listening to lawyers go on and on has to be the best sedative for sleep that there is.
But you all have done a great job. So, on behalf of everybody here, I just want to start out by telling you thank you.
When we started this case, we talked about a theme, and I will tell you that the plaintiff's opening argument, or statement, was identical to the closing argument, which is let's not talk about what this case is really
responsibility for not trying hard enough.
Well, in reality, the correct statement is she didn't try at all until 1990. And where do we get that from? From her. She told us that.
And in 1990, she got COPD. The damage was done in 1990, and she never gave a thought to quitting, says Mrs. Ruffo.
She didn't want to quit until 2010.
That's what we heard. You heard that from Mrs. Ruffo.
And when she wanted to quit, she did.
This is what this case is about. This case -and I've made some notes so that I don't forget something that I think is important for you to do your job.
This case is about Mrs. Ruffo and the legal cause of why she has COPD.
Now, in the jury instructions that you will get, I'm correct about that, right, Judge, they will get these?
So you'll get these. So don't worry about memorizing them or anything right now.
But there's a jury instruction that I think is very critical to you, and it's instruction number 4. And what jury
instruction number 4 says, in various parts, is how you -- you heard the Judge talk about you're the judges in the case. You're the judges of the facts.
Instruction number 4 says, in a couple parts that are important to -- do you remember, during jury selection, we talked about how many people have kids and know how to make -- how do you make a decision when somebody has a dispute, and one person tells you one thing, and somebody else tells you the other? Do you remember that?
The point of that was, that's what you're going to do here. And what this instruction number 4 does is, this is the law of the State of Florida. This isn't what some lawyer wants you to believe. This is the law in the State of Florida.
And the law in the State of Florida names all these different things that you can consider about a witness when they're testifying. And it says you're the ones who then decide whether you're going to believe them or not.
And I think that's important in this case.
prevail, you have to take your common sense and throw it out on the courthouse steps, because it won't match what the real life and the real world is all about.
We told you in opening what the evidence would be. We told you what issues were in play and which ones were not. And I'm telling you that what we told you in opening is exactly what happened in this case, and that's what I'm going to do with you now and go through that.
If you remember, we started out with the things that were not in dispute. There is no dispute that cigarette smoking was the medical cause of Mrs. Ruffo's COPD.
Nicotine is addictive. Even addicted smokers can quit. You heard that in this courtroom, and I will explore that with you in a little bit more detail.
Quitting smoking reduces the risk of developing COPD, in this case, in 1990, had there been a quit before.
And once you get COPD, quitting smoking limits the progression of COPD. And you know, in this case, that after she was told that she had COPD, what did she do? She kept smoking,
And one of the statements is, it says right here, "To consider any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case."
That means they want you to believe their story so that they can get what they came here for, and I think you just heard what they really came here for. That's an interest in the outcome of the case.
The second thing, and something that's pretty important. When I was a -- I was a young lawyer once, and one of the guys that trained me used to always say, make sure the jury understands that they don't leave their common sense on the courthouse steps, and this is what this law says.
It says, "You consider the testimony of the witnesses in light of all the evidence in the case, and in light of your own experience," how you make your decisions when you're settling disputes in your everyday life, "and common sense." It's right in the law. That's where it comes from.
And I would tell you, ladies and gentlemen, as we go on throughout this discussion today, that in order for them to
right?
So there's -- these are the things that are not in dispute.
I want to review again with you, and you're going to see that Mrs. Ruffo is not a member of this class that they were talking about, and that the defendants in this case are not liable for being the legal cause of her COPD.
Now, when the case began, we discussed some issues -- and may I have the slide, please?
Remember I wrote these words on here, so they'd be nicer for you. I put them up there.
Control. Who was in control of Mrs. Ruffo's decisions that she made every day in life? Who was in control of when she decided to start smoking, keep smoking, quit smoking? Who was in control of how she decided to live her life?
And you heard some things about how she lived her life and what ended up happening from that.
You remember the story that you heard about how she used to like to go to the beach,
suntan all the time, and what happened in 1998? She ended up having a skin cancer removed at that time. That was a choice that she made to do what she did. Everybody has the right to make choices.
But in this case, I think two issues that are important are who was in control of these decisions that we've been hearing about. And once you answer the question of who was in control, then you get to the question of responsibility.
And, in this case, who was responsible for Mrs. Ruffo having COPD? Who was responsible for the COPD progressing from 1990 to where it is now?
Who was responsible for the daily choices that are made? And when we make those choices, if you recall during opening statement, I said it's not a criticism. You make the choices you want to make.
But at the end of the day, if the choices you made didn't turn out right for you, who answers for that? That's what it comes down to.
And once you answer these questions,
Well, to find out if she's a member of the Engle class, we go to instruction number 5 on the packet that Judge Zabel will give you.
And what you first have to determine in order to see if she is a member of this Engle class is whether she was a cigarette smoker who suffered from COPD legally caused, legal cause, by an addiction to smoking cigarettes causing nicotine.
Now, I've broken down these questions in a way to try to help you understand these issues in this case and be able to answer the verdict form.
But the question is, in essence, was an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of Mrs. Ruffo's COPD?
Now, during opening, we said this is really, really important. And if you remember,
I gave you the example, and I want to go through it again, if you let me do it one more time with you.
I walk in the street. I get hit by a truck. You remember that example?
My injuries are from what? The truck hit me. That's the medical cause. Cigarettes
you'll get an idea of what this case is really all about.
Now, is there anybody else responsible for Mrs. Ruffo's decisions that led to her getting her COPD? And that's an important question.
In this case, we are not talking about percentages. If you remember, when Dr. Goldman was here testifying, I think it was a week ago today, and he kept talking about percentage of smokers that he was aware of, and I kept saying, I don't care about those percentages.
I want to know what you know about Mrs. Ruffo, because this case is about one smoker. This is not a class action. It's about one smoker named Mrs. Ruffo. That's what this case is about.
On the verdict form -- and I can -- switch that, please. Thank you for doing that.
This is the verdict form that the Judge is going to give you, and I'm just going to blow it up.
Can you all see that okay? Make it bigger? Okay.
The first question is, "Is Dorothy Ruffo a member of the Engle class?"
causing COPD is the medical cause.
When we said what was the legal cause, and we asked some questions, what's the legal cause of me getting hit by this truck?
And we said, you're going to have to investigate that. We have to get more information, right?
So what you do in that situation is, let me ask you if you just assume that a truck hit me in the street out in front of the courthouse here, what else do we need to know?
Well, here is one thing I want you to consider. What if I told you the truck hit me because it saw a stop sign and ignored the stop sign and slammed into me? That's the legal cause.
What's legal cause in this case?
Mrs. Ruffo was given plenty of stop signs during her life, as you heard from their own expert. And we're going to go through each of those individually, but she was given stop signs, basically saying stop smoking.
And they're in here telling you that even when her doctor, when she was with -- pregnant with her baby said, do not smoke, it's bad for
your baby and it's bad for you, Mr. Kaiser apparently is proud of the fact that his client lit up in her maternity ward.
That was a stop sign being told by a doctor when she's pregnant, and she doesn't listen. She ignores it. That's the legal cause. The stop sign the truck blew through is the legal cause of the accident.
Mrs. Ruffo, blowing through all the warnings saying "do not smoke", even when given by her doctors, which you heard over and over and over in this case, she didn't stop smoking.
That's what legal cause is. And so, because she is the legal cause here, when you answer this question on the verdict form, the answer is simply, no, she is not a member of the Engle class, not at all.
The second question here talks about -let me see if I can make that a little bit bigger.
Now, I want to go through this with you in a little bit of detail at this point.
Mrs. Ruffo -- did Dorothy Ruffo's COPD -and remember, COPD has an umbrella that, by her own experts, includes chronic bronchitis and
can't breathe because they're making a bed? They have severe shortness of breath? Not just shortness of breath, said the records, severe shortness of breath going up one flight of stairs? Severe shortness of breath sitting at the beach doing nothing but tanning?
Severe shortness of breath, Dr. Reed said, doing just the basic, ordinary things of everyday life called activities of daily living. You see that in the medical records as ADLs.
Now, that starts happening to her in the '80s. Is it reasonable, is it reasonable to say, gee, I have no clue why suddenly I'm short of breath? Because that's what they're selling to you right now. I had no idea. My cigarettes? Really?
Think about that for just a minute. It's not meant to belittle anybody. It's meant to make a point.
You know, put it another way. If somebody starts eating at McDonald's every day, and stops working out, and suddenly says, gee, my pants are tight, what could that be from. You all would laugh at that, because you know what
emphysema, that all comes under one umbrella -did it manifest itself in such that she knew or, in the exercise of reasonable care, should have known, on or before May 5, 1990, that she had an illness which there was a connection to her smoking and her COPD?
What did Mrs. Ruffo tell you? She said,
I've been smoking, by that point, let's round it up to 1960, that's 27 years, 28 years, been smoking cigarettes for 28 years.
And depending on which version Mr. Kaiser likes to use, apparently, he still thinks she was smoking two to three packs a day starting in 1964, from what I saw on the demonstrative he put up there, when you know she said she didn't start doing that until 1987. But that's what he told his expert, and that's what he's trying to tell you today, two packs a day starting in 1964.
But let's just say that she was smoking cigarettes, a lot, from 1959 all the way up until 1988 or the mid '80s.
And does it fit with your everyday experiences of life and your common sense that somebody suddenly is making a bed and they
it's from.
And what this jury instruction says -and, again, this isn't lawyer talk, this is the law. It says, did it manifest itself and that she knew. That's not the end of the inquiry, did she know.
Or, says the law of the State of Florida, in the exercise of reasonable care, should have known. And I'm going to show you something that one of her own experts said about the 1980s that answers that question for you.
And the answer to this, when using your everyday experiences of life, as is in instruction number 4, and your common sense, is absolutely she should have, and without question about that.
Mrs. Ruffo is the sole legal cause of her disease. She chose to smoke. And it was her decision not to quit. And by her responsibility saying, I accept responsibility, she's admitting to you that she is the legal cause of her illness. That's what she's telling you by accepting responsibility.
She smoked because she wanted to, and she enjoyed it, and she knew the risks, and she did
it anyway, and she didn't want to quit.
So her decision not to quit is the legal cause of her COPD, and that's straight from the evidence in this case.
May I have the statute of limitations slide, please? Thank you for doing that. I'll only do it one more time.
This is the law that you're going to get from the Judge. It's instruction number 8.
And it says, "On the defense, the issue for your determination is whether plaintiff Dorothy Ruffo's COPD manifested itself, such that she knew or should, in the exercise of reasonable care."
What does that mean? Think about that from your own everyday experiences of life and common sense. What does that mean?
Does that mean that when you're experiencing a sudden onset of severe shortage of breath, that she told her doctors, those are her own words, that had been going on for over two years, that you don't have to go to a doctor? You don't have to check it out? You can just sit back and do nothing? That's not reasonable care under the law.
witnesses still are around.
In this case, medical records are still around, and you do remember that, from May 21 st, going back, there isn't a single document available, not one, not an X-ray, not a radiology report, not a patient form that was filled out, gone. That's why the rule exists.
And in this case, she didn't bring it in time based on what that law says there, and that's why it's important. That's why people need to take a look at that.
And the question here, as I said, is whether a reasonable person in her shoes would have known or should have known that she had COPD, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, as a result of cigarette smoking. That's the key.
So please remember that when you go back to deliberate on that.
There is a section on this verdict form -I said this the last time, and I intend to stick to it, but thank you.
I'm just going to go through some more of this verdict form with you.
Because you answer these questions this way, you should not get to page 2. If you did
"Which would have allowed her to know or" -- remember this, this is very critical.
It does not matter just that she knew. It's or should have known. And that's in the law -and that's why I wanted to show you this.
This is what you're going to be getting from Judge Zabel. This is what you'll have back in the jury room when you're deliberating.
Think about that distinction of knew or should have known and exercising -- in the exercise of reasonable care, because that's the law, and that's something that you have to follow.
You can leave that up for just a minute
more.
The reason for this rule is because everyone who thinks they've been injured has a right to bring a lawsuit. That's the way our system works. You have a right to bring a lawsuit.
But if you're going to exercise that right, you need to do so in a timely fashion, as the law sets out. Why? Why does it matter?
Well, it matters in the law because you want to do it while memories are fresh,
get to page 2, the next question is, was the smoking -- was smoking cigarettes manufactured by one or more of the defendants a legal cause of the injuries?
Well, some of you say, well, of course, she smoked cigarettes, that's what causes COPD. Is that the legal cause? No, it's not the legal cause. That's why it's so important.
What was the legal cause of her getting COPD? And the answer on this one is, no, because of these words right here. Legal cause.
If, for some reason, you go beyond that, again, the question in the law of the State of Florida is, was smoking cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris a legal cause of her injuries?
Not the medical cause, the legal cause. And make sure to keep bringing that up, because that's the key.
And the answer to that is, no, based on the evidence in this case.
The next question talks about Lorillard Tobacco Company. That should also be no, but I'll let Mr. -- I'm sure that Mr. Bideau will address that, but that should be no based upon
the evidence in this case. From their own experts, it's very clear that that couldn't have caused - been the legal cause, and I should use the proper terms.
Next, this one is important, "Did Dorothy Ruffo reasonably, reasonably rely, to her detriment, on any concealment or omission by one or more of the defendants of material information not known or available, due to their failure to disclose material facts concerning the health effects or addictive natures of smoking?"
In the end of this discussion with you,
I'll address this in a little bit more detail, but you need to ask yourself the question: Why are they always raising this point? I'm not here defending what companies did 50 or 60 years ago. Not even close.
But the point is, where was the connection? In order to rely on something, you have to know that it's there. You have to know that it exists.
Now, think about this when you debate -you won't get here, but if you do, think about this, if she didn't reasonably rely on what she
will see how this word comes all over the place in this thing. I think now you've got the picture as to why I've been trying to pound on this legal cause and what it means.
Really important to remember, because if you can see this, and let me see if I can get closer to this. What does this question number 5 say?
There's that word again. Before they can prevail, they have to convince you what the legal cause was, and it's not just a cigarette.
That's the medical cause.
What was being done by whom to lead to her COPD? She's already admitted responsibility.
Now, it's interesting, if you remember, she said, I think 15 percent for both defendants, in her deposition is what she said.
Now, Mr. Kaiser then came up and said, well, that's before you knew all these things that they did.
Well, I would hope that, before you file a lawsuit, you would know what they did, so that you could make a claim against them. You didn't just file a lawsuit, a frivolous suit, and then come in and say, oh, well, now I'm
was told by her doctors, why would she reasonably rely on anything she heard from a tobacco company who was trying to sell her something or an automobile manufacturer or Starbucks or anybody else who is trying to tell you something about their products?
And the fact of the matter is that the evidence in this case is -- and I'm sure you remember this, she said the only message she ever got from a tobacco company was what? The warnings on the sides of the packs. That's the only thing she ever remembers seeing.
She saw some ads, which, again, we'll discuss, but what was her testimony? Think about this, because that's why we go through this.
Why did she start smoking those Kent cigarettes, when she, herself, said, I never even saw a Kent ad, ever?
So the answer to this is, no, because of her own testimony. She didn't see anything.
She didn't rely on anything. And the fact of the matter is, whoever gave her information, she wasn't going to listen.
When you get to the percentages -- and you
going to investigate to see if I actually have a claim? No. That's something they knew.
And when this deposition was taken where she said 15 percent, this case had been going on for a while. So she said 15 percent for both defendants.
And then somebody asked a very good question. It was a really good question from the jury that said, well, now that you know, what do you think the percentage should be? What was her answer? She didn't know, did she? No, she didn't know.
Why didn't she know? The reason is clear to everybody, except for, perhaps, at this table, the reason is clear, that Mrs. Ruffo knows that, as unfortunate as her condition is, her decisions and her decisions alone caused her to develop this disease, her decisions, her choices, her responsibility.
And so, as I said in opening statement, of course, she should accept responsibility. She admitted she never even thought about quitting, and then got COPD.
So the answer to this question, should you get here, is 100 percent, based on her own
testimony.
And this time she couldn't give you a number there, and I think you know why.
And then there's the damages issue. And the damages issue, I never address that. I trust you to use your judgment on that. But keep in mind that, in this case, when it comes to the damages, they're not asking for medical bills. They're not asking for lost wages.
They're not asking for lost future wages.
The only thing they're asking for is what comes under the heading of pain and suffering. That's the only damage they're asking for.
None of those other things.
And the Judge will instruct you that you can't give an award of damages just to punish somebody. I mean, if you think that what the tobacco companies did was bad, okay, but that's not on this verdict form. That's not a part of this case.
And under your oath as jurors to follow Judge Zabel's law, you can't do anything like that. And in this case, you shouldn't. And I will describe later why.
So what I want to do now is -- and thank
She was sitting right here when she said that, right here in front of you.
She said, for me to quit, I have to want to quit. Right here. Everything I'm telling you came right from here.
She said, I had not made up my mind to quit before 2010.
Can I have the next slide, please, Leah?
This is from the trial testimony. That's from trial.
"In fact, before 1990, you never made a single attempt to quit smoking? Do you agree?
"Yes."
Does that sound like I didn't try hard enough? No. That is, without hesitation, I never made a single attempt to quit before 1990, legal cause.
Next slide, please.
"Before 1990, you never even gave a thought to quitting smoking? Do you agree?
"I agree."
"I agree," her words.
So now let's go back and look at what she knew and then we'll come back to this.
So I was just addressing 2010, when she
you for putting that up. I appreciate that.
What I want to do with you right now is I want to go back and look at some of the evidence with you and see if I can do it without going too fast, but get through it because I think it's important.
You remember this time line? Let's just review this together again, and maybe make some points here.
Mrs. Ruffo enjoyed smoking. She knew the hazards of smoking. She ignored those warnings. She ran right through that stop sign, and she didn't quit until 2010.
So we have, in 2010, the first quit event. And, actually, what I'm going to do -- I think you'll see why I'm doing this, is I'm going to start from the back at this point.
Here we are in 2010. In 2010, we know that Mrs. Ruffo quit for the very first time she tried to quit. We know it's the first time she wanted to quit, and I'm taking all this from what she said.
She quit with no difficulty. She said, when we asked her, why didn't you quit before this date, I had not made up my mind to quit.
quit. And she hasn't smoked since. Remember that.
I'm going to go through this time line somewhat quickly, and I hope I'm not going too fast.
She never gave a thought to smoking here. Do you remember that testimony when those girls gave her a cigarette, she never gave a thought to smoking. She never stole any cigarettes from her parents who you now heard were both smokers.
Parents setting an example, right? I wonder where she got the idea to maybe smoke or, as Mr. Kaiser said, how she knew not to put it up her nose. She had been watching her parents do it.
She tries her first cigarette at age 16, and then goes out and buys a pack.
When she was asked, "Why did you do that, "was it something you saw, some ad?
"No.
"Was it something you read?
"No.
"Why did you do it?
"Because my girlfriend gave it to me or my
girlfriend's girlfriends gave it to me."
That's why I did it.
"Why did you go buy the pack of Kent? Did you see any ads for Kent?
"Nope, not a one."
Not a one.
You know, it's interesting. Do you remember when they were showing you these ads for Old Gold cigarettes, I think they were?
Those were in the '20s and '30s. She never even heard of Old Gold cigarettes.
So, again, ask yourself the question again, where is the connection? Why are you showing us all this stuff? Why are you telling us all these things? Is it just to get us upset so maybe we won't use our heads and common sense and judge this case on the facts of this case?
Is it to take your eye off the ball, and have you look at something else and say that's really horrible, I'll nail them for that?
There's no jury instruction that says you can do that.
What the jury instruction says is what was the legal cause. They want to talk about all
Again, we're told that she knew she shouldn't be smoking, but she did. Her choice.
But then came, and this is really important, Mrs. Ruffo, when she was told don't smoke for your baby and you -- let's stay right here for just a second, right in here.
Heard it, understood it, ignored it, never gave a thought to quitting here, not a thought, and smoked for another 49 years.
Then came what we talked about in detail, the Surgeon General report. Now, the Surgeon General report, Mr. Kaiser said in his opening, and it was a statement that I think I even commented on, I think you remember this.
He said it was the news story of the 20th century. And I came up and made some comment, well, gee, I don't know, maybe the lunar landing might be up there, too.
But the point is, the lawyer who is bringing you this case and is asking you for millions of dollars, comes in and says, this was the story of the century.
And what did Dr. Proctor say?
Dr. Proctor, the historian, agreed that when this came out, there was an avalanche, an
these ads and everything else, and it doesn't tie up here.
Her son, Michael, is born. There's discussions about being told about smoking.
Now, here's something that's important. You remember Dr. Proctor, the history guy that came here from California? I love history, so I got a little carried away.
Right here in the '50s, remember he was talking about all the news that was coming out, the first studies were coming out, and they were in scientific journals, and then the magazines picked it up, and then we showed you articles from Reader's Digest, and other magazines talking about what was going on?
There was suddenly a huge spike here in cancer cases and what was going on, and people started saying, what is going on here. This is right about -- she started smoking right after all of this is coming out. This is all in the news. It's everywhere.
We showed you the Miami Herald from this time frame, talking about cigarette smoking and illness.
Her son, Michael, is born here in '62.
avalanche of news stories.
We showed you the news story in the Miami Herald when it came out. It was on radio, TV, magazines, special reports. It was everywhere.
And what did it say?
It said that this panel, put together by the President of the United States, or at the direction of the President of the United States, led by the Surgeon General of the United States, said, no doubt, smoking increases the risk of getting lung cancer and COPD, emphysema and chronic bronchitis. And we showed you those pages. I won't do it now, just so we can keep moving along.
Now, Mrs. Ruffo, when she was being asked right here, said, I knew and understood -here -- "I knew and understood in 1964" -- you know, that's almost 50 years ago. It's hard to believe. It's almost 50 years ago, next year.
She knew and understood smoking was harmful to her health. She said, "I read it and I was aware that smoking is bad for my health."
That's a stop sign, don't you think? She heard it. She understood it. She ignored it.
She gave no thought to quitting. And then she continued to smoke for another 46 years.
But I want you to think about this point right here. The biggest news story of the century. How much bigger does the stop sign get?
And keep in mind, at this time, contrary to what Mr. Kaiser has told his expert and now told you, she was not smoking two to three packs in '64. She testified she didn't start doing that until 1987.
Here, she was only smoking a few cigarettes a day, maybe up to half a pack, maybe, and she had the interesting statement where she said she shared them with her friend, Dee Dee.
So not very many cigarettes, but, yet, makes no attempt to quit smoking. How do you know that? Some lawyer telling you that? No. You heard it from her, that she made no attempt to quit smoking.
Now, the excuse that came out at this point, and in a couple of other points in this case is, well, everybody was smoking.
Well, that's not true. We know that
landmark report.
But here is the thing that he said that I found fascinating. He said this was the beginning of the end for cigarettes, and that the graph looks like this when you come to 2013.
And I don't know if you remember him saying this, but I said, now, the per capita smoking percentage in the United States is now as low as it was in the 1930s, before people took off and started smoking.
And he said, that's right. And his words were, if you remember, "This was the beginning of the end for cigarettes in the United States, right here."
So does this look like everybody was smoking? Or does this look like some people made a decision and said I'm going to stop and the numbers have dropped and dropped and dropped?
But, yet, what were you told, you, the jury, who has to make a decision in this case to award substantial damages? What are you told? Well, everybody was smoking. That's why I kept smoking. That's what you heard right
everybody wasn't smoking. I don't think she meant every single person in the world was smoking.
But what did Dr. Proctor say about 1964? I'm going to turn this around, and I'm going to draw on the back of it since it's mine, and I can do that.
1964, Dr. Proctor said -- if I'm in the way, tell me.
Here is where smoking was on a per-capita basis, and I hope you remember this, because it's really an interesting statistic.
Dr. Proctor said that, when that report came out, up to 5,000 smokers a day were quitting. They heard it. They understood it, and they said, I'm done. That was their choice.
It was also a choice to say, no, I'm not going to be done, but then you can't come in here and ask for the amount of money that they were talking about.
He said millions of people were quitting. And from 1964, if I remember the numbers, from 1964 to like 1970, something like 13 or 15 million people had quit because of this
from here a couple of days ago.
Dr. Reed stated, her doctor stated that if she quits -- let me flip this around -- if she quits in 1964, she doesn't get COPD. That's from her own doctor.
In 1966, we talked about this warning that came out. And it was on every pack that she smoked in 1966. And it's around this time that she switches to Benson & Hedges.
So every pack of Benson & Hedges may have been gold, but it also said cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health.
What's the important thing? Mrs. Ruffo said, I read the warning and I understood the warning. She didn't say I never saw it, wasn't available to me, paid it no attention. I saw it. I read it. And I understood the warning.
And once again, she ignored it. She doesn't give a thought to quitting, and she smokes for 44 more years.
And Dr. Reed, her doctor, said if she quits here, she doesn't get any COPD.
In 1970, new warnings come on the packs. And you're asking, well, if you already told us this, why are we going through it?
Well, the first time we went through it, there was no evidence in this case. Now, people have come in and given you evidence, and so I want to talk about the evidence a little bit here, because now this isn't some lawyer saying this came out and she made no attempt to quit. You heard it from her.
Here is the key. In the 1970s, this new warning. Mrs. Ruffo said, I remember this warning. Not I didn't see it. Not I tossed it to the side. I remember that warning.
She saw it. She understood it. She ignored it. And she never gave a thought to quitting, and smoked for 40 more years.
Also in the 1970s, we have -- remember we discussed this friend of theirs called Tim Piper, who had this campaign to get his friends to quit smoking. He had just quit smoking, and we asked Mrs. Ruffo about that.
The one thing she said that was interesting in her testimony here in court is she said, "Yeah, Tim Piper called them cancer sticks. He used to call cigarettes cancer sticks back at this time."
That's a pretty good idea, according to
advertisements are now banned and warnings are put on all print advertisements in 1972.
This, we already talked about, her son, Marshall, being born and smoking while he's a little kid, while they're in the hospital. No attempt to quit at all in the '70s.
In 1980s, in the 1980s, Mrs. Ruffo was getting what I call a very personal warning in addition to all these other warnings from the media and from the government.
And what I mean by personal warnings is, some people may have heard the phrase, you know, you got to listen to your body, when your body aches or something, don't push it, listen to it, it's trying to tell you something.
We know, from her testimony, that, in the '80s, she began to experience this shortness of breath and it's severe, according to her own experts. And this was from 1980 to 1990, and even beyond, as where we are today.
Now, can I have the next slide, please?
This is some of the testimony from this trial. And COPD is an umbrella term. It includes chronic bronchitis and emphysema.
It's a progressive disease that doesn't occur
Dr. Proctor, of what people were thinking about cigarettes at that time.
And Dr. Proctor stated, when he was being questioned by Mr. Sloman, that the word "cancer sticks" didn't really become well-known until the beginning of the 1950s and continued beyond that.
Well, yeah, of course, that's what's important here, because the 1950s, the end of the 1950s is when Mrs. Ruffo started smoking.
So her own friends are calling them cancer sticks. Why did this term come up?
According to Dr. Proctor, because of the publicity of the rise in the illnesses that were caused by smoking, caused people to come up with these slang terms. And he said sometimes people convey ideas by coming up with what they think are humorous phrases to get the point across.
But what also happened here is there were pictures of these smokers' lungs, and you remember Mrs. Ruffo said that her husband described them to her, and they were bad. But she makes no attempt to quit in the 1970s.
And we know that radio and TV
overnight.
You know that by now. You probably know more about COPD than you care to know right now.
Mrs. Ruffo had diagnoseable COPD in the 1980s. How do we know that? Well, we know that because Dr. Reed said there was no doubt that she had emphysema by 1985, when I asked him that question. No doubt she had that in 1985.
Why did he say that? Real briefly. You remember we put up the X-ray, and we showed you what it looked like, and we had Dr. Reed -- why wouldn't the people asking you for significant amounts of money, who are representing Mrs. Ruffo, why wouldn't they show you that X-ray? Why would the defense show it to you?
Because that X-ray shows why Dr. Reed was able to diagnose her having emphysema like that, why he saw what was in her lungs and said, that's severe emphysema in 1990. That didn't just happen.
And when we asked him, Dr. Goldman said this was diagnoseable for some variable period of time before 1990. That was diagnoseable.
Dr. Bernstein, who is the last pulmonologist who testified yesterday by deposition, said she had severe emphysema by at least 1985.
These are the doctors that came and testified for you to talk about Mrs. Ruffo.
Can I have the next slide, please?
Now, Mrs. Ruffo, here in this courtroom, that's the trial transcript, said -- the question was, "I understand what you're saying. But you agree that you had symptoms of COPD, emphysema and chronic bronchitis in the '80s, correct?"
And you can read the answer for yourself. That's what she told us. She had the symptoms in the '80s.
And remember what the jury instruction says about knew or should have known and using reasonable care.
1985, these rotating warnings come out.
And we already know that they talk about causing lung cancer and heart disease and emphysema.
And there's another one on here that says -- it's right there -- it says "Quitting
"Yes.
"And what did you used to call that?"
These are Mrs. Ruffo's own words, going back to the 1980s. "They used to call that a smoker's cough."
Now, is it still plausible, having seen what you see here, having heard what you heard in this courtroom, that she had no idea it was from her cigarette smoking, no clue until May 21st of 1990?
That's for you to decide utilizing your skills as outlined in jury instruction number 4, and think about it.
When she saw Dr. Rice -- this was interesting, and Mr. Kaiser talked about it again today.
Dr. Rice sent her for an upper GI. Now, I don't know if you caught this during her testimony or not, but when she was asked, "What did you tell Dr. Rice, did you tell him that you were experiencing shortness of breath," she said, "No, I didn't tell him that."
Not a big surprise, because we don't have a patient who is a very good historian when she goes to her doctors. She's already admitted
smoking greatly reduces the risk to your health."
Why is that important? Why am I bringing that out for you? What did Mrs. Ruffo say about these warnings? Did she see them? Had she seen these on the packs of her cigarettes?
Yeah, she did. She said that.
She said, "I recall the warnings." She said, "I read them and understood them," but she ignored them and she never gave a thought to quitting and she smoked for 25 more years.
1985, can we have the slide, please?
I made mention of this a few moments ago, but I want you to see -- no, that's not it.
The severe emphysema slide, please.
Dr. Bernstein said in this courtroom, in 1985 -- you can leave that up -- she had severe emphysema. She had symptoms of COPD, emphysema and chronic bronchitis in the '80s.
Then, there was a series of questions -the smoker's cough, please.
These questions were actually asked on direct examination, that means her lawyer, and she said, "Did you ever have a cough after your cold?
that everything she told her doctors about her smoking history was false. She said that to you.
So now she goes to the doctor, and she doesn't tell them, you know, I've been experiencing shortness of breath for the past two years. So what does the doctor do? He doesn't have the information he needs.
You remember the discussion that I had with Dr. Reed about when you are using your clinical judgment, and when you have to get the data you need, and one of the most important pieces of data is to get the history from the patient.
So the patient comes in, who is a long-term smoker, and she doesn't say, I can't breathe or I'm having shortness of breath, and it's been going on for a couple of years. She doesn't tell him that, and that's right there, right in her testimony.
So, of course, when utilizing his clinical judgment, in trying to go through what's known by doctors as an index of suspicion, what's more likely causing what's going on, he would assume that it was -- she said she had a pain
here after eating, that's a no-brainer. That's got to be from eating something. Let's check it out.
But when he's told she has shortness of breath for two years that's so severe that you can't make a bed, walk a flight of stairs, walk short distances without getting significantly short of breath, well, then he sends her to the pulmonologist.
Remember the story that you saw with the TV, with the gunk on the TV, that she said happened sometime in the '80s, I think, that her husband was cleaning the TV, and she said, what did you think about that, and her word was yuck?
And she was asked, "Did you think that might be dangerous to your health?"
And she said, "Well, I wondered, but did nothing." Her words, "I wondered, but did nothing."
So she knew something was going on with her in the '80s. She felt it. She lived with it, and she ignored it. And she never gave a thought to quitting, and continued to smoke for another 25 years.
remember Dr. Cohen, I don't remember Dr. Goldberg. And, yes, I did see Dr. Teichner for yearly checkups through the '80s.
What do you think those doctors would be telling her if, according to her doctors, she had severe emphysema going back to the mid '80s?
Everyday experiences of life and common sense, severe emphysema by 1985, it's affecting you, period. And when you go to your doctor, and the doctors know of your smoking history -could I get the slide -- she was asked, "Did Dr. Rice have knowledge of your smoking history?"
Now, that's different from the shortness of breath. Keep in mind that distinction.
"Did he have knowledge of your smoking history when you were seeing him?
"Yes, he did.
"And he told you, you needed to stop smoking."
Interesting answer. "They all did."
They all did, and she chose not to believe it. She chose not to follow it. Her right, but that's a decision that she made.
We talked about that there were, in the late '80s, there were some Public Service Announcements from the American Cancer Society. She never gave a thought to quitting when she saw these ads on TV.
These are the Public Service Announcements from the American Cancer Society and the Lung Association, and said that they came at a time when she was starting to have severe breathing problems and could not do the minimal activities of daily living.
She said they were in the '80s when she recalled seeing these, but she kept on smoking.
Here is something else to think about in this case to help you when you get this case.
In the '80s, she could not remember, when we asked her what doctors did you see, a Dr. Cohen and a Dr. Goldberg. She said that this Dr. Teichner had stopped treating her in '77, when her youngest son was born.
And, yet, when we went and found applications she made for employment, in there, she said, Dr. Teichner, she had seen him yearly for checkups throughout the '80s.
And she sat here and told you, I can't
Now, this is something very interesting. Can I have the next slide, please?
In 1990 -- let me go back to 1990 here, the last board, I promise -- well, no, I do have one more.
"In 1990, when Dr. Reed told you, in May of 1990, you had severe COPD, you weren't concerned? Do you agree?
"I really didn't understand it, no.
"You agree, you really weren't concerned?
"Answer: Right."
You're not -- let's put this piece by
piece.
You're not concerned when you're told you have a disease that could lead to your death, and you just heard Mr. Kaiser say that, and you're not concerned. Why?
What was remarkable is the testimony that was given in here is that Dr. Reed never told me it was a significant disease.
I don't know if you remember that. It was incredible.
So now it's Dr. Reed's fault, because he didn't make it crystal clear.
You saw him testify. That's a caring,
competent physician who still cares and is still taking care of her now.
Do you really believe, do you really believe that he would diagnose her with severe COPD, diagnoseable on X-ray, and he wouldn't say to her, this is bad stuff you got here, and you have to quit smoking?
Do you remember the discussion I had with him about what is your custom, habit and practice? Do you remember that? Because doctors can't remember everything they do over the course of 20, 25 years.
"What do you tell your patients when they come in and have COPD?" And he told me. "I tell them of the severity of the disease. I tell them that it's a progressive disease. I tell them if they stop smoking, it's the best thing they can do, because they can stop that progression. That's what I tell them."
And, yet, they're here telling you he never told me any of that stuff, and that's why I kept smoking.
Then she told us that she didn't smoke for a few hours after she got that information.
And when her doctors told her that smoking
You heard Dr. Reed tell you that. You could see that yourself in his records.
She agrees that when she tried the patch once, it wasn't -- it was not a quit attempt.
She didn't throw out her cigarettes, even though her son came and told you -- of course, he's her son, but he told you that she had thrown everything away, ashtrays and all.
Mrs. Ruffo got up here and said, no, I didn't throw out my cigarettes, I didn't do anything like that. And she told you I didn't really want to quit at that point in time.
Motivation. Everybody has agreed that you need to have motivation to quit. Her doctors even said that when they testified. Without motivation, you are not going to quit.
She tells Dr. Caride she was aware of the dangers of smoking, but is not motivated to quit. That's in 1996. In 2002, she tells Dr. Caride, I'm still not motivated to quit.
So before 2010, she had never quit for even one day. Her son quit in the summer of
2010.	That didn't motivate her to quit at that point in time. She kept smoking.
Then, in November, she got pneumonia.
would make her lungs worse, she still did not want to quit.
When a doctor told her she needed to quit, she just didn't want to.
Can we have that slide, please?
You can read that for yourself.
I want you to see that, because this isn't just lawyer talk up here. This is the facts of this case. This is why this case is about Mrs. Ruffo. This is why this case is about her choices and her responsibility and her control. And like it or not, at this table, that's what this case is about. That's what it's about.
She didn't quit smoking until December or November of 2010. She agreed that to quit, she had to want to quit.
Here is something that I think is amazing. She told Dr. Reed she did not want his help to quit. Twice she told Dr. Reed, no, I'm not going to Baptist, I have no interest in getting help to quit.
Does that sound like somebody who is struggling the way it's been portrayed to you?
She had a patch on once. She had a prescription for the patch she never filled.
Maybe it was October.
Now, we heard about Chantix. Chantix, as you heard Dr. Reed tell you, is not a miracle drug. You don't just pop a pill or two or three and you're done, you're cured. It doesn't work that way.
If you remember from the discussions, both with Dr. Reed, and even with Mrs. Ruffo, the package insert, which is the piece of paper you get when you buy medicine from wherever you go, tells you how you're supposed to use it.
The package insert said it's a 12-week program. You don't take it for a couple of days and the heavens open, the sun shines, the doves come down and you're cured from smoking. It doesn't work that way. And who told you that? Her treating doctor.
The paid expert gave you a completely different story. And it was interesting that, during the case, Mr. Kaiser wants to make a distinction between, well, he's the treater, he's not an expert, we're going to bring you another expert, who knows absolutely nothing about Dorothy, but we're going to bring him in to tell you some things.
What did Dr. Reed tell you? It's a long program. It's not a miracle drug. It does have some side effects. He doesn't particularly care for it that much.
And in his records -- and you need to take a look at his records about this Chantix mystery miracle drug.
He says she didn't use it as required.
She told us she only took it for a few days, got upset, got an upset stomach, felt like she had flu-like symptoms. And said, you know what, I'm going to dump this medication, but I'm also going to try to quit at the same time, and she did. That's the facts, and that's in the records.
And she had no withdrawal symptoms. Nobody came in here to tell you about withdrawal symptoms, nobody who knows her, nobody who lives with her. Her son didn't tell you anything about withdrawal symptoms that she had when she quit smoking, not a word.
And nobody else that lives with her told you that she had any withdrawal symptoms or friends of hers or anything else. She said to Dr. Reed that she felt fine, and that she's
responsible. She left that number blank for you and we discussed that already.
Now, here is the important thing. They had one expert on awareness, and it's a word I'm going to talk about now for a little bit before I'm done.
Awareness means what was out there in the public that people knew. And that's Dr. Proctor, the historian from California.
Dr. Proctor came and said to you, and I wasn't criticizing him for it, but it is important for you to know, under jury instruction number 4, as to what people know about the facts of the case, and he said, I'm not here to give you an opinion about Mrs.
Ruffo, because I don't know anything about her.
Now, if you remember, they said he is only one of two experts in the country that can go around and testify in these cases.
He didn't give you an opinion on what she saw or relied upon, did he? He didn't come in here and say, you know, this is the ad that made her start smoking Kents, this is the ad that made her start smoking Benson & Hedges, this is the document that made her say, then
never smoked again.
Now, let's take a common sense appraisal of this case, and I'm going to wind down, okay?
She said -- let me ask you this, let me put it this way, take it from a common sense standpoint.
Do you really believe that Mrs. Ruffo was waiting to hear from some tobacco company or from Philip Morris to decide whether, you know what, they say I should quit, so I'm going to quit?
If she didn't listen to all these other sources of information, why in the world would she listen to that? That's just common sense.
Did she say anyone did or didn't do anything that had a substantial impact on the decisions that she made? Remember, that's in the jury instructions, a substantial impact.
Direct and substantial are words in the jury instruction.
Did anyone or anything have a substantial impact on her that she came and told you about? No, not at all. Certainly her doctors didn't.
Her family didn't.
Mrs. Ruffo has never said anyone else is
I'm not going to quit.
There's no connection at all. None. He is one of two experts that's been paid well over a million dollars, and you heard in the last three years he's made $800,000.
This guy knows his stuff. He came in here to testify to you, he could offer nothing on the subject of reliance that you heard, what she relied upon. He could offer absolutely nothing to you in doing your job.
And I will tell you this. Mrs. Ruffo didn't either. She didn't either. Why?
Because there is none. There's no reliance here.
Now, I have to use this one thing one more time. I know you guys don't like it or you think it's messy, but let me try it one more time, and I won't delay it for a long time.
Let me make sure you can see this, first. It's not that bad.
There's one name I have to add on here, and this is Dr. Bernstein. To help you remember, he testified by deposition.
He said, Dr. Bernstein said, "In all probability, she had severe" -- I need my red
pen -- "she had severe emphysema in 1985."
Now, granted, and I'm not trying to be funny, this isn't pretty, it's not colorful, it's not professionally done. I guess it is, because I'm a professional, so we can say that.
So this is what we've got here. What's the purpose of this? What's the purpose of this? It's inescapable that when you take everything their experts said, when you take everything Mrs. Ruffo said, all -- it all comes here. All these doctors that she was seeing in the '80s that we have no records from. And what is it that the plaintiffs want to hang their hat on?
They want you to think that, right here,
16	days after May 5th, somehow that's where it all starts. That's the first time she knows that she has a disease caused by cigarettes. That's the first time that she knew or should have known.
And I submit to you that what this diagram is doing here is showing you all of the opportunities for her to know or should have known.
Can I have the Dr. Reed slide, please? Is
you need to stop, which explains why here, on May 21st, she says, "I wasn't concerned."
Of course, she wasn't concerned. She already knew or should have known. Please remember that. The instruction doesn't require that she knew. That she should have known.
Dr. Reed also said that from ten years -I'm sorry -- that from zero years, meaning no damage to the lungs, to what he saw in May takes ten years to develop. You don't just go from nothing to what he saw on those X-rays.
And she never even considered that smoking had anything to do with her decline in her health.
Now, I'm going to put -- it's the last slide I've got to show you. And this slide, before it goes up, look at it very carefully.
Look at who it came from and look at what it says completely.
Can we have the slide up, please?
Now you know why I'd rather do this,
right?
First, look at who said it. It's their paid expert that they brought in here from Tampa. And this goes to the heart of the
this in the way?
I asked Dr. Reed, "And in your mind, there is no doubt, in all medical probability, what Mrs. Ruffo had, the emphysema she had when you saw her, in May of '90, goes back at least five years in terms of medical probability." That's the words we have to use when we get opinions from experts.
He said "Yes," which means from 1990, it's 1985. That's when it started. That's her treating doctor.
That means that the shortness of breath doesn't just go back two years. Her shortness of breath goes back here, and they can say what they want about Connie Cooper, but Connie Cooper said in her deposition -- here is Cooper, said, "Somewhere in this area, I was told by Mrs. Ruffo that I had been diagnosed with chronic bronchitis."
Now, Dr. Bernstein says, I don't think she had it. Well, that's the point. These are two laypeople talking to each other.
Somebody in here, someone in here told her, you have bronchitis. Someone in here told her, you've got a disease from your smoking and
argument and to the heart of the jury instruction, and to the heart of the verdict form.
"If she had gone to her doctor in the '80s, any doctor would have told her that her shortness of breath was more likely than not related to cigarette smoking."
And their paid expert said, "I would think
so."
Then I asked him the one other question, "And that's not a difficult thing to figure out, is it?
"No."
That quote, that quote gives you what you need in this case to answer this question, that she knew or should have known what was going on with her in the '80s.
One of the things that I forgot to mention to you on damages, is remember that Judge Zabel will tell you that you cannot resolve this case based on sympathy, and I'm sure everybody here feels sympathy, especially when you're hearing about that someone is facing a death sentence, in essence. That's hard to be a human and not be moved by that.
But what it means is you cannot use that in making your decisions in this case. That's one of the hard parts about being a juror.
Now, I have one last thing that I want to use, and I've made this board here for you, because I think, as I was listening to Mr. Kaiser, he actually was speaking exactly to what I want to talk to you about here.
On this board, I have two sides. One is called the plaintiff's world. What I mean is this is the world where the plaintiff lawyer lives, and what they think the world looks like, and this is the real world, where everybody else lives.
Now, here is what I'm going to show you. This is a simple point I want to make, but it goes to what I was talking about with awareness. That's what this goes to.
So Mrs. Ruffo, where was she getting information from on awareness? Well, in the real world, we know from her husband, who was talking to her. We know that her sons had spoken to her. You heard one of her sons talk to you about this.
We know that she had friends. Based upon
This is what the real world looks like. This is where we get our information.
Now, to listen to Mr. Kaiser's closing argument, this is what the world of the plaintiff lawyer looks like. Tobacco company ads that everybody is sitting, waiting for a tobacco company to say you need to stop, you need to know this, you need to know that.
In the face of all of this in the real world, if you take a second and think about what that closing argument was all about and what their case was all about, and why they don't want to talk about Mrs. Ruffo, it's because this is the world they want to pull you into, that everything revolved around this, that the whole world, in the '50s and the '60s and the '70s and the '80s and the '90s, and even now, this is what controls everything and forget about all of this.
That's what they want you to do, forget about the stop sign that she's been given on multiple, multiple occasions.
In the plaintiff's world, only May 21st, 1990 exists. And you know that's not true.
Now, this is my last chance to talk to
the talk about going to the beach and all that sort of stuff, she had friends. None of them were here to testify, but we know she had friends.
You know that she had doctors. We've just gone through this. Doctors telling her, stop smoking, it's not good for you. That's been going on a long time.
In 1964, there was the Surgeon General report that came out, and what came with the Surgeon General report? Dr. Proctor, an avalanche of articles in the newspapers, in the magazines, on television, on the radio.
In 1966 came the start of the warnings ordered by the government. And on those warnings -- and keep this in mind when you're deliberating, she doesn't deny seeing and understanding these warnings.
She saw the warning in '66. She saw the warning in 1970. She saw the warnings in 1985 talking about emphysema. She told you that she recalls seeing Public Service Announcements from the American Cancer Society, and we talked about the photographs that her husband was telling her about that the friend told him.
you. That's good news, right? My last chance to talk with you, but I want you to remember that, because they have the burden of proof,
Mr. Kaiser is going to get back up here and talk to you.
And what I want you to do is to listen very carefully and see, does he ever get around to talking about Mrs. Ruffo and her world, or does he keep living over here? And if he does, say, well, what does that have to do with Mrs. Ruffo? What does it have to do with her? Where's the connection? Show us the connection. Show us where she said she saw something, and that she relied on it. Prove that to us because that's their burden of proof.
So I want to finish up with one last thing and say thank you again, and I want to finish up with a clip that you saw that I think outlines what this case is about very well, from 1964.
(At this time, a video was played for the court and taken down to the best of the court reporter's ability:)
SPEAKER: This is a CBS News extra on
"Smoking and Health, the Finding of the Surgeon General Committee."
Almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked. But the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report by the Surgeon General's Committee. This, in summary, is what the committee says:
Cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the same way. Cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis.
Cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases. Male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it's not proven that smoking is the cause.
On the question of filters, the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but it didn't exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed.
In short, the committee says, if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. The sooner you start, the more you
every day, for listening to us. As Mr. Fasi said, we haven't always been on time but you guys have, and we very much appreciate that. I know all of us do.
As Mr. Fasi said, this case is about Dorothy Ruffo. It's about her choices, her decisions concerning her smoking. It's not about some class of smokers. It's not about other people. It's about Mrs. Ruffo.
Now, Mr. Kaiser started out, he was talking about the findings and he put up the findings. I want you to understand something. These findings, the findings he put up there, they don't establish liability as to anyone.
In fact, the jury instruction that you're going to get, jury instruction number 7, this is the last paragraph and it says, those findings that Mr. Kaiser put up there do not establish that either defendant is liable to the plaintiff in this case, nor do they establish whether plaintiff was injured by defendants' conduct or the degree, if any, to which defendants' conduct was the legal cause of Mrs. Ruffo's COPD.
You are the only jurors who are going to
smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are.
In this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. No one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell them it's good for them either. The decision is his, and the decision and the health that may depend on it.
This is Harry Reasoner, good night. This has been a CBS News extra on "Smoking and Health."
(End of video.)
MR. FASI: On behalf of I and Lori Schultz and my last time to talk to you, thank you very, very much.



MR. BIDEAU: Thank you, Your Honor. Give me just one second.
THE COURT: Sure.
MR. BIDEAU: Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. May it please the Court, counsel,
Mrs. Ruffo.
I want to join Mr. Fasi in thanking you all for your service today, for being here
hear about Mrs. Ruffo. You are the only people who are going to make any decisions about Mrs. Ruffo and Mrs. Ruffo's case.
Now, when I started out in my opening, and it was pretty brief, I think you remember, a couple of days ago, I'm going to try to be brief this time. I won't be quite as brief as I was the last time. Let me put this up.
And I started out with this board to talk to you about Lorillard's smoking history in this case.
And, you know, I told you you wouldn't hear a lot from me, and I think I kept that promise. You didn't hear a lot from me during this trial. I didn't ask a lot of questions of the witnesses, only really the ones that mattered to my client.
And Mrs. Ruffo told us she began smoking in 1959 and she started with a Kent cigarette, that was by happenstance because her friends gave it to her.
She smoked, she told us, a very small amount from 1959 until about 1961, when her son Michael was born. I think she said about a few cigarettes a day up until '61, and after that
about a half pack a day.
It turns out it's about three pack years of smoking combined. She was not, during this period of time -- this period from 1959 to '66, she was not a heavy, chronic smoker.
Mr. Kaiser was talking about heavy, chronic smokers. She was smoking a few cigarettes a day and then maybe a half a pack.
But during this period of time, as Mr. Fasi pointed out, Mrs. Ruffo got a lot of warnings. Mr. Fasi talked about the fact that her first son was born, I think in 1961, and there was some discussion, I think Mr. Kaiser said in his opening that an obstetrician back in the '60s told Mrs. Ruffo not to smoke. It was bad for her, bad for her baby.
And this is back when she was smoking just a few cigarettes a day. Nobody has come in here and told you that she was hopelessly addicted to cigarettes back in 1961 or 1962.
And then remember, that in 1964, the Surgeon General's report came out, and that Harry Reasoner clip you just saw -- hopefully this board is not blocking you. Is that board blocking anybody?
talk about that.
One of you actually asked, I think it was Dr. Reed, a question about what pack years meant. And as lawyers, we think you understand everything we're saying. So it was a good question, and I am going to talk about that a little bit later because it relates to another claim in this case.
But also remember during this period of time, Mrs. Ruffo told us that she never saw -as to my client, she never saw a single Kent advertisement. No Kent advertisement, actually. She said she never saw a Kent advertisement in her entire life.
She never heard anything that was said by my client, Lorillard. In fact, she told us until she got to this trial, she had never heard of my client, Lorillard Tobacco Company, and she never relied on anything that my client said or didn't say, did or didn't do. She absolutely had no knowledge concerning my client and never saw anything that my client said.
Now, remember, even after -- so this is really the end of my client's involvement in
The Harry Reasoner clip that you just saw was actually the day of the Surgeon General's report, that was the news report on it.
And so in 1964, again, when she is smoking just a few cigarettes a day, she was asked, I think by Miss Schultz during the trial, was she aware of the Surgeon General's report, and she says yes.
And at that point in time, you were aware that smoking was bad for your health? And her answer was yes.
So Mrs. Ruffo, very candidly, I think told us that she was aware of the health effects of smoking all the way back here in 1964, when she was just smoking a few cigarettes a day.
Then we go up to 1966 and, as Mr. Fasi pointed out, there were warnings on the packs in 1966. And Mrs. Ruffo told us, very candidly, I was aware of the warnings, I read them. And most importantly, that she understood them.
And this is 1966. Again, when she's now smoking just a half a pack of cigarettes, at most, according to her. And again, this whole period of time, three packs years, and I'll
the case, and that's sort of why I've been sitting over there in the corner not doing very much, because this is really the only period of time that she smoked our product.
And after three pack years of smoking, she was done and she moved on to continue smoking up through 2000, until the time she quit.
But remember, she also told us in 1970 -now she's smoking a different brand but in 1970, when she's still not smoking very heavily, the new warnings come out. And Mrs. Ruffo says, I heard them, I understood them, and I didn't try to quit.
And she did say during this whole period of time, despite the two pregnancies she had in here and despite her doctors telling her that she should quit, she never tried to quit. She doesn't think she tried and couldn't. She doesn't say, it was hard for me.
She says, I didn't try. And we asked her why. She said, because I didn't want to.
And that's fine. I don't want anybody to think that I'm criticizing Mrs. Ruffo in any way. We all make choices in life and we're entitled to make them, and nobody is entitled
to criticize us for making those choices or making those decisions.
We're also responsible for the consequences of all decisions we make in life, whether it's about smoking or, frankly, whether it's about anything else in life.
But Mrs. Ruffo tells us that, in 1970, she heard the new warnings. She understood them. She didn't try to quit.
And then the warnings that Mr. Fasi put up there from 1985. And remember, those were the rotating warnings. I think they had a board with four warnings on it that talked about emphysema. It talked about, hey, if you quit, that's a good thing. It will cut your risk of disease.
And Mrs. Ruffo says in response to one of Mrs. Schultz' questions, I heard them and I understood it, and I didn't try to quit.
And in fact, what she says is, through
1990,	through her diagnosis, she never tried to quit, she never gave quitting a thought.
I see they did put up the warnings behind me, okay. But you all have seen those warnings anyway.
And the first issue that I want to talk about is the first question on the verdict form. The first question on the verdict form is: Is Mrs. Ruffo a member of the Engle class? And that doesn't really tell you very much.
So you're going to have a jury instruction and the jury instruction is jury instruction number 5, okay. And it tells you how you're going to determine that, although it does that in what would charitably be called legalese.
But essentially, it's two questions, and you'll have a chance to read this, you don't need to write it all down. You're actually going to get the written jury instructions when you're back there.
It's essentially two questions: One, was Mrs. Ruffo addicted to cigarettes and the nicotine in cigarettes, and two, was her addiction the legal cause?
And Mr. Fasi and Mr. Kaiser spent a lot of time talking about things like legal cause.
But legal cause is pretty easy to understand because it's right below that. There's a description of it.
And think of it as this, "but for." It's
She never gave quitting a thought. It was just nothing she was interested in. In fact, when her doctors told her to quit, and we asked her, well, Mrs. Ruffo, why didn't you quit, what she said was, I simply wasn't interested.
And even in 1990 -- and Mr. Fasi touched on this briefly. Even in 1990, when Mrs. Ruffo first saw Dr. Reed, remember one of the things Dr. Reed said was, I want you to go to the Bethesda Hospital free smoking cessation clinic, I'd like you to go there. And I believe they put all the medical records from Dr. Reed.
And what Mrs. Ruffo said, according to Dr. Reed's notes is, I'm not interested. I don't want to go. I'm not interested in your help quitting smoking.
Again, that's her right. But with that right comes responsibility for its consequences.
Now, let me move to a slightly different topic. I want to talk about the verdict form and the various claims that are in this case and what you're going to need to do when you go back and deliberate.
really "but for" cause. So the question that you're going to have to decide on class membership is, was Mrs. Ruffo's claimed addiction the "but for" cause of her developing the COPD?
Or was it her decision -- going all the way back here to the time she was smoking just a few cigarettes a day and being warned by her doctors in 1961 and '64 and '66 and '70, was it her choice back then, was it her choice back then not to quit smoking, not to follow the advice of her doctors, not to follow the advice of the Surgeon General? Was that the "but for" cause of her COPD?
And I suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, the evidence in this case, Mr. Fasi went through a lot of it, and I promise you, I will not go through all of that evidence again, demonstrates conclusively that, yeah, it was Mrs. Ruffo's decisions about smoking, her decisions not to quit in the face of the information and evidence that she had about the health effects that was the "but for" cause.
And if you find that, then your answer is no to question number 1, she is not a member of
the Engle class, and your job is over. You don't have anything else to do in this case.
And Mrs. Ruffo, by the way, told us when we asked her, we asked her, you know, did you enjoy smoking, why didn't you quit? And her answer, and I think she was very candid about it, she said, I enjoyed it, I liked it, it's something I wanted to do. I think she talked about, it was stress relief, it was a good diet, it relieved tension, and, again, those are all things that she certainly is entitled to.
But at the end of the day, if you find that it was her decision not to quit, even in those very early days, then your answer to question number 1 is simply no, and your work is done.
I want to go briefly to question number 2, the statute of limitations, and again, I'm not going to go through all of this.
Can you put up the statute slide for me?
What I've done is I put together -- this one. Okay, thanks.
What I've done is, I've put together a slide that I hope will come up here eventually,
symptoms were in 1980.
Is it a coincidence that when Mrs. Ruffo told the state, her doctors, and these other folks, that her symptoms of COPD were in the late '80s, is that a coincidence that that happened at all of these different times on all of these different occasions? I would suggest not.
It's not a coincidence. Mrs. Ruffo is being absolutely truthful when she told the state, when she told her doctors, when she told everybody that her symptoms were in 1980, on each of these occasions and all at different times.
The second part of the statute of limitations questions, does Mrs. Ruffo know or should she have known that those breathing problems -- I think everybody acknowledges existed in 1980, in the late '80s, did those -did she know or should she have known that they were related to her smoking? And the answer to that, of course, is, of course she did.
You met Mrs. Ruffo. She's a smart lady. She had gotten warnings and we went through those warnings back in the 1960s, '70s, and
if not, I'll put it up on the Elmo for you.
But these are all of the -- all of the documents, statements and things -- actually not all of them, a large number of the documents that Mr. Fasi went through when he was talking about the statute of limitations issue.
And these are all either testimony or documents, all done, by the way, at different times, folks, and I'm not going to go through each one of them. You've heard them all, the disability exam, the disability report, the medical records.
But think about this, every one of those documents was done by Mrs. Ruffo at a different time in her life, every one was done for a different purpose.
All of them were done at a time when Mrs. Ruffo and her lawyers weren't trying to fit this case into a mold, make sure it's all before May 5th of 1990.
These were done back -- these were done long before there was a lawsuit, with the exception of her interrogatory answers, they were done after the lawsuit, and they said her
'80s that smoking was bad for her.
But probably the best record is from Dr. Reed, when he said Mrs. Ruffo reported that before she came to see him, she cut back on her smoking.
Now, whether she did or not, I think Mrs. Ruffo said she really didn't, isn't important.
What is important is that she recognized that there was a link between those breathing problems that she had been reporting on all these sources and her smoking, and that's all that's required for you to check yes on question number 2, and then we don't go any further.
Now I want to spend most of my time talking really about the next question and really question 3A on the verdict form because this is the first time that my client's name appears. This is the first time we are being asked to make a decision about each of the defendants in this case.
And you can see that the question up here is, whether or not smoking cigarettes manufactured by each of the defendant was the
legal cause of Mrs. Ruffo's COPD?
Again, we're back to legal cause, "but for" cause. And Mr. Fasi told you why it was no for Philip Morris, I agree with him. He told you that he suspected I would say it was no for Lorillard, and he was right.
And he told you -- so he gave you a lot reasons for why it was no. I won't go through them, because Lorillard has an additional reason that I want to talk to you about, and that is, in Lorillard's case, Mrs. Ruffo simply didn't smoke enough Lorillard cigarettes to get COPD. And that's not based on me telling you that, okay. That's based on all three doctors who testified in this case.
In order for you to answer yes to question 3B, you would have to conclude that, in fact, Mrs. Ruffo smoked enough Lorillard cigarettes that they could be the legal cause of Mrs. Ruffo's COPD.
Now, we know they can't be and we know that because Dr. Bernstein, who was the doctor who was read by Mr. Kaiser just yesterday, I think, Dr. Goldman, and Dr. Reed all said that smoking and COPD has a dose response
just didn't smoke enough of them during that brief period of time in 1959 to 1966.
Can you put up the next slide?
Dr. Reed, the treating physician in this case, he said that -- let me get his testimony exactly.
What Dr. Reed said is that, according to him, the threshold before he could say that somebody would develop COPD is 15 pack years. You need 15 pack years before you can develop COPD from smoking. That's what Dr. Reed said.
What Dr. Goldman said is he said, in his view -- he had a more conservative view. He said that you don't get -- clinically diagnoseable COPD is not seen in smokers with a smoking history of less than ten pack years.
So he's a little more conservative than Dr. Reed in terms of when you get there.
And Dr. Bernstein, the pulmonologist that Mr. Kaiser read -- Mr. Kaiser and Mr. Sloman read. I think it was the last witness they put on. Dr. Bernstein was even more emphatic about this.
Can you put up Dr. Bernstein's testimony?
What Dr. Bernstein said was -- the
relationship; that is, that you need a certain dose of smoke before you're going to develop COPD and it takes place over time.
And the way they measure that dose is in something called pack years, which is a pretty easy concept to talk about once you sort of understand it, and here -- I know I'm blocking somebody now with this.
Here is a description of pack years, okay. And this is what Dr. Reed I think was trying to explain late in the day, and I know it got a little confusing, but it's pretty easy.
Pack years is, you take the number of cigarette packs smoked per day times the number of years smoked and you come up with pack years. So the example I used up there was one pack per day times three years, you get three pack years.
Pack years are important because doctors look at those things in terms of deciding the probability that you're going to come down with a disease or going to get a disease.
What the evidence in this case is that Lorillard cigarettes could never have been the legal cause of Mrs. Ruffo's COPD because she
question was, if she would have quit smoking at ten pack years or less, is it your opinion, to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, that she would have avoided developing COPD?
That's the standard, a reasonable degree of medical certainty. And Dr. Bernstein, the doctor that Mr. Kaiser and Mr. Sloman read to you, at the end of the day, he said that's correct, you need at least ten pack years or you will not get med -- that you will not get COPD.
So how many pack years of Lorillard cigarettes did Mrs. Ruffo smoke during that time period in '59 to '66? The answer is right here. She said she started in 1959 or '60.
She wasn't quite sure and nobody blames her.
It was a long time ago. I was born in 1958 so it was a long time ago.
Okay, I am old, I know that, Mrs. Ruffo.
Anyway, she said she smoked a few cigarettes a day, so I used quarter of a pack, five cigarettes a day, I don't know, three, five, whatever, through 1961 when her son Michael was born. Two years is basically a half a pack. If it's a little more than that,
maybe it's a pack year here.
'62 to '66, she was smoking about half a pack a day, okay, times five years, that's another two-and-a-half pack years, that a grand total of three pack years. That's it. That's the entire Lorillard smoking history in this case is three pack years.
And if Mrs. Ruffo -- that is simply not enough smoking to develop clinically diagnoseable or to develop any COPD. And that's not according to me, and that's not according to somebody I brought to you. That's according to her treater, her expert and the doctor that Mr. Kaiser and Mr. Sloman read to you yesterday.
So the answer to question 3B has to be no based on that. It's just simple math, folks, there's nothing more.
And what Mr. Kaiser has argued -- and I suspect you'll hear that, is what Mr. Kaiser will tell you is, well, you know, I mean,
Dr. Goldman did say every cigarette counts.
But that's not the standard, folks, okay.
To be "but for" cause -- to be the "but for" cause, it has to contribute substantially, to
that Mrs. Ruffo justifiably relied on something that Lorillard said, Dr. Proctor said he had no idea what Mrs. Ruffo relied upon, so he can't help you answer that question.
The next question is -- you know,
Dr. Proctor bases all of his testimony on these thousands and thousands of documents that he says were read.
Dr. Proctor brought you not a single Lorillard document. Now, when you go back to the jury room, you're not going to see a single Lorillard document, other than you're going to see two annual reports from 1952, when Mrs. Ruffo was nine years old, and from 1953, when she was ten, and I don't think Mrs. Ruffo was reading Lorillard annual reports, but they're not secret documents. They're publicly available documents.
The only thing that Dr. Proctor talked about was a Dick Van Dyke ad, remember he played that, Dick Van Dyke, and I think Mary Tyler Moore was Lori Petri, right? I think -they played that.
That was in 1966. And Mrs. Ruffo, of course, said she never saw any of our ads
be legal cause, it has to contribute substantially. That's the legal definition.
And from their own doctors, Lorillard's smoking doesn't contribute substantially.
Let me move on to question 4 on the verdict form. And Mr. Fasi held that up for you. And that's the reasonable reliance form.
Did Dorothy Ruffo reasonably rely to her detriment on the concealment or omission by one or more defendant of material information not otherwise known or available?
Not otherwise known or available. That's the standard, and Mr. Fasi talked a lot. That was a lot of the boards he put up. That was a lot of the other information he put up. So I just want to talk to you really about Lorillard and about what you heard about Lorillard in this case.
And the answer is, you didn't see or hear virtually anything about Lorillard. You know Dr. Proctor came in and testified, and, as Mr. Fasi told you, he was their conduct expert, and what did he say?
He said, one, he knew nothing of Mrs. Ruffo. So if the plaintiff has to prove
anyway. But, of course, that was after she switched brands so that ad couldn't have had any impact on her.
And a Bob Cousy basketball ad, I'm not really sure what that was all about.
But the question you have to ask in determining this question -- by the way, that's it for Lorillard. You didn't hear anything else about Lorillard. You didn't see any other Lorillard documents.
You did see Ms. Leung, but she didn't know anything about Mrs. Ruffo. In fact, she wasn't even asked any questions about Mrs. Ruffo.
You realize the lawyers didn't ask her a single question -- I don't even know why they played that 30 minutes of video for you guys.
They didn't ask her about Dorothy Ruffo. They didn't ask her about any of the documents she looked at related to Dorothy Ruffo. They showed you an Old Gold advertisement from the 1920s, before Mrs. Ruffo was born, and a brand she never smoked.
Ms. Leung did tell you a couple things, that cigarette advertisings were tightly regulated by the federal government going back
to the '50s, and that Lorillard was preclearing its ads with the federal government going back to the '50s.
Now, again, it's not really relevant to this case because Mrs. Ruffo didn't see any of our ads, but nonetheless, that's about all Mrs. Leung could talk about, other than general marketing information. So I'm not sure why they brought Ms. Leung to you, why they spent your time on that.
I do want to turn to the issue of comparative fault because everybody sort of talked about that. I agree with Mr. Fasi that when you get to the comparative fault question, based on the totality of the evidence in this case, I don't think you'll get here, by the way.
I think if you answer no to question 1, which is the class membership question, obviously you don't get there. If you answer yes to question 2, you don't get there.
So I don't think we ever get to comparative fault. But if you get to comparative fault, I suggest you base it on the evidence in this case that you ought to be
recognize that this is the last time I get to talk to you.
And some of you may disagree with me, but you're bound to follow the evidence that you have in this case in determining things like damages. And I'd suggest to you, based on the evidence, based on what Mrs. Ruffo knew, based upon the choices Mrs. Ruffo made, that if you're inclined to award damages, you should be talking about the hundreds of thousands of dollars, not the tens of millions of dollars that Mr. Kaiser put out.
But, again, I think the number is zero. I think the number is zero because -- for the same reason Mr. Fasi did, because this case is about Mrs. Ruffo and her choices.
Mrs. Ruffo, as we talked about on the time line, had knowledge. Mrs. Ruffo made the decision that she didn't want to quit. And she told you, very candidly, why she didn't want to quit.
As Mr. Fasi pointed out, there is no claim for medical expenses, there's no claim for lost wages. And as the Judge will tell you, you can't enter a damage number to penalize
putting a hundred percent next to Mrs. Ruffo, because Mrs. Ruffo had the information. She had the information and she made a choice, a choice she was absolutely entitled to make.
But she had that information.
Now, as to Lorillard, if you want to talk about Lorillard, I think the number should be zero. It should be zero for two reasons.
One, she didn't smoke enough of our cigarettes to even get COPD, and, two, you saw nothing, you saw no Lorillard documents, no Lorillard internal documents, you heard nothing about anything that Lorillard did that Mrs.
Ruffo relied upon.
So I don't know how you can put any number based on this evidence -- and you have to decide this case based on this evidence. Based on this evidence, I don't know how you can put any number down for Lorillard other than zero.
Now, I do want to talk to you about compensatory damages, because Mr. Kaiser put up a pretty big number, tens of millions of dollars.
And again, you don't get there based on the discussion we just had. But my job is to
Lorillard or Philip Morris.
It has to be based on evidence that you have in this record.
Well, I know my time is almost up. I can see that over there. And this is the last time I'm going to get to speak you to. It's probably the longest I've spoken to you in the last two weeks.
And, as Mr. Fasi said, he and Ms. Schultz don't get to talk to you again. So I do want to thank you for your time and for your attention.
But I'd also like you to think, as you begin to deliberate, keep in mind Mrs. Ruffo's own testimony, that despite repeated health warnings from doctors, the Surgeon General, friends, remember that guy who showed the picture of the lungs in the '70s, and for the entire time up through 1990, she made the decision to continue to smoke.
And what she said was that she never even considered quitting up through 1990. That's her testimony. She never gave quitting a thought. Again, that's absolutely her right.
And when we asked her, you know, why she
didn't give quitting a thought -- the next slide -- there was a slide before that, but that's okay.
When we asked her why she didn't give quitting a thought, she said it was because she didn't want to. That even when her doctors were telling her -- and this is long before she was diagnosed with COPD. Even when all of those doctors that Mrs. Ruffo told you about, because she told you, candidly, every doctor told her to quit smoking. This goes back to the beginning of time, every doctor told her to quit smoking.
We said, why didn't you quit back then, back when you were smoking a few cigarettes a day? And her answer was pretty simple, and I think very honest. I just didn't want to. I liked smoking.
And she told you that the first time, the very first time that Mrs. Ruffo ever really put her mind to quitting, the only time that she really wanted to quit was when she did in October of 2010, okay?
Mrs. Schultz asked this question, "Had you ever made up your mind that you really wanted
back.
