MR. PERSONS: Yes, Your Honor. Thank you. May it please this Honorable Court, Counsel,
Mr. Ryan, Mrs. Ryan, ladies of the jury. Good morning.
THE PANEL: Good morning.
MR. PERSONS: I want to begin by thanking you, just as Mr. Alvarez did. This process wouldn't work without you. And you have been most, most attentive throughout this process and we greatly, greatly appreciate it, having you. It's an inconvenience having to put your other matters aside, your work aside and other obligations to do this, and we greatly appreciate it.
When I started this case, it seems like it's been longer than about a week or so ago, but it was about a week ago we started with opening statements. I told you then and I'll say it again now, this case is about Thomas J. Ryan and what happened in his life and the decisions that he made and the basis for those decisions.
I also told you at that time that all the questions on the verdict form relate to Thomas J. Ryan. And that's still true.
I told you during opening statement that there were some key facts that would help you answer every question on that verdict form, and that's still true.
Mr. Ryan did not start smoking because of
anything a tobacco company said or did. That's just not true. He lived with his father at his grandparents' house. He's living in the same -- he's sharing a room with his father.
His father leaves his Camel cigarettes on his dresser, the cigarettes are accessible, he gets them and he starts smoking. He wants to emulate 18- and 19-year-old boys. Those were peers.
And Dr. Henningfield told you in no uncertain terms, he said advertising -- in the scale of things, advertising is down here, parents and peers are up here in a separate major category of influence. And we saw that during the course of this trial. Mr. Ryan was influenced by parent/father, peers.
Mrs. Ryan, smoked her first cigarette when she had gone away to college, influenced by peers. When she took up smoking at the age of 38 in 1972, she was influenced by peers. The other teachers were smoking in the teachers' lounge. It wasn't advertising that made her do it. It wasn't James Dean that made her do it. It wasn't John Wayne that made her do it. It was parents and peers.
Mr. Ryan didn't reasonably rely on anything the tobacco companies said or did. Reasonably. Reasonably, and that's the key word. Was it reasonable? We're going to explore that, why it was not even reasonable to do such a thing.
Despite knowing that smoking was dangerous, he continued to smoke. He wants to say now he didn't know about it, but the warning was on the pack and there were other warnings that he had in his life about the dangers of smoking.
He quit smoking permanently in 1997, the first time he got serious about it. He was diagnosed with COPD in 1995, but it wasn't until 1997 that he got serious about quitting. Obviously at that time when he was diagnosed, he knew about the dangers, he's lost his father to the disease. But he didn't make any effort to try to quit until he got serious about it. When he got serious about it, he quit and stayed quit.
Mr. Ryan admits he's partially responsible, partially at fault for causing his own COPD. And we're going to explore that.
What does that mean? It means that he could have done -- taken steps to quit sooner. He could have done some things that would have prevented him from getting COPD and being in the condition that he finds himself in today.
Despite the advertising, despite the statements, Anne Browder and other people from The Tobacco Institute, he could have done things that would have prevented him from being in the condition he finds himself in this very day.
Now, we talked about the rest of the story and I told you about Paul Harvey when we had opening statement. During cross-examination of the plaintiffs' experts, that's when the other side of the story was told. Look at Dr. Proctor.
On direct examination, Dr. Proctor said to you that the industry withheld knowledge that selective filtration wasn't possible. You saw one of those documents during plaintiffs' closing just now. But on cross-examination he said the public health community knew that selective filtration was not possible. They knew that a filter couldn't remove all of the
cancer-causing effects.
Nobody ever said that a filtered cigarette was safe. They said it was less dangerous than a nonfiltered cigarette. That's just common sense. That will be one of the things in the jury instructions, using common sense.
Nobody ever said it took everything out of -- all the dangerous chemicals out of the cigarette. It reduced the amount of tar that was reaching you, but not all of the tar that was reaching the smoker.
The FTC robot measurements were confusing and misleading, that's what Dr. Proctor told you on direct examination. On cross-examination, he had to admit that the industry, the tobacco companies told the FTC that using this robot would not mimic the way people smoked. A smoker doesn't even smoke the same cigarette the same way. Might take a deeper draw this time, a lesser draw the next time.
The 1964 Surgeon General's Report, according to Dr. Proctor, was a minor blip.
But on cross-examination he said years immediately following that report was one of
the highest periods of quitting. 30 million people, 8,000 a day, quit in the ten years following that report. And they did so despite everything that the industry was saying, despite the campaign of deceit and denial, they took this to heart. People who were serious about it, did something about it. Actions speak much louder than words. People took steps to do something about it.
Now, in 1964, how old was Mr. Ryan? You see he's 24 years old. He's not a youth smoker at that point. He's 22 years old.
'53 Teague report that they brought out where Dr. Teague went across the street to the library at Wake Forest University medical school and did research, research that was publicly available to anybody who's trained in science and medicine, and put together a memo that said that, yes, smoking causes cancer.
And guess what, nothing that he cited was secret or based upon any research the tobacco companies had done. It was based upon publicly available scientific research.
Dr. Proctor said on direct examination, the industry didn't warn the public that if you
switched to a filter, you may smoke more.
Didn't have to. That's -- that concept is called compensation. The concept of compensation is common sense. You can see that message going back for decades. If you've got something that you're drawing air through, obviously you're going to pull on it harder.
You don't need a scientist to tell that you.
"Industry research, ammonia to provide a nicotine kick. That was what he said on direct. On cross-examination, he had to admit that there was no evidence that ammonia makes cigarettes more dangerous or addictive. In fact, adding ammonia to it is a way to reduce the amount of nicotine in the tobacco plant. Using ammonia or another solvent, including water, he said, would remove nicotine from the tobacco leaf.
And he had to admit on cross-examination that when you burn tobacco, ammonia is one of the things that's released. Would knowing that have stopped Mr. Ryan from continuing to smoke cigarettes? Absolutely not.
Plaintiffs spent days reproving Engle findings, talking about company conduct and the
bad things in those documents and misguided opinions expressed in those documents, the campaign of deceit and denial. That was all part of the Engle trial.
Brought you some generic witnesses.
Here's three of them. Witnesses who didn't know anything about Mr. Ryan. Dr. Henningfield said, I don't know what has happened with any of the individual plaintiffs. Dr. Burns said, I'm not aware of the names of the cases where they might plan to use this videotape.
Dr. Proctor said, I don't know anything about his biography except the brands of cigarettes that he smoked. Their testimony is generic, doesn't answer the questions on the verdict form as they relate to Mr. Ryan.
Dr. Proctor, last two years testifying against tobacco companies, he's made a million dollars. He's made over $3 million testifying in his career against tobacco companies.
70 percent of his income comes from testifying. He spent -- $34,000 he charged to review the documents in this case, but nothing about Mr. Ryan.
The evidence from the generic witnesses
took several forms. They talked about youth marketing evidence, advertising evidence, addiction evidence, filter and low-tar evidence, and design evidence. We're going to go through some of those.
Youth marketing. Here's their youth marketing case. Mr. Ryan started smoking because his father smoked and he wanted to be like 18- and 19-year-olds in town.
Plaintiffs' evidence on youth marketing occurred after Mr. Ryan was an adult. The earliest document they showed you was from
1973.	In 1973, the man is 31 years old.
Plaintiffs' evidence on youth marketing involved brands that Mr. Ryan never smoked. They're talking about Marlboro and things that Mr. Ryan -- he never smoked those type of cigarettes. So the evidence on youth marketing, that didn't have any impact on Mr. Ryan. He was already grown at the time that they were doing all these youth marketing studies.
Dr. Henningfield told you in no uncertain terms that parents and peers are so powerful that you basically had to put them in their own
category. Way above advertising, way above anything else that would influence somebody to smoke, the greatest predictor of whether somebody is going to smoke is whether they have a parent who smokes or they've got friends who smoke.
That was one of the bases for this Public Service Announcement that came out back in the ' 60s .
Can we play that, Mr. Smith.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
Like father, like son. Like father, like son? Think about it. For information on smoking and heart disease, ask your heart association.
(Thereupon, the video ended.)
MR. PERSONS: That's where the influence came from. That's where the influence came from.
Advertising of cigarettes is a legal activity, just as it is for advertising other products. There's no evidence that Mr. Ryan continued to smoke or refused to quit because of advertising.
Plaintiffs presented evidence of advertising that Mr. Ryan never saw and for brands of cigarettes that he never smoked.
Remember, whatever else you do, over 60 million smokers, they were exposed to the same kind of advertising, but they managed to quit.
There's a jury instruction on this. And the instruction says, and this is the law, that the manufacture, advertisement and sale of cigarettes are lawful activities. Reynolds cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes.
So using Mickey Mantle to advertise cigarettes or John Wayne to advertise cigarettes is legal. There was nothing illegal about them.
Dr. Henningfield told you that nicotine addiction doesn't interfere with a smoker's ability to make an effort to quit. You can be addicted to nicotine; doesn't mean you can't call a smoking cessation clinic or you can't take steps to try to quit.
Nicotine addiction does not prevent smokers from permanently quitting. Nicotine
addiction doesn't prevent heavy smokers or highly addicted smokers from quitting, in fact, any smoker can quit. That was his testimony.
Nicotine did not prevent 60 million smokers or Mr. Ryan from quitting and quitting for good.
Let's talk about filter and low-tar evidence. Mr. Ryan switched to filtered cigarettes after the vast majority of smokers had switched to filtered cigarettes. So if he was buying into the filter story, then he would have switched back in the '50s and early '60s when other people were switching to filters instead of switching to filters into the '80s.
Mr. Ryan switched to filtered cigarettes more than 25 years after the public health community had been telling smokers that filtered and lower-tar cigarettes were safer, they were telling them, either you quit or you switch. And by the way, that was based not only tobacco company research, that was based on research that the American Cancer Society did, the American Lung Association did, the National Cancer Institute did. It was
independent scientific research.
And there is no evidence that Mr. Ryan would have quit smoking instead of switching to a filtered cigarette.
You may recall Dr. Proctor said, well, having people switch to filtered delayed their quitting. It caused them to delay trying to quit. That's not the case with Mr. Ryan. It didn't delay him trying to quit. He made no efforts to quit in the '50s, '60s, '70s or into the '80s at the time that he switched to filtered cigarettes, he hadn't made any attempt to quit. He didn't make an attempt to quit until six years after he had switched. So obviously it didn't delay him trying to quit smoking.
Plaintiffs' evidence on filters and low tar have nothing to do with this case.
The design evidence. We know that since the 1800s, it was reported that cigarettes were inhalable and, therefore, uniquely dangerous.
We covered that with Dr. Proctor.
Dr. Proctor said on direct examination it was flue curing that made it inhalable, but on cross, he had to admit back in the 1830s in
Turkey, using Turkish tobacco, and the Turks did not use flue curing, they used sun curing or air drying.
JUROR JOLIE: Can you move the easel, please?
MR. PERSONS: Sure.
That they used air curing. But he had to admit that the cigarettes were still inhalable. And when you inhale something like that and you get it down into your lungs, it's going to be dangerous.
He told you that natural tobacco is just as dangerous and addictive. It contains thousands of chemicals, carcinogens and nicotine, just like the tobacco that has additives in it.
Dr. Proctor said roll-your-own cigarettes are just as dangerous as manufactured and just as addictive as manufactured cigarettes. He told you that additive-free cigarettes are not any safer or less addictive than cigarettes that have additives. Bottom line is there's no such thing as a safe cigarette. There simply is not. They are dangerous and they're addictive by definition, by nature.
Again, the manufacture, advertisement, sale of cigarettes are lawful activities. Reynolds cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes.
The plaintiffs have failed to prove their case. I'm going to tell you why. Failed to prove Mr. Ryan was a class member. They failed to prove that the health effects or the addictive nature of cigarettes were unknown or unavailable to Mr. Ryan. And they failed to prove Mr. Ryan reasonably relied on anything Reynolds said or did regarding the health effects of smoking or their addictive nature. And failed to prove they're entitled to any money damages.
I want to talk a little bit about believability of witnesses, and this goes to credibility whether somebody is, in fact, believable or are they testifying inconsistently.
Do you have to take the deposition from prior testimony and bring it to them and contradict them with it? Do they testify consistently? I can remember a long time ago I
was told that -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
MR. PERSONS: There's an old saying that you don't have to try to remember the truth, because the truth doesn't change. And so if it doesn't change, and it's a constant, you don't have any trouble remembering it. But when you have conflicting stories, when you tell one story in January of 2014, and then you tell another story here in the courtroom, and they're inconsistent, then somebody's got to confront you with your prior testimony. We're going to talk about some of those inconsistencies.
When people testify inconsistently and it erodes their credibility, you can choose to accept what they say or you can reject it outright, you can disregard it entirely. You can also take into account whether somebody has an interest in the outcome of the case.
People say a lot of things and lay fault and blame other people for millions of dollars memory gets better for certain things if it's going to affect the outcome of the case. So keep that in mind.
With respect to experts, the judge will instruct you -- did instruct you -- these are the instructions you will take with you. You may accept such opinion testimony, you can reject it, or you can give it the weight you think it deserves. It's up to you.
Now, let's see, do we have the ELMO? The class membership question on the verdict form. Number 1: Was Thomas Ryan addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause, a legal cause of his COPD/emphysema? I submit to you the answer is no, and I'm going to tell you why.
We talked about the three hurdles in opening statement: Medical causation, addiction, addiction causation. There's no dispute that he has COPD. There's no dispute that his COPD was caused by smoking. Smoking Lucky Strikes and smoking Vantage cigarettes. There's no dispute about that. He's over that hurdle.
There's a dispute about addiction.
They've got to prove that Mr. Ryan was addicted to nicotine. But even more than that, they've got to prove that the addiction was a legal
cause of his COPD; that but for the addiction, would he have developed COPD, a legal cause.
Now, not everyone who smokes becomes addicted. That was their own evidence. Some smokers enjoy smoking. Dr. Henningfield told us that. Some smokers want to keep smoking and do not want to quit. They make no effort to quit.
Dr. Henningfield testified about the DSM-IV, which he said the psychiatrists use, sponsored by the American Psychiatric Association, but no one applied it to Mr. Ryan to diagnose him with addiction.
What Mr. Alvarez did was ask Mr. Ryan yesterday when he was on the stand those questions that are in the Fagerstrom Test.
Well, you can get a zero on the Fagerstrom Test and be considered addicted.
There's no legal instruction on what constitutes addiction. You'll have to use your judgment and your common sense about whether or not Mr. Ryan was, in fact, addicted.
But even if he was addicted, they still have to prove that the addiction was a legal cause of his COPD. Now, what does that mean?
It means that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing -- containing nicotine, the COPD would not have occurred.
In other words, did Mr. Ryan have the ability to quit, but chose to continue to smoke, or was Mr. Ryan compelled to smoke, leaving him no choice, no matter how hard he tried, but to continue smoking until he developed COPD?
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge, that's not the legal standard.
THE COURT: Thank you. Ladies, you rely on the instructions I give. This is counsel's argument to try to persuade you based upon the evidence and instructions.
Proceed.
MR. PERSONS: Thank you, Your Honor.
Plaintiff admits that Mr. Ryan is partially responsible for his COPD. There's no dispute about that whatsoever.
What does that mean? Mr. Ryan knew that smoking was dangerous while he continued to smoke. Because if he didn't know it was dangerous, how can he be at fault for continuing to smoke?
Number 2, Mr. Ryan was not confused about the dangers of and addictiveness of smoking because if he was confused about it, how can he be partially at fault for it?
Mr. Ryan had the ability to quit smoking earlier. Had he quit smoking earlier, he could have avoided getting COPD.
Mr. Ryan could have tried harder to quit smoking. This is what the partial fault admission means. He could have tried harder. But he didn't. Making five attempts to quit in a 41-year period is not trying hard at all. In fact, that's not trying at all for several decades.
Mr. Ryan had the ability to quit smoking in time to prevent his COPD.
And we know he could have done it.
Millions and millions of addicted smokers were quitting, when Mr. Ryan made no effort whatsoever to quit.
We know that between 1950 and 1965,
17.6 million people quit smoking. And that was during the time when that early information came out about the mouse-painting studies where they put the tar from cigarette smoke on the
backs of the mice and they developed tumors.
'64 Surgeon General's Report, after 15 years following that, 30 million quit; and then by 2014, 60 million.
But quitting takes motivation and persistence. Dr. Henningfield:
"Question: I think we just talked about it, but among the things you need, it takes motivation, does it not?
"Answer: Yes.
"Question: Takes persistence?
"Answer: Yes.
"Question: It takes willpower?
"Answer: Well, they go hand in hand.
"Question: You would agree that if someones does not want to quit smoking, it's unlikely that they're going to quit smoking?
"Answer: Correct."
He also talked about this pamphlet put out by the American Cancer Society called "Smart Move." It's a little pamphlet and it's just a little handy thing. And in the pamphlet, they said, "Do you have what it takes to quit smoking?" And there's nothing about nicotine gum or nicotine patch or Zyban or Prozac or
anything else. It says, "Do you want to stop smoking," first of all. Yes or no. "Are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine?" Yes or no. "Are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments?" Yes or no. "If you can answer yes to all three questions, you can stop smoking." If you're willing to put up with some uneasy moments.
They compared nicotine to heroin and cocaine, but the withdrawal effects from those drugs are not what you have with nicotine.
With nicotine withdrawal, people become irritable. They get headaches. But they don't have DTs like they do when they're withdrawing from alcohol or have to be hospitalized, like they do when withdrawing from heroin. So it's a big difference.
There was information in the newspapers throughout the '60s, '70s, '80s, '90s about stop smoking. And Mr. Ryan was living in Auburn, New York at the time and this is from the Auburn Advertiser and it says, "All it takes is willpower." That's all it takes to quit.
Mr. Ryan was not motivated to quit smoking
prior to 1997. We know that. Because he never tried to quit in the 1950s, '60s or '70s. He didn't smoke in 1987 by going to sleep for five hours. He said, all right, I'm not going to smoke, and then he went to sleep and then he woke up and he had a cigarette. So he quit for five hours.
In 1988 he quit for 15 to 20 hours. He didn't smoke in 1990 that was less than 24 hours. He tried in 1996 with nicotine gum, but he smoked while he was using it. Tried in '96 with the patch, but he smoked while he was wearing the patch.
He wasn't motivated to quit because he didn't throw away his lighters or cigarettes.
He smoked while he was using the patch and gum. He didn't ask for help to quit. He rejected his doctors' advice to quit. He delayed in trying to quit after he was diagnosed with COPD. And he didn't discuss quitting with Dr. Bratt until 1997, although he had been seeing Dr. Bratt since 1976.
So he was not motivated to quit. But in order to quit, you've got to be motivated to do so.
Addiction did not drive Mr. Ryan's smoking. What drove it was he didn't want to quit smoking. He simply didn't want to quit.
Mr. Ryan was motivated when he was told that if he continued to smoke, he would become a respiratory cripple. Dr. Singer told him,
I'm not going to continue to treat you if you keep smoking. Yet it was four to five months later Mr. Ryan made an appointment with Dr. Singer because he was serious about quitting and then he quit a month later. Those are the facts. That's what happened.
When he was told that, he said -- after he got the Zyban and made up his mind he was going to quit, he said, it must be working, so I thought I'm going to use a little willpower. I can't just depend on the pill, I've got to use willpower.
And he says he started the willpower. And he said, I depended on Zyban at first, but then the willpower kicked in, I made up my mind that this has got to be it. And once he did that, he was able to stop.
We talked about the fluctuation of his weight. And that had more to do with the
impact it had on his breathing as anything else, but also to illustrate that once he made up his mind, once he got motivated to lose weight and improve his breathing, he was able to do it, just like he was able to quit smoking.
Even though at one point in time, he was -- let's see, in '98 and '99, he's up to 273 pounds he started losing and losing and then he gets down to 230 some pounds in '09 and by 2010, '11, he's down to 2 07 pounds and he's been able to keep his weight down, but that's using willpower to do it.
So when Mr. Ryan is motivated to do something, he does it. I asked this question:
"Question: Mr. Ryan, just a few more questions, please, sir. Losing weight was something you wanted to achieve, wasn't it?
"Answer: Yes, sir.
"Question: And you've been able to keep the weight off through today, correct?
"Answer: Yes. In the last couple of years, yes.
"Question: Just like you've been able to refrain from smoking through today?
"Answer: Yes, sir."
So it's willpower. And all this talk about relapsing does apply to Mr. Ryan.
Dr. Henningfield said relapse is commonly defined as going back to smoking after a week or more of cessation. Well, Mr. Ryan never relapsed.
He also said some definitions of relapse looks at whether you go back to smoking after one day of quitting. Mr. Ryan never relapsed. Relapse occurs in a great majority of smokers who intend to quit smoking. It doesn't apply to Mr. Ryan because he did not relapse.
Mr. Ryan, is he any different than the 60 million smokers who quit? Were the cigarettes he was smoking more addictive than the other cigarettes? No. Was his brain affected any differently than the smokers who quit? No.
Was he exposed to advertising different from the smokers that quit? No. Was he exposed to tobacco statements different than the smokers who quit? No.
Did he smoke more or longer than the smokers who quit? No, he did not. Did he make
his own decisions and choose not to be serious about quitting before 1997? Yes.
And he said several things. We don't know for sure what it is that he felt about smoking or why smoked. We just know that he had no desire to quit until 1997. Because he said some contradictory things.
In his deposition he said, "I didn't enjoy the taste of them." At trial he said, "I must have enjoyed the taste."
In his deposition he said, "I didn't enjoy the smell. It makes your eyes burn and your nose run." And at trial in front of you he said, "I enjoyed the smell of it."
In his deposition he said it didn't stimulate him. Yet, yesterday in trial before you he comes to court and says it stimulated him and that's why he smoked.
One thing is uncontradicted, one thing he's consistent about, and that is he quit in 1997 when he got serious about quitting and hadn't had another cigarette. He's been consistent there.
Mr. Ryan failed to prove that his addiction was caused -- that addiction caused
his COPD.
So I submit to you Question 1, was Thomas Ryan addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his COPD/emphysema, the answer is no. If your answer to Question Number 1 is no, that's the end of your deliberations and the end of this process.
Now let's talk about concealment. Verdict Questions 5 and 6. Number 5, did Thomas Ryan reasonably rely to his detriment on R.J. Reynolds' concealment or omission of material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of Thomas Ryan's COPD?
Did Thomas Ryan reasonably rely to his detriment on any act or omission in furtherance of R.J. Reynolds' agreement with other tobacco companies and organizations to conceal or omit material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of
Mr. Ryan's COPD?
I suggest the answer to both of those questions is no, that's if you get there.
And they failed to prove concealment because in order to prove concealment, you've got to show a link, a causal link between the concealment or the agreement to conceal and Mr. Ryan's COPD. And they've got to prove that there is something that Mr. Ryan reasonably relied upon that was concealed from him that had he known it, he would have avoided getting COPD.
Let's look at the instruction. The instruction says: On this claim, the issue for your determination is whether Thomas Ryan reasonably relied to his detriment on Reynolds' concealment of material information not otherwise known or available -- we're going to talk about what's material information -- not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of Mr. Ryan's COPD.
Mr. Ryan did not develop COPD because the information about the dangers of smoking were
unknown or unavailable to him.
Here's Dr. Proctor. He said that in the 1950s, people didn't know about the risks of smoking, but on cross-examination.
"Question: And you'd agree there were hundreds of articles on smoking and health in the New York Times back in the 1940s and 1950s?
"Answer: That's right, it was big news.
"Question: And from the 1920s to the 1950s, you wouldn't be surprised if the New York Times published thousands of articles on smoking and health, would you?
"Answer: I would not at all be surprised.
"Question: The historical records show that there were other newspapers in the New York area reporting on this topic, correct?
"Answer: That's right."
We know that for hundreds of years -- and this is Dr. Proctor admitted these things. For hundreds of years, people have been writing and talking about smoking being bad for your health. For over 2 00 years, it's known that tobacco use can be hard to quit. For hundreds of years, schools were teaching about the dangers and addictive nature of cigarettes.
We brought you some schoolbooks that were approved by the Catholic diocese where Mr. Ryan went to school, both at Alfonso Elementary School and the Mount Carmel High School, those books. And those books talk about the dangers of smoking.
In the early 1800s, people referred to tobacco use and smoking as addictive. For a hundred years, it's been known that nicotine is in tobacco. They didn't need the tobacco companies to tell them nicotine was there. People knew that.
A hundred years ago it was no secret that nicotine was the substance that caused people to get addicted to cigarettes, that people smoked for nicotine.
Slang terms for cigarettes have been around for a hundred years, and Dr. Proctor admits that. He -- and Mr. Ryan remembered hearing terms like coffin nails, cancer sticks and nicotine fit.
Dr. Proctor said, well, they were kind of joking about it. Well, there was no joke in this ad showing a coffin with a bunch of cigarettes in it and the cover story there on
the headline is about the Surgeon General's Report.
But warnings throughout the '50s in Mr. Ryan's own community -- and we know he read the paper because that's how he looked at the want ads for jobs and so forth -- talk about the dangers of smoking and how it can kill you and how it cuts your life short.
1964 Surgeon General's Report comes out and says in no uncertain terms, they said it was established beyond a reasonable doubt that smoking causes lung cancer and smoking is associated with an increased risk of emphysema. There was no secret.
And then here's all the newspaper coverage in the 1960s, and this is just a small fraction of them. But they're big and bold above the fold, telling you about the dangers of smoking. Priests urging people in the Catholic church to quit. Public health officials urging people to quit smoking. Radio shows on stopping smoking. How Congress wanted to put a label on cigarettes, that made news.
197 0s, again, more coverage of the link between smoking and disease. COPD/emphysema
wasn't a secret. It was out there too in the news about the link between emphysema and smoking.
More coverage. Emphysema and smoking link. Do you want to live or do you want to smoke? It's a choice.
Summary and conclusions of U.S. report: Cigarette smoking one of the most important causes of chronic bronchitis in the United States. Smoking cigarettes is associated with increased risk of dying from pulmonary emphysema.
Again, more coverage, bronchitis, emphysema, swelling of the lungs due to presence of air in the connective tissues. You didn't need Dr. Burns to tell you that; it's in the front page of the New York Times in 1964 for everybody to see.
So was the information known or available? Yes. Yes, it was available. All you had to do was read it. It was no secret.
Here's another story, cigarettes a factor in chronic bronchitis. That's in 1962. 1978, here's the research that was done, funded in part by the tobacco companies and the American
Medical Association, the same medical association that Dr. Proctor took the stand and said they were bought and paid for. But here's what they said about smoking.
They came out with this study, and this is in 1978, they said, "A $15 million, 14-year research project sponsored by the AMA Committee for Research on Tobacco and Health and funded by the nation's top tobacco companies strengthens scientific arguments that cigarette smoking is to blame for a plethora" -- that means a lot -- "of health woes. The committee believes that the bulk of research sponsored by this project supports the contention that cigarette smoking plays an important role in the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases."
That's tobacco funded research, 1978.
That ain't from -- that's not from somebody's file somewhere or secret document. It's out there in the public realm. It's in the literature.
In fact, this is from the Fort Lauderdale News. "Research bolsters the old idea that cigarette polonium is cancerous." They're
talking about chemicals in smoke. It's right there in the newspaper. That's May 28, 1975, Fort Lauderdale News, talking about a chemical component in cigarette smoke that can kill you, that can cause cancer. It's no secret.
In 1954, Dr. Levin, a major health official, he warned -- he issued a statement concluding there was more than enough evidence about the dangers of cigarette smoking, to advise the public to quit smoking in order to lower the incidence of lung cancer. That question was asked of Dr. Proctor and he said, yes, that's true and Dr. Levin's statement was picked up and reported in the New York Times.
Again, here's the head of the commission -- commissioner of health in New York, New York State, and that's where Mr. Ryan was living at the time, back in 1958. He said, "Those who deny that tobacco is a causal factor in lung cancer just won't face facts."
Dr. Leroy Burney, this is 1957, and Dr. John Heller, who are on the ground, they were there, they're in real-time in 1957, they say the public was informed.
Now, Dr. Proctor comes in in 2014 and says, well, they weren't informed. Well, who's in a better position to know, the people who were there whose job it was to inform the public about the dangers of smoking, or somebody who was about three or four years old at the time, in the case of Dr. Proctor, who wasn't around? Who's in a better position to know?
And so we're looking at what the people who were on the ground who were on the front lines fighting this battle, what they had to say in real-time.
Daniel Horn said in 1968, "You could stand on a rooftop and shout 'Smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they don't already know." He's saying this in 1960.
Dr. Burns said in 1975, more Americans know -- know that cigarette smoking is dangerous than know the name of the president of the United States. And in 1981 he said 95 percent of people are thoroughly aware of the health dangers of smoking and 90 percent of them realize their own health could be affected
by it.
That's despite all of the stuff that the Tobacco Institute was putting out and Anne Browder and all that, people knew. They knew.
1985 -- I mean, I'm sorry, 1966, the first warning goes on, says "Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." Now, Mr. Ryan testified that he was aware of this. When the warnings went on in '66, he was aware of those warnings. He testified to that.
And, of course, they strengthened it in 1970. It said, "The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." It's very important, 1966, when this warning went on the package of cigarettes. Because if not the first, it was one of the first consumer products that you could obtain without a prescription that had a warning on it. Everything else was something -- medicine that you needed a prescription for that had a warning on it, but no other consumer product had a warning on it.
There are warnings on alcohol now, we've got warnings everywhere now. You even have warnings on a cup of coffee that the coffee is
hot. But back in those days when this warning went on, it was new. It was revolutionary and that's why it made news and that's why it got people's attention and that's why a lot of people quit smoking.
I don't care what they were saying in the advertising, the warning was on the pack that this was dangerous. It didn't say it may be. "The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health."
And then they had the rotating warnings beginning in 1985, one of which said,
"Cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema."
Now, Mr. Ryan didn't need this warning to know that it could cause emphysema, because his father had been diagnosed with emphysema in 1983. So he didn't need this, but it's there. The information is available. It's available. It's not unknown. It's known.
13 million people quit -- smokers quit between 1966 when this warning went on and 1970. They heeded the warning. They took heed of the warning. They didn't ignore it. Those who did ignore it, they did so at their own
peril. But 13 million people heeded the warning.
And Dr. Henningfield said the first label was a massive educational campaign that through the media makes a difference. Because the media covered this fact that they had to put this warning on cigarette packs.
Millions and millions of people were quitting for health concerns since the '50s. 17.6 million by 1965, 9 million between '60 and '65. 30 million between '64 and '79. And a substantial number of these smokers who quit were heavily addicted smokers and 90 percent of them quit cold turkey.
So let's take a moment and let's look at this, the public information campaign and how well it worked to convince millions of people to quit smoking. We talked about Dr. Levin's statement about lung cancer and the association between lung cancer and smoking in 1954 . And you look at between 1955, following Dr. Levin's statement on smoking and cancer, and then in 1957, the Surgeon General said the public was informed, through excellent coverage, about the dangers of smoking.
Surgeon General's Report comes out in 1964. And then that other line is '65.
Between '55 and '65, you've got 17.6 million people quitting.
The warning label goes on in 1966. In 1968, that's when Daniel Horn said, "You could stand on a rooftop and shout 'Smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they didn't already know. The warning label was strengthened in 1970. In 1972, the warning goes on all advertising.
So even if you're looking at a Vantage ad in the newspaper or magazines, it's got the warning in there.
And then in 1975, we know from Dr. Burns that from that poll data that more Americans knew smoking was dangerous than knew the name of the president. Between '64 and '79, you've got millions and millions of people quitting. 30 million people quit smoking.
And I asked Dr. Proctor this on cross-examination.
"Question: Regardless of the campaign of doubt that you talked about, we had in this
country the highest quitting rate between '64 and '75, didn't we?
"Answer: Yes, the quitting rate was high at that point."
So despite the campaign of doubt, people quit smoking and they did it for their own health.
Now, we know that the risks of smoking were not unknown or unavailable to Mr. Ryan.
His father punished him for smoking his cigarettes. He remembers warnings that were on the cigarette packs. Mr. Ryan watched "See it Now," he watched Harry Reasoner, he read the newspaper, he read the Reader's Digest, all sources of information about the dangers and addictive nature of cigarettes.
He switched to Vantage in 1981, even though he said he didn't have any serious doubts about whether smoking was dangerous until the late 1980s. His stepmother died of lung cancer in 1985, and she was a smoker of filtered cigarettes. And his father died in 1987 .
So these are messages, that's information, information being available about how dangerous
smoking is, how deadly it is and how addictive it is. The dangers and addictiveness of smoking were not unknown or unavailable to Mr. Ryan. That information was known by Mr. Ryan, and it was available to Mr. Ryan.
Reasonable reliance on the concealment of a material fact is a legal cause of his COPD if it directly, and in natural and continuous sequence, produces or contributes substantially to producing his COPD so that it can reasonably be said that but for the reasonable reliance on the concealment, his COPD would not have occurred.
So now, what -- and just using common sense, what's going to be more impactful in terms of what information you're going to rely on? Are you going to rely on somebody coming on TV and saying, well, no, it hadn't been proven.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge, golden
rule.
THE COURT: Sustained. Rephrase.
MR. PERSONS: I'll rephrase it,
Your Honor.
What would a reasonable person rely on?
Father's diagnosed with COPD in 1983. Father says to son, my doctor says that my COPD was caused by smoking. Are you going to believe that or believe something that somebody on television -- and by the way, when I had him on cross-examination, he said he didn't remember any of these things that were on TV -- or what's happening before your very eyes?
It's the same thing with the advertising. Are you going to believe what your parents are doing, is that going to influence on you, or something you see on a movie screen? What's going to be a bigger influence on you? An activity that one of your parents engages in, whether it's drinking beer, whether it's smoking cigarettes or some other endeavor, or something you see an actor or movie star or sports figure do on TV?
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge, golden rule violation.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: What's going to be a bigger influence on someone, especially a young person, a teenager? What's happening to your father and your stepmother?
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge, golden rule violation.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PERSONS: Or what's happening -- and when I say your, I'm talking about Mr. Ryan, your stepmother, Vera Ryan, in 1985 died of lung cancer caused by smoking. Going to believe that, or are you going to believe what Anne Browder is saying about, well, it may or may not cause it?
Are you going to rely on what you're seeing that's happening with your loved ones, happening to your family members, or what Anne Broward is saying may or may not happen or what has not been proven and you see it with your very eyes?
So is it reasonable, does it make sense, common sense, to rely on something like that when you've got contradictory evidence right in your own family with people suffering from disease associated with smoking? That's what reasonable reliance comes down to.
That's an unreasonable reliance.
Let's look at what -- a material fact.
It's not just any fact. A material fact -- and
you'll have these in your instructions. This is Instruction Number 13 on page 14 of the instructions the judge gave you. It says a material fact is one that is of such importance that Thomas Ryan would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission of that fact.
Now, would he have quit smoking if he saw a document from R.J. Reynolds that said, well, filters really don't work? Would that have stopped him from smoking?
Remember, now, he was diagnosed with COPD in 1995. He goes to the doctor in '96, and the doctor says, you really need to -- you need to quit smoking. He told him -- he had told him before, but he's telling him, you really need to quit smoking with your condition.
He doesn't quit. He goes to see him in '97. And the doctor says -- notices that he has a pack of cigarettes in his pocket. He says, Mr. Ryan, if you don't quit, I'm not going to treat you anymore. Does he quit? No. He still doesn't quit.
So would a memo from R.J. Reynolds have caused him to quit smoking? When he's
diagnosed with a disease that killed his father, and that doesn't cause him to quit, not even for a day, would Reynolds have been able to tell him anything that would have made a difference?
Would that old man Heimann that you saw in the videotape, who was going on and on like this, would something that he had told Mr. Ryan, would that have changed his behavior and caused him to do something about his health? No.
Would having a list of all the ingredients in cigarette smoke have changed his behavior? No.
So, if it wouldn't, it's not a material fact. Because all these other things that he saw with his own eyes and he understood with his own eyes, that those didn't change his behavior.
Knowing a list of ingredients, I submit to you, it wouldn't have changed his behavior.
Why is it necessary to even know all the ingredients if you know something is dangerous? You don't need to know all the ingredients in Clorox to know that it's dangerous. You don't
need to know all the chemical formulas of everything in it to know it's dangerous. Read the warning label, it tells you it's dangerous.
You read the warning label on a pack of cigarettes, it tells you it's dangerous. All you have to do is read the warning.
So why would a memo from R.J. Reynolds have made a difference? And when has it become necessary to get a memo from somebody or information from a manufacturer in order for you to do something to protect yourself?
Someone can look at an advertisement for a product, let's say alcohol, liquor, you don't see anything in there about drunk driving. You don't see anything in there about cirrhosis of the liver. Is it glamorous? Yes. You see Puffy Combs or somebody advertising Ciroc vodka, and it looks glamorous. But just because it looks glamorous, does that mean you're going to overlook the fact that there are adverse health consequences associated with using that product? No.
Mr. Ryan had never heard of these folks anyway. He'd never heard of the Frank Statement that they heard all that time talking
about whether the tobacco companies said about public health, he never saw that. Never saw that until he got to his courtroom. But it ran in all the newspapers in 1954. It's been around all this time, but he never saw it.
He never saw any -- any statements from the CTR. He never saw any statements from the TIRC. He never saw any Tobacco Institute statement, never saw any press releases. All those press releases that they put out there for the newspaper to pick up, he never saw any of that.
He never saw any of these white papers.
He never saw any tobacco industry interviews or statements. He never saw tobacco company statements about smoking and health. He never saw any tobacco company statements about smoking and addiction. Never saw it.
If he didn't see it, how can you rely on it, much less reasonably rely on it?
This was yesterday:
"Question: You don't remember any ads from the tobacco companies where they said smoking was not dangerous, do you?
"Answer: That smoking was not dangerous?
"Question: Yes.
"Answer: I don't exactly know when they said that, no, I don't.
"Question: Isn't it true that you have no recollection of seeing a person for a tobacco company on television talking about whether smoking was dangerous?
"Answer: I can't recall."
In the 1960s, '70s and '80s the public health community's common messages were smokers of unfiltered cigarettes should quit or switch to filter or low-tar cigarettes. And low-tar and nicotine cigarettes were deemed to be less hazardous. Not safe, but less dangerous. Lower-tar and nicotine cigarettes may be easier to quit. Those were findings that they made. And these findings were based on studies that they conducted. Over 40 years of research done by the public health community, not the tobacco companies. This wasn't a tobacco company position.
In fact, the public health community is what urged the tobacco companies to develop filtered cigarettes. Dr. Proctor told you that on cross-examination. That's how they
developed. That's how they came into developing the filtered cigarettes. Because the research showed, the epidemiological studies showed that people who used those filtered cigarettes had less incidence of lung cancer. Not that it eliminated lung cancer; they just got less of it. Not that the cigarette's safe, but just less dangerous.
In the 1960s, Reynolds told the FTC that the tar and nicotine machines would not mimic actual smokers. In the '60s, '70s and '80s, Reynolds scientists generally believed that low-tar filtered cigarettes were better than unfiltered cigarettes. That's in the internal documents. A genuine belief. Not something we're going to fool the public. No. They genuinely believed it.
Because their research showed the same thing that the National Cancer Institute's research and the American Cancer Society's research showed, which was that there was a lower incidence of lung cancer among people who smoked filtered.
And there was no agreement among the tobacco companies to conceal anything about
filters or low tar. None. The agreement to conceal was about just denying that it's dangerous. Not about filters.
So filter or low-tar cigarettes cannot be the basis of plaintiffs' concealment or conspiracy claims because it's something they firmly believe, and Dr. Proctor told you there was no conspiracy to produce filtered cigarettes. In fact, they competed with each other, trying to see who could make a better filtered cigarette.
Smoking Vantage cigarettes is not evidence of reasonable reliance. Mr. Ryan's father, stepmother and his wife smoked filtered cigarettes for years before Mr. Ryan switched to filtered cigarettes.
When he met his wife in 1974, she was smoking a filtered cigarette. When he came to Florida to move down here from New York to stay with his daddy, his daddy and stepmother were both smoking filtered cigarettes. That was back in 1973 . Yet it was 15 years later, almost 15 years later that he switched to filters.
Not Vantage. No Vantage ads say that
smoking is safe or healthier. No Vantage ad says that. The Vantage ads were aimed at female -- by the way, the TV ads were off the air ten years before he switched. That was the first question I asked him yesterday when I had chance to cross-examine him.
They had shown that TV commercial for Vantage, and he claimed that that's what made him switch. Well, that ad was produced -- the TV advertising for cigarettes ceased in 1971.
He switched in 1981. Use common sense. An ad that you saw in 1970, at the latest, because that's when they took them off TV, so '70 -'71 is when they were banned -- influenced you to switch to Vantage in 1981? Makes no sense.
Vantage ads were aimed at female white-collar smokers. He doesn't fit that category. Vantage ads backfired. And Dr. Proctor admits that, because the implications of tar and nicotine and cancer, that overpowered the reference to taste.
That's what the revolutionary filter was about, that it could be a low-tar cigarette that would taste good.
Well, Mr. Ryan said in his deposition that
taste didn't matter to him, that he didn't like the taste. So he wasn't smoking for taste, but that's what Vantage was advertised for, taste. And then when he started with Vantage, he ripped the filters off anyway and smoked the cigarette, just like he had smoked all those years the unfiltered Lucky Strikes.
No evidence Mr. Ryan reasonably relied on anything the tobacco companies concealed or omitted. Mr. Ryan's father developed COPD in 1983 and told him it was caused by smoking. By 1983, he definitely believed that smoking could cause him to get COPD.
His stepmother died of lung cancer in '85. He lost his father to COPD in 1987. Yet he never tried quitting before his father died.
Not one time. Even after his father was diagnosed with the disease. Same one that he has now. He didn't try. Didn't make one single effort to quit. Full knowledge.
If you don't know by that time, there's nothing R.J. Reynolds can do or say that would tell you or convince you that this is a dangerous activity.
The knowledge was available. It wasn't
unavailable. He had the knowledge. No evidence that he would have quit instead of switching to Vantage. He didn't try to quit when he believed the risks of smoking in the early '80s. He didn't try to quit after he definitely knew the risks after his father's diagnosis. He didn't try to quit when his stepmother died, and he didn't try to quit at any time his father had COPD between '83 and '87. The whole time his father was suffering with COPD, he didn't make one single solitary attempt to quit smoking. And what did make a difference for him? Here's what he had to say.
"Question: What made a difference for you in your attitude about smoking was when you started feeling ill effects of smoking, when you started feeling badly?
"Answer: It was after my father passed away, and shortly after that, I was feeling the effects."
That was the only message that he would understand. Not something from Reynolds.
Could have disclosed all kinds of things to him. That wasn't going to make a difference.
It wasn't anything that the doctor asked him to
do. No. It wasn't anything that happened to his father or his stepmother. It was, when I started feeling the ill effects. When his own body started warning him, that's when he got serious. But not serious enough to quit. Not serious enough to quit. He didn't rely on any concealment to his detriment. None. None.
TECHNICIAN SMITH: Robert, could you turn on the ELMO, please.
TECHNICIAN PHILIPSON: Sure.
MR. PERSONS: All right. Let's look at Question Number 5 and Question Number 6. He didn't reasonably rely on anything to his detriment, so to COPD, the answer should be no and no.
Was I supposed to stay up here with this?
TECHNICIAN SMITH: No.
MR. PERSONS: Gotcha.
TECHNICIAN PHILIPSON: Sorry.
Are we good?
MR. PERSONS: We're good.
We're back up to Question Number 2:
"State the percentage of fault that was the legal cause of Thomas Ryan's COPD."
I submit to you it's a hundred percent.
And I'll tell you why. The assignment of fault relates only to the actions that were a legal cause of Mr. Ryan's COPD. A legal cause. Reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of Mr. Ryan's COPD.
Let's look at what was the legal cause. Let's look at 41 years of smoking. Let's look at starting in 1955 and coming all the way forward to 1997. You look at all these years in between, Surgeon General's Reports coming out, warnings on the cigarette pack, strengthened warnings on the cigarette pack, rotating warnings on the cigarette pack.
Millions and millions of people are quitting smoking, and yet there's not even an attempt to quit. That shows there's no desire to quit. Don't want to quit. Made no attempt to quit throughout this whole period of time throughout the '6 0s and into the '70s, throughout the '70s into the '80s.
And then in 1987, there's a quit attempt that consists of going to bed and sleeping for five hours and then waking up and going into the ashtray and getting a butt. That was, in his own words, a serious quit attempt.
I submit to you it was not a serious quit attempt.
And then quitting for a few hours in 1988, and this is after his father passed away, by the way, and then a quit attempt in 1990 that lasted less than a day. And then using the patch and using the gum in 1996 and continuing to smoke while he's using those things.
Of course, in his deposition, he said he had tried the patch and the gum in '92, '93 and then when told that, well, they were weren't available without a prescription until '96, he said, well, it must have been 1996, then.
Let's talk about quitting and declining risk. What this means is that the sooner you quit, the sooner your body starts restoring itself and the -- lessens the likelihood that you will develop a serious disease from smoking cigarettes.
And Dr. Burns talked to us about that.
This was on cross-examination.
"Question: Now, if you look at the chart and you see the curve downward of the triangle for all-cause, is it true that after ten years, more than half of the excess risk of death from
smoking is gone, correct?
"Answer: Approximately half, yes.
"Question: And after 15 years, what, more than 80 percent of the excess risk of death from smoking is gone, correct?
"Answer: That's correct.
"Question: And by 20 years, the triangle is almost down to 0.0, so most -- you know, almost all of the excess risk of dying is gone, correct?
"Answer: About 5 percent remains."
So you're almost in the position of somebody who never smoked after you've been quit -- after you have quit for 20 years. But after quitting for just ten years, more than half of the excess risk is gone. More than half of the excess risk is gone.
So I submit to you that had Mr. Ryan quit when his father quit in 1983, he most likely would not have developed COPD. He had all of the information he needed to quit at that time. And he could have avoided it, but he didn't.
Let's look at some of the information he had available to him. Make sure everybody can see it. Then I'll move it once we get through
talking about it. Can everybody see that all right?
Mr. Ryan was warned throughout his life that smoking was dangerous and addictive.
Father forbids him from smoking. When a choice: Become a regular smoker, or don't start. But he became a regular smoker.
We know that there were warnings on TV and in the newspapers and magazines about you need to quit for your health. He continued to smoke. He could have quit for his health, but he continued to smoke.
We had warnings from the Surgeon General. He continued to smoke. He could have made the choice for his health.
Warnings on the cigarette packs starting in 1966. Yet he continued to smoke.
The Great American Smokeout started in 1976. He knew about it. He said, I knew about it. But I said, you didn't participate, did you? He said no. He continued to smoke.
Father diagnosed with COPD, and his father quit smoking cold turkey. That would have been an ideal time, if you're serious about it, to quit. But yet he continued to smoke.
Stepmother dies of lung cancer two years later. That would have been an opportunity to quit. He continues to smoke.
Father dies of COPD. He continues to smoke.
Warnings from his own body, coughing and shortness of breath. He continues to smoke.
Millions and millions of other people are quitting, and that's making the news. He continues to smoke.
Doctors warn him, you into need to quit smoking. He ignores their warnings. He continues to smoke.
When the doctor says, I'm not going to treat you for your COPD unless you quit smoking, get serious about it, he got serious about it and quit. That's when he quit smoking.
But all this other information that he had, all these other warnings that he had, he didn't heed. He didn't do anything in response to it. He continued to smoke. He continued in that activity because that's what he wanted to do. That's what he wanted to do. He didn't want to quit.
I submit to you Mr. Ryan's actions are the only legal cause of his COPD. There's nothing that R.J. Reynolds could have done that would have prevented him from continuing to smoke. Nothing.
If you see what's happening to your daddy and you see what's happening to your stepmother, and you don't quit, there's nothing R.J. Reynolds could have done or said that would have made a difference. And only Mr. Ryan had the ability anyhow to prevent his COPD. Nobody could do it for him. Nobody could do it for him. Nobody else could put the cigarettes down for him. That's something he had to make up his mind he wanted to do, that it was worth doing, and get serious about it and do it. And he didn't.
Mr. Ryan's a hundred percent responsible for the choices he made. He's a hundred percent. He can't lay that off on somebody else. Can't lay it off on somebody else. If you know that something's bad for you, as a consumer, and you continue to indulge in it, you can't blame somebody else.
If you know you can have some adverse
consequences from consuming alcohol, and you continue to do it, you can't blame somebody else. Because in this country, they said, well, you've got free choice. It's a legal product. You can choose to do it, or can you choose not to do it. You're grown.
Yeah, he started as a teenager, but he was a grown man when all these documents were coming out about youth marketing, youth marketing. They weren't marketing to him. He was a grown man. Somebody's daddy. He was no teenager. Thirty some years old. That's grown. When you're grown, you can make some choices. And nothing about an addiction, nothing, even if he is addicted -- let's -just for the sake of argument, let's say he's addicted. Would that have kept him from picking up the telephone and calling a smoking cessation clinic if he wanted to quit? There's no evidence of it. Mrs. Ryan testified yesterday she never saw him do anything to try to quit except when she saw him with a patch, and she saw that one time. One time.
In 40-some years, nothing. Not one time. This is somebody who is living in the same
house with you. No conversation about wanting to quit. No conversation about trying to quit in all of that time, but yet you want to blame R.J. Reynolds because they make a dangerous product.
THE COURT: Fifteen minutes, Counsel.
MR. PERSONS: Thank you, Your Honor.
When you had a choice and you exercise it -- you weren't robbed of your choice. You weren't robbed of your choice because you could pick up the phone and call the smoking cessation clinic. You could pick up the phone and call the American Lung Association. You could pick up the phone and call the American Cancer Society.
In the newspaper, they talk about these different clinics and groups that meet to try to quit smoking. Did you ever go to one of them? No. Before nicotine gum, you could have got chewing gum and tried to do that, but he didn't even do that because he did not want to quit. He did not.
TECHNICIAN SMITH: The ELMO?
TECHNICIAN PHILIPSON: The what?
TECHNICIAN SMITH: The ELMO.
MR. PERSONS: All right. 100 percent.
100 percent. 100 percent. Because, see, you could have quit in '83 when your father was diagnosed, but you didn't. And had you done so, you wouldn't have COPD now. But you didn't. You can't lay that off on R.J. Reynolds.
I'm going to talk about damages, not because they're warranted, certainly not, certainly not some $20 million, paying somebody for abusing their body.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge, it's inappropriate, "paying somebody."
THE COURT: Thank you. Ladies, again, this is counsel's opportunity to persuade you to reach a verdict. It's comment on what he believes is the evidence. Objection is noted. It's overruled. Proceed.
MR. PERSONS: Any damages have to be fair and just in light of the evidence, and all of the evidence, including the evidence about how you didn't try to quit smoking after your father got diagnosed. All of that evidence weighs in on it. Not just something -- a memo from the internal documents of R.J. Reynolds
from back in 1973 or 1978. Oh, no. Why did you keep on doing it and take no steps to try do anything about it after you saw what happened to your father?
And it wasn't until you got a message from your own body that you thought about doing something about it. Even after you were diagnosed with COPD, you didn't do anything about it. Yet you want to blame somebody else.
They have the burden to prove every dollar of damages, and they failed to do it because Mr. Ryan chose to smoke, despite knowing the dangers of it. He chose to do it anyway.
They're not seeking damages for lost wages, loss of support and services, and that would be like cleaning the swimming pool and mowing the lawn. They're not claiming anything for that. Not claiming anything for his medical expenses or any other economic damages.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge, inappropriate.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: Mr. Ryan's lung function is stable. Mr. Ryan normally leaves the house without his oxygen. He goes to bars for hours
without his oxygen. In fact, he was at his deposition in January of 2014 for two days without his oxygen. Mr. Ryan wasn't using his oxygen at his deposition.
Mr. Ryan's medical records note that he did not have shortness of breath in 2015. His condition is essentially stabilized.
He's been stable for decades. This is based on the medical records and the lung function tests, how well his lungs are functioning.
You go back to 1996. You see there, that's where he was. And then now -- this is normal decline. See average decline for a non-smoker and the average -- here's the decline for Mr. Ryan. You see that. He's essentially stable compared to people who are nonsmokers.
I submit to you no damages should be awarded.
Thank you, Robert.
All right. Let's talk about punitive damages. Under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted
against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. The answer is no.
Punitive damages can be only be awarded for concealment that was a legal cause of Mr. Ryan's COPD.
Remember what I said: But for. Something that was concealed for him that, had he known, it would have changed his behavior. They don't have that.
You cannot punish Reynolds for any harm that was suffered by anyone other than Mr. Ryan. They keep throwing out all these people who suffer from smoking-related illness every year. And that's unfortunate, don't get me wrong. But you can't punish Reynolds for something that happened to someone other than Mr. Ryan.
Punitive damages are in addition to damages to fully compensate. They can only be awarded to Mr. and Mrs. Ryan, not to the cancer society or the lung association.
And the burden is on the plaintiff to prove by clear and convincing evidence. Let's talk about what that is. I've got it highlighted here.
In contrast to greater weight of the evidence, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter at issue.
So if there's any hesitation whatsoever about whether punitive damages should be awarded, then they shouldn't be awarded, because it has to be without hesitation.
Without hesitation whatsoever.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge, that's not the standard. It's clear and convincing.
THE COURT: Ladies, I gave you instructions you are to rely on.
Proceed.
MR. PERSONS: The Engle findings do not establish that plaintiffs are entitled to punitive damages. You can't take into account the Engle findings in answering that question regarding entitlement.
Here's why Reynolds shouldn't be punished. Here's this research that they funded. Awarded more than $350 million in grants to fund independent scientific research projects.
Funded projects resulted in 7,000 published scientific or medical articles and reports.
More than 600 of these scientific articles were cited by the Surgeon General on smoking and health.
Funded ten Nobel Prize winners and funded research at virtually every major university in the country.
To hear Dr. Proctor tell it, all these universities, including Stanford, University of Florida, University of Miami, they were in some grand conspiracy with the tobacco companies to do research. Just use your own common sense whether that even makes sense.
Here's from the American Journal of Psychiatry, and this is research funded by the tobacco companies. "Heavy cigarette smokers thus appear to be true addicts." This is in 1963. Surgeon General came around to saying that in 1988.
But here in 1963, they are saying this. This is in the Journal of Psychiatry. You can go in the library and get the book. It's no secret. Then they say, this work was sponsored in part by grants from the American Cancer
Society and the Tobacco Industry Research Committee.
What did Reynolds do? Reynolds tried to reduce the levels of carcinogens in smoke going back to the 1950s. Going back to the 1950s, trying to remove the cancer-causing agents in tobacco smoke. But you can't remove them.
Started developing heat-not-burn technology, because when you burn tobacco, you release those harmful chemicals, cancer-causing chemicals. Thought that by heating it, you would avoid that. So they spent a billion dollars in research to develop the Premier and the Eclipse cigarettes. And they were less harmful than conventional cigarettes. There's no dispute about that. Dr. Proctor admits that.
Cigarettes -- they failed in the marketplace. People didn't want to buy them.
If they don't want to buy them, you can't make them buy it. You can't force people to buy things they don't want. And so they failed.
Cigarettes have carried warning labels since 1966. Reynolds has not disputed the dangers of tobacco for almost two decades. And
even after they did that, people continued to quit and start at the same rates they did before that. It didn't make any difference.
Reynolds has displayed ingredients on its websites for years. Punitive damages are not needed to prevent Reynolds from concealing the dangers of smoking, because everybody knows about it, number one.
And, number two, everything is on the website. It's disclosed. You wouldn't be telling anybody anything they didn't already know.
Smoking has declined for decades among youth. A lot of focus by the plaintiffs on youth smoking.
Well, let's look at the data. Smoking among junior high and high school students has declined by 66 percent since 1996. In the past four years alone, smoking among junior high and high school students has declined by 25 percent. Teen smoking is continuously undergoing a process of what he called demobilization. In other words, stigmatized associated with smoking. You're stigmatized, you're outcast if you're smoking. It's frowned
upon. It's not socially acceptable, and so fewer and fewer young people are taking up the habit of smoking, the practice of smoking.
Plaintiffs' experts agree that any smoker, even an addicted smoker, can quit. And any smoker can quit if they're willing to put up with some uneasy movements after stopping. That's what that book that I had out here talks about, this "Smart Move." Says that: "Are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments?"
And had Mr. Ryan been willing to put up with some uneasy moments after his father was diagnosed with COPD, we wouldn't be in here today. Wouldn't be in here. But he wasn't willing to do it.
So are a few uneasy moments worth millions of dollars? That's what you ask yourself. Ask yourself that. He knew the dangers, but wasn't motivated to quit, so he didn't quit until he got motivated.
Number 7. "Under the circumstances of the case, state whether by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages are warranted against R.J. Reynolds." The answer is no.
What have we got now, Mr. Smith?
TECHNICIAN SMITH: Last couple.
MR. PERSONS: We're almost through.
TECHNICIAN SMITH: We are.
MR. PERSONS: I'll move through these very quickly. Here's what Dr. C. Everett Koop -they like to quote the Surgeon General, so we've got some quotes from the Surgeon General. Here's what he had to say:
"The cigarette is not going to light itself and jump into your mouth, nor are you going to go into a brain-induced hypnotic trance and light the cigarette. No matter how much you have smoked or how much you smoke, the choice to light up is always yours.
"48 million of us have" -- at that time,
48 million people had quit -- "have successfully quit. When you engage in an internal warfare with yourself about whether or not to light up a cigarette, you can fortify yourself by remembering this important fact. Ultimately, you are the one who has control over your behavior."
That's nothing new. That's Dr. Cuyler Hammond. He was saying this back in 1954.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
CUYLER HAMMOND: It is now established, in my opinion, beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. In my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers, and they are being warned. What they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business."
(Thereupon, the video ended.)
MR. PERSONS: That's what they were telling the public back in the 1950s in the United States of America. Warned, should be warned, are being warned. What you want to do, it's your own business. It's your own business.
And then let's play Harry Reasoner, what he had to say after the Surgeon General's Report came out.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
HARRY REASONER: In this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. No one is going to forbid an adult
to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it's good for him either. The decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. This is Harry Reasoner. Good night."
(Thereupon, the video ended.)
MR. PERSONS: So, that's the bottom line. Can't lay it off on Reynolds. Can't lay it off on addiction. You've got to look at the mirror. Look in the mirror. It's your health that's depending on it, on your decisions.
Your health. If you think you're addicted, try to get some help for it. Didn't do it.
I submit to you that the evidence, the clear and convincing evidence points, in favor of a verdict in favor of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. Thank you for your kind attention.
