MR. ALVAREZ: May it please this honorable court, Mr. Ryan, gentlemen.
Morning, ladies. This will be my last time that I'll be addressing you. And you are the lucky six. I hope you feel that way. We talked about it in opening statements and voir dire.
And I hope that this process has at least given you the sense that the civil justice system works and that everyone has their fair -- fair time and opportunity to address their grievances in court.
And on behalf of Mr. and Mrs. Ryan, we want to thank you for your attention in this case. Thank you.
This phase of the case is really about two things. It's about punishment. It's about asserting the appropriate punishment that you already said by your verdict in Phase I that is warranted. And the second thing is to deter other corporations and companies and people from doing the same thing that was done in this case. Not just to deter Reynolds, but to deter other corporations.
And that's an important concept to understand, because I think what you heard during the opening statements yesterday is that Reynolds does not want you to punish them. They want a pass. And that would not be fair, and that would not be just. And, in fact, it would be unjust. And injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.
And this is about what they did to this man. And let's stop in 1995 when he got COPD and looked at what they were still doing, because they were still lying; they were still covering up; their product still killed people.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: They had no regard for human life. They cared only about money. And they need to be punished for what they did.
And the time is always right to do what is right. And the time is now, and the place is here.
One of the instructions the judge read to you yesterday is, "During your determination, you must consider the degree of misconduct," you know, how bad is the misconduct in this case.
And they had an opportunity in 1953 to stop it when this man was only 11 years old before he put the very first cigarette on his lips. They had a chance. And they knew exactly what they were doing to people like Mr. Ryan. They did it for money. They did not care who they hurt.
And they killed 20 million Americans.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: And they need to be punished.
I want to go through -- I have a very few slides, and I'm going to speak briefly this morning. I'm going to be followed by Mr. Paige,
who I agreed to share my time with. This is not going to go for an hour. It's going to go for much less a period of time.
But let me show you some documents I want to talk to you about.
MR. PHILIPSON: Hold on one second.
MR. ALVAREZ: You know, this is a document you saw in Phase I. It's a 1982 document. And it talks about, this is to say that, "If the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we would [sic] be out of business almost overnight."
I mean, this clearly shows the mental impressions, the state of mind of what they cared about and what they thought about and what they wanted. And it certainly wasn't about human life. They didn't care about suffering. They didn't care about who they hurt. And they only cared about one thing, and that's money.
And that's the only thing that they understand. And in order to deal with the company that only understands one thing, that's why we have a law that punishes companies when they act this bad.
There's a document that talks about removing certain reports from the research files and as
an alternative to invalidate reports or getting authors to rewrite reports. That's just bad. That's just wrong. Doing things like that, corporations in the United States just can't do things like that when they know that the purpose of doing those things is to harm people so that they could profit from them. That is not the place that we should be living in when companies like that are doing things like that. They have to be deterred. They have to be punished. Companies have to understand that they have to value human life.
Youth marketing is still going on. Regular smoking -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: It's still going on today. Children are still -- young people, teens are still smoking. 90 percent of all regular smokers are still starting as teenagers. This is at their hands. This is what they're doing.
And look at the Surgeon General report when it talks about how young children as young as six years old associate Joe Camel with cigarettes. The same number of children, the
same percentage of children associate Mickey Mouse with the Disney Channel. That's the world they shaped. That's the world they created.
And that's why 90 percent of all teens -- 90 percent of all smokers start as teens.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: Because that's what they shaped. That's what they wanted.
You can take it down.
They want to avoid responsibility for Mr. Ryan. They think they could escape responsibility because, well, we're selling less cigarettes because we're regulated by the FDA. Well, why are they regulated by the FDA? Why are they regulated by the FDA? They're regulated by the FDA because they can't regulate themselves. Why they -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: And move to strike.
THE COURT: Jury is to disregard the last statement.
MR. ALVAREZ: Why are they spending hundreds of dollars in user fees which their own witness
admitted is very unusual, no other corporation does it? What does any of that have to do with Mr. Ryan? Hearing your verdict is not enough. They have to feel it in order for it to be real punishment. Telling a corporation like Reynolds is not enough. They must be held responsible in a legal and meaningful way. Words are not enough. If they hear something, you want to make sure they hear it, it doesn't go in one ear and out the other. They have to feel it back in Winston-Salem.
And the means we use must be as pure as the ins that we seek. And this is what the law commands. This is what the law gives you discretion to do. And you are well within your law -- within the law to punish them for what they did to this man and his wife.
You heard a lot of words like "changes" yesterday. Well, I submit that those are nothing else than excuses. And you cannot lie and cause misery and death and illness for 50 years and not expect to be punished. A lie cannot live.
We heard that some of these company executives are no longer with the company. But
what you didn't hear is that not one was fired, demoted or even disciplined. You didn't hear a single word that these men were responsible for doing anything wrong. These men were the company. These men caused suffering -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: And move to strike that comment.
THE COURT: Jury is to disregard the comment.
MR. ALVAREZ: These men were the executives, the scientists in charge of this company.
You heard some evidence about the Master Settlement Agreement. What you heard there, if you listen very carefully, is that money goes to the states. And in Florida it goes to the State of Florida. It does not go to the people. It reimbursed for medical care, for Medicare and Medicaid, not to the people. People have to sue to get compensation. Not one penny of those dollars that went to the state is for punitive damages.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor, and move to strike. And may we come sidebar?
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
SIDEBAR CONFERENCE:
(The following proceedings were had before the Court outside the presence of the jury:)
MR. PERSONS: This is way over the top. And several of the comments are inflammatory, improper. The cumulative effect of it puts us in jeopardy. And, therefore, I move for a mistrial on that basis.
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. ALVAREZ: The MSA goes to -- they admitted the MSA goes to reimburse for medical care. That evidence came in over our objections. And I can point out that that is not -- not one of those dollars went for punitive damages, which is what they're here to assess. Okay? So that's an appropriate comment on the evidence.
THE COURT: Anything else?
MR. PERSONS: That has nothing to do with punitive damages. There's no link between that and punitive damages. And it's improper in Phase II to talk about that money went -- did not go for punitive damages.
MR. ALVAREZ: That's the whole purpose of
this trial, this phase of the trial. Then what was the relevance of that evidence?
THE COURT: Okay. I'd sustain the objection. There's no -- there's no manifest necessity for a mistrial. That motion for a mistrial is denied.
I will sustain the objection regarding punitive damages in the cases under the Master Settlement Agreement. That's sustained.
END OF SIDEBAR CONFERENCE
(The following proceedings were had before the Court and jury:)
THE COURT: Thank you. Ladies, I sustained the last objection. Disregard the last comment.
Proceed, Counsel.
MR. ALVAREZ: Yes, Your Honor.
Their conduct has shown you what they did to this man. And they should be punished. And they should reap what they sewed.
Now it's time to -- for me to suggest to you what a fair verdict for punitive damage, what punishment, what punishment they should get.
What's right? What's fair? What will punish a corporation like Reynolds?
Because in order for them to feel the
punishment, in order for your verdict to have meaning and a deterrent effect, it has to be fair, reasonable and they have to feel it.
Can you bring it up?
And we think $21,500,000, which is what you gave in compensatory damage, will do that, will do that. It's within your discretion to do that. And we implore that you exercise your discretion and punish them for what they did to Mr. Ryan and Mrs. Ryan and that that will have a deterrent effect on other corporations. And this is well within your discretion to do.
And with that I yield to my friend and my partner, Gary Paige.



MR. PAIGE: Good morning.
(Jury responds, "Good morning.)
MR. PAIGE: So as Alex did, and I'm sure Mr. Persons and also Mr. Guest will do, I also want to thank you all, every one of you for your time and your attention. We know that all of you have paid attention, and we also know that
you all have your own lives, and to be here is a sacrifice that you all made. And on behalf of Mr. Ryan, Mrs. Ryan and Robert Philipson, who's my friend, too, we all appreciate the sacrifice that you all have made.
And, you know, I just want to say that this -- you know, and Alex did bring this up, and hopefully you all did learn a lot. When you came here, you probably had some understanding of what you believe you knew about smoking and health and what was being revealed and not concealed. And we have been here a long time.
So as we all go on with our lives and you all move on, you know, five years or ten years from now, hopefully you all will look back at this at some point, you know, when you're talking to somebody or a friend, and this may come up, and you've learned a lot that maybe you'll use in your lives at some point.
But from Mr. Ryan and Mrs. Ryan, they do appreciate your verdict in compensatory. They do.
You heard about the misery he goes through and will go through. And Dr. Burns, the gentleman who was on videotape, he worked for
the Surgeon General. I hate to say this in front of him, but, you know, he has to look forward to a life of getting worse and ultimately suffocating to death. And that's how he's going to die, and that's what they caused him.
And, you know, the first phase we heard a lot about from the defense, this is about Thomas J. Ryan, you know, Thomas J. Ryan. They couldn't talk enough about him in the first phase. And we do, and he does appreciate what you did in the first phase.
But the -- this phase is about punishment to punish them. And these trials are important. And, you know, we know that you have your lives and your families, and that's important. But these cases that we do, you know, other than, you know the birth of my children, these are -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: Move to strike.
THE COURT: Jury is to disregard last comments.
I'm sorry, Counsel.
MR. PAIGE: These -- these -- these cases
are extremely important, and I think you all know that. And so we appreciate what you're doing.
And the punishment phase, you know, there's going to be a lot of talk about -- and it's important. You see Alex got up, he talked. I'm going to speak. Then Mr. Persons is going to speak, and then Mr. Guest is going to speak. We all want to speak because this is the very important part of the case because punishment, you've determined they need to be punished. Of course they do from what they've done.
And so for a punishment to be effective it has to be -- you have to take into account the -- you know, in lives with children or with other people who are punished, you take into effect what they did. What did they do? Was it bad - -
MR. PERSONS: Objection. Golden rule. Move to strike.
THE COURT: Sustained. Rephrase, Counselor.
MR. PERSONS: And motion, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Jury is to disregard the last comments.
MR. PERSONS: Motion, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Want to do it?
MR. PERSONS: Motion.
THE COURT: Thank you, sir.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. PAIGE: Sometimes I'll use the word "you," and I don't mean that. I'm talking figuratively about people in general. If I do that, I'm going to try to be clear when I use the word "you" or "you all," I don't mean you six. But I'll try to be more clear.
But in society when somebody else has to punish a child, it will take into account the severity of the action. You know, is it -- is it bad? How bad was it? Was it very bad? And based upon the severity of the action, that's how we determine the punishment. And if
somebody has multiple kids, you know, the severity of the punishment may deter the other kids. Because if you have -- if somebody has a child who does something wrong and they let it go -- well, you know, we all know what would happen.
So what they did here, there's nothing worse they could do to a group of people, to a group of human beings, to a group of individuals than what they did.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: It's argument. Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: So for Mr. Ryan, the number was brought up yesterday -- Dr. Garner is here.
He's a nice man, and I have no qualms with him, and I didn't mean if I -MR. PERSONS: Objection. Personal comments.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PAIGE: If I came across argumentative with him yesterday, I apologize to you all.
That was not my -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained. Move on.
MR. PAIGE: Okay. Mr. Garner yesterday Dr. Garner yesterday mentioned there were 3,800
plaintiffs from Engle. And you met one of the Engle plaintiffs, Mr. Ryan. And I have the privilege of representing him, and, again, thank you for your verdict.
This is not -- what he did took a long time to get here. You heard that the Engle class action was filed in 1994. It's now 2015, okay. So for 3,800 people, you know -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: What's the objection, Counselor?
MR. PERSONS: It's -THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PERSONS: There's no foundation for that. Misstates the evidence.
THE COURT: Thank you. It's argument, counsel. Proceed.
MR. PAIGE: Okay. I forget where I was, so I'm doing my best.
You know, Mr. Persons is a colleague of mine. He objects from time to time, and that's part of what we do. I wasn't always a lawyer, so I'm doing the best I can.
MR. PERSONS: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: Personal comments. Move to
strike.
THE COURT: Thank you. Jury is to disregard the last comment.
MR. PAIGE: Okay. What I was trying to -- I don't even remember. Let me think for a second what I was thinking about.
MR. ALVAREZ: 3,80 0. You were at 3,80 0.
MR. PAIGE: 3,800. So 3,800 plaintiffs.
He's one. The evidence is between 1964 and 2004 they killed 20 million people.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: 20 million people. You have to put that in perspective. 3,800 is probably -- I didn't calculate it. I'm sure it's .00000 something percent of that number that they've killed, and now there's 3,800 people in Florida who are trying to get their day in court. If we try 30 cases a year -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Thank you. Sustained.
Rephrase.
MR. PERSONS: Move to strike. Motion.
MR. PAIGE: You've heard from Dr. Garner yesterday. He's testified in three trials.
He's testified in three trials. There's 3,800 plaintiffs. This is just one of them.
This is a picture of Mount Everest. So with 3,800 plaintiffs from 1994 to 2015, what you're doing, what we're asking you all to do, more people have climbed Mount Everest than have been successful and brought an Engle action and -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: That's highly inappropriate. Move to strike. And I have a motion.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Jury is to disregard the last comment.
Let's talk about the evidence and the law, Counselor.
MR. PAIGE: Punitive damages. Punitive damages, your verdict is to punish and deter, and I know when I sit down Mr. Persons and Mr. Guest are going to come up.
THE COURT: Excuse me, guys. You have to keep it down. I can hear you up here.
MR. PERSONS: I'm sorry.
MR. PAIGE: And they're going to ask you not to punish them. They're going to say that they have been deterred. But it's not about
deterring them. It's about punishing them and deterring others so that other corporations, not only other cigarette companies but other cigarette companies, Philip Morris, Lorillard, Liggett, so when they see what you all did today to R.J. Reynolds, that will deter those companies, and they'll know they'll be punished for doing what they've done. The same is true. So that's why punishment is important.
One of the jury instructions is you're to consider the degree of the misconduct, and that's one of the things that I was talking to you all about. You have to consider the degree of the misconduct. So when you look at the 2 014 Surgeon General report, this was the report from just last year, the report comments about the "Century-long epidemic of cigarette smoking has caused an enormous avoidable public health tragedy. Since the Surgeon General's report of 1964, more than 20 million premature deaths can be attributed to smoking cigarettes. The epidemic was initiated and has been sustained by the aggressive strategy of the industry which has deliberately misled the public on the risk of smoking." That's what they did. That's why
you're here. That's why you found they should be punished and punitive damages are warranted. We're still -- you know, we're happy to have this debate.
"The burden of death and disease from the tobacco use in the United States is overwhelming."
So when you're considering what punishment to instill on them, when you're considering what will be proper to punish them, what will be proper to deter other companies, you have to consider that what they did on the scale of horrendousness, how bad is this? How bad is what they did on the scale of bad?
Okay. They talked yesterday about Dr. Garner, and they talked about what they're doing now differently, and what they're doing now differently all started after 2000. And they started with the Premier, the Eclipse cigarettes he told you about. He told you about the VUSE, the e-cigarette. He told you about the snus. And so that's their evidence to you to say, hey, please consider that we finally admitted after 50 years that cigarettes are harmful, we finally admitted after 50 years that
nicotine is addictive. Now that that message is getting out, smoking is going down in our society.
Dr. Garner told you about that. He told you about their guiding principles, how they're guided by the principles, one of the principles they're guided by that smoking causes horrible diseases. They put that up to tell you about that. So they know about that. And their transformation they talk about, that we're transforming is taking a long time. It's been taking them a long time to transform, because it is about money, because they sell nicotine, an addictive drug. That's what their documents say. They've said that for decades. We're in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. They know that.
And so they're transforming because the word is out. They know, they've been forced to transform, and that's why they're transforming. And now because they're forced to transform they've come up with these other products, because if they can sell nicotine, an addictive drug - -
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor,
preemption, 403, State Farm versus Williams.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection is overruled.
MR. PAIGE: If they can sell nicotine, an addictive drug, in other forms because the FDA is regulating cigarettes, but the FDA is not regulating is not regulating Eclipse.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor. Misstates evidence.
THE COURT: Thank you. Ladies, you're to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
MR. PAIGE: The FDA is not regulating the Eclipse cigarette, so they're now transforming to the Eclipse, which I asked Dr. Garner, I asked him, do you know about what the Surgeon General said about Eclipse, because you told the jury that it was safer? And this is in evidence what the Surgeon General has told them about the Eclipse and the Premier cigarettes. This is from 2 010.
"Human machine testing indicate these products provide no clear benefit to users.
"Intensive machine smoking of Eclipse delivered levels of key lung and cancer-causing toxicants similar to or higher than those from
two commercial brands."
That's their transformation. We've killed 20 million with the conventional -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained. Rephrase.
MR. PERSONS: Oral motion. Motion, Your Honor.
MR. PAIGE: That's their transformation. So that's part of their transformation. That's not it. They've transformed here, and then they've transformed to the e-cigarette. So the e-cigarette -- you know, you heard about all the youth smoking the regular cigarette. 90 percent of all people, all smoking start as teenagers, because if you don't start by teenager, most likely people will never smoke. So they know with a regular cigarette nicotine is an addictive drug. If they can get them to smoke as teens, that's good, that's really good.
MR. PERSONS: Objection. Misstates the evidence.
THE COURT: Thank you. Ladies, you're to rely on your own recollection of evidence.
MR. PAIGE: Now with the e-cigarette and the VUSE cigarette, I spoke to Dr. Garner about this
yesterday, they know in 2 012, only 2 percent of high school -- this was only high school. He said there was another number for middle school. But for high school students only 2 percent were smoking the e-cigarette in 2012, and now they're up to 13 percent, 13 percent of teenagers. So it's going up.
So as they're transforming down, they're transforming back up selling the e-cigarette, which is another nicotine delivery device. It's another -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor. Preemption.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection is overruled.
MR. PAIGE: That's what Dr. Garner admitted yesterday. He admitted it yesterday.
So now we know, and when they talked about the MSA, he talked about certain numbers, that, hey, we've paid $44 billion into the MSA, we've paid that. We've paid user fees to the FDA of,
I forget the number, but it was a lot of money, a billion dollars or whatever it was. It seems like a lot of money. But this is what the Surgeon General says that they're spending every
year, every year on marketing. They're spending $10 billion every year. So over the same 18 years that they paid into the MSA, the 44 billion -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor. State Farm. Relevance.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection is overruled.
MR. PAIGE: The 44 billion over 18 years, it's 180 billion marketing and promoting that they're spending during the same time period. They certainly -- which if you do the math, it's about a million dollars an hour, a million dollars every hour is what the industry spends.
Adolescents are clearly the target.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: That's what it says here. "Adolescents, long-term cash flow for the companies. In addition, the nature of imagery used in the advertisements clearly appeal to the aspirations of adolescents, suggesting they're the target."
That's not a surprise to us now. But that's in the 2012 Surgeon General report. So that's
their other transformation. They went to the Eclipse now. They're transforming to the VUSE, which, you know, Dr. Garner admitted, they can't say that they're safe. They can't say that they're safe. They can't say that. They can't say it. We don't know what's going to happen in 40 years from now with all these teenagers smoking VUSE.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Thank you. Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: State Farm. Motion.
THE COURT: I sustained the objection.
MR. PAIGE: And, you know, it's no wonder that the executives like Claude Teague,
Horrigan, Johnston are no longer with the company. Of course they're no longer with the company. It's taken this long to uncover their fraud. It took 5 0 years. And now we're 2 0 years post-Engle, of course they're not around anymore. Of course those guys aren't here anymore. But they told you it's a new company now. They're doing new things. They're doing new things. They're selling addictive drugs in other forms.
And, finally, they have snus, they're going
to migrate all of us, all of us -MR. PERSONS: Objection. Golden Rule.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: Motion.
MR. PAIGE: They're going to migrate smokers, all the smokers to snus, the snus, the nicotine delivery device that causes mouth cancer. And so that's their migration. That's their great transformation. That's why they don't want to be punished for what they did for 50 years.
And I submit to you respectfully, those arguments have no place here. They should all be rejected, and the number that Alex,
Mr. Alvarez asked you for, 21.5 million, I respectfully submit to you that that's a fair number. It's a fair number. They will feel that in Winston-Salem. They will feel that and that's a very fair number.
I just want to say in 3,800 plaintiffs the -- what they did for 50 years, the 50 years of lying, the 50 years of concealing, what their transformation is now, circling back and selling addictive drugs, it's a long road that ends nowhere. It's the same thing. Nothing has
changed. Nothing has changed but the date on the calendar, and I -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor. Highly inflammatory.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: I respectfully submit to you we appreciate your time and thank you all very much. Thank you.



MR. PAIGE: If it please the court.
THE COURT: You may proceed, sir, when you're ready.
MR. PAIGE: Thank you, Your Honor.
Okay. So I'm not going to respond to each and every slide that they used, but I will try to respond to some of what they said. And Mr. Guest, what he just said when he sat down is that this phase is no less important than the first phase even though it was a less amount of time. And I submit to you it's actually more
important. This is more important, because this is when they are going to be held accountable for all -- for what they did to Mr. Ryan. So this is when we talk about punishment and why they should be punished.
And I think it's interesting when I hear them -- I hear them. I'm taking notes, telling, hey, Robert put this slide up, I have to talk about this slide because a lot of what they say, you know, have very logical responses to them, because when you hear them say the message will be that if you change, they're saying to you, hey, you're going to punish us? We've changed. Don't punish us because we've changed. So you're going to send, you're going to send a bad message if you punish us. That's what they're telling you.
But think about it logically. What really happened? For 5 0 years they concealed. For 5 0 years they knew how addictive their product was. For 50 years they told people about they had lower reduced-risk products. We'll talk about that. For 50 years they concealed, they didn't reveal. They lied. People died. And then they got caught. Then they admitted the truth. And
now it's taken this long for Mr. Ryan to get his case to court.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PAIGE: And now 15 years later after they've admitted it they're now saying, hey, we've changed. So the message that they want you to say is that if you lie long enough, if you could keep your lies long enough and you could then after you get caught go ahead and change, then there's no punishment. You get a free pass. And that's wrong. That's wrong.
And they know it's wrong.
And the numbers that they use today show you -- I'm going to show you that they're not accurate numbers. They're not going to make sense when you -- when you do the math.
The next slide, yeah.
So here's what they want to talk about. Common sense. Okay. $21.5 million. And he said, I wrote it down, "No one is going to laugh. No one is laughing. No one is going to laugh at that."
That's not the purpose. Nobody is laughing. I assure you nobody is laughing. You know that.
You know that. This is sad what happened. And nobody is laughing.
And although he said that Mr. Ryan and Mrs. Ryan are going to be wealthy, that's not their desire. You know that. This -- that number was for compensation. There's no restoration under the law. You can't restore the harm they did to Mr. Ryan or any of these people.
If you could, if you could take away the $21 million -MR. PERSONS: Objection. Your Honor, obj ection.
THE COURT: I don't know what the objection is, Counsel. Why don't you tell me, two words.
MR. PERSONS: I don't know if I can do it in two words. I apologize.
THE COURT: Why don't you come sidebar.
SIDEBAR CONFERENCE:
(The following proceedings were had before the Court outside the presence of the jury:)
THE COURT: I apologize. I thought he said if you could take away the 21 million. What's wrong with that?
MR. PERSONS: I thought where he was going
with it -- and I have to be quick sometimes -was that if you could take away the 21 million and give him his healthy set of lungs back, he'd take it. But that's improper argument.
MR. PAIGE: Why is it improper when you made references to how wealthy they're going to be, how this is not a laughing matter? And I'm allowed to rebut that, Your Honor. It is true. This is about compensation, not restoration.
He's hurt. They can't restore his health, and he would take that in a heartbeat. It's not about money. There is no -- this is our measure of damages in this type of case. They shouldn't be criticized for that.
THE COURT: Anything else?
MR. PERSONS: No.
THE COURT: Objection is overruled.
END OF SIDEBAR CONFERENCE
(The following proceedings were had before the Court and jury:)
MR. PAIGE: So is 21 million a lot of money? Absolutely. Okay. But the law -- there is no restoration. You can't restore the harm, the misery they inflicted. There's compensation. It's fair. If you could give him back his
health so he wouldn't have to live a life of pain and misery, so he wouldn't have to suffocate one day, I assure you that him and his wife would hold hands and walk out that courtroom and be happy, be happy about that.
So to now say that, oh, they're wealthy people when they're spending a million dollars an hour marketing their -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: -- when they're spending a million dollars every hour -- we've been here two and a half hours -- marketing their deadly product and to then criticize him for receiving fair compensation -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: I submit to you that that's not right. They put up that the money would go to Mr. and Mrs. Ryan. And I want to submit to you, that's right. They're -- Mr. -- Dr. Garner was there. He's gone. The money from R.J. Reynolds that they're spending, that they have, their profits, he told you they're a profitable -MR. PERSONS: Objection. Misstates the
evidence.
THE COURT: Ladies, you need to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
Proceed, Counsel.
MR. PAIGE: And that money will go to Mr. and Mrs. Ryan. That's true. And you know what? In ten years when she's taking care of him and he's dying -MR. PERSONS: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PAIGE: As they go on in life and they go through their pain and their misery, they'll look back and say, you know what, thank God this jury -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
Improper argument.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: Motion.
MR. PAIGE: They showed you this slide. You should not award punitive damages. And then they talk about this amount, the $21 million has the effect of deterrence to Reynolds. And they keep saying that about the effect of deterrence to Reynolds. Hey, we don't need to be deterred anymore; we're deterred enough. That's not the
point. They need to be punished. When you see the jury instruction, it's about deterrence to others, so others know when a corporation acts the worst that they can act, when they do the worst possible things that a jury is not going to listen to that and give them a free pass.
And that's why you consider -- respectfully, they're misstating that. The law is deterrence to others.
They talk about the Tobacco Institute is gone; the CTR is gone; the TI is gone. They were co-conspirators. You heard about that.
They were disbanded. They talked about Wakeham and Bowling and Walker. They're all gone. None of them were fired. None of them were sent off for bad behavior. You know, they're gone. And, you know what? Good riddance. Thank God they're gone.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PAIGE: They're asking you to consider whether punitive damages, deterrence is needed in light of changes, the changes in the conduct. So they're talking now -- they're asking now for you to consider changes, and I ask you again to
respectfully remember what it is that they're -what they changed from, okay, what did they do and what they're now -- you know, I know what they said. Respectfully, I disagree with the way they portray their changes, that they're now changed to a corporation that has been, the words I wrote down where Dr. Proctor said that there was a decrease in youth smoking is a good thing in society, it's good because it's going down and smoking is going down, and that's because of all new information that's coming out, things are happening and people know what's the truth now.
But they're changing now. They're taking that nicotine addiction and changing -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: They're changing to a company that's still selling nicotine addiction. You saw the numbers. They're talking about youth smoking is down 25 percent. Youth e-cigarette use -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor. State Farm preemption.
THE COURT: Objection is overruled.
MR. PAIGE: Youth e-cigarette smoking is up 600 percent, okay, from 2 percent to 13 percent high school so far. It's going up, okay. So that's what they're changing for. They're changing to products that now cause mouth cancer, to e-cigarettes that we don't know what it's going to cause. They're saying it's reduced risk, it's -- it leads to more reduction, they're not as bad. We've heard that before. We heard that story. We heard that 50 years -MR. PERSONS: Objection. Golden Rule.
THE COURT: Rephrase.
MR. PAIGE: You all heard the evidence from 50 years ago. That's what they said about filters. Remember?
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
Violates the ruling in limine.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection is overruled. Proceed.
So what are they changing? 500,000 Americans are dying every year still.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor. Williams/State Farm.
THE COURT: Objection noted. It's
overruled.
MR. PAIGE: 50 0,00 0 Americans are dying. Nobody is laughing. Nobody is laughing. It's not funny. They're changing to a corporation that's still selling nicotine addiction. Youth e-cigarette, snus, whatever it is, mouth cancer, that can't be pleasant. They're profiting from that. Nothing is changing but the date on the calendar, and they know it. And that's what they're changing to. That's what they've changed to.
So we've heard all this before. We've heard. We've litigated this in Phase I about how they try to convince people to go to filters, to go to lights, to go to low tars.
And what happened to those people?
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor. Preemption.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: Well, here's a fine example of it. And, again, they say, well, we don't know, we don't know what's going to happen to these people who smoke our VUSE. We do know that teenagers are smoking it. We do know it's a nicotine delivery device, but we don't know. We
just don't know. We don't know. Is it safe?
Is it unsafe? Well, it's their product. They should know before they sell it.
You know, they're transforming because they have to, right -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor. It's improper.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: -- for money. So now they're transforming. They got caught. They admit the truth, and now they're transforming to another problem, and they sit here and say, well, we don't know, we don't know. It's risk reduction. Go ahead and smoke it. And 4 0 years from now -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Why don't you come sidebar.
SIDEBAR CONFERENCE:
(The following proceedings were had before the Court outside the presence of the jury:)
THE COURT: How much longer do you have?
MR. PAIGE: Five minutes, two minutes.
MR. PERSONS: Judge, the objection is this is -- these are legal products, and he's indicting the product and then is speculating about what may or may --
THE COURT: That's what you're doing. You were speculating about how many plaintiffs, how much damage they're going to get. It's the same thing. I shouldn't allow you to do it. I shouldn't be allowing this.
Let's go. Let's wrap it up.
END OF SIDEBAR CONFERENCE
(The following proceedings were had before the Court and jury:)
MR. PAIGE: Let me show you these, the last slide I have. The FDA, Mr. Persons said to you, I wrote it down, he said it's like paying the police -- this is when he was talking about this slide and equating it to what they now have to do. He said, "It's paying the police not to guard your house but to guard you, to make sure you don't step out of line."
Okay. So they're paying the police, they're paying the FDA $565 million over six years. Again, they're spending $10 billion a year marketing their product. They're paying the police in his analogy to market -- to watch them. Why do they need that? Why do they need to pay the police to watch them to make sure that they don't step out of line? That's the
conduct we're here for, their concealment, for their hurting people, for their marketing to teenagers. That's reprehensible conduct.
There's nothing worse. There really isn't.
He said there's 3,800 cases pending. This is his math. He said 3,800 cases pending. If we give 500,000 to every person, that's $2 billion, and we're going to feel it. That's what he told you, okay.
But you have to take -- you have to think about it logically what he's telling you, because he's also telling you more than 100 cases have been tried. Okay. There's 3,800 cases, 3,800 Engle plaintiffs in Florida. I'm not going to say the number of people who die every year but we -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: We have 3,80 0 cases pending in Florida. The Engle lawsuit, as you heard, was approved in '07, so it's eight years. So that's about 12.5 cases a year on average under their slide. So to get 3,800 plaintiffs to verdict, if you do the math, would take 304 years. 304 years. 300 years ago, that was before
George Washington was our president. That's how long it would take. So he's telling you we have to pay $2 billion. Well, over 300 years. That would suppose, would presuppose, would mean that every plaintiff wins. So that's not what this case is about. It's not about 3,800 people who haven't had their day in court, who may have their day in court, who may never have their day in court. That's not what this is about.
It's about in this case the evidence that you six, respectfully, that you heard and what amount will punish them so that they feel it and what amount will deter others, and that's why we ask you for a fair amount. As Alex suggested an amount, it could be more; it could be less.
It's in your hands. You're the jury, respectfully. Whatever you decide, Mr. Ryan, Mrs. Ryan will respect and appreciate, and they will not forget that.
That's all I have. Thank you very much for your time.
