         MR. WICHMANN:  Good morning, folks.  It's
    been a long couple of weeks.  And on Harry's
    behalf, we'd like to thank you for the attention
    that you've paid to the case.  We can tell you've
    taken great notes and stayed awake and basically
    put up with, I hope it was not something that I
    did that might have irritated you.  I know that
    there were times when I was pulling pages out of a
    notebook and maybe speaking in a tone of voice
    that was higher than I should have.  I know I was
    close to you-all during that.  So I just want to
    apologize if anybody thought that maybe I was
    irritating them.  Please don't take it out on
    Harry.  This is, after all, his case, and it's his
    one chance in the court to get justice for what's
    happened.
         I also would like to ask you to please keep
    your eye on the ball, as they say, the golfers and
    the baseball players say.  By that, I mean, please
    try to focus on the issues that the Court has 2471 instructed you on and that you will get in the
    verdict form and not get distracted with issues
    that are really not in front of you in this case.
         I think, folks, if you could sum the case up,
    I would ask you to remember Dr. Hurt from the
    Mayo Clinic when he first came and testified.  I
    asked him about the conspiracy between the tobacco
    companies.  And here was my question.
         Without getting into the legalities of it,
    can you tell the jury in simple terms why it
    should not have happened?
         And his answer was:  Well, if you have a
    product -- I'm reading from his testimony -- that
    is going to cause people to die, it would be my
    opinion, as a human being, that you should do
    something about that.
         He looked at you and he said, And it would
    not be my idea to hide that and to keep it from
    the public eye if you have a product that kills
    that many people.
         Now, he looked at you and he said, It would
    be my opinion as a human being.  Reynolds -- you
    got an instruction from the Court that they are a
    corporation, but they're supposed to be treated
    just like a person, just like a human being. 2472 Well, it seems to me that the Golden Rule
    ought to apply to them just like it applies to
    individuals.  And it doesn't seem to me that it
    should be that surprising, that a company should
    do unto others as it would expect others to do
    unto them.  It doesn't seem surprising to me that
    a U.S. -- major U.S. corporation should not lie,
    should not mislead, should not conspire and should
    not conceal information about a product that it
    manufactures for 50 years, that, if used exactly
    the way that they want you to use it, causes
    addiction and death on an epidemic scale.
         Now, truth really is our goal in this case.
    Do you remember at the beginning, I pointed to
    Lady Justice up there?  The scales were level and
    her eyes were blindfolded.  Well, now is the time
    when the scales are no longer equal.  You've heard
    all the evidence in the case and have gotten the
    instructions.
         The Judge gave you the instruction on the
    greater weight of the evidence.  And that's the
    test that you should use to decide who wins in
    this case.  By that I mean which side is more
    likely true than not?  It could be 51 to 50.  It
    could be 80 to 20.  But that's the balancing test. 2473 And you're going to get a road map, a path on
    how to make these decisions.  And it's going to be
    in the verdict form.
         Would you put that up for me, please, Baron?
         This is going to be your little road map to
    the truth and to accountability in this case.  I'm
    going to go through the verdict form with you
    during my part of the presentation, and then
    Mr. Millard is going to get up and he's going to
    talk to you a little bit about some of the
    questions that you will also have to answer.
         At the beginning of the trial, the lawyers
    got up and told you what we thought that the
    evidence would show.  And we told you -- or I told
    you that that should be considered as our promise
    to you, and you should hold us to that promise.
    You should go back there and ask yourselves, This
    is what the lawyers for the cigarette companies
    said.  Did they prove it?  This is what the
    lawyer -- the lawyer team for Harry Schlenther
    said.  And did they prove it?  And did they prove
    it by the greater weight of the evidence?
         And we submit we proved our case by more than
    the greater weight of the evidence.  What we told
    you in the beginning, from Harry's standpoint, 2474 that we would prove to you that Reynolds engaged
    in a 50-year conspiracy to conceal information
    about nicotine addiction and the health
    consequences; that these were cold, calculated,
    business decisions that they made for money.
         Now, how bad was it?
         Baron, would you play Dr. Hurt?
         You heard that from Dr. Hurt, and I'm going
    to show it to you again. Q.   Are you familiar with these statistics, that
about 15 million Americans have died from smoking
during the 50-year period from 1950 to 2000?  Are you
familiar with that?
    A.   Yes.  I have seen that number.  It's actually
a little bit higher than that, but it's in the ballpark
figure, yes.
    Q.   So you agree with that?
    A.   It's probably more than that, but 50 million.
It's over 400,000 Americans every year.  So if you just
do the math, it doesn't take very long to figure it
out.
    Q.   Well, that's right.  The very next point,
approximately 443,000 Americans die from 2475 smoking-related diseases every year.  And that's from
the CDC, right?
    A.   That's correct.
    Q.   And do you agree with that, Doctor?
    A.   I do.  And that's, just to give you
perspective, that's the equivalent of three fully
loaded 747s crashing daily, 365 days a year, with no
survivors.  That's how many people 440,000 people have
to be.
    Q.   Well -- That was the evidence you
    heard from the witness stand.  It was also the
    evidence that you heard from the U.S. Surgeon
    General, when I read to you 443,000 American
    smoking-related deaths a year.
         You'll be getting all this evidence, and
    you'll get to take it back there in the evidence
    room with you and go through it, double-check,
    make sure what the lawyers are saying is
    absolutely right and whether or not we proved our
    case.
         We also told you -- I told you in the
    beginning, part of my promise in opening statement
    was that I would show you, prove to you, that 2476 Beverly Schlenther was addicted to cigarettes
    containing nicotine and that her addiction caused
    her COPD and death.  Again, thinking of the
    scales, that was the promise we made.  We did it.
    And now is the time for you to hold R.J. Reynolds
    accountable.
         Now, what promises did R.J. Reynolds make to
    you at the beginning of the case?  When I say
    promises, I mean like the Frank Statement.
         Would you put it up, please?
         Do you remember this was the beginning of the
    whole conspiracy?  This was back in 1953, 1954.
    It was published in 400 newspapers all over the
    country, including the St. Pete Times, where
    Beverly was living as a teenager at the time, and
    in the Tampa Tribune.  And here is what they
    promised to the American people:
         We accept an interest in people's health as a
    basic responsibility, paramount to every other
    consideration in our business.  We believe that
    the products we make are not injurious.  We always
    have and always will cooperate closely with those
    whose task it is to safeguard the public health.
         And the guys that signed off on it were the
    president of The American Tobacco Company, the 2477 president of Brown & Williamson, and the president
    of R.J. Reynolds.
         Now, they also told you in opening statement
    that they would prove to you Beverly Schlenther
    was not addicted.  Who did they bring?  This is
    R.J. Reynolds, a major U.S. corporation, Fortune
    500 company.  They had a witness.  They could have
    brought you the best right there from the witness
    stand to tell you Beverly was not addicted.  They
    brought to you a three-year-old videotaped
    deposition of Dr. Neal Benowitz that went on and
    it went on and it went on.  Towards the end, he
    was asked:
         Doctor, let's talk about what you know about
    the smoker in this particular case.  Do you know
    the name of the smoker or smokers in this case?
         His answer on the videotape was:  No.
         The question was:  You haven't read any of
    the depositions in this case, have you?
         His answer was:  No.
         You've not reviewed any medical records in
    this case, have you?
         No, I have not.
         That's the best they've got.  That's what
    they brought you. 2478 Now, Mr. Baringer stood up in opening
    statement and told you we're going to bring you
    Harry Schlenther's brother-in-law.  Here is what
    he said in opening statement:
         The brother-in-law, he will testify that,
    according to the brother-in-law, she said, I don't
    care.  I like smoking.  I would rather be dead
    than quit.
         Where is the brother-in-law?  Ask yourselves,
    where was he?  I didn't see it.  This is
    R.J. Reynolds, a major Fortune 500 company, making
    these promises to you.
         Now, what did they bring you?  They brought
    you one live witness, Dr. Michel, the historian.
         Baron, if you would.
         Now, it shouldn't surprise you that
    Dr. Michel told you, Well, I haven't done any
    research ever on tobacco, never done any research
    ever on nicotine or addiction.  Not a medical
    doctor.  I'm a historian.  No, he said, I have
    never published or done any research on the
    history of tobacco in this country.
         What I found most interesting was he looked
    over at you and he said for this year, 50 percent
    of his income comes from R.J. Reynolds. 2479 That wasn't a new revelation.  I asked him
    about last year.
         He said, Well, last year, it was 50 to 60
    percent.
         Now, back a year before that, I said, How
    constant is it?
         Well, maybe back then it was 40 to 50 percent
    of his income from R.J. Reynolds.
         If they win this case, he'll get a full-time
    job with them.  That's who they're bringing.
         Now, he brought a slide show, or a sideshow.
    What did he do?  He just substituted the names.
    Summary of opinions.  Yes.  He puts in
    Mrs. Schlenther.
         Well, he had another case that he testified
    for R.J. Reynolds in courts in Florida.  In fact,
    Mr. Frailly's name shows up.  Same opinions.
         The next one, Baron, please.
         Subject of the testimony.  Same slide, just
    substitute the name.
         And the one I really liked, could you show
    us, please Baron.
         Here we go.  Boy, oh boy.  Beverly's name
    right in the beginning, right in the middle with
    all these sources of information around her that 2480 she was supposed to know, because everybody knew
    it was no big secret.  Nicotine was addictive and
    cigarettes would kill you.
         Same slide he used in the Roland Cox case.
         Well, you recall he had something in common
    with Beverly.  She was born in 1942.  She started
    smoking in the fifties, almost 10 years before the
    warnings were on the packs.  This young man, he
    had the benefit of a college education.  He was
    born in 1966, the very year that the package
    warnings went on cigarettes.  He didn't have the
    benefits that Beverly did.  She dropped out of
    high school.  He went to college and got a Ph.D.
    And guess what.  With all that information out
    there about how dangerous cigarettes were and with
    the warnings on the pack, he still started
    smoking.
         He looked at you and he told you that.  Yeah,
    yeah, I guess everybody knew.  And they're paying
    50 percent, 60 percent of the freight.  I did all
    of this information and investigation, but, yeah,
    I, you know, I started smoking too.
         That's what he said.
         And then the most unbelievable part of his
    testimony.  I read you the U.S. Surgeon General's 2481 report on the tobacco industry spending
    $250,000,000,000 over the years for cigarette
    marketing and advertising.  And this guy told you,
    well, I went to the two towns where Beverly lived
    in, St. Petersburg and High Springs.  For some
    reason, the tobacco industry missed those two
    places when Beverly was growing up.  With a
    straight face, he told you, I couldn't find any
    advertisements for cigarettes there when she was
    living there.  I just couldn't find it.
         So that $250,000,000,000 they were spending
    went all over the country and everywhere except
    those two towns that Beverly grew up in or lived
    in.  Well, how believable is that?
         Then he tells you that -- they read or they
    played to you Smoke, Smoke, Smoke That Cigarette.
    Remember that?  He got up there and told you,
    yeah, this is all part of American history.  It
    goes to show how everybody knew.  And he played
    the song, and everybody smiled.  Tex Ritter.
         Well, what he didn't tell you and what you
    will have back there to look at, because it's in
    evidence in this case, is poor Tex Ritter's
    obituary.  The man that performed the song that
    the Reynolds witness said told all of America 2482 about the dangers of smoking.
         Country-western songwriter and entertainer
    Sollie "Tex" Williams.  A heavy smoker best known
    for his tune Smoke, Smoke, Smoke That Cigarette,
    died after a year-long battle with cancer.  His
    daughter said her father, who was diagnosed a year
    ago as having cancer, smoked two packs of
    cigarettes a day, dropping to about a pack a day
    before he died.  Quote, he tried to quit but he
    couldn't.
         Another in the long list of those Americans
    that were on those 747s that Dr. Hurt told you
    about.
         And I asked the young man that was sitting
    over there.  I said, It just wasn't Tex Ritter,
    was it?
         He said, No.
         I said, How about Peter Jennings?  Died of
    lung cancer.
         Yeah, you know, I heard of him too.
         How about Edward R. Murrow?
         The young man said, Yeah, yeah, I have heard
    of him too.
         And then he had the gall to bring up Gallup
    polls, and Mr. Baringer brought up Gallup polls in 2483 their opening.  Well, they told you -- and that
    Reynolds witness said -- that Gallup poll in 1954
    shows that everybody in America, 90 percent of
    Americans knew all about smoking causing lung
    cancer.
         Well, you can take this back.  It's got a PT
    number on it, PT 03876.  Look at it yourself.  The
    headline, Gallup Accuses Big Tobacco of Misusing
    Poll in Court.
         Okay?  The very organization that they're
    standing in front of you telling you runs a poll
    that shows that all of America knew, so Beverly
    must have known, disavows the poll and accuses big
    tobacco of misusing the results in court.
         Go back.  Read it.  Read the article.  The 90
    percent figure, Gallup contends, reflects
    knowledge of a controversy.  Hah.  Sounds
    familiar.  The controversy that Dr. Hurt told you
    about, not a widely held belief that smoking
    causes cancer.
         Meanwhile, Gallup says, responding to another
    question in the poll, only five percent of
    Americans said they thought that smoking causes
    cancer.
         They didn't bring you that.  They didn't tell 2484 you that.  But boy, they had those polls up there.
         So take this back, look at it and decide
    which side is more likely true.
         Now, it seems to be a pattern.  If we go to
    the DiMarco letter, please.
         Dr. Hurt told you about previously secret,
    personal and confidential, one of those memos.
    And, please, I know it's been three weeks.  And I
    know we've went through them all exhaustively.
    And I know I ripped them out of a book and I waved
    them around.  And I apologize for that.
         They will all be back there if you want to go
    through them all.  Okay?
         Let me give you the highlights, because there
    is only a certain amount of time I have before
    Mr. Millard comes up and tackles me, because he
    has some things he wants to talk to you about too.
         But I say it's a pattern.  Dr. Hurt told you,
    it was a previously secret, December 13, 1982.
         If you turn to page 2, please.
         This is not new.  What they did when they
    brought this witness in here, who was making 50
    percent of his income from Reynolds, they misused
    the Gallup poll with a straight face.  It's not
    new.  Their own internal records.  Personal and 2485 confidential.  He said also that our medical/
    scientific witnesses will say whatever we want
    them to say, clearly implying, if not stating,
    that they lacked credibility and integrity.
         What evidence did we put on?
         Baron, would you play Dr. Worth's clip,
    please? Q.   It is your opinion that tobacco use
contributed to her death?
    A.   Absolutely.
    Q.   Would you say it's a substantial contributing
factor?
    A.   Yes.
    Q.   And is it your opinion that she was addicted
to cigarettes?
    A.   Absolutely.
    Q.   And in your opinion, can you state, within a
reasonable degree of medical certainty, that she was
addicted to cigarettes?
    A.   Yes. Who was that gentleman?  That
    gentleman was Beverly Schlenther's treating 2486 doctor, family physician, 1998 until the day that
    she died.  He signed the death certificate.  I'm
    not going to put it up, because every time I try
    to fumble with this thing, it doesn't work and it
    wastes time.  But you're going to get the death
    certificate back there.  And you're going to see
    signed, certified, Dr. Randal Worth, cause of
    death, end stage COPD.  And there is a little box
    in the lower right-hand corner.  Did tobacco play
    a part in her death?  Checked yes.  There it is.
         This man laid his hands on her, took care of
    her, he talked to her, he treated her, he did his
    best to take care of her.  We brought him in.  He
    told you under oath, said yes, she was addicted to
    nicotine in cigarettes, and, yes, her addiction
    caused her death.
         Would you play Dr. Whims-Squires, please? A.   Yes, she was addicted prior to seeing me.
    Q.   And you saw that noted by the physicians as
well?
    A.   Right.
    Q.   And in your opinion, was the addiction the
cause of her COPD? 2487 A.   Yes.
    Q.   And is it also your opinion, as a medical
professional, within a reasonable degree of medical
certainty, that the addiction was also the cause of her
death?
    A.   Yes. Who was she?  She was the lung
    doctor, the pulmonology doctor, right down the
    street, who took care of Beverly, put Beverly in
    hospice, gave Beverly the breathing device that
    she needed to live those last few years under this
    curse of COPD that was caused by her addiction to
    cigarettes.
         Now, you may remember -- it's a long time
    ago, but the first witness you heard from was by
    videotape deposition.  She was Dr. Kathleen Brady,
    who told you she was unable to be here because she
    had to go to an international conference on
    addiction psychiatrists in Switzerland.
         Now, this lady has authored over 300 articles
    dealing with women and nicotine addiction.  This
    lady is a medical doctor and a pharmacologist.
    She's the country's foremost expert on women and
    addiction.  She won -- she won the Betty Ford 2488 award, a very prestigious award given out by the
    ex-First Lady to those professionals who help
    women who are addicted in this country.  She won
    that award.
         She testified under oath about modern
    science.  And we're going to get to choice in a
    second, because all you're going to hear from them
    is choice, choice, choice.  Modern science, she
    said modern science shows by MRI technology that
    when a human being starts smoking as a teenager,
    that it affects the frontal part of the brain.
    That's the part of the brain that makes executive
    decisions.  And if that part of the brain is
    continually bathed in nicotine, then there is
    permanent damage to that part of the brain.  And
    that's the part of the brain that controls
    impulse.  And that's the part of the brain that it
    affects.  Do you have a free choice or not?
         Now, we all know teenagers.  They know
    everything, but they know nothing.  It's our job
    as grownups to protect them.  We're going to show
    you how they didn't protect them.  They targeted
    them.
         But let's hear what Dr. Brady had to say
    about whether or not Beverly Schlenther was 2489 addicted. Q.   Were you able to assess whether or not
Beverly Schlenther was addicted to the nicotine in
cigarettes during her lifetime using the DSM-IV?
    A.   Yes.
    Q.   And what was your final assessment?
    A.   I -- my final assessment is that she
definitely had nicotine dependence.
    Q.   You used the term "dependence."  Is that
synonymous or does it mean the same as addiction, in
your mind?
    A.   In the DS- -- the way the DSM uses
dependence, yes, it's the same thing as addiction.
    Q.   Are you able to reach a conclusion today as
to whether or not, under the DSM, Beverly Schlenther
met the criteria for being addicted to nicotine?
    A.   Yes. Dr. Hurt, the man who was in
    charge of the Nicotine Dependence Center at the
    Mayo Clinic, which is world class, told you he's
    board certified in internal medicine and board
    certified in addiction medicine.  He has written 2490 over 175 peer-reviewed articles, book chapters.
    He's testified in front of Congress.  He's
    testified -- he talked at Harvard.  He came down
    twice.  Told you the exact same thing, that
    Beverly Schlenther was addicted.
         So when you-all get back there and you have
    your verdict form, the first question is, Was
    Beverly Schlenther addicted to cigarettes
    containing nicotine?  That seems to be a
    no-brainer, because if there was a single witness
    who would come in and tell you that she was not
    addicted, you don't think Reynolds wouldn't have
    brought them?
         The next question:  Was Beverly Schlenther's
    addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a
    legal cause of her COPD and death?
         Yes, yes.  That's a no-brainer.  You don't
    think that if Reynolds could find somebody to come
    and tell you that her addiction didn't cause her
    COPD and death, that they wouldn't have done it?
         The balance on the scales is over here,
    folks.
         Now, this whole addiction thing -- and I'm
    sure even some of the ladies on the jury have been
    fishing.  But if you think of it from the fish's 2491 perspective, the fish is not out there wanting to
    get hooked.  The fish is not out there wanting to
    get caught.  The fish sees the bait.  The fish
    doesn't see the hook.  The fish bites.  Some are
    lucky, because the hook only hits the lip.  But
    some are not so lucky, and the hook goes all the
    way down and they die.  Right?
         They manufactured a product.  The bait was
    nicotine.  Poor Beverly, at 13, 14, and 15, she
    was the fish.  They caught her.  And they got that
    hook down deep.
         Now, they're going to come up and tell
    you-all about, you know, she was able to quit.
    Everybody is able to quit.  Bear in mind the
    multiple quit attempts that her doctors and her
    family told you about in trying to quit on her own
    unsuccessfully.  Wellbutrin from Dr. Worth.
    Unsuccessful.  Hypnosis.  She tried hypnosis
    twice.  Unsuccessful.  Finally it was the nicotine
    patch.  And it was trying with that first birthday
    of her granddaughter that she was finally able to
    lick this addiction.  But by no means was that
    easy.
         And that's exactly the way that they designed
    their product to be.  They designed their product 2492 to hook people, to keep people addicted.
         And then they start calling them replacement
    smokers.  They're talking about human beings, like
    Beverly.  They're calling them replacement
    smokers.  Who are they replacing?  Those three
    747s a day that are crashing.
         So they're going to want to tell you that one
    of their best customers -- who started 10 years
    before the package warnings, smoked all the way to
    2001, got sick and died -- they're going to tell
    you that one of their best customers was
    (inaudible).
         Now, the point is that nobody chooses
    addiction.  Nobody chooses and makes a choice to
    go out and get addicted and die.  They would have
    you believe otherwise.  Their historian, everybody
    knew, so then I guess it means that Tex Ritter,
    Peter Jennings, Edward R. Murrow, 435,000 people a
    year that die and make a choice, Oh, I'll just
    choose I want to get addicted and die.
         That's what their argument amounts to.
         But Dr. Hurt came and explained to you how
    they manufacture the modern cigarette.  They put
    menthol in it.  And I showed you -- I had -- right
    here.  Just like their cough drops, they put that 2493 menthol in.  Why?  Because it gives the smoker the
    cooling sensation in his or her throat so that she
    can -- he or her can inhale the smoke and continue
    the cycle of nicotine addiction to become a
    constant customer followed by, in their own words,
    a replacement smoker.
         Dr. Hurt told you about ammonia.  All of this
    was unknown, what they were putting in their
    cigarettes, until the Minnesota trial.  He showed
    you that Reynolds' competitor, Marlboro, figured
    out how to put ammonia in their cigarettes to
    increase the pH to increase the kick, to increase
    the nicotine to freebase.  Talking about like
    drugs here, to freebase.  That's in their own
    records.  There is a list of them over there.  You
    can write them down.  Go back there and do that.
    Freebase the nicotine.  Give those folks that
    kick.  Right?
         He told you about how much ammonia that the
    cigarette companies use to develop their products.
         Well, I didn't hear a single witness come
    from R.J. Reynolds to sit there and tell you, We
    don't put additives in our cigarettes.  We don't
    put menthol in our cigarettes.  We don't put
    ammonia.  I didn't see one single R.J. Reynolds 2494 witness get up there and say, Using our products
    is not going to be injurious to your health.
    That's what they're saying now.  But that's not
    what they were saying before Minnesota, and that's
    not what they were saying after the Engle trial.
         Could you put up the Engle findings, please,
    Baron?
         You-all check those boxes and find Beverly to
    be a class member.  And Mr. Millard is going to
    address the other questions on the verdict form.
         If you find that she is a class member -- the
    Judge read you the instructions -- certain other
    findings are binding on you.  He read them to you.
    You have them in there.  We're not going to repeat
    them to you.
         But they are that they conspired to conceal
    and they concealed material information from the
    American public with the intention that the
    American public, like Beverly, would rely on that
    to their detriment.
         Now, let's talk a little bit about the
    defense.  Get it out there.  Choice.  I want you
    to take your pad.  Every time that Mr. Baringer,
    Reynolds' lawyer, says choice in the next couple
    of hours, write it down.  You're going to fill 2495 your pad up.  It's going to be choice this, choice
    this, choice this.
         But ask yourselves, how many times is he
    going to tell you, say to you, an adult choice, a
    fully informed adult choice?
         They don't want to talk about that.  And I
    will show you why.
         If you will play the small babies clip,
    please.
         I don't know if you-all caught this.      A SPEAKER:  From CBS Washington, in color,
    Face the Nation, a spontaneous and unrehearsed
    news interview with Joe Cullman, III, chairman and
    chief executive officer of Philip Morris
    Incorporated and chairman of the executive
    committee of The Tobacco Institute.
         A SPEAKER:  We have no program that I know of
    to try to help people to stop smoking.  We do talk
    to the question of whether or not cigarettes are
    hazardous.  We do not believe that cigarettes are
    hazardous.  We don't accept that.  And this
    industry can face the future with confidence
    because when, as, and if any ingredient in 2496 cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious
    to human health, we are confident that we can
    eliminate that ingredient.
         I will tell you that I did read that report.
    And I concluded from that report that it's true
    that babies born from women who smoke are smaller.
    But they're just as healthy as the babies born
    from women who do not smoke.
         A SPEAKER:  Well, what about the higher rate
    of deaths?
         A SPEAKER:  And some women would prefer
    having smaller babies.
         A SPEAKER:  How about the higher rate of
    deaths?
         A SPEAKER:  I don't -- I'm not familiar with
    that. Now, that, ladies and
    gentlemen, is a choice.  That's a fully informed,
    grown-up choice; that's a choice made by an
    executive; that's a choice made by an educated
    man, to tell you it's okay for women to smoke.
    Why?  Some women prefer smaller babies.  That's
    what they were telling the American public in
    1971. 2497 Now, Mr. Baringer is going to get up here and
    say to you-all, Yes, yes, yes, but where is the
    connection to Beverly?  Right?
         Would you play Beverly's clip, please? Q.   Did you ever quit smoking at any time when
you were pregnant?
    A.   No.
    Q.   For any length of time?
    A.   No.  They would bring our babies to us, and
we would nurse them or feed them, and then after they
took the babies, we could smoke in our bed.  We could
smoke in our room.  We could smoke in the recovery
room.
    Q.   Did they ever encourage you not to smoke
while you were pregnant?
    A.   No.  My Dr. Williams smoked.  He delivered
two of my children.  Back then, it was different.
    Q.   I'm sorry. Back then it was different.
         Her children were born in the early sixties,
    before the Surgeon General report came out.
         This guy got up there from Reynolds and told 2498 you everybody knew way back when how bad these
    were.  Beverly's own doctor smoked.  She smoked in
    the hospital.  That's the way things were.  You
    know what?  They were telling women in America in
    1971 it was okay to smoke, because they were
    telling women in America, they were telling the
    American people, some women wanted their babies
    smaller.  That's what we're dealing with here,
    folks.
         Now, they won't tell you about their fully
    informed choices, and they won't tell you about
    what they were thinking back then, because it was
    secret until the Minnesota trial.
         If you can put up the PT 2184, please.
         You can take this document back and you can
    look at it.  And it is dated in 1980.  And it is a
    memo from The Tobacco Institute, one of the public
    relations groups that R.J. Reynolds funded.  And
    you'll see what they were saying about choice
    then.
         I'm told that the entire matter of addiction
    is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney
    can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case.  We
    can't defend continued smoking as free choice if
    the person was addicted. 2499 Their own words.  Their own words.  Yet,
    again, they are going to get up here today and
    they are going to tell you it's choice, choice,
    choice, choice.
         Now, what choices do 13-year-olds,
    14-year-olds and 15-year-olds make?  How
    responsible do we hold Beverly Schlenther for the
    choices that she made 10 years before the warnings
    were on the packages of cigarettes when she was a
    teenager?  When she went to school right here in
    St. Petersburg, in high school, and where they had
    a smoking section for the students, and the
    students could go up in the library.  They
    couldn't eat in the library, they couldn't talk in
    the library, but they could smoke in the library.
         Things were different then.  But they're
    going to tell you, like their historian told you,
    Well, that school board, that's the school board's
    fault.
         Then they're going to tell you, Well, maybe
    it was Beverly's mom's fault.  What did she know?
    Because Beverly smoked around her mom when she was
    a kid.
         By the way, can you put up Beverly's picture,
    please? 2500 Here she is, about 13.  This little girl.
    How grown up was she and how accountable do we
    hold her today for making that first choice to
    smoke 10 years before the warnings were on the
    packages?  How accountable do we hold her for
    smoking or doing what was cool, doing what all the
    other kids did, what they did in the high school,
    what they allowed her to do?  How accountable do
    we hold her for that?
         Now, you know, it's interesting, because
    Beverly told you in her deposition -- and you need
    to bear in mind that that deposition was taken
    February 16, 2010.  She was on end-stage COPD at
    home on her oxygen machine.  Dr. Whims-Squires
    came in and told you she had her on multiple
    courses of medicine, including morphine.  The
    woman was subjected to questions from the tobacco
    industry lawyers, and you saw them go on and on
    and on again.
         They even asked her:  Tell us all the
    medicines you're on.
         She said, Well, I -- I don't know.
         He said, Tell us what medicines you're on.
    Give us the medicines.  Give us the list.
         She said, Well, I can't -- I can't remember. 2501 Ten days before she died.  She's on morphine.
    She was in her home.  The lawyer could have said
    to her, Ma'am, let's take a break -- because Harry
    was there.  Ma'am, let's take a break.  Harry,
    would you go over to the medicine cabinet and get
    out her medicines and read them to us?
         No, no.  That's not why they were asking that
    question time and time and time again.
         But you know what?  The lady had something
    very interesting to say.
         Would you play Beverly Schlenther's
    videotaped deposition?
         I would like you to see this one.  It's hard,
    but I would like you to see it. Q.   Do you feel like you bear any responsibility,
even partial responsibility, for any of your
smoking-related illnesses?
    A.   I probably should have never started, but I
did.  And I don't think it's entirely my fault.
    Q.   Thank you.  Some your fault, some the tobacco
company's fault?
    A.   Yeah, because it's put out there, and if it's
put out there, it's going to harm you. 2502 (End of video clip.)
         MR. WICHMANN:  You know, this poor lady on
    her deathbed, 10 days before she dies.  Oh, the
    words of regret.
         Dr. Cummings, we played his videotaped
    deposition.  He's the epidemiologist.  I know it's
    hard with the videotaped depositions.  But he told
    you he did a worldwide study.  And the worldwide
    study showed that 95 percent of the participants
    who were smokers regretted ever having started.
         So what she was telling you 10 days before
    she died was she was regretting the choices that
    she made as a 13-year-old.
         But you know what, she was owning up to it.
    Do you think they're going to?  Do you think
    they're going to tell you that they accept any
    responsibility for this epidemic of disease and
    death in America?  You think they're going to tell
    you they accept any responsibility for this
    50-year conspiracy and Beverly Schlenther's death?
    I don't think so.
         One of the questions you're going to have to
    answer on the verdict form -- and it's right here.
    It will ask you to state the percentage of
    responsibility.  And I, we, submit that Beverly 2503 should be 15 to 20 percent.  Why?  She told you
    how she felt about it.  Looking back on the
    decision she made when she was 13, we're willing
    to accept that.  That's what we would suggest.
         But you-all, again, ask yourselves, what are
    they going to own up to?
         Now, Dr. Brady, the very first witness, came
    in and told you the cutting edge of modern science
    with the MRI and the brain disease, that
    teenagers, they can't make these decisions.  They
    shouldn't make these decisions.  But nicotine, if
    they use it at that age, compromises their brain
    and it causes permanent brain damage, and it makes
    it way, way harder for them to quit as an adult.
    And it makes people who smoke as teenagers,
    it's -- they become addicted at a much greater
    rate than those that don't smoke when they're
    teenagers.
         That, ladies and gentlemen, was the hook that
    they got way down deep in Beverly.
         You're also going to be asked for an amount
    of damages for Harry's loss of his wife.
    Mr. Millard is going to discuss that at great
    length with you when he talks.  But we are going
    to ask you for a number between $8- and 2504 $10,000,000.
         The last question on the verdict form,
    whether punitive damages are warranted against
    Reynolds, we submit that you check yes.  I would
    like to have a brief discussion with you about
    that before I sit down.
         The Judge read you the instructions.  We've
    talked to you about punitive damages, and we've
    talked to you about punishing companies.  We
    talked to you about considering harm to others.
    We talked to you about the safety and welfare of
    the American people, the American public.
         Well, let me tell you about what the U.S.
    Surgeon General says today, not back in 1964, not
    back when they had this old definition of
    addiction that they're going to trot out again.
    That doesn't count anymore.  But they don't --
    they're not going to want -- they're going to try
    to confuse you with that.  But what does the
    Surgeon General say today?
         And you have the big book.  You can take it
    back.  You can look at it yourself.  I'm going to
    read it to you.  The message from the Surgeon
    General in 2012:
         Each day in the United States over 3,800 2505 young people under the age of 18 smoke their first
    cigarette, and over 1,000 youth under age 18
    become daily cigarette smokers.  The vast majority
    of Americans who begin daily smoking during
    adolescence are addicted to nicotine by young
    adulthood.
         It's not 1964.  That's not 1974.  That's not
    19 -- that's today.
         It goes on to say:  Tobacco imposes enormous
    public health and financial costs on this nation,
    costs that are completely avoidable.  Until we end
    tobacco use, more young people will become
    addicted, more people will become sick, and more
    families will be devastated by the loss of loved
    ones.
         That's not 1964.  That's not 1954.  That is
    2012 from the U.S. Surgeon General.
         Of every three young smokers, only one will
    ever quit, and one of those remaining smokers will
    die from tobacco-related causes.
         Most of these young people never considered
    the long-term health consequences associated with
    tobacco use when they started smoking.  And
    nicotine, a highly addictive drug, causes many to
    continue smoking well into adulthood, with deadly 2506 consequences.
         That's our Surgeon General talking today.
         Eighty-eight percent of adult smokers who
    smoke daily report they started by the age of 18.
    This is a time in life of great vulnerability to
    social influences, such as those offered through
    the marketing of tobacco products and the modeling
    of smoking by attractive role models as in movies.
         Do you remember, Beverly said she
    remembered -- and they're going to get up and tell
    you no, she never relied on anything.  She never
    did.
         Baron, do you have that clip?  Let's listen
    to what she said. A.   I remember the Marlboro man.  I remember the
Camels.
    Q.   Anything else?
    A.   From the movie stars, you know, and they did
all of the -- you know, they were all lovey-dovey and
advertised the cigarettes.
    Q.   What do you remember in that respect?  I
don't understand what you mean by that.
    A.   Oh, they have -- like you could have Humphrey 2507 Bogart and Lauren Bacall, and they smoked and they --
they loved each other and were really lovey and -- Can you play "To Have and Have
    Not"?
         You have this in evidence.      Thanks. $250,000,000,000 over the
    years, according to the U.S. Surgeon General.  I'm
    sure it's by accident that those cigarettes
    appeared in beautiful Lauren Bacall's hands during
    that movie.
         The Surgeon General went on to say, 2012,
    cigarettes are the only legal consumer product in
    the world that causes one half of their long-term
    users to die prematurely.
         The major conclusions -- and you can take it
    back and look at it and flip through there and
    say, you know, this lawyer told us it's here.  You
    know, I want to double-check.  I want to make sure
    that he's living up to the promises that he told
    me. 2508 Here is the major conclusion of the
    Surgeon General's report.  Advertising and
    promotional activities by tobacco companies have
    been shown to cause the onset and continuation of
    smoking among adolescents and young adults.
         That's today, folks.
         Last but not least -- and this would be
    Chapter 3 of that report:  Tobacco companies are
    successfully targeting young people in advertising
    and promotion efforts to attract new smokers.
         Today, 2012, folks.  That's part of what this
    case is about.
         I'm going to have a chance to talk to you
    again after Mr. Millard, after Mr. Baringer talks
    to you about the industry position.  Thank you
    very much for your attention.  And I know that
    there is just an enormous volume of documents and
    testimony and information for you-all to digest.
    I know how attentive you are.  But, please, please
    pay attention to the verdict form.  Keep your eye
    on the ball.  Okay?
         And remember, we're grownups.  We did things
    when we were 13.  We did things when we were 14.
    We did things when we were 15.  Those are not
    adult informed choices.  And once you become 2509 addicted to nicotine -- and you heard it from
    every single doctor that we brought -- choice
    becomes compromised, and you can't confuse the
    motivation to quit with choice, because the front
    part of the brain, medically speaking, the doctors
    told you it's -- addiction is a brain disease.
    That part of your brain that decides whether you
    make a choice or not is affected.  People want to
    quit.  They try to quit.  They go to their doctors
    but still can't quit.
         That goes to the power of the product that
    Reynolds sells.  That goes to the product, the
    addiction and the disease and it has caused this
    epidemic in this country.
         Thank you very much.


         MR. MILLARD:  Thank you.
         Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.  I know
    Mr. Wichmann thanked you-all for your service and
    your attentiveness and the efforts you put forth
    in this case.  And I want to thank you again.  I
    want to thank you on behalf of Mr. Schlenther and
    our entire team.  We have watched you guys, and we
    have seen you working hard, and we've seen you
    paying attention, and we've seen you taking notes,
    and we've seen you following along through the
    evidence.  And there has been a lot of evidence.
         What I'm trying to do now is we're trying to
    help you see it the way we see it, how the
    evidence came in.  I'm trying to give you an
    outline and a summary of what we think the
    evidence did show in this case.
         In the openings, we talked about what we 2517 thought it would show.  Now we are going to tell
    you what we think it did show.
         Mr. Wichmann, he's always trying to give me
    grief because he was talking about promises that
    we made in opening.  I made a couple promises, and
    I'm here to tell you I was wrong on a couple of my
    promises.
         First of all, I told you one of the things
    that was going to happen in this case is there was
    going to be a defense that they had the burden of
    proof on showing that Mrs. Schlenther had COPD
    before 1990.  I told you they would bring in an
    expert and they would talk about all this.
         I was wrong.  It's not an issue in this case.
    It's not on the verdict form.  You will see no
    questions asking you about that.  In fact, we
    never once saw a medical doctor take the stand on
    behalf of Reynolds.  We never once saw anybody on
    that stand on behalf of R.J. Reynolds telling you
    that the medical conditions were anything but what
    Mrs. Schlenther's treating doctors said they were.
    Nobody, not one on that stand.
         So what I want to do is I want to look at
    what the evidence was.  I want to look at look a
    little bit at what the trail of evidence was, what 2518 the trail of medical treatment was, what the trail
    of conditions were.
         Baron, if I could get that easel up.  Could
    you do that for me?
         MR. PHILIPSON:  I can.
         MR. MILLARD:  Thank you, Baron.
         MR. PHILIPSON:  You are welcome.
         MR. MILLARD:  In openings I talked about the
    defense was going to be that her COPD started
    before 1990.  It's now that it didn't start until
    after 1996.  And we will see on the verdict form,
    No. 3, the question you will need to answer is,
    Did Beverly Schlenther have COPD on or before
    November 1 -- 21, 1996?
         It's our burden to show that she did.  If she
    did, it brings her within the class membership,
    assuming that these first two questions were
    answered.  And what we focused on is the language
    on this.  We are going to see here the key word is
    right here.  Did she have COPD?
         On that, let's go to the next question that
    goes hand in hand with this.  Question No. 4, Did
    Beverly Schlenther know or should have -- or
    should she have known, in the exercise of
    reasonable care, on or before that date, November 2519 21, 1996, again, that she had COPD and that there
    was a reasonable possibility that her COPD was
    caused by her cigarette smoking.
         I'm here to tell you that the evidence is
    going to show that both of those should be checked
    yes.  The evidence will show that, indeed, she
    both had COPD before 1996 and she should have
    known, even if she did not know, that she had it
    at that time.
         I'm not going to go through all the medical
    records.  We saw them go up there.  You saw a lot
    of records come up.
         We saw a lot of the treating doctors that
    came in here.  Mr. Wichmann talked a little bit
    about them.  Dr. Worth came in.  That's her family
    practice, her internist, her primary care
    physician.  Dr. Whims-Squires, the pulmonologist,
    specializes in the lung.  Both board certified,
    great reputations, local doctors, located -- came
    in and talked to you.  They talked to you about
    their hands-on treatment of Beverly Schlenther.
    They talked about what they saw, and they talked
    about speaking with her about her condition.  They
    talked about the various complaints she had, the
    symptomology she was experiencing over time and 2520 what they did about it.
         I'm going to step back for just a little bit,
    and let's talk about when the story really begins.
    You'll recall that we had the deposition of
    Beverly Schlenther on the screen.  And she talked
    that in her deposition at one point that she said
    she had asthma.  And we heard a lot about that in
    the medical records, and that she had that for
    quite a while, and she had inhalers to treat her
    for that.  And she believed that the asthma was
    caused by smoking.  Do you remember that?
         Baron, could we show that clip real quick?
    It's a depo of Beverly Schlenther. Q.   Earlier you indicated that you believed you
associated your asthma, as well, with cigarette
smoking; is that correct?
    A.   Yes, sir.
         (End of video clip.)
         MR. MILLARD:  So she was thinking about her
    cigarette smoking at this time.  She is thinking
    about, You know, I think this is causing me
    problems.  If you will recall later in her
    deposition, she was asked if her doctors told her 2521 any of that.  They said, Yeah, absolutely, smoking
    is bad for your asthma.  Stop.  Stop smoking.
    It's not good.  It's irritating it.  It's not
    causing it; it's irritating your asthma.
         You heard Dr. Worth.  He got up here and he
    told you that.  He said smoking does not cause
    asthma, but it certainly is an irritant to it.  It
    makes it bad.  It hurts.  It makes your lungs
    hurt.
         Now, next we heard in 1990 -- and you saw a
    lot of this.  You saw the Dr. Mason record up
    here, 1990.  And a big deal was made out of that,
    when the position was that she probably had it
    before 1990.  That's not what it said.  We had the
    doctors talk about that and showed a lot of
    evidence.
         But it does show at that time in 1990, Mrs.
    Schlenther was concerned.  She said, The doctor
    didn't write what his findings were in that
    record, you will recall.  What he wrote is she
    thinks -- she thinks -- that she had chronic
    bronchitis, and it's caused by smoking at that
    time.
         She was concerned.  She was starting to
    think, You know what?  I think the smoking is 2522 hurting me.  I think something is going on.
         Now, what we also heard from the doctors --
    and we saw in the records -- which she wasn't
    right in her own self-diagnosis as to what was
    going on.  What we did learn, and we heard from
    the doctors and heard from Mr. Schlenther and
    heard from Russell, her son, who got up here and
    said what she did have is she had bronchitis every
    winter.  In the wintertime she gets sick.  She
    suffered from bronchitis.  She would go get some
    treatment, she would go see a doctor, they would
    take care of it, and there you go.
         So we don't think she had chronic bronchitis.
         We learned from Dr. Worth and
    Dr. Whims-Squires that acute bronchitis, that it
    comes and it goes.  It comes -- and you can get
    very sick, and they can treat you for it, and it
    goes away.
         Chronic bronchitis, the component of COPD, is
    something, once you get it, it keeps going.
         Dr. Whims-Squires had the visuals up here,
    and she described the lungs and she described the
    effect of it.  When she described chronic
    bronchitis, she talked about how the bronchioles,
    the air tubes, start getting congested with mucus, 2523 excess mucus.  You have seen people cough a lot
    who get bronchitis real bad.  There's a lot of
    coughing.  A big component is coughing.
         That's not what was going on with Mrs.
    Schlenther.  She had the other aspect going on,
    emphysema.  And you remember Dr. Whims-Squires
    talked about what that is.  And she talked about
    the balloon.  The air goes down the bronchioles
    into the air sac.  And what happens with emphysema
    is it starts damaging those air sacs, and it
    causes permanent damage so they do not fill and
    contract normally.  They become like dead
    balloons, she said.  So you're struggling, when
    you have that, to get breath.  Breath in, breath
    out.
         What did she tell you, the symptomology from
    that?  What are the symptoms?  Shortness of breath
    on exertion.  And we've heard a lot of evidence
    about that.  And you think about that.  Think
    about the witnesses, think about the doctors,
    think about the records.
         What we saw happening with Beverly Schlenther
    is as this disease progressed, as it does, she
    became more symptomatic, symptomatic with dyspnea,
    they called it, shortness of breath on exertion. 2524 We talked about a lot in the records you saw, and
    we're going to talk a little bit specifically
    about some of these.
         You will recall, though, in the 1988, 1999
    time frame, that Harry and his bride, Beverly,
    were involved in Amway.  Do you remember that
    testimony?  And they talked about going to
    conventions, and they would go to the big
    convention hall and walk around and see the booths
    and do what people do at those kinds of
    conventions.  But it entailed a lot of walking.
    At one of them with that, he talked about going to
    Indianapolis and being in a football stadium.  Do
    you remember that?  They were going up and down
    the stairs at the stadium.  And I'm certain that
    all of us would get a little out of breath just
    because it's hard going up and down stairs, but
    nothing unusual.  Harry told you it was no big
    deal at that time; that there was none of that
    symptomology that was lasting, the shortness of
    breath at that time.
         Beverly was starting to be concerned, though,
    at that time that her smoking was causing some of
    her problems.
         The next thing we saw is that there was a 2525 report.  And it was Dr. Worth's new patient
    questionnaire.  You'll recall she came to him in
    1998.  And there was a questionnaire, and they had
    a bunch of check boxes.  Do you have any of these,
    different tests that have ever been performed.
    She checked "yes" to pulmonary function and wrote
    "1994."
         What do we know?  We know that we have no
    records of the test.  We have no records of the
    results.  We have no medical records of that time
    period.  But what we do know from her treating
    doctors who did treat her -- granted, later on,
    one of them being a pulmonologist -- that when we
    do those kinds of tests -- and when do we do those
    kinds of tests?  And what Dr. Worth told you is
    that the most likely reason -- remember those
    scales, more likely than not?  He said the most
    likely reason for doing that at that time was to
    test or evaluate the signs and symptoms of COPD.
         Baron, let's put some of Dr. Worth up, a clip
    at 966, 9 through 16, please. Q.   However you were advised that, at some point
in time around 1994, the test was performed, true? 2526 A.   Correct.
    Q.   And in order to perform a test, I think you
already told us that somebody would be having signs or
symptoms that had alerted the physician to the
potential of COPD; is that correct?
    A.   Most likely, that's correct.
         (End of video clip.)
         MR. MILLARD:  Most likely.  Do we have any
    other explanation?  We don't.  Sitting here as
    jurors, your job is to look at all this evidence,
    put it all together, to use your common sense to
    make reasonable inferences as to what the evidence
    means.  Put it all together.
         This is a case that COPD is the kind of
    disease where we're never going to be able to pin
    it on a date that it started.  Nobody can do that.
    Doctors told you that there is no way to grab a
    single date and say, Bam, that's the date it
    started.  But they looked at the overall picture,
    and they looked at what was going on with this
    patient, looked at what was going on with Beverly.
    They looked at her symptoms.  They looked at her
    treatment.  We talked with the family and we heard
    what they had to say.
         So in 1994, the most likely explanation as to 2527 what was going on -- there is no evidence to the
    contrary -- the most likely explanation of what
    was going on is she was beginning the symptoms of
    COPD.  Her COPD had begun.  It was starting to go.
    And we don't know -- we don't have a record to say
    exactly what was happening, but the doctors think
    that's the most likely explanation.
         But it goes further, because we know in 1995
    she then went a year later, or even less than a
    year, depending on what date in 1994 she had that
    test.  But she did go into a cardiologist,
    Dr. Walsh.  Remember hearing about Dr. Walsh?
    He's the cardiologist that her husband had seen
    and that he credited for saving his life.  Do you
    remember that testimony?  He said, He saved my
    life, his quick response, his care for me.  His
    treatment for me saved my life.
         Well, Beverly is having some concerns about
    her heart.  She went and saw this doctor.  He
    didn't just look at the heart, like the earlier
    doctor had done in 1990, but he evaluated the
    whole picture.  He said, What's going on here?
    Let's try to figure out what was happening with
    this person in 1995?
         Well, he made some interesting findings, not 2528 from her statements but from his examination.  He
    put in his report -- and I believe you will
    recall --
         And if we could just put it up, Baron.  It's
    Exhibit 7, 0118.
         November 9, 1995.  Do you remember this
    document?  It's Dr. Walsh.  We talked a lot about
    it.  Right here is the third impression.  These
    are his impressions.  He's evaluating the patient.
    He's talking to her.  He's looking at her
    condition and trying to determine what's going on.
    He says, Exertional dyspnea and decreased exercise
    tolerance, 1995.
         That's COPD.  That's it right there.  1995,
    she had COPD.  He saw it, he wrote it down, he
    made a finding that she had it.
         Now, to verify that -- and you heard the
    doctors talk about that -- is that we find the
    symptoms of COPD, and then we'll do these tests to
    confirm it -- right? -- to find out if it's
    consistent with the findings the doctor is making.
         This is emphysema.  This is exactly what you
    would describe as to what is emphysema, the
    dyspnea on exertion.  And he said, Let's figure it
    out.  Let's go further.  Let's rule out.  Let's 2529 make sure it's not her heart.  Let's see if it is
    pulmonary disease or heart disease.  Let's keep
    following up on this.  Let's take a look.
         Well, it turns out he's right.  And we know
    he's right, because we have the later doctors who
    did treat her said, Wow, she's got COPD, and it's
    bad.
         Do you remember Dr. Whims-Squires?  Did the
    full-on pulmonary function test with her and said
    at that stage -- and that was 2001, June of 2001,
    -- when she came to her that time, it didn't just
    start, it was at a severe stage.  Severe stage.
         What did she also tell you?  She said this
    was a disease that progresses.  It's a progressive
    exertional dyspnea.
         If you look down the document a little bit,
    Baron.
         In the middle here, she has had no problems
    since that time until the last several months when
    she has had progressive exertional dyspnea and
    weakness.
         You heard the doctors talking.  What does
    that mean?  Progressive means progressive.  It's
    something that starts and keeps getting worse over
    time.  We know with emphysema and chronic 2530 bronchitis, COPD, that it's a progressive disease.
    You heard the testimony.  Doctors got up there and
    told you all about it.  Once it starts, it's
    there.  It's a permanent problem, it's a permanent
    injury, and it progresses over time.  It's not
    always bad right at this beginning, but the
    symptoms are there.  And the symptoms started.
         And we saw Beverly, and we'll talk about it
    in a minute.  But you saw that she had -- bless
    you -- she had symptoms of shortness of breath.
    Doctors were taking a look at it.  Doctors were
    concerned about it being pulmonary disease.  And
    it wasn't until, like, '01 when it got really bad.
    You will remember that.  And you saw the records
    of how bad it got.  And we'll talk about that in a
    minute.
         So at this time, she's got COPD.  The
    diagnosis is not a requirement.  You can read on
    the jury instructions.  It doesn't ask you for
    that.  It says, When did she have it?  When did
    she have it, the diagnosis?
         And you will see from Dr. Whims-Squires that
    she didn't even write that.  She said the COPD is
    consistent with the symptomology -- excuse me --
    the testing, the pulmonary function testing.  The 2531 results were consistent with COPD.
         What's COPD?  What was she talking about?
    The ones the doctors had already been talking
    about.  It just is not confirmed by that type of
    testing.  That's all that is.
         You are going to hear, just as you hear
    choice, choice, choice from the defense, you're
    going to here diagnosis, diagnosis, diagnosis.
    They will talk about that a lot.  Why?  It's not
    on the jury verdict form.  It's not a question you
    have to answer whether it was her diagnosis or
    not.  It's not required.  It's written right here:
    Did she have it or not?
         It was confirmed in '01.  She had it starting
    in 1995, 1994 time period.  Something is going on
    there.  We heard the doctors talk about it.
         Let me play real quick, if I could, Baron,
    clip -- it's Whims-Squires Clip 1048, 1 through
    17.
         She's describing the progressive nature of
    the disease.
         That's all right.
         You will recall Dr. Whims-Squires got up, and
    she talked -- and I asked her.  I asked her the
    question.  I said, Describe for me the procedure, 2532 the process COPD goes through.  Once someone gets
    it, does it come and go?  Is it --
         MR. PHILIPSON:  I got it.
         MR. MILLARD:  Does it happen all at once?
         MR. PHILIPSON:  Sorry.
         MR. MILLARD:  That's okay. A.   Progressive shortness of breath usually.
They, you know, start having more difficulty with -- it
depends on the severity of the disease.  Obviously, it
can be simply that they just have trouble to exert
themselves to progression to where they have shortness
of breath doing anything that they require for their
daily activities, like showering, making the bed.  So
it just depends on the severity of the disease.
    Q.   And would you consider COPD to be a
progressive disease?
    A.   Yes, sir.
    Q.   And it does not happen overnight; it develops
over time?
    A.   Yes, sir.
    Q.   And as it develops, it goes through a number
of different stages?
    A.   Exactly, or symptoms. 2533 (End of video clip.)
         MR. MILLARD:  It's progressive.  1995,
    Dr. Walsh says she has got progressive dyspnea,
    shortness of breath.  Most likely what she was
    describing is what COPD is.  So it's happening at
    that stage.
         Again, we talked in opening.  I told you guys
    that we don't have a lot of records from the past.
    It's by no fault of anybody.  Standard business
    procedure, seven years, facilities, businesses
    destroy records.  The documents are no longer
    available for that period of time.
         What we do know, though, is we do know that
    Dr. Walsh worked at the same facility as both of
    the treating doctors.  They were partners in the
    medical practice.  And you heard Dr. Worth talk
    about that.  Dr. Whims-Squires talked about that.
    In fact, Dr. Worth said when Beverly finally came
    to him, what he did is he went and grabbed
    Dr. Walsh's chart.  He saw what he had done and
    started charting in the same medical chart.  He
    didn't start all over.  He wasn't guessing on what
    was going on before.  He saw what Dr. Walsh found,
    saw what he talked to -- talked to her about, saw
    the symptomology that was going on and continued 2534 to treat her.
         You heard Harry -- when Harry was talking
    about Dr. Walsh, what did Harry tell you about the
    kind of doctor he was?  He said he loved this guy.
    The guy was so good he saved his life.  But he
    went further.  He said he was the kind of doctor
    that just didn't just come in and run out in a
    moment's time, but he spent time with his
    patients.  He sat with them.  He talked with
    Harry.  He explained to Harry what was going on.
    He listened to what Harry's complaints were, what
    his symptoms were, what his conditions where.  And
    he would even tell Harry, Here is what I think is
    going on here, here is what my impressions are of
    what your problem is, and here is what I'm going
    to do about it.  Here is the treatment I suggest
    we do.  Here is where I think we go from here.
         Harry said he did that every time he was in
    there.  Harry still sees Dr. Walsh.  He still sees
    him.  He said -- when Beverly went, Harry was with
    them, and the doctor treated her exactly the same
    way.
         So the question becomes, on No. 4, you are
    asked, Did she know?
         We don't have tests of what she knew or not 2535 at that time, but we know that she should have
    known, because Dr. Worth told her.  He would say,
    Here is what's going on.  Here is what we think is
    happening.  You are getting a progressive -- your
    symptoms are becoming progressive now.  There is
    exertional dyspnea.  I think it's a pulmonary
    disease.  I'm going to check it out and follow
    that up and see what's going on okay.
         Unfortunately, we don't have anything further
    in the records to describe that.  But, again, we
    have the doctors that saw her afterwards.  And
    they talked to us about that, and they explained
    what they thought was going on.  It's the only
    evidence we have.  Reynolds didn't bring in
    anybody to tell you they were wrong or incorrect
    or their theories or opinions were inaccurate.
    They were the ones who treated her.  They know
    better than anybody.
         In fact, if we could show Dr. Whims-Squires
    clip at 1088, 14.
         Have you got that?
         MR. PHILIPSON:  Yes.
         MR. MILLARD:  Here is what Dr. Whims-Squires
    said:
         (A video clip was played for the jury as 2536 follows:)
    Q.   How is it that you can determine that the
same underlying disease process that may have caused
her shortness of breath in 1995 wasn't the same
underlying cause in 1990?
    A.   After reviewing Dr. Walsh's notes that she
had gotten better after the initial, she's started with
symptoms again, which shows that she -- whatever issue
was going on at the time resolved itself.  Then when I
saw her, she had told me she had progressive shortness
of breath over several years and had worsened over the
past year, which would link together around the time
that Dr. -- around the time that Dr. Walsh saw her into
the time that I was seeing her, along with the severity
of her disease on pulmonary function test at the time
makes -- suggests to me that it is more than just a
heart issue that was taken care of or a flare-up of her
asthma that settled down, like you might suspect from
that because of the progression of her symptoms.
         Her lung function, being less than a liter at
the time, which is usually where you start seeing
people require nocturnal oxygen, which she did, goes
along with it being a longstanding disease of COPD,
puts that picture to me that, starting somewhere around
that time, would have been about the time that she 2537 should have been aware that this was more than
something that was fleeting.
         (End of video clip.)
         MR. MILLARD:  Around that time she should
    have been aware.  This is the time that the doctor
    is looking at the records.  And the doctor also
    knows Dr. Walsh and knows the way he practices
    medicine.  The same way with Dr. Worth.  They talk
    to their patients.  They explain what's going on.
         Here is what she should have known.  Whether
    she did nor not, here is what she should have
    known.  Dr. Walsh was talking about her
    symptomology.  Dr. Whims-Squires agrees.
         Dr. Worth came in here, Dr. Whims-Squires
    came in here, hands-on doctors, looked at all the
    medical records, went to the 1990 record, looked
    at that, looked at Dr. Walsh, looked at the
    patient, talked to the patient, treated the
    patient, got to know the patient, knew her well.
    They described her personality.  They described
    Harry.  Both of them rendered opinions on these
    issues for you today.
         And if you could play the clip starting with
    Dr. Whims-Squires at 1069, 1 through 15.
         (A video clip was played for the jury as 2538 follows:)
    Q.   And based on all the information you have
before you, and based on your training, your skill,
your experience, your hands-on treatment of
Mrs. Schlenther, within a reasonable degree of medical
certainty, when would you -- what is your opinion as to
when she first developed symptomatic COPD?
    A.   Somewhere around 1994, 1995, from the records
that I have available.
    Q.   Is there any way to put an exact date on
that?
    A.   I don't think anybody knows the exact date.
    Q.   Nobody could, with what we have available?
    A.   Right.
    Q.   So more likely than not, that's your opinion,
that it was in the early to mid nineties?
    A.   Yes.
         (End of video clip.)
         MR. MILLARD:  More likely than not, from all
    available evidence.  Nobody can pin an exact date.
    It's what the pulmonologist, the only
    pulmonologist we've heard from in this case,
    that's what she thinks happened.
         The next clip, if we could, of Dr. Worth, 998
    at 12. 2539 Doctor. Q.   Now, based on your treatment of
Mrs. Schlenther, looking at the medical records that
you had in your file, looking at the symptomology that
she displayed and experienced, when did you start --
when do you believe her COPD started to become
symptomatic to her?
    A.   I would have to presume that it was somewhere
in the mid nineties, you know.  And I base that on the
way she presented to me in '98 and the fact that
somebody had done spirometry or PFTs on her in the mid
nineties, even though we didn't have documentation of
that.  But that's generally when you do the spirometry
or the pulmonary function test, is when somebody starts
presenting with those ongoing symptoms and have the
risk for COPD, i.e., cigarette smoking.
         (End of video clip.)
         MR. MILLARD:  I don't know if there is any
    better evidence than the two doctors who actually
    treated her.  They cared for her.  They came in,
    and they weren't paid to come in here.  They came
    in to talk to you because they were treating
    doctors and wanted to tell you what they had done. 2540 They came in here and talked to you about what
    they thought was going on with her, what the
    symptomatology was, what her conditions were.
         But you will also remember they both came in
    here and they talked to you about Harry.  They
    didn't just talk about Beverly.  They said, We got
    to know this man.  This man was at her side all
    the way through the progression of this disease.
         And like I said, I'm not going to throw up
    all the medical records.  But let's think back for
    a second.  Recall the types of records that we
    had.  This was about the '01 period of time when
    it really started getting bad.  She started
    running out of breath doing everything.
         And some of the records said that fact, that
    she couldn't do anything anymore.  She couldn't
    vacuum.  She couldn't clean.  She couldn't pick up
    the room.  She couldn't take laundry from the
    washer to the dryer.  She couldn't make it outside
    to the mailbox without even running out of breath.
         And Whims-Squires -- and when Dr.
    Whims-Squires, on the record, she would get so
    tired and short of breath that she would not even
    eat at one point in time.  Dr. Worth said, It
    doesn't get any worse than that.  That is as bad 2541 as it gets.
         And Harry sat with her, and he held her hand,
    and he took her to all these treatments.
         And we talked about in openings, he's not the
    kind of guy that runs way when the time gets
    tough.  We saw the wedding pictures.  He made some
    vows, through sickness and in health.  Here is a
    man that took that seriously.  He held her all the
    way through and never left her.
         But in doing so, what happened to Harry?  All
    right?  We heard, too, about his love affair with
    his wife, that it was serious.  Remember her --
    and this was kind of a cute moment, if you will.
    When she was testifying, we talked about that he
    wasn't her first husband, but she said, He was my
    best.  He was my favorite.  I loved Harry.
         And you know he felt the same way.  It wasn't
    his first marriage.  They finally found each
    other.  Thirty-four years.  Thirty-four years they
    were together.
         He told you he depended on her almost like a
    child sometimes.  He didn't know what to do
    without her.  He was like a lost puppy dog.  She
    is gone.  Every night Harry goes to bed alone.
    Every night.  Every morning he gets up alone.  She 2542 used to cook for him.  He sits in the same kitchen
    she used to cook in.  Now he cooks, and he is all
    alone.  He sits at the table where you saw that
    deposition taking place.  Same table.  He sits
    there now and eats by himself.  He grieves her
    every single day.
         Let's take a look at the damages in this
    case.
         You will get to the damage question on
    here --
         Before we get there, I know Bill went over --
    Mr. Wichmann went over some of these things.  But
    we contend that the evidence will show -- and
    Mr. Wichmann talked about it.  He'll get a moment
    to talk to you a little bit more.  But was the
    negligence the legal cause of COPD and death?  We
    say yes to that.  We think you will see the
    evidence the same way as we do on that.
         Was the defective and unreasonably dangerous
    product, dangerous cigarettes, placed on the
    market by R.J. Reynolds a legal cause?
         Remember, it doesn't have to be the only one.
    You heard the instructions.  It has to be a legal
    cause, one of the causes.  The same with this up
    here, a legal cause. 2543 We say yes to that.
         Was she reasonably relying?
         We say absolutely.  You saw the documents.
    That's exactly what they wanted her to do.  That
    was their intent.  That was their marketing
    scheme.  That was their plan.  She was their best
    customer.  She did exactly what they wanted her to
    do.  So we think that all of those should be yes.
         You get to the damages.  There are damages.
    Loss of his wife's companionship, protection,
    mental pain, suffering as a result of the COPD and
    death.
         That's a hard job.  We think our job is hard?
    Your job is harder.  You've got to look at all
    this evidence, look at what you have learned from
    Mr. Schlenther and you've learned from his doctors
    and you've learned from him and you've learned
    from his children -- or not even his own children,
    but Beverly's, and raised them as his own -- he
    loved them, and they loved him -- as to how
    devastating that loss has been for him.
         What we look at is we look at the full loss.
    And the full loss is his being there with her
    through the major part of the suffering, her
    suffering.  He suffered being at her side. 2544 I would suggest to you that that began in
    2001 and ran to her death in 2010.  That's
    eight-some-odd years right there of him
    struggling.
         You heard Dr. Worth say he would come in and
    plead with him, Please, Doctor, you've got to do
    something about this.  He tried everything he
    could to help her.  He was there the whole way
    through and suffering right along with her.
         She's passed.  It's been almost three years
    now since her passing.  That's three more years.
    How long is he going to live?  You heard the
    instruction --
         And I hate to say this, Harry.  Don't listen
    to this.
         As we all know, five years, ten years.  You
    guys figure that out.  Okay?  I would suggest that
    at a minimum, five more years.  That's 16 years.
         Put that in perspective.  What does that
    mean?  How long is that?  Well, we can look back
    in time.  That might help up you a little bit.
    For me it's easy.  I have a 16-year-old daughter,
    so I can put that right in perspective from when
    she was born.  Different events.  That's a long
    time.  Sometimes we think it goes by in a flash, 2545 but, really, think back sixteen years.
         Let me give you a couple things to think
    about as to how long that's been.
         1996, 16 years ago.  Remember the O.J.
    Simpson trial?  1996.  That seems like forever,
    doesn't it?  1996.  JonBenet Ramsey, the murder.
    Remember that 1996?  A long time ago.  Lance
    Armstrong diagnosed with cancer, 1996.  A long
    time ago.  Presidential election.  Bill Clinton
    and Al Gore are going against Bob Dole and Jack
    Kemp.  Remember Ross Perot?  Remember Ross, the
    little jokes?  A long time ago.
         If we just went back 15 years, Princess
    Diana, killed in a car crash.  Seems like forever.
         That is a long time to think about passing
    while grieving over your No. 1 companion, your
    best friend, your soulmate.  He said she made him
    whole.  He's not whole any longer.  A gaping hole.
         If you just look 12 years ago, remember the
    election with George W. Bush.  Right here in
    Florida, the hanging chad controversy.  Right?  Do
    you remember that?  How can we forget?  That seems
    like forever, 12 years.  Twelves years ago.
         So I give you these, not as a way to give you
    a number to put on it, but think about the time. 2546 Put that in perspective.  How long has this man
    been forced to not only suffer the pain and the
    emotional distraught for losing his companion?
    She is gone now.  He lost her.  She took care of
    him.  She protected him, the protection.
         So you can look at these things as separate
    individual items, loss of his companion, loss of
    his protection, his pain, his suffering.  Put them
    all together and think of a whole loss of this
    period of time.  Whatever makes sense.
         Mr. Wichmann put up a number.  It's kind of
    weird thinking about separating these out and
    thinking out what would compensate.  He'd give up
    his entire world if he could just bring her back.
    Right now, he would give it all up and bring her
    back.  But we can't do it.  Our system only
    provides that we can give him monetary damage.
    And we're going to ask that you do that.
         We think that's a fair range.  We leave it up
    to you, we trust you.  We know you've been paying
    attention and taking notes.  We know you've been
    following the evidence.  And, again, we thank you
    very, very much for your time and service and
    attentiveness, and ask that you now please give
    the same courtesy to Mr. Baringer.  Give him your 2643 THE BAILIFF:  Yes, Your Honor.


         THE COURT:  You may proceed. 2644 MR. WICHMANN:  Thank you.  Thank you, Judge.
         I wanted to be sure that I was paying
    attention here so that I can -- I can respond.
         Would you put up instruction 31, please?
         MR. PHILIPSON:  Yes.
         MR. WICHMANN:  I was taking notes, and I
    thought I heard Mr. Baringer say that you couldn't
    take into consideration the harm to others if you
    were to check the box for punitive damages "yes."
         Well, take a look at your instruction pack
    when you go back.  Number 31.  The judge gave you
    the law on that.  And there it is.  And it says,
    R.J. Reynolds must have wantonly or recklessly
    disregarded the safety and welfare of the public,
    or the conduct showed such reckless indifference
    to the rights of others.
         So you can consider.  That's the law.  You
    can consider their conduct as it relates to the
    health, the safety and welfare of the public and
    the conduct of others.
         Now, I would like to put to rest this
    addiction business once and for all.
         Could you put up 7118, please?
         I would be very brief.  I know it's the
    afternoon.  Everybody is tired.  This document has 2645 been shown to you before, and it will be part of
    your packet that you take back with you.
         Highlight the top, please, Baron.
         1995 record from Dr. Walsh, one of her
    treating doctors.  And look there.  Number 4.
    Impression, smoking addiction.  He wrote it in his
    chart long before anybody was thinking about
    suing, long before any lawyers were involved.
         So who are you going to believe?  Are you
    going to believe them when they say she wasn't
    addicted, or are you going to believe the man who
    was taking care of her in 1995?
         The next one.  Could you please put up 104,
    please?
         Again, you'll take this back with you.  It's
    in the exhibits.  Look here at Dr. Worth's
    handwritten notes.  The fellow came in and
    testified under oath.  And what did he write?
    Quit smoking totally, and in parentheses, can't.
         Again, he told you that at that point in time
    she told him, this patient told the doctor she
    just couldn't quit.
         Now, Mr. Baringer, I beg to differ.  The
    modalities, the treatments that she used over the
    years, it wasn't until 2001 that she got a 2646 prescription for the nicotine patch.  And it was
    with the technology of the nicotine patch that she
    finally used in 2001 that she was finally able to
    quit.
         You say, Well, she could quit at any time.
         Well, there is a doctor's record saying, just
    can't do it.
         Now, you can put up 9596, please.
         This is another record that you will get.
         I'm sorry to turn my back on you.  I didn't
    mean to do that.
         This is another record that you will get,
    that you can take back to you -- in the jury room.
         MR. PHILIPSON:  It's a big file.  Okay.
         MR. WICHMANN:  Okay.  This is
    Dr. Whims-Squires who wrote this letter in 2008,
    four years ago.  This is what she said about
    whether Beverly had COPD before 1996.
         If you will see, based upon the severity of
    the disease.
         Baron, could you please highlight that?
    Right there.  Go down a little bit lower.
         Based on the severity of her disease, it
    would be consistent with her having significant
    COPD back in 1994 when she did undergo her 2647 previous pulmonary function testing.
         You-all can take that back.  You all can look
    at it.
         She talks up top -- if you could highlight it
    up top -- she had pulmonary -- in the third line.
    She had pulmonary function testing, first
    performed in '94.  However, that has been
    destroyed and not available for review.  However,
    I did have documentation that she had a previous
    pulmonary function testing in 1994.
         So she's writing this back in 1998.  The lady
    had COPD in '94, according to her treating
    physicians.
         Now, I was paying attention.  Mr. Baringer
    came in and started telling a story about he heard
    a train whistle and that nobody from Reynolds ever
    lured -- lured, I guess is the proper term --
    Beverly onto the train.  She got on the train all
    by herself.
         Would you put this up?
         Okay.  I want to highlight it for you.  And
    you-all can take the numbers down, go back there
    and look at the evidence.  This is 4013.  That's
    one of the letters that we showed you that they
    were marketing to children.  They were sending 2648 their salespeople out in 1928 to market to kids,
    and then there is the one, 1959, PT1533, Youth
    Research Institute.  1959, high school students
    they were targeting.
         And then there was that famous R.J. Reynolds
    ad right in the middle.  And you'll get that back
    there.  That's correct, marked PT504.  And that's
    where the girl has a 1952 prom book in her hand,
    and she's also got the cigarette.  And that was
    all over the country.
         Now, they didn't lure her?  They didn't lure
    her onto the train?
         Look at the 3872.  This is another document
    that pertains to youth marketing.
         And then we go down to 1973, PT1040.  We must
    get our share of the youth market.
         You'll have that document back there.
         And here is the one, the presentation that
    was made to the R.J. Reynolds board of directors.
    That's PT1641.  Fourteen-to-24-year-old age group
    represented 21 percent of the population.  They
    represent tomorrow's cigarette business.
         That was the marketing plan in the lower
    right-hand corner that Dr. Hurt told you about,
    that they -- that they planned it the year before 2649 and enacted it the following year.
         If you could put up the next slide.  Here we
    go.  Smoking, PT1479.  Smoking among the 14-to-17
    age group.  We talked about that.
         And then one of the most outrageous internal
    documents.  That's in the lower left-hand corner,
    PT3400, where they talk about young adult smokers
    from the age of 14 to 21 are the only source of
    replacement smokers.
         Okay?  And here we have Mr. Horrigan.  I
    don't know how long that is.  We'll play that
    clip.
         He's the 1984, the CEO of Reynolds.      TED KOPPEL:  R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
    took out this ad in a number of major newspapers
    and magazines, calling for an open debate about
    smoking.  In brief, the ad contends that medical
    studies, which show that cigarette smoking causes
    disease, are ignoring significant evidence to the
    contrary.
         Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer:  Yes
    or no?
         MR. HORRIGAN:  It is not known whether 2650 cigarettes cause cancer.  It's not been currently
    established.
         TED KOPPEL:  Cigarette smoking, no causal
    relationship between cigarette smoking and
    emphysema?
         MR. HORRIGAN:  Despite all of the research to
    date, there has been no causal link established.
         TED KOPPEL:  No causal relationship between
    cigarette smoking and heart disease?
         MR. HORRIGAN:  No.  As a matter of fact,
    there are studies that, while we are accused of
    being associated with heart disease, there have
    been studies conducted over ten years that would
    say, again, that science is still puzzled over
    these forces.
         TED KOPPEL:  If there is doubt, should we not
    be leading our children in the direction of not
    smoking?
         MR. HORRIGAN:  Yes.  In fact, as far as we --
    when I say "yes," the cigarette industry's
    position is that young people should not smoke.
    As long as it is an open question -- and I say it
    is an open question -- and as long as science
    continues independent research to get at the
    answers, then we believe that people should wait 2651 until they are, let's say, young adults and make
    that informed decision.
         TED KOPPEL:  All right.
         MR. HORRIGAN:  And that's a very strong
    position that our industry does take. There it is again.  Young
    adults.  1984.  We have the documents.  We showed
    you.  I read earlier from the 2012 Surgeon
    General's report that they're still marketing and
    advertising to young adults, because those are
    their next generation customers.
         Now, you'll also get -- if we could put this
    up, please -- PT1252.  That is a letter in 1968
    from R.J. Reynolds to the Geiger School fourth
    grade class.  Write the number down.  You can take
    read -- you can take a look at it.  And they're
    telling fourth graders, Science has been unable to
    establish that smoking causes disease.
         They already knew that back in the labs.
    Okay?
         Here's another one.  Fifth graders they're
    writing letters to.  1433.  And this was dated
    January 1st, 1990.  They wrote a letter,
    R.J. Reynolds.  Right there.  It's on 2652 R.J. Reynolds' letterhead.  They wrote a letter to
    the Willow Ridge fifth grade class.
         Science does not know the cause or the causes
    of chronic diseases associated with smoking.
    Please pass this information along to the
    students.
         Okay.  That's their whole campaign.  They
    knew that cigarettes were addictive, they knew
    that cigarettes caused disease, and they denied
    it.  It took the Minnesota trial that Dr. Hurt
    told you about for them to finally come clean and
    finally tell the truth.
         Now, frankly, I'm offended when I hear this
    business about, Well, we're a little bit late into
    the debate.  It took us a while.  We maybe dragged
    our feet before we told the truth.
         Well, think about it.  How many American
    lives would have been saved if they had just come
    clean back in the fifties, back in the sixties,
    and said, You know what?  Our research shows,
    nicotine is addictive and it causes disease.
    Mr. Surgeon General, can we work together and
    figure out what's going on here?
         They say, Well, we're a little -- we were
    late to admit it.  Well, it took the Minnesota 2653 trial to admit it.  But let me show you again what
    they were telling the Surgeon General the day
    before the Surgeon General released his report
    linking smoking to health and disease.
         Would you play the Dwyer clip, please?      A SPEAKER:  It was suspect from the start.
    HEW Secretary Califano launched his anti-smoking
    campaign a year ago with all the zeal of a
    reformed sinner.  And now in an apparent attempt
    to bring some science to the side of his new
    evangelism, the former three-pack-a-day secretary
    told the Surgeon General, Prepare a new report.
    Its issuance, an internal HEW memo said -- and I
    quote -- would be a media event, closed quote.
         Turning a significant health question into a
    publicity stunt is an insult to serious science.
    America, beware if Joe Califano ever gives up
    drinking or other pleasure pursuits, even the most
    intimate. That's the U.S. Surgeon
    General he's talking about the day before the
    Surgeon General is going to issue the report.  You 2654 see all the microphones going to all the major
    networks.
         I asked Dr. Michel.  He said, Why, you can't
    conclude that just because the microphones were
    there.
         This is what they were telling the American
    people about what the U.S. Surgeon General was
    trying to do.  He was trying to tell the American
    folks -- okay? -- cigarettes are bad, they're bad,
    they're killing people.
         And what were they doing?  Trying to block it
    and spend all this money to create this
    controversy and create this doubt, because they
    knew that an addicted smoker, one reason to quit,
    two reasons to quit, three reasons to quit, the
    smoker who has lung cancer and still says, I know
    I have lung cancer, and I know I'm going to die
    from it, but I'm still going to smoke.  That
    person, as long they hear one, two, three, four,
    but over here, what do they hear?  They get that
    message:  There is no proven link.  There is
    doubt.  They see the ads.  They see on TV.
         That's the psychological crutch.  That's the
    campaign of doubt that they spent the $250,000,000
    to create over 50 years.  That's it right there. 2655 Because people who are addicted, they have
    this conflict.  And the doctors all came in and
    told you.  And it's hard for them to quit, but
    it's hard for them to reconcile quitting when they
    are hearing this kind of information from the
    folks that are selling them the product.
         Now, last but not least, I want to talk to
    you a little bit about the law, two instructions
    you're going to get.  One is No. 19.  And that is
    the instruction on reliance.
         Mr. Baringer got up and told you for two
    hours, She never relied on anything.  Okay?
         This is in your packet.  This is the law.
    And again, I ask you, focus, keep your eye on the
    ball.  Focus on the law.
         The judge read it to you:  The plaintiff need
    not provide direct evidence of Beverly
    Schlenther's reliance on any specific statement by
    the defendant.  You may, instead, infer
    Beverly Schlenther's reliance on such statements
    if the evidence as a whole supports such an
    inference.
         You'll get as evidence in the case PT3870K.
    It is the 1981 FTC Federal Trade Commission
    report, where the federal government wrote in 2656 1981, Cigarette advertising reaches virtually all
    Americans who can either read or understand the
    spoken word.  So pervasive is cigarette
    advertising that it is virtually impossible for
    Americans of almost any age to avoid cigarette
    advertising.
         That's the point.  The blast from the
    industry was out there.  And you saw that man cast
    aspersions on U.S. Surgeon General.  You saw the
    CEO, Mr. Horrigan, on Nightline saying, Well,
    there is no proven link, there's still doubt, when
    they knew otherwise in their labs.  And they lied
    and they misled.  And this was the conspiracy to
    conceal and the actual concealment.
         One last point I would like to make.  And
    that is that Mr. Baringer talked about choice and
    choice and choice and choice, like I told you he
    would.  You will get this instruction in your
    package.  It's instruction after No. 8, No. 9,
    No. 10, No. 11.
         If you can put up 8, please.
         It is what is called the concurrent cause
    instruction.  And it's No. 9 on the bottom.
    You're going to get it after every major question.
         In order to be regarded as a legal cause of 2657 COPD, addiction need not be the only cause.
         That means you can go back there and think,
    well, maybe choice, maybe motivation, maybe there
    were some other things in the equation.  It's not
    all or nothing.  Addiction need not be the only
    cause.  It must be a legal cause, even though it
    operates in combination with the acts of another.
    So you can go back there and think, Well, maybe
    there was some choice, maybe there was some
    motivation.  But addiction need not be the only
    cause for you to find for the plaintiff in this
    case.
         Thank you.  It's been a long trial, and we
    appreciate the attention that you have given.
    Thank you very much.
