          MR. BAYUK:  Okay.
          Please the Court, Counsel, Ms. Schleider.
          Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
          JURORS:  Good morning.
          MR. BAYUK:  I've been up here a few times in
     front of you now.  I guess dating back to about two
     weeks ago when I gave you the opening statement on
     behalf of R.J. Reynolds.  It's my privilege to give
     you the closing argument on behalf of Reynolds 4729
     today.  I'm going to talk for a little bit and then
     my partner, Ms. Henninger, is going to get up and
     talk to you a little bit more about the various
     aspects of the verdict form.
          So I'm pleased to be up here.  I have a lot of
     ground to cover, both in terms of initially some of
     the stuff that Mr. Paige talked to you about and
     then what I think the evidence is going to be or
     the evidence is that's going to help you answer the
     questions that y'all are here to decide.
          Very similar to what I told you in opening
     statement, I made a prediction in opening statement
     about what type of evidence the plaintiff was going
     to put on in their case and whether it would be
     helpful for you in answering the questions that
     you're going to have to decide when you go back to
     the jury room.
          And so I'm going to talk to you a little bit
     about what the plaintiff has done over the last two
     weeks in terms of putting on that evidence.
          But I want to make clear -- before I do that,
     I want to make sure that we're all clear what this
     case is about.
          I told you this in opening statement, it
     hasn't changed in the last two weeks.  The case is 4730
     about Mr. Schleider, it's about one smoker and one
     brand of cigarettes, his unfiltered Lucky Strike
     cigarettes.  It's not about smokers in general.
     It's not about smokers other than Mr. Schleider.
     It's not about historical tobacco company conduct
     in general.  It is about one smoker and one brand
     of cigarettes, and that is Mr. Schleider.
          And you don't have to take my word for it.  I
     told you in opening you would need look no further
     than the verdict form that you are going to take
     back to the deliberation room to see, you are not
     asking -- you are not answering questions about how
     you feel about tobacco companies or what you think
     about documents or smokers other than
     Mr. Schleider.  If I can --
          I'm not sure who has got control of this.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  I do.
          MR. BAYUK:  I think Mr. Paige showed you some
     of these verdict form questions on the screen, but
     you can see, and you'll have this when you go back
     to the verdict -- to the jury room, every question
     on the verdict form has Mr. Schleider's made on it.
     Every question except the last one deals with
     Andrew J. Schleider.
          And so that tells you you are answering 4731
     questions about Mr. Schleider.  You are answering
     questions of a very specific, a narrow legal
     framework, all that has to do with what the
     evidence has been about Mr. Schleider.
          Judge Zabel read you jury instructions before
     we started closings.  You're going to get a copy of
     those when you go back to the jury room.  They are
     numbered.  And so as I walk through the evidence,
     walk through some of these issues, I want to give
     you some instruction numbers that I think are going
     to help you review the evidence and answer the
     questions that you-all are here to decide.
          And so I would encourage you to take notes, I
     would encourage you to write the instruction
     numbers down because I think this is what is going
     to help you.
          So I want to cover two of the preliminary
     instructions briefly, kind of set the framework for
     our walk through the evidence.
          The first thing I want to show you, I want to
     remind us, is that the plaintiff is the party with
     the burden of proof.  That's something you've heard
     since jury selection.  It hasn't changed.  Every
     issue on the verdict form is something that the
     plaintiff bears the burden of proof on.  They bear 4732
     the burden to bring you evidence to prove their
     claims.
          So how it works, if they don't meet their
     burden, we don't even have an obligation to stand
     up and do anything, an obligation to cross-examine
     their witnesses, an obligation to put on evidence.
     If they don't carry their burden, they lose, that's
     how the law works, because they brought the
     lawsuit.  So we know they have the burden of proof.
     This is instruction number 11.
          You'll see in instruction number 2 what they
     need to do in order to try to meet their burden of
     proof.  And this tells you, "The evidence in the
     case consists of testimony, exhibits, and facts
     that may be admitted."  That means you have to base
     your decision on the evidence.  You have to rely on
     the evidence that you heard in trial.
          You see at the moment, you should not guess
     about things.  You can't base your decision on
     guesswork, you can't base it on speculation.  And
     when I get into what Mr. Paige talked to you about,
     you can't base your decision on attorney argument.
     You can't base it on rhetoric to help plaintiff
     meet their burden.  They can only meet it with
     evidence. 4733
          And so what we have as we walk through the
     verdict form is kind of a very specific framework
     where you have every question dealing with
     Mr. Schleider, the plaintiff bears the burden on
     every issue and they have to prove that burden,
     carry that burden with evidence.
          Now, before I get into discussing what
     Mr. Paige did --
          Can I go back to the slide?
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Sure.
          MR. BAYUK:  I want to talk to you about what
     the evidence does show.  And it's really not a
     close call.  I'm going to talk to you for the
     remainder of my time about class membership issues.
     And, you know, I'll show you the hurdles we used in
     opening, but I'm going to focus on the first three
     questions of the verdict form, and then
     Ms. Henninger is going to talk to you about the
     remainder of the verdict form.
          But the evidence does show, the evidence when
     you all go back into the jury room, is that there
     has been a complete failure by the plaintiff to
     carry their burden of proof on class membership, on
     every issue.
          And so what do I mean.  First, there is no 4734
     dispute in the evidence that the plaintiff's claims
     are barred under the rule of law that governs Engle
     cases because they have not proved Mr. Schleider
     had COPD or lung cancer that manifested by
     November 21st, 1996.  And we're going to walk
     through that evidence in detail on both COPD and
     lung cancer.
          Second, the plaintiff has brought you no
     credible expert testimony or evidence to prove that
     Mr. Schleider was addicted to nicotine.
          We're going to discuss Dr. Drobes.  We're
     going to discuss the testimony from the stand of
     people like Ms. Schleider and her daughter and the
     son's deposition that was read to you and discuss
     what the plaintiff needs to do to prove addiction
     and why they have not done that.
          And then finally, we are going to walk through
     the evidence on addiction causation.  Because
     that's something, if you check your notes, I know
     all of you took notes during the trial and when you
     go back there, you will be able to look at those
     notes.  And I would encourage you to look for
     anyone that the plaintiff put on the stand or they
     cross-examined that told you that addiction caused
     Mr. Schleider's disease or death.  Please look for 4735
     that in your notes.  It won't be there because it
     didn't happen during the course of the trial.  They
     have completely failed to carry their burden of
     proving that to you.  So check your notes, please.
          If you get past class membership, and I submit
     to you, the evidence, I don't think you will, but
     we need to cover the other issues in the verdict
     form.  You're going to deal with these issues of
     concealment and agreement to conceal and so on, and
     so you need to look at what evidence you have
     there.
          This is what Ms. Henninger is going to talk to
     you about.  But here you can't rely on generic
     evidence.  That doesn't help you answer the
     questions you are here to decide.  You need
     specific evidence about Mr. Schleider.  And the
     only evidence about that came from people like
     Mrs. Schleider and the daughter and the son Chris's
     deposition, which was read to you.
          And I submit to you, that evidence is
     inconsistent, it doesn't make any sense in terms of
     linking anything up to what the plaintiffs spent
     the bulk of their time talking about in this trial,
     which is generic evidence in the case.
          And so Ms. Henninger is going to talk to you 4736
     more about that.  I want to first -- well, I want
     to briefly, before I get into the specific evidence
     that will help you, I want to discuss what
     Mr. Paige talked to you about in his closing.  And
     I think a good way to think about this is why did
     the plaintiff take two weeks to try the case?  Why
     have we been here for two weeks since opening?
          I told you in opening much of the evidence
     that they're going to put on isn't going to help
     you.  And they have spent the better part of two
     weeks re-proving the Engle findings.
          You've been instructed if they meet their
     burden on class membership, they get the Engle
     findings.  They're binding in the case if they meet
     their burden of proof.  They don't have to re-prove
     them, that's the point of the findings.  And so
     despite that, they have spent most of their time
     bringing you generic evidence.
          You heard it in Mr. Paige's closing because
     there were a number of documents shown, a number of
     internal documents, and then Mr. Paige would follow
     up with "and Andrew Schleider was affected by
     this."  That's the evidence that's lacking in the
     case.  That's the evidence they hope that you'll
     overlook that they don't have. 4737
          So they try to put on generic evidence to try
     to make you overlook them not meeting their burden
     of needing specific evidence to prove their claim.
     So they spent most of your time bringing you
     evidence that won't help you.
          Some more specific examples.  It was an hour
     into the plaintiff's opening statement, I told you,
     before they even mentioned Andrew Schleider.  It
     was a week into this trial before you heard any
     evidence --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Excuse me, Judge, I object to
     them attacking the way we tried our case.
          THE COURT:  Well, it's sustained.
          MR. BAYUK:  Okay.
          You waited a week before you heard a witness
     who knew anything about Andrew Schleider.
     Dr. Proctor was on the stand on four different
     days.  You can see just in terms of length of
     testimony 877 minutes, more than 14 hours of
     testimony for someone who said I know nothing about
     Mr. Schleider, I don't know what he smoked, I don't
     know what he saw, I don't know where he lived, I
     don't know what he relied on.  I had the
     opportunity to learn about him.  I could have
     talked to Mrs. Schleider, I could have read the 4738
     depositions in the case, I could have learned
     whether what I'm here to talk about had any
     connection or relevance to him, but I didn't do
     that, because that's not what I do.  I'm not a
     biographer of the plaintiff or the smoker.
          And so they brought someone, and he's a
     well-credentialed man, he works at Stanford, but 14
     plus hours of testimony to know nothing about
     Mr. Schleider.
          This isn't a generic case.  That's generic
     evidence.  And so that's what I mean when I say
     much of what they did isn't going to help you
     today.
          More specifically, you know, Mr. Paige showed
     you examples about advertising, he said 250 billion
     dollars in advertising, showed you ads for brands
     and companies that Mr. Schleider never smoked.  The
     real story in advertising came from Dr. Proctor,
     and it comes from the jury instructions as well.
          You are going to get an instruction,
     advertising and marketing of cigarettes was and is
     legal.  Cigarettes are advertised like other
     products, like alcohol, and so on.  Other product
     advertising is legal.  More specific to this case,
     there is no evidence Mr. Schleider started or 4739
     continued smoking because of advertising.  No
     evidence he ever chose a brand of cigarettes
     because of ads.
          The evidence from Dr. Proctor is while
     Mr. Schleider was smoking, most smokers switched to
     filtered cigarettes.  Eventually 90 percent of
     people were smoking filtered cigarettes.  Those
     were the only cigarettes that were being
     advertised.  Mr. Schleider never switched.
          In fact, the brands of cigarettes he smoked,
     unfiltered Lucky Strikes, they stopped advertising
     the year that Mr. and Mrs. Schleider got married.
     He couldn't have relied on advertising for the
     brand he was smoking because there were no ads.
     That's the plaintiff's advertising case in context.
          The bottom line, you've heard 60 million
     people quit.  Advertising didn't prevent that.
     Advertising didn't prevent people from quitting.
     That's what the evidence is in the case.
          The jury instruction you are going to get,
     this is instruction number 17, this tells you,
     manufacture, sale, and advertising is legal for
     cigarettes.
          You heard a lot from Mr. Paige about youth
     marketing.  What's the story with youth marketing 4740
     in terms of the specific evidence in this case?
          Well, there is no evidence about why
     Mr. Schleider started smoking.  You-all have heard
     the testimony from witnesses, there is not even
     clear evidence of when he started smoking and when
     he became a regular smoker.  There is no evidence,
     as far as what we know, that he was a regular
     smoker before he got out of the Navy.
          There is no evidence about what brand he
     smoked before he was an adult, before he was 24
     years old.  There is no evidence that he ever saw
     or relied on any advertising or marketing by R.J.
     Reynolds or anyone else.  There is just no evidence
     of it.  That's what you have to work on in this
     case.
          You heard some stuff from Mr. Paige about
     cigarette design, making cigarettes more addictive.
     This comes from Dr. Proctor.  Cigarettes were
     inhalable decades before Reynolds even made a
     cigarette in 1913.  Inhalability was not a secret.
     Cigarettes were all -- have been known to be
     dangerous and addictive before Reynolds ever made a
     cigarette, back into the 1800s.
          Dr. Proctor also told you there is less
     nicotine in cigarette tobacco than in the nicotine 4741
     plant growing in the field and in natural tobacco.
     Nicotine is actually removed from commercial
     cigarettes, there is less nicotine in those.
          Additives that -- Mr. Paige discussed
     additives and ammonia.  Dr. Proctor told you there
     is no evidence that those make cigarettes more
     dangerous or more addictive than cigarettes without
     additives or roll-your-own cigarettes.  This is the
     plaintiff's cigarette design case in context.  It
     just doesn't -- what Mr. Paige told you doesn't add
     up with what their witness said on the stand.
          Mr. Paige has said a lot in this trial about
     things like polonium-210, arsenic, cyanide,
     formaldehyde.  He said it in closing today.
          There is no evidence from Dr. Proctor, the
     evidence y'all have, there is no evidence those
     things are added to cigarettes.  The evidence is
     those are either naturally occurring in the
     environment and go on the tobacco plant or it's a
     natural process from when you burn anything.  If
     you burn lettuce, you'll produce formaldehyde.
     It's the natural burning of organic material.  It's
     not added by companies, it's there by nature, not
     by design or manufacturing.
          Moreover, these ingredients or these 4742
     carcinogens have been long reported, long known in
     the public, and been reported by Reynolds to the
     Surgeon General back in the '60s and '70s.  They
     weren't a secret.  That's what Dr. Proctor admitted
     on the stand and that's what Dr. Figlar admitted
     when the plaintiff played his deposition for
     you-all.
          The bottom line, the presence of carcinogens
     in cigarette smoking and cigarettes has not been a
     secret.  That's what the real story is.
          Important because you heard about the Engle
     findings.  We know the plaintiff has the burden of
     proof.  They cannot meet their burden of proof by
     re-proving the Engle finding.  This is another way
     to say they need to bring you specific evidence
     that helps you answer the claims you're here to
     decide.
          And so I'm going to talk to you about the
     specific evidence that will help you.  The first
     thing I want to show you is something I showed you
     in opening, it's a board.
          Thank you.
          It's a board that I --
          May I set up the easel, Your Honor?
          A board that I told you in opening statement 4743
     that I expected the evidence would show and would
     be all of the information that you would need to
     answer every question on the verdict form.  And
     this evidence has come in.  And what I told you in
     opening is still true.  Each of those four facts
     are uncontroverted, they're in evidence, and they
     will answer every question when you go back to the
     jury room that you need to decide.
          I'm going to talk to you for the rest of my
     time about the third and fourth points.
     Mr. Schleider had the ability to quit smoking and
     prevent his own death, and that his claims are
     legally barred because they did not manifest in
     time, because he did not have diseases caused by
     smoking that manifested under the black letter rule
     that we have governing Engle, the prerequisite that
     the plaintiff must prove, his claims are barred.
          Ms. Henninger is going to talk to you about
     points 1 and 2 when she gets up.
          So this is the evidence that is going to be
     helpful for you.  We are going to get into more
     detail.  You have seen this slide, I showed this to
     you in opening, you have heard a number of times
     that Mrs. Schleider has admitted fault for her
     husband.  And more simply broken down, she said he 4744
     did not try hard enough or often enough to quit.
          Now, Mr. Paige told you during his closing he
     tried as hard as he could, and then he said but he
     admits fault because he didn't try as hard as he
     could.  This is what the evidence is.  This comes
     from the plaintiff in the case, it comes from
     Mrs. Schleider.  This is key evidence that will
     help you answer every question in class membership
     and the other questions on the verdict form.
          Mr. Paige says it doesn't come into class
     membership, it doesn't relate.  That's actually not
     right.  You can use it to answer every question in
     class membership and every other question if you
     get there.
          So this is key evidence.  I'm going to discuss
     it as we walk through the class membership issues.
     One thing that's very important, these Engle
     findings, you have to put them out of your mind
     while we consider class membership.  You've been
     told the findings, but you cannot consider them.
     This is instruction number 14 in your instructions.
     You have to basically forget about them when you're
     deciding class membership.  They can't be used to
     meet plaintiff's burden on that issue.
          And so these questions, the first three 4745
     questions on the verdict form are the class
     membership questions.  The first one deals with
     lung cancer.  The second one COPD.  And then the
     third one is lung cancer in relation to a death.
          All of them have addiction and addiction
     causation components.  I'm going to discuss them in
     order and then I will explain the order in which
     you answer them before.  But these are the
     questions I'm going to talk about.
          I discussed these with you in opening.  These
     illustrate the burden that the plaintiff has to
     prove class membership.  There are multiple
     components they have to bring you evidence on in
     order to even be a member of the Engle class.  They
     deal with medical issues, they deal with addiction
     and addiction causation.  And I think when you see
     the evidence that we're going to walk through, the
     only conclusion, you can draw from that evidence is
     they have failed to carry their burden.
          And I'm going to show you why, it's not just
     me saying it, I'm going to tell you what the
     evidence is that's come in.
          So I want to start with the first hurdle,
     medical causation, the plaintiff must prove that
     Mr. Schleider had lung cancer caused by smoking, 4746
     that it was a legal cause of his death.
          You heard expert testimony on this.  You heard
     from Dr. Villa.  You heard from Dr. Brooks.  You
     have a number of medical records in evidence,
     you've seen some of the records multiple times.
     I'm sure you have those in your notes.  The
     plaintiff carries the burden to prove these issues.
     They have to prove to you that Mr. Schleider had
     lung cancer caused by smoking and it caused his
     death.
          What did the experts tell you about that?  The
     experts told you, first of all, we don't have a lot
     of information.  We're missing a lot of information
     that could help decide this issue.  That's
     something you have to determine, whether you think
     plaintiff has enough evidence to meet their burden
     on this issue.  They told you we don't have x-rays,
     we don't have CTs or MRIs, we don't have any
     pathology tissue from Mr. Schleider's lung.  There
     is no pathology slides, no autopsy, no test done to
     determine the cause of Mr. Schleider's cancer, and
     no determination by any of his treaters that his
     cancer was caused by smoking.
          Now, plaintiff told you in their closing, you
     know, Dr. Brooks said I think more likely than not 4747
     the cancer was caused by smoking, and that's fine.
     Dr. Brooks did say that.  He told you a lot of
     stuff from the stand.  But he told you that in
     context of there are a number of other small cell
     cancers that it could have been.  There are a
     number of other small cell lung cancers that are
     not causing by smoking.  We don't have any tissue
     from the lung and so we make an assumption that
     this is a lung cancer.
          Dr. Villa basically corroborated that, said a
     very similar thing, you can't diagnose lung cancer
     without tissue from the tumor in the lung.
          So you have admissions from the experts, you
     all are the ones that decide whether the plaintiff
     met their burden.  You all are the ones that have
     to weigh that evidence.  That's up to you, it's not
     up to an expert, that's your decision when you go
     back there.
          But what did Dr. Villa tell you on this issue?
     He told you on the appearance on that chest x-ray,
     that 11/21/96 chest x-ray, there are many things
     that can appear on x-ray or CT to be cancer, but
     you can't say it's cancer until you actually look
     at it under a microscope, look at it
     pathologically.  He told you just because there is 4748
     a nodule in the lung, there is no definitive
     diagnosis of lung cancer until there is tissue
     confirmation, and unless you have that tissue, you
     can't diagnose it correctly.
          This question and answer from my
     cross-examination of him, "Because we don't have
     any tissue from Mr. Schleider's nodule in his lung,
     you can't diagnose pathologically that nodule as
     lung cancer, can you?"
          And he said, "That's true."
          That's true.  This is the plaintiff's witness,
     the plaintiff's first medical -- their only medical
     expert who came and talked to you a week ago.  This
     is what he said from the stand I think last Monday.
          There was also, I said you will have medical
     records in evidence.  Mr. Paige said the medical
     records, the pathology reports prove that this was
     lung cancer.
          This is what the pathology reports show.
     Small cell carcinoma.  The only pathology that was
     taken was from the liver.  None of them say lung
     cancer.  Dr. Villa admitted it.  Dr. Brooks
     admitted it.  That's just the evidence you-all
     have.  And so you have to decide whether the
     plaintiff has met their burden of proof on that 4749
     issue.
          I want to focus a lot of time on another
     component of the medicine, manifestation.  This is
     a key issue in the case.  You've heard this issue
     described over the last two weeks.  You've heard
     examinations and crosses discussing symptoms
     Mr. Schleider may have had.  You've heard this
     date, November 21st, 1996, and you've heard the
     legal significance or you've heard that it does
     have legal significance.
          This is, as I said, a black-letter, absolute
     rule of law that the plaintiff has to prove with
     evidence in order to prove class membership.  There
     is no dispute about that.  The instructions tell
     you.  This is instruction number 7 in your
     instructions.  This is the first time that you-all
     are instructed what the term "manifest" means.
     You've heard some objections and some debate about
     it.  You-all have a definition now of what it
     means.  You have a legal instruction of what
     manifested means.  And this is that instruction.
     This is -- may be the most important instruction in
     the packet you are going to get, it's number 10.
          Number 10, the manifestation instruction.
     They have to prove it manifested by November 21st, 4750
     '96.  I want to highlight the third sentence or the
     third paragraph.  "A disease or medical condition
     manifests when it becomes diagnosable through
     evaluation of the smoker's symptoms."  Symptoms.
     Now, it was suggested to you that a 1 centimeter
     nodule in the lung is a symptom.
          Does that make any sense to you?  Is that a
     symptom?  You have to think about that.  Think
     about the argument that you heard from the
     plaintiff in closing to try to satisfy this
     standard.  I'm going to show you what the evidence
     is.  I'm going to show you what the evidence is
     because that's what you have to base your decision
     on.
          The manifestation issue relates to two
     conditions, COPD or lung cancer.  I'm going to
     focus on COPD first and then walk through lung
     cancer.
          The first thing I want to point out, the
     plaintiff is making no claim for lung cancer {sic}.
     That's clear in your instructions.  That's
     instruction number 13.
          MS. HENNINGER:  COPD.
          MR. BAYUK:  No claim --
          MS. HENNINGER:  COPD.  You said lung cancer. 4751
          MR. BAYUK:  I'm sorry.  COPD.  The plaintiff
     is not claiming damages for COPD.  They're not --
     you're not going to be asked to award damages for
     COPD.
          Now, you know what the evidence is.  Only
     Dr. Brooks is the doctor that came here and talked
     about COPD.  He talked to you about it from the
     stand.  And we're going to talk about what he said.
     And I think that you'll find, I submit that you'll
     find the evidence is that Mr. Schleider more likely
     than not did not have COPD.  And we're going to
     look at that evidence.
          But think about the fact that plaintiff is not
     claiming anything for this.  Don't you think if
     Mr. Schleider actually had COPD, they would claim
     damages for it?
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge, inappropriate.
          THE COURT:  Well.  It's sustained.
          MR. BAYUK:  When you look at the evidence on
     COPD, think about the fact that plaintiff is not
     claiming any damages for it.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Judge, you just sustained my
     objection.  He did it again.
          MR. BAYUK:  It's a jury instruction.
          THE COURT:  Well, show the jury instruction. 4752
          MR. BAYUK:  The jury instruction -- the jury
     instruction is as I stated, the plaintiff is not
     seeking damages for COPD.
          So what was the evidence on that?
          Can we go back to the projector?
          What was the evidence.  You heard from
     Dr. Brooks.  And he had a board over there like
     where that board is now with various reasons that
     he walked through, what he looked at in the
     records, explained to you why Mr. Schleider did not
     have COPD.  He walked through each of these.  The
     first thing was no symptoms, and he told you he
     reviewed the record to look for symptoms of COPD,
     and he did not find anything that was attributable
     to Mr. Schleider having COPD.
          Now, Mr. Paige, during his closing, said that
     Dr. Brooks on cross-examination withheld a record
     and disclosed for the first time that there was a
     second medical record that said chronic cough.  He
     showed you some parts of testimony about that and
     said it wasn't disclosed at all until
     cross-examination.
          I want to show you just one part of the direct
     examination.  This is before Mr. Paige's cross.
          Can I have the Elmo again, please? 4753
          I was asking him about a December 13th record
     that said usual chronic cough?
          He said, "Yes, I know that record."
          I asked him, "Did you see any symptoms before
     that record evidencing COPD?"
          He said, "No."
          Then I asked him at line 7, "Did you see any
     records after this that note a usual chronic
     cough?"
          And he said, "I believe it was mentioned in a
     second opinion oncology report somewhere, yes."
          And then he told me he didn't relate that to
     COPD.  So the insinuation that he didn't -- he hid
     a medical record until cross-examination is simply
     not true.  Now, this is very similar, you remember
     when Dr. Castro was on the stand yesterday and
     Mr. Paige was asking him didn't this son report
     this, didn't Dennis Schleider say this, that his
     dad said he couldn't quit, without showing a
     deposition, and I had to show Dr. Castro the
     deposition where Dennis Schleider was asked about
     that and gave the real answer.
          So you have to think about these
     representations that are being made to you about
     what people said.  This is the evidence.  There is 4754
     no hiding of a record from y'all.
          Dr. Brooks scoured the record and explained to
     you why he didn't find anything symptom-wise that
     would be consistent with COPD.
          Then he went to another line of evidence.
          I'm sorry, can I have the slides back?
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Sure.
          MR. BAYUK:  He went to another line of
     evidence and explained to you the gold standard,
     the only standard for diagnosing COPD, pulmonary
     function testing.  It's the standard now, and in
     response to one of y'all's questions, it was the
     standard back in 1995, same time Mr. Schleider is
     alleged to have had COPD, that was the standard
     back then, the only way to diagnose.
          The plaintiff's only evidence, you have all
     the medical records, the only records that say
     COPD, say impression, COPD, two chest x-rays.  You
     are going to have a lot of records.  I encourage
     you to look through them and see if you find any
     record that says COPD or any symptoms consistent
     with COPD, because you won't find them.  You have
     two records.
          And so Dr. Brooks scoured the record looking
     for evidence of a PFT or any evidence that one was 4755
     even considered or ordered for Mr. Schleider.  And
     he told you there was none, he told you there was
     no evidence.
          So no PFT.  The next line of evidence, he was
     never treated for COPD.  And that makes sense
     because Dr. Brooks told you he never had any
     symptoms of COPD.  So if you don't have any
     symptoms of COPD, you would never be treated for
     COPD.  This came from Mrs. Schleider on the witness
     stand before you-all.  He was never treated, never
     had any medications, inhalers for COPD.  That is
     what the evidence is.  And so Dr. Brooks explained
     this line of evidence to you.
          And I do want to make a point, on the prior
     slide you heard from Dr. Raiford.  Dr. Raiford was
     a radiologist, he's somebody who was also
     incidentally an Engle plaintiff himself.  He's the
     guy who said I did the 11/21/96 chest x-ray, and I
     put impression, COPD, because of this
     hyperinflation of the lungs.
          Now, Dr. Raiford told you he never saw
     Mr. Schleider.  He was in a different part of
     Florida when he reviewed the medical record.  He
     never saw Mr. Schleider, didn't know anything about
     him, didn't even know he was a smoker.  In fact, he 4756
     was asked do you have any opinions on the cause of
     Mr. Schleider, if he had COPD the cause of that?
     He said I don't know anything about it.  I have no
     opinion on cause because I don't even know
     Mr. Schleider.  He's never been in front of me.  I
     wasn't even in the Keys when I read the medical
     record, when I read the chest x-ray.  That's the
     testimony you have.
          It's undisputed by both this radiologist, this
     non-board certified radiologist, and Dr. Brooks
     that you can't diagnose COPD based on a chest
     x-ray.  That's undisputed.  The plaintiffs have
     never refuted it, they have no contrary evidence in
     the case.  Check your notes, you will not find it.
     The only evidence is you can only have COPD based
     on a PFT.
          So we know Mr. Schleider wasn't treated.  We
     know that Mr. Paige showed you some of these
     records, showed you the full -- I encourage you to
     find these records in evidence, please.  Please.
     And look through them to see if there are any
     symptoms noted for COPD, any report of COPD,
     because you won't find it.  And Dr. Brooks
     explained to you the particular significance of
     this anesthesia preop form.  Because it's critical 4757
     if you are going to undergo surgery to clear a
     patient to make sure their lungs are healthy enough
     to undergo anesthesia.  That is critical as a
     pulmonologist.  As a pulmonary physician he has
     cleared patients for anesthesiologists a number of
     times and you have to assess things like COPD.
     There was no report on this record when
     Mr. Schleider underwent anesthesia of any problem
     in his lungs, ever.
          The next line of evidence, he explained to you
     COPD is defined as two conditions, chronic
     bronchitis and emphysema.  Neither of those terms
     are found in any record or any deposition in the
     case.  You won't find them.  There was never a
     diagnosis of either of those conditions.  Then
     maybe the most telling, because the plaintiff's
     case on COPD is based, as I said, on two chest
     x-rays, two chest x-rays.  And there, not
     surprisingly, are a number of subsequent chest
     x-rays and CT scans.
          And Dr. Brooks walked you through each one of
     those chronologically later in 1996, throughout
     1997, and explained each one to you that every
     single one found no abnormality, no lung disease
     that would be consistent with COPD, not even the 4758
     symptoms, the hyperinflation, the flattening of the
     diaphragm, nothing was ever found or reported.  And
     that's unusual, because Dr. Brooks said COPD is a
     progressive disease, it gets worse over time.  It
     doesn't reverse, it gets worse.  So if you can see
     it in 1995, in 1996 changes consistent with it,
     you're going to see it in 1997.  That's what he
     told you.  And this is the evidence you have.
     Please find these records and see if there is
     anything that leads you to believe COPD on any of
     these dates because you won't find it.  That's
     simply the evidence in the case.  It's undisputed.
          Dr. Brooks, as a pulmonologist board certified
     for 25 years, the only person you heard from who
     specializes in diagnosing and treating COPD.  The
     only person.  There was some discussion about
     Mr. Schleider's pharmacy log and
     methylprednisolone.
          And actually the question I'm directing you to
     and maybe you have it in your notes, was any of
     those medications used in Mr. Schleider's case for
     COPD.  Not whether they can be used.  Were they
     prescribed to him for COPD.  And Dr. Brooks said
     no, they were prescribed for his back pain.
          Remember he walked through the issue from the 4759
     Cleveland Clinic with the leg weakness and the
     fatigue and the bedrest and joint pain and all the
     pain medications and muscle relaxers, Dr. Brooks
     said in my experience, methylprednisolone can be
     prescribed for a thousand things.  In this case,
     with COPD it is not even used as a first line
     treatment, it is used down the road only after
     bronchodilators are used.  You would never confuse
     it in this case for being used for COPD.  That's
     what the actual testimony was.  That's what the
     evidence was.
          So putting all this together, the plaintiff
     has two x-ray reports.  They don't even note that
     Mr. Schleider is a smoker on those reports.  They
     don't know of any symptoms on those reports.
          You have all of the rest of this in evidence.
     And you have Dr. Brooks' testimony, unrefuted, even
     on cross-examination by Mr. Paige, that in his
     opinion and based on the evidence, Mr. Schleider
     did not have COPD.  You can't say that he had it.
     That is the evidence before you and there is no
     dispute about it.  There is no contrary evidence.
          So that alone should answer your question.
          If you find that he does have COPD, if you
     were to find that, then there is still an issue 4760
     with manifestation.  Because remember the jury
     instruction, it has to be diagnosable through
     symptoms.  There is no evidence in the record that
     Mr. Schleider ever had any symptoms.  He was never
     treated.  There are no symptoms ever linked up with
     COPD at any time.  So even if you found that he had
     it, there is no evidence that it manifested.
          But even if you find that he had it and that
     it manifested in time, the plaintiff has no
     evidence that it was caused by smoking.  They
     didn't put on any witness to talk about COPD and
     smoking.
          I told you Dr. Raiford said I didn't know
     Mr. Schleider, I have no idea what he did, I can't
     tell you whether it was caused by smoking or not
     because I don't even know if he was a smoker.  That
     is the evidence that you have before you.
          So for those three reasons, he didn't have it,
     that it didn't manifest by November 21st because
     there were never symptoms of it, and then even if
     you find that, the plaintiff hasn't carried their
     burden of showing that it was caused by smoking.
     The plaintiff has failed to carry their burden of
     proof on COPD, they have overwhelmingly failed to
     carry the burden of proof. 4761
          You heard a lot about Dr. Stegall.
     Dr. Stegall was one of Mr. Schleider's primary care
     physicians, family practice doctors, practiced down
     in the Keys, this is something we read to you-all
     yesterday, an interrogatory response served by the
     plaintiff under oath where the plaintiff was asked
     tell us every person you know of that can speak to
     the manifestation and diagnosis of both COPD and
     emphysema -- or COPD and lung cancer.  Tell us
     every person.  And the only person the plaintiff
     told us about was this physician, Dr. Stegall, down
     in the Keys, they said she diagnosed both the COPD
     and the lung cancer, they give the date of
     diagnosis for COPD of 8/28/95, but they didn't
     bring her here to testify to you.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge, commenting on
     witnesses that didn't testify.  They could have
     called whoever they wanted to testify too.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. BAYUK:  You're not going to have any
     evidence from Dr. Stegall, you don't have any of
     her medical records, you don't have her saying he
     did have COPD.  This is someone who is in the
     control of the plaintiff not of the --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge, that a doctor 4762
     is under the control of the plaintiffs.
          MR. BAYUK:  That's --
          THE COURT:  All right.  Yeah, no, I'm going to
     overrule it.
          MR. BAYUK:  Think about what evidence you have
     and what evidence you don't have.  And I submit to
     you the plaintiff cannot carry their burden on COPD
     and it's not even close.
          Now, you see they also listed Dr. Stegall as
     having knowledge of lung cancer.  That's the second
     issue I want to talk about.  Because lung cancer
     manifestation is also critical for the plaintiff to
     prove to you in order to move forward in the case.
     And I submit to you they can't do it.
          So we start with Dr. Stegall.  They said she's
     the only person who can speak to diagnosis and
     manifestation of lung cancer.  And you haven't
     heard from her.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, that's not what it
     says.  It doesn't say she is the only person.
          THE COURT:  All right.
          MR. BAYUK:  All right, it says --
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. BAYUK:  -- state all people, the date --
     state all smoking-related injuries, illnesses, 4763
     diseases, or conditions from which the decedent has
     ever suffered, the date that each such alleged
     smoking-related illness, injury, disease, or
     medical condition first manifested itself, the day
     it was first diagnosed, state the name and address
     of the persons who will testify as to such
     manifestation and the physicians or healthcare
     providers who made such diagnosis.  It asked about
     everyone who knows anything about these conditions.
     This is the only person that they listed and you
     haven't heard from her, that's the evidence.
     That's the evidence you don't have.
          And so moving beyond this, the evidence is
     clear, like the COPD, they have completely failed
     to carry their burden of proof on lung cancer.  And
     it's not close.
          Dr. Brooks and Dr. Villa testified.  Dr. Villa
     actually destroys the plaintiff's case on this,
     their own expert.  And I'm going to show you the
     testimony, like Mr. Paige.  I'm not going to
     summarize it for you, I'm going to show you the
     transcript, I'm going to show you what he says.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Excuse me, I object to him
     continuous attacking us on how we presented our
     case. 4764
          THE COURT:  All right.  Sustained.
          MR. BAYUK:  I'm going to show you the
     transcript cites, I'm going to show you the actual
     testimony from Dr. Villa, but first I want to
     remind you the manifestation instruction.  They
     have to prove that Mr. Schleider had symptoms of
     lung cancer that made the lung cancer diagnosable
     as of November 21st, 1996.  They had to prove that
     he had symptoms that would make a doctor say you
     have lung cancer on that date, by that date.
     That's what they have to prove.  And so what did --
     what did the evidence show?  Well, both physicians,
     Dr. Villa and Dr. Brooks spoke about this and said
     all of the records reviewed, there were no symptoms
     of lung cancer or liver metastases as of
     November 21st, 1996.  Undisputed by both experts.
     But it gets -- it gets clearer than that.
          Dr. Villa puts the exclamation point on this.
     This is one of the plaintiff's slides they used in
     opening to show the symptoms that they were going
     to prove.  Dr. Villa shot every single symptom
     down, said they are nonspecific, you wouldn't worry
     about it, not high on the differential diagnosis
     for lung cancer.  It gets better.  He said, on
     cross-examination, "There are no specific symptoms 4765
     that could be related to lung cancer."  Based on
     all of the records he reviewed, no symptoms.
          It gets better than that.  "None of the
     symptoms were suggestive or consistent with a 1
     centimeter lesion."  None.  No symptoms.
          "He was asymptomatic for liver lesions as
     well?"
          "More likely than not, that is correct."
          Now, you saw, Mr. Paige told you, Dr. Villa
     said oh, fatigue, fatigue was a symptom.  This is
     what Dr. Villa admitted on cross-examination.
     Asymptomatic for liver lesions.  And then it gets
     better than that.  Because this is the actual jury
     instruction y'all have to decide the case on.  And
     look at the question.  "You didn't see any support
     in any of the records, did you, sir, for having any
     symptoms related to either the lung nodule or the
     liver lesions?"
          He said, "That's true.  No symptoms."
          Then I asked him, "You certainly didn't see
     any symptoms that would have allowed
     Mr. Schleider's doctors to diagnose cancer based on
     the symptoms; right?"
          And he said, "That is correct."
          No symptoms that could have been used to 4766
     diagnose cancer.  Look at the jury instruction.  A
     disease or medical condition manifests when it
     becomes diagnosable through the smoker's symptoms.
     Dr. Villa essentially answered the jury instruction
     by telling you they don't have that evidence.
          This alone bars the plaintiff's case.  This
     alone prevents them from meeting their burden of
     proof through their own expert.
          Dr. Villa went on, because Mr. Paige said
     fatigue is the issue.  Okay, you throw out weight
     loss, throw out the cough.  Dr. Villa latched onto
     fatigue.  So I asked him about fatigue on
     cross-examination, this is what he said, "Not to
     lose the point of the question, though, Dr. Villa,
     when someone tells you they're fatigued, the first
     ten things that you would think of wouldn't be lung
     cancer."
          He said, "That is true."
          I said "Maybe more; right?"
          He said, "It's not high on the differential
     diagnosis."
          He's already told you there is no symptoms at
     all.  He's already told you no doctor could ever
     diagnose it based on what's reported.  Now, he's
     telling you even with fatigue, you wouldn't even 4767
     think about lung cancer.  That's what his testimony
     was on fatigue.  You don't need to get any further
     than this.  This is their expert who they brought
     to satisfy their burden tanking their case on
     manifestation.  Clear admissions that match up
     exactly with the jury instruction.  That's all you
     need to consider.
          Then Dr. Brooks went on to talk about fatigue
     and he actually explained to you what the fatigue
     would have been related to, to Mr. Schleider's
     chronic pain, to his use of pain medication for his
     legs and back pain injury.  Dr. Villa didn't even
     make an effort to do that.  So that is the evidence
     that you have before you and I submit to you it's
     overwhelming, it's undisputed.  It's undisputed
     evidence that the plaintiff cannot get around.
     There is a complete failure to prove their medical
     case.  And that ends the case.
          I'm going to discuss if you get further, I
     don't think you will based on the evidence, but I
     need to discuss it just to do my job so I want to
     discuss the next hurdle, addiction.  You heard
     testimony about addiction from Dr. Drobes and
     Dr. Castro.  Both experts agreed, as Mr. Paige
     said, any smoker can quit.  Both experts agree that 4768
     even half, half of people that smoke every day,
     like Mr. Schleider, would not even be addicted
     under the DSM.
          You know, the presentation you heard earlier
     may have made you think everyone is addicted,
     nobody can quit, every smoker who smokes regularly
     is addicted.  But this is the testimony from the
     witness stand.  Even Dr. Drobes admitted it.  This
     is on cross-examination.
          There are a number of other reasons why people
     that smoke smoke other than nicotine addiction.
     This is the plaintiff's witness.  People can smoke
     for social reasons or because the taste -- they
     enjoy the taste or the smell, it relieves stress
     and so on.  This is the plaintiff's witness telling
     you this.  Dr. Castro agreed with it because this
     is what's -- this is what's known in science.
          This is the evidence that's before you.  Not
     that everybody is addicted, not that people can't
     quit.  That's not the evidence in the case.  You
     have to base your verdict on evidence, not argument
     that you hear in closing.  That's what you'll have
     back in the jury room.
          The first time that anyone diagnosed
     Mr. Schleider as addicted was in this courtroom 17 4769
     years after he passed away.  Now, I know Mr. Paige
     showed you a medical record that said tobacco use
     disorder.  And, you know, Dr. -- both doctors that
     came and talked to you, Dr. Castro and Drobes, said
     they used the DSM-5, they talked to you about that.
     And they said it came out in May of 2013 that's the
     first time that term came out, tobacco use
     disorder, that's what the evidence is.
          There was no term, the medical record he
     showed you, that wasn't even a diagnosis back in
     1996 or '97 when that record was from.  That term
     didn't even exist in the DSM.
          And don't you think that they thought if that
     was evidence of addiction, they would have had
     their expert talk about that record or they would
     have cross-examined Dr. Castro on that record?  Now
     because they know how Dr. Castro went and they know
     how Dr. Drobes went, now they're showing it to you
     in closing to try to prove addiction that way.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge, he continues
     to attack the attorneys and the way that we
     presented our case.
          MR. BAYUK:  I can discuss what the evidence
     is.
          THE COURT:  Right. 4770
          MR. ALVAREZ:  He can attack what the evidence
     is, he just can't attack us.
          THE COURT:  All right, continue with your
     closing.
          MR. BAYUK:  Thank you.
          So you saw that record for the first time in
     closing.  You didn't even see it during the case.
     You saw it during closing and then after Dr. Drobes
     got off the stand, then they put on the daughter,
     Suzanne, then Mrs. Schleider testified, and they
     resorted to asking the family members if they would
     think Mr. Schleider was addicted.  Well, why would
     they do that?  Why would they ask the family
     members?
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge, again, he
     can't attack us like that, why would we do
     something.  That's inappropriate.
          THE COURT:  Thank you.  As I said to
     Mr. Bayuk --
          MR. BAYUK:  I'll move on.
          THE COURT:  -- let's avoid the speaking
     objections, just give me a legal objection.  You
     can move on.
          MR. BAYUK:  Thank you.
          So let's get to Dr. Drobes, because Mr. Paige, 4771
     I was going to read it to you, but he read it for
     me, there is an instruction on the believability of
     witnesses, both lay witnesses and experts.  And so
     that's something, it's instruction number 3 in your
     instructions.  I encourage you to read it when you
     go back to the jury room.  They said they found a
     world-renowned nicotine scientist.
          Well, what did Dr. Drobes tell you?  He
     doesn't have a clinical practice, he's a researcher
     in Tampa.  He doesn't treat patients.  He has --
     does not diagnose anyone with addiction.  He
     doesn't use the DSM outside of the courtroom.  And
     he said much of what he did in court he doesn't do
     as a matter of what he does outside.  This isn't
     what he does for a living.  This is who they
     brought you to diagnose addiction.
          They asked Dr. Castro a lot of questions about
     University of Miami smoking cessation clinic, how
     good it is, who works there, how they help smokers.
     Dr. Castro told you that's five miles down the
     road, that's ten minutes away.  They didn't bring
     anyone from there.  They brought Dr. Drobes from
     his research lab where he doesn't diagnose anyone
     and tried to come in and have him use the DSM with
     you all. 4772
          And you wonder why they brought him because as
     you saw yesterday, the plaintiffs served a sworn
     interrogatory, a sworn response saying I'm not
     qualified to diagnose addiction, I'm not qualified
     to give an opinion on addiction, it's a medical
     condition.  They asked her from the stand anyway if
     she thought he was addicted, so we had to publish
     this yesterday to say under oath her answer was I
     can't say if someone is addicted or not.  You need
     an expert to say that.  And she said you need an
     expert doctor, a medical doctor.
          There is no medical doctor that testified for
     the plaintiff.  That's what you have to consider
     when you are weighing whether they met their burden
     on this hurdle, on the addiction hurdle.
          Dr. Drobes also told you his definition of
     addiction changes daily.  It changes depending on
     what day you ask him.
          And then he said, although he purported to use
     the DSM, spent time with you-all walking through
     the criteria, ultimately he said I just need to
     know if they smoked ten cigarettes a day for two
     years.  And then when he was talking about
     Mr. Schleider he said all I need to know is that he
     smoked daily.  He diagnosed Mr. Schleider as 4773
     addicted before Mr. Schleider turned 20 when we
     know nothing about him.  He said I presume he was
     smoking daily, I don't have any evidence of that,
     but I presume he was and so he would have been
     addicted at that time.
          So they tried to use the DSM, then ultimately
     it came out all he needs to know is if you smoke
     every day.  That's not the science, that's not what
     the evidence is in front of you.  That's who they
     brought you.
          On cross-examination, he told you the DSM-5
     was the gold standard.  Remember I said don't you
     agree with that.  He said I've never used the term
     "gold standard" and then we had to break out the
     deposition, the impeachment.  And the first line
     was it is the gold standard.  We had to impeach him
     a number of times.
          You know, that's something you can consider
     when you are weighing the believability of
     witnesses, did the plaintiff have to impeach our
     experts?  Did they have to trot back and forth with
     deposition and trial transcripts for their changed
     testimony or did you see that more often from us?
     That's something you can consider when you think
     about that instruction, that changed testimony. 4774
          More to the point about Dr. Drobes's use of
     the DSM, you remember these discussions where he
     had these meetings with plaintiff's lawyers, I
     don't care if they were 20 minutes or 30 minutes,
     Mr. Paige told Dr. Drobes he had to use some
     criteria, he couldn't just come in and pull an
     opinion out of his hat.  If he was going to come in
     and testify and have it admissible, he actually had
     to try to use scientific criteria and so he was
     told he had to use the DSM-5.  And then he was told
     that the DSM-5 requires you to have six or more
     criteria in order to meet addiction.  That's what
     the plaintiff's lawyers told him he had to do to
     come testify.
          So he used a book he never uses in a way he
     never uses it and came in and tried to cobble
     together an explanation for you and then ultimately
     said I just need to know that they smoke every day,
     that's all I need to know.  So you have to think
     about that.
          And then you have to wonder if he really
     applied it correctly.  You're going to have it in
     evidence, the criteria.  Dr. Castro explained this
     threshold criteria to you, the threshold -- not
     part of the 11, but the first sentence that said 4775
     you need a clinically-significant impairment or
     distress.  It's not enough to check off the 1
     through 11, it has to be significant and apparent.
          Dr. Drobes ignored that criteria.  It's not
     surprising because he doesn't use the book outside
     the courtroom.  Now, think about that when you have
     it in evidence if you want to look at it.  Think
     about whether he applied it the right way.
          You know, say what you want about Dr. Castro,
     Mr. Paige I guess doesn't like him.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.
          MR. BAYUK:  I'll withdraw it.
          THE COURT:  All right.
          MR. BAYUK:  Mr. Paige, this was the only
     cross-examination in the whole trial that lasted
     longer than the direct exam.  The whole trial, any
     witness, lasted longer than my direct examination.
          You know, Dr. Castro is local, he came from
     Miami.  He works at the medical school.  He works
     in the Department of Psychiatry.  He treats
     patients for smoking every week.  He's someone who
     does use the DSM-5 in his day job and assesses
     nicotine addiction in his day job.  He's a
     clinician.  And he told you these things.  He
     didn't meet the criteria.  He didn't lose control 4776
     over his behavior.
          The evidence on that is overwhelming again, if
     we are going to define ourselves to what's evidence
     and what -- even the plaintiff told their expert
     you have to use scientific criteria, the only
     evidence in front of you is as it was correctly
     applied, Mr. Schleider did not meet the criteria.
     That's up to you to see whether the plaintiff
     carried their burden.
          Final hurdle of class membership, addiction
     causation.  This is -- even if Mrs. Schleider was
     addicted, did addiction drive him to smoke until he
     got a disease and died.  That's how you can think
     about this.  Was Mr. Schleider rendered powerless.
     Could he not change the outcome.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, that's not the
     standard.  That's not the standard.
          MR. BAYUK:  This is argument.  This is
     argument.
          THE COURT:  It's overruled.
          MR. BAYUK:  You're going to get an
     instruction, it's going to tell you that addiction
     had to be the but-for cause of Mr. Schleider's
     death, the but-for cause.  Without the addiction,
     he would not have smoked for some other reason or 4777
     some reason absent addiction and got a disease, if
     his disease was caused by smoking, if you find
     that.  That's what the plaintiff has to prove.
          And so let's look at the evidence on that.
     First, this is the legal cause instruction.  It has
     to be a but-for cause.  Both experts, anyone can
     quit.  Addicted or not addicted, heavy smoker,
     light smoker, anyone can change their behavior.
     That's what we know from the science.
          Dr. Drobes on cross-examination, millions and
     millions of people, addicted, heavily addicted
     people have quit, of course.  Of course, they have.
     You've heard more quit stats from all three of the
     experts.  Millions of people quitting at the same
     time Mr. Schleider is continuing to smoke, through
     the '50s, '60s, '70s.  90 percent of them with no
     assistance at all, no Chantix or medication.  90
     percent quit on their own, 5,000 people every day
     quitting, the same time Mr. Schleider is smoking.
     The same time that Dr. Proctor's testimony about
     these documents, and the campaign of doubt, and the
     conspiracy is going on, 5,000 people quitting every
     day, tens of millions of people quitting in a span
     of years.  Millions of people quitting.
          Dr. Proctor, more quitting by the millions. 4778
          So is Mr. Schleider different?  Was he
     different than the 60 million people that quit?
          Well, his cigarettes were not more addictive,
     Dr. Proctor told you that.  His brain was not
     affected any differently.  He was not exposed to
     any different advertising than the people who quit.
     Not exposed to tobacco company statements different
     than people who quit.  He had not smoked more than
     the people who quit and he did not start earlier
     than people who quit.  So why was he different?
     What do we know about him?
          Well, first we know the plaintiff admits he
     could have quit, he didn't try hard enough to quit,
     he didn't try often enough to quit, and those
     failures to quit were a cause of his death.  That's
     the plaintiff's admission.  That's what it means.
          What more can it mean?
          He had the ability to quit.  He had the
     responsibility to quit.  He could have been
     successful in a time to prevent his own death.
          Why would you ever admit that he's at fault if
     he couldn't quit, if he couldn't change the
     outcome?  Why would you ever admit that?  You
     wouldn't.  You wouldn't admit that if you didn't
     have control over your behavior. 4779
          And what do we know from the testimony in the
     case?  Dr. Castro said these are the traits that he
     looks for in people when he's going to motivate
     them, he's going to use these traits for people to
     change their behavior, decisive, strong-willed,
     methodical, made up his own mind.  How he related
     to his family about issues.  And it was clear from
     the description from the family he was someone who
     made up his own mind.  No one was going to tell him
     what to do.  Mrs. Schleider said we didn't have
     that kind of relationship.  I couldn't tell him
     what to do.  In terms of quitting she said, he had
     to quit on his own, it was up to him.
          Dr. Castro and Dr. Drobes both said motivation
     is key if you are going to quit smoking.  It's key
     when you are looking at someone's behavior change.
     You don't need to look any further than
     Mr. Schleider's ability to quit another addictive
     behavior and contrast it with his efforts to quit.
          This has come in clearly, it's all in evidence
     through testimony, you have medical records
     discussing alcohol use issues.  I mean, look at the
     contrast.  Dr. Castro laid out this contrast, and
     then I expected with the length of the cross of
     him, there would be some discussion of this. 4780
          And remember when I got up, my last question
     to him on the redirect yesterday was Mr. Paige
     asked you a lot of questions about addiction.  He
     didn't ask you any questions about addiction
     causing this man's disease or death, and your
     opinions about smoking versus drinking.
          Now, you think about why -- there were no
     questions about that.  Because what can they say?
     This is the clearest evidence through the records
     and the evidence we have that when he wanted to
     change his behavior and was motivated to change his
     behavior, he could.
          Dr. Castro told you alcohol addiction is more
     severe than nicotine, that's what he sees in his
     patients, and someone who can quit drinking can
     quit drinking {sic} and we know again, the
     plaintiff acknowledged he could have quit smoking,
     acknowledged it.  And so you have to think about
     what the evidence is when you decide whether the
     plaintiff has carried their burden of proof on
     addiction causation.
          This is his son, Dennis Schleider.  What was
     the difference, what was the difference between the
     two things?  Just motivation, not addiction,
     motivation.  Motivation for one behavior, not for 4781
     the other behavior.  That is the evidence before
     you.  That is why I asked you, when you go back,
     please look at your notepads.  Please see where the
     plaintiff put on any evidence that addiction caused
     Mr. Schleider's disease or death because I submit
     you won't find it.  You won't find it.  Just look.
     Please.
          Bottom line, addiction did not cause
     Mr. Schleider's injuries and death.  That is what
     the evidence shows in the case.  That is unrefuted
     evidence, that's all the evidence you have.  So
     when you answer the verdict form on these issues, I
     told you that there are three questions to class
     membership.  The first one asks you about -- the
     first one, I'm sorry to block you, the first one
     asks about whether Mr. Schleider was addicted to
     cigarettes containing nicotine, if so, was his
     addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer that
     manifested itself on or before November 21st, 1996?
     We've discussed all the components of that.  That
     has the medical causation issue, the manifestation
     issue, the addiction issue, and the addiction
     causation issue.  All four hurdles that we just
     went through.  And I showed you why the plaintiff
     hasn't carried their burden on any of them.  So I 4782
     submit respectfully your answer to that has to be
     no under the evidence and the jury instructions
     that guide you in the case, so your answer there
     should be no.
          And you see there is instructions below that.
     If you answered the question no, then you should go
     to question 2.  Question 2 is the same question but
     for COPD.  The same question but for COPD.  So it's
     the same issue.  You know the evidence on that.  I
     submit to you the answer there has to be no.
          And finally question 3 -- well, you won't get
     to question 3 if you answer both those no, but if
     you get to question 3 because you find one of those
     questions yes, did he have lung cancer caused by
     addiction and, if so, was that a legal cause of his
     death?
          You know the answer to that, it's the same
     hurdles.  The answer to that has to be no.  And so
     I submit to you that is what the evidence will
     show, that's the evidence that you have.
     Ms. Henninger is going to get up and talk to you.
     Thank you so much for your time.  You've been very
     attentive.  Thank you.


          MS. HENNINGER:  Well, I'm lucky enough to be
     in the lunch hour, so I'm going to start by first
     saying the first good afternoon, ladies and
     gentlemen.
          JURORS:  Good afternoon.
          MS. HENNINGER:  It's been a long morning.
     It's been a long couple weeks.  And so let me start
     by thanking you.  Because as we -- as you figured
     out, we're all under some time constraints, so if
     at the end I run out of time, I want to make sure
     that I do the most important thing and thank you
     for your patience, for your diligence, and your
     attention.
          And as Mr. Bayuk said, I'm going to walk
     through some of the remaining issues for you on the
     verdict form.  But I submit to you that for all of
     the reasons that Mr. Bayuk just outlined to you,
     hopefully you will not get to any of the issues 4784
     that I have to address with you because
     Mr. Schleider is not a member of the Engle class.
          But to the extent that you find otherwise, I'm
     going to walk through the rest of the verdict form.
     And you see that he stopped at question number 3.
     There is a question number 4.  I'm skipping it for
     now, but I will be back, I promise, to question
     number 4.  I want to start with question 5, and
     there is one in between, 6, 7, and 8.
          And these are "Did Andrew J. Schleider
     reasonably rely on R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's
     concealment or omission of material information not
     otherwise known or available concerning the health
     effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes
     and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of
     Andrew J. Schleider's lung cancer and death."
          That's the question number 5.
          And number 7 is "Did Andrew J. Schleider
     reasonably rely on any act or omission taken in
     furtherance of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's
     agreement with other tobacco companies or
     organizations to conceal or omit material
     information not otherwise known or available
     concerning the health effects or addictive nature
     of smoking cigarettes and, if so" -- can you see 4785
     okay?
          JUROR:  Yes.
          MS. HENNINGER:  "Was such reliance a legal
     cause of Mr. Schleider's lung cancer and death?"
          Now, a lot of the argument you heard this
     morning from Mr. Paige talked about general tobacco
     company conduct.  And that's a lot of the evidence
     that you've heard the last two weeks.
          And I'm going to talk to you about what the
     plaintiff has to prove.  Remember, it's their
     burden of proof.  And they have to prove to you, if
     he is a member of the Engle class, you get the
     findings on concealment and agreement to conceal,
     you have all of this general information that
     they've talked to you about for hours and for weeks
     here at trial, but they have to provide, like
     Mr. Bayuk told you in opening statement, they have
     to provide the links between the concealment or
     agreement to conceal and Mr. Schleider's death.
          This is not Engle.  That case has been tried.
     This is Mr. Schleider's case.  And they have to
     prove the connection between any conduct and
     Mr. Schleider's death, and they have not done that.
     There is no link here.
          Plaintiff did not prove that Mr. Schleider 4786
     died because the dangers of smoking were unknown to
     him.  And there is a key component to this.  Not
     only were they not unknown, they were not
     unavailable to him.  And we're going to talk about
     that because this is all in your jury instructions.
          But I want to stop and talk a little bit
     because today and the last two weeks we've heard a
     lot about company documents.  There's a lot of
     documents you saw from Lorillard Tobacco Company,
     American Tobacco Company, Brown & Williamson, R.J.
     Reynolds, Philip Morris, you name it, Tobacco
     Institute, CTR, you've seen them all.  Lots of
     internal company documents, they like to call them
     secret documents.  You've seen little bits of
     pieces here and there, some of them were in
     evidence.  But the important part and what you have
     to focus on is, sure, there might be some things in
     there that sound odd and we can't defend them, but
     at the same time, they have to prove that all of
     those things that they showed you link to
     Mr. Schleider, and that's what they cannot do in
     this case.
          The issue in this case for you to decide, and
     when you get to the verdict form, is not whether or
     not there was concealment in general, it's whether 4787
     or not the concealment or the agreement to conceal
     had any impact on Mr. Schleider and caused his
     death.  And the answer is clearly no.
          So let's talk about the evidence that is
     specific to Mr. Schleider.  Because we've heard the
     general conduct evidence.  The only witness, the
     only witness who came into court and testified
     either live or by deposition that tried to link any
     conduct to Mr. Schleider was the plaintiff in this
     lawsuit, Mrs. Schleider.
          And I want to talk about what she said,
     because as Mr. Bayuk pointed out in his statements
     just a moment ago, plaintiff cannot meet their
     burden of proof with inconsistent evidence.
          And Mrs. Schleider came in here, and she
     provided testimony on the stand.  And I want to
     talk a little bit about what she talked about,
     because she told you on cross-examination that she
     first learned, first learned that cigarettes were
     harmful to one's health in 1996.  That's what she
     told you.
          She also told you that she started to believe,
     however, that in the 1980s, cigarette smoking was
     harmful.  Now, she said she never saw any
     publicity, either in magazines or newspapers, about 4788
     the health hazards of smoking, on television,
     anywhere.  But then she also told you that her and
     Mr. Schleider saw those public service
     announcements or PSAs, and they discussed them.
          She said, "I never read a warning on a pack of
     cigarettes until after my husband passed away."
     But yet when I asked her, do you recall hearing the
     language of the warnings, caution, cigarette
     smoking may be hazardous to your health in 1966,
     she recalls that language.  She recalled the
     language from the 1970 through 1985 warnings as
     well.
          She told Mr. Alvarez that she had
     conversations with Mr. Schleider all the time about
     the cigarette controversy beginning in the 1960s,
     but she doesn't remember Mr. Schleider ever telling
     her what he saw or read about this controversy
     until 1985 or forward.
          There is no accusations that she's giving any
     mistruths or anything, but there is just a lot of
     inconsistencies, a lot of inconsistencies, and
     those inconsistencies don't provide the link that
     plaintiff needs to prove their case.
          Now, I want to talk about jury instruction
     number 21, because this is very important.  We 4789
     heard a lot of about general things and we -- you
     know, Mr. Paige said, I'm not scared of Reader's
     Digest.  I could show you hundreds and thousands of
     newspaper articles about the dangers of smoking,
     et cetera.  And tried to say that that wasn't
     important.  But they are important for this very
     reason.
          There is an instruction.  And on the claim for
     fraudulent concealment, the issue for your
     determination is whether Andrew Schleider
     reasonably relied, and we're going to talk about
     that in a second, reasonably relied to his
     detriment on the defendant's concealment of
     material information, and we're going to talk about
     what material information means as well, which was
     not otherwise known or available.  They have to
     show that the information was not known or
     available.
          They don't have -- we don't have to prove that
     he knew.  All we are showing you is that the
     information was out there, and it was available to
     him, and that defeats their claims.
          So that's why we showed you all of those
     newspaper articles, all of the Reader's Digests,
     and that's why with Dr. Proctor I spent so much 4790
     time on cross-examination proving this point.  The
     dangers and addictiveness of smoking were not a
     secret.
          Dr. Proctor came in here and told you all
     sorts of things about the conspiracy, but then he
     also told you very plainly and clearly that the
     dangers and addictiveness of smoking were not a
     secret, and they haven't been a secret for a number
     of years, hundreds of years.
          So was the information about the dangers and
     addictiveness unavailable, unknowable?  Clearly,
     you've heard in this case, that's not true.
          The dangers and addictive nature of tobacco
     has been public knowledge for centuries.
     Dr. Proctor told you for hundreds of years people
     have known that smoking causes cancer and can be
     life threatening.  There have been written in
     discussions, articles and discussions about tobacco
     and smoking being addictive and bad for you for
     hundreds of years.
          "Addicted to smoking," that term, that phrase,
     shows up commonly starting in the 1850s.  Smokers
     cancer, now that was mouth cancer at the time, but
     smokers cancer showed up as an official cause of
     death over a hundred years ago. 4791
          And one of you asked about schoolbooks and
     when schools started teaching this information, and
     he told you that the dangers of smoking have been
     taught in schools for over a hundred years.  This
     was his answer.  He said, "I'm sure some schools
     did well over a hundred years ago.  Of course, you
     have to distinguish between some schools and all
     schools.  So if you mean some schools, a hundred
     years ago or maybe even more."
          But what's important is we also showed you,
     when I was cross-examining Dr. Proctor, that there
     were New York laws mandating that this information
     be taught in New York State.  And these are just
     some of the textbooks that we showed you with
     Dr. Proctor during the time period that -- before
     Mr. Schleider was in school and while he was in
     elementary school, and we showed you the laws
     during cross-examination as well.
          Now, it's important to keep in context where
     Mr. Schleider was raised, where he lived, and the
     information environment around him.  And people in
     New York City, in the greater New York City area
     knew about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking
     before Mr. Schleider ever smoked a cigarette,
     before he was ever born. 4792
          Dr. Proctor told you that the greater New York
     area was one of the most informed areas on smoking
     and health in the country.  The newspapers carried
     some of the most sophisticated presentation.  There
     were thousands of articles published in New York
     newspapers between the 1920s and the 1950s.  And
     the American Cancer Society and other organizations
     were very, very active in the New York area.
          Now, Mr. Alvarez when he was asking
     Mrs. Schleider some questions on the stand, he was
     trying to say that, you know, they didn't live in
     this greater New York area, that they had some
     rural -- they were in, like, a -- I think a farming
     community, but they lived in Long Island.  You
     heard that testimony, and you also heard testimony
     about how Mr. Schleider worked.  When he was
     working, he worked in Manhattan, and that's where
     he worked as a carpenter.
          But more importantly, you don't have to figure
     out where he lived or what he was exposed to
     because we have that evidence.  We know exactly
     what media Mr. Schleider was listening to,
     watching, and reading, because there is testimony
     on it.
          And you have heard that he was intelligent, 4793
     and he reads all of these newspapers.  Not only
     does he read The New York Times every day, he reads
     the New York Post, Newsday, he watches TV, the
     nightly news.
          So we also know from Mrs. Schleider's answers
     to interrogatories, remember we showed those
     yesterday, her sworn answers to interrogatories
     tell you that he -- the question was state the name
     and dates of things that the decedent, that's
     Mr. Schleider, subscribed to, purchased, reviewed,
     or read, including newspapers, newsletters,
     journals, et cetera.
          She listed a ton of magazines that we read to
     you, but importantly, let's look at Reader's
     Digest, TIME magazine, Newsweek, New York Post, New
     York Times, and Daily News.  We've showed you lots
     of articles from all of those publications.  Don't
     have time to do them all again today, but
     Dr. Proctor told you there were thousands and
     thousands of articles about smoking and health, the
     addictive nature and all of those complications.
          So I want to go through just briefly and talk
     about before he was born, before he was a smoker,
     there were warnings in the newspapers that he read.
     And those warnings continued during the time that 4794
     he read them.  The dangers of smoking, including
     lung cancer, were not a secret, not a secret even
     before he started smoking.
          Now, the information clearly was known or
     available to Mr. Schleider.  And that started
     before he was even smoking.
          And not just on lung cancer.  Not just on
     danger, but addiction as well.  There were
     newspaper articles, and this is just some of the
     Reader's Digest articles, and I'm sure you guys
     will never want to see another Reader's Digest
     again after this trial because everybody has shown
     them, but let me just back up and explain again why
     Reader's Digest is being shown to you again and
     again, because as Dr. Proctor told you, this was
     perhaps one of the most important publications of
     its time.  One in four households got it, and it
     contained some very -- very significant articles on
     smoking and health that the Surgeon General, the
     American Cancer Society, all of these organizations
     have said that the Reader's Digest was perhaps one
     of the most important, most influential magazines
     to convey to the lay public, people like you and
     me, the dangers and addictiveness of smoking.  They
     didn't take cigarette advertisements. 4795
          So that's why you see a lot of Reader's
     Digests in these types of cases, but one of the
     main reasons, perhaps, that you see it in this case
     is because it was listed by Mrs. Schleider.  Not
     only did she read it, because she told you on the
     stand, but Mr. Schleider did.
          Now, one of the other things she listed,
     Newsweek.  Don't have to go through the article in
     total, but Newsweek was also publishing about the
     dangers of smoking in the 1950s.  And one more
     Reader's Digest, because this is a really
     significant one, as Dr. Proctor told you, remember
     the "Cancer By the Carton".  And this was before
     all of the mouse skin painting studies, the Surgeon
     General's Report.
          And Dr. Proctor told you that this article, he
     said, "No single article that had more impact on
     starting people to quit, alerting the public, than
     this one issue."  And why is that?  He told you
     it's because the title itself.  It said everything
     you needed to know.  If you buy another pack of
     cigarettes, you are buying a carton of cancer
     risks.  This was all in the information
     environment, known and available, and this
     information was causing smokers to quit.  And you 4796
     heard from Mr. Bayuk, by the millions.  Dr. Proctor
     told you that, Dr. Drobes told you that, and
     Dr. Castro told you that.
          Now, one thing we didn't see yet, we heard a
     lot about with Dr. Proctor, so I'm not going to
     spend a lot of time on it, but you heard a lot
     about this 1953 Survey of Cancer Research by
     Dr. Teague at R.J. Reynolds.  I just want to remind
     you that Dr. Teague was summarizing published --
     published literature.  He surveyed the literature,
     that's why it's called a cancer -- I mean, the
     Survey of Cancer Research is sort of a no-brainer,
     right, but he goes to the medical library, he
     surveys the research.  He writes a memorandum.
     Whoops.  Sorry.  Whoops.  Did I go too far?  That's
     why they shouldn't give me the clicker, right?
          And anyway, it was no secret.  There is
     nothing secret in the Survey of Cancer Research,
     there is nothing hidden, there is not even a
     conclusion that smoking causes lung cancer.  It's a
     Survey of Cancer Research.  So the title speaks for
     itself.
[#DELETED MOTION FOR MISTRIAL#]
          MS. HENNINGER:  So after Dr. Teague's Survey
     of Cancer Research, something happened, something
     very important happened, and that was the Wynder
     and Graham mouse skin painting studies, and you've
     heard, Dr. Proctor talked about them on direct, we
     talked about them on cross, but the fact of the
     matter is is that when this study came out, this 4801
     animal study came out, remember he talked about
     epidemiology, the animal studies, there were
     chemical studies.
          This was an animal study that came out in
     1953, and this information published in LIFE
     magazine, published elsewhere, all over, even
     newspapers, it caused concern for smokers and the
     information caused millions and millions of smokers
     to quit smoking.
          And these studies didn't stop.  Tens of
     thousands of articles were written after 1953
     finding that smoking was dangerous.
          And this exchange with Dr. Proctor was very
     interesting because I -- my question was, well,
     there were a lot of studies and he said, yeah,
     throughout time, there is a lot of studies, and I
     said there is probably hundreds, and he said
     thousands.  And I said okay, thousands and he said,
     what did he say?  Tens of thousands.  Tens of
     thousands of articles after 1953 found that smoking
     was dangerous, it could harm your health, it could
     cause lung cancer, and a number of other diseases,
     but Mrs. Schleider claims that they heard nothing
     about the dangers of smoking until the 1980s.
          The information has to be known or available. 4802
          Ask yourself what makes sense.  Not only did
     you have public health officials, national public
     health officials talking about the dangers of
     smoking, you had state and local public health
     officials talking about the dangers of smoking.
          And in New York specifically, there was a very
     famous commissioner of health, Dr. Hilleboe, and he
     said, he was very outspoken on his beliefs that
     smoking could cause disease, and one of the things
     he said, and this is in the New York Post, "Those
     who deny that tobacco is a causal factor in lung
     cancer just won't face the facts."
          This is in 1958, after the mouse skin painting
     studies, before the Surgeon General's Report, his
     statements were being picked up in newspapers in
     the New York City area, newspapers that
     Mr. Schleider read.
          More Reader's Digest, because in the 1960s you
     saw that there were a number of articles in
     Reader's Digest about lung cancer and addiction,
     and what is important here is that the Schleider
     family got these Reader's Digests.  You heard she
     got them from a relative and they were in their
     household, and despite that, there was a claim that
     they never saw any of these articles about smoking 4803
     and health in Reader's Digest.  And that is
     something that is important because it is
     information that is known or available.
          So what happens after this.  In 1964, you
     heard about the -- perhaps the biggest news story
     in the history of the United States on health
     issues, and that was the 1964 Surgeon General's
     Report.  That was the first report that found that
     cigarette smoking is causally related to lung
     cancer in men.  And Dr. Proctor talked to you about
     how that was on the news, you saw news clips from
     not only plaintiff, but defense counsel, everybody
     showed you television news, they showed you
     newspaper articles, it was just big news.  It was
     covered everywhere, radio, TV, newspapers, military
     newspapers.
          And we showed you not just a sampling, it was
     front-page news, New York Times, New York Post,
     magazines, and newspapers that Mr. Schleider read.
          Now, Mrs. Schleider can't say that
     Mr. Schleider didn't hear about this.  She says she
     never heard about the '64 Surgeon General's Report,
     but we don't know about Mr. Schleider because they
     weren't together at the time.  She was married to
     her first husband at the time, and he was in the 4804
     Navy.  But it was everywhere.
          Dr. Proctor talked to you about the coverage
     of the 1964 Surgeon General's Report.  And
     following that report, what also started to be
     covered were quitting smoking, smoking clinics
     where people could go to get help to quit their
     smoking, they could go to, you know, self-help
     programs, and there were programs modeled after
     Alcoholics Anonymous that people -- that were
     publicized that people could go to that were free,
     and they were in the newspapers throughout the time
     that Mr. Schleider was reading these, in the
     newspapers that he was reading.
          But despite this information, he never went to
     one of those self-help groups to try to quit
     smoking.
          So we follow up and go to 1966.  You heard
     that the first warning goes on the pack of
     cigarettes, and it was the, "Caution:  Cigarette
     smoking may be hazardous to your health."
          Now, Dr. Proctor talked to you about congress
     mandating this warning label on the packs of
     cigarettes, they mandated where it was located,
     what the font was, what it said, and how big the
     lettering is, et cetera.  And one of the things 4805
     that is important to note is that this was on every
     pack of cigarettes that Mr. Schleider smoked from
     1966 to 1970.  And if you use a conservative
     estimate of one and a half packs a day, that means
     during that time he saw this warning when he picked
     up a pack of cigarettes 40,000 times.
          In every pack of cigarettes during their
     married life that Mrs. Schleider, who was married
     to Mr. Schleider, every pack of cigarettes had a
     warning label on them.  Every pack of cigarettes
     during their marriage had one.  And this was the
     one from 1966 to 1970.
          And in 1968, you had Daniel Horn, plaintiff
     actually showed you this in their direct
     examination of Dr. Proctor, and Daniel Horn, he was
     in charge of getting the information out to the
     American public at the time, and he made a
     statement in 1968 that "You could stand on a
     rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous' at the top
     of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone
     anything they didn't already know."
          Is the information known or available in 1968?
          So 1970, the warnings change, and it becomes
     "Warning:  The Surgeon General has determined that
     cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." 4806
     This is on every pack of cigarettes from 1970 to
     1985.  Importantly, starting in 1971, Surgeon
     General warnings are on every cigarette
     advertisement.  1971 forward.
          This -- if he -- again, using the conservative
     estimate of one and a half packs a day, if he
     smoked from 1970 to 1985, he would have picked up a
     pack of cigarettes 160,000 times with this warning
     on it.
          So Reader's Digest, I just want to talk about
     them briefly in the 1970s because the Schleiders
     were receiving Reader's Digest in the 1970s.  There
     were articles that continued to appear in the 1970s
     about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking, yet
     there is a claim that there was never any
     information available.
          You also heard a lot, and there were polls
     shown to you even in the closing arguments today,
     that despite all of this information, that smokers
     didn't really know or believe, but the simple fact
     is is in 1980 -- I believe it's 1980 Surgeon
     General's Report, I would have to check, but one of
     the Surgeon General's Reports there is a graph
     where there was a poll from the Surgeon General
     that said, the question was, "Cigarette smoking is 4807
     harmful to health."  And the percentage of smokers
     who agreed or percentage of nonsmokers who agreed
     increased.
          Throughout this time, from 1964 to 1975,
     people were agreeing, they got the information, the
     information was out there, it was known, it was
     available, and people were believing it.
          This was all during this time that Dr. Proctor
     talked to you about, this campaign of doubt, that
     the tobacco industry, he spent hours and hours
     talking about the campaign of doubt, all during
     this time, the information was getting out there,
     people were believing it, and guess what else they
     were doing?  They were quitting, and they were
     quitting by the millions.
          Now, I'm going to briefly talk about public
     service announcements only because the Schleiders
     saw them together, they talked about them, and that
     was another source of warnings that were out there
     that Mr. Schleider received, and that's one we know
     he received because she testified about it.  So
     known or available.
          (Video clip played as follows:)
          SPEAKER:  Ladies and gentlemen, the late Yul
     Brynner. 4808
          YUL BRYNNER:  I really wanted to make a
     commercial when I discovered I was that sick and my
     time was so limited.  I wanted to make a commercial
     that says simply now that I'm gone, I tell you
     don't smoke.  Whatever you do, just don't smoke.
     If I could take back that smoking, we wouldn't be
     talking about any cancer, I'm convinced about that.
          (Video clip stopped.)
          MS. HENNINGER:  These PSAs, Dr. Proctor told
     you ran through the '60s, '70s, and '80s and
     continued, and the Schleiders saw them and talked
     about them.
          More warnings, 1985, the Congress mandated
     different warnings on the packs of cigarettes.
     There is rotating warnings.  I'm not going to read
     them all, but importantly there is a warning that
     says, "Surgeon General's warning:  Smoking causes
     lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, may
     complicate pregnancy" and the one under it is very
     important, we're going to talk to you about it in a
     second, "Quitting smoking now greatly reduces
     serious risks to your health."
          Now, before I leave the warnings, there is an
     instruction, number 18, and this is very important,
     because there is an instruction that says, "The 4809
     warning labels placed on cigarette packs and
     advertisements by Reynolds complied with federal
     law and Reynolds had no obligation to place
     additional warnings on its cigarette packs and
     advertisements after July 1st, 1969."
          And to be clear, "Plaintiff is not making any
     claim that the warning labels placed on cigarette
     packs and advertisements after 1969 were
     inadequate."
          Known or available.
          So Mr. Schleider did not die because the
     information about the dangers and addictiveness of
     smoking were known -- unknown or unavailable to
     him.
          Now, all of the information, we've talked
     about it all, I'm not going to go through it all,
     one box I haven't talked about and that is warnings
     from his family.  And this is important because he
     was receiving personalized warnings from the people
     he loved the most.
          You heard his daughter, Suzanne, get on the
     stand and she talked about how when she was in
     middle school, she started learning in school about
     the dangers of smoking and would constantly ask her
     father to quit.  Sometimes he would put his 4810
     cigarette out, but she also described something
     very important to you, which is the look.  The look
     that dads give when they say don't question me, I
     don't want to hear it.
          And she said, she told you that she thought
     that her father knew, the reason she was asking him
     to quit was because she wanted him to live longer
     because of his health.  That's a personalized
     warning that he received from his daughter.  And
     Mrs. Schleider talked about the information, new
     information she would bring him that she saw in
     newspapers and magazines.
          Now, Mr. Paige asked y'all if you knew what a
     material fact is, and I think maybe some of you
     nodded your heads you knew what a material fact is,
     but that is actually defined for you in instruction
     22, and that's what your definition you have to
     use, is "a material fact is one of such importance
     that Mr. Schleider would not have acted but for the
     concealment or omission of that fact."
          Now, "reasonably relied," I want to define
     that for you because that's in instruction 21, and
     that's very important, because they have to prove
     that Mr. Schleider relied to his detriment on the
     Defendant RJR's concealment of material information 4811
     not otherwise known or available.
          So ask yourself this.  Whatever they're
     claiming was concealed or withheld from
     Mr. Schleider, whatever information in those
     documents that they liked to talk about, those
     secret documents, was it of such importance that
     but for that information, Mr. Schleider would have
     acted differently?
          Do you think that -- does it defy common sense
     that he knows or the information is out there that
     smoking can cause lung cancer and kill you, but yet
     he would have stopped smoking if he only knew
     arsenic was in cigarette smoke?
          You take your common sense to the jury room
     and imply -- apply the instructions to the facts
     you have before you.  That's what the law is.
          And there is something else I want to point
     out briefly.  The instruction says the
     determination is whether Andrew Schleider
     reasonably relied, not people in general.  They
     have to prove that he reasonably relied, and that's
     what they cannot do.
          So one more instruction, and this is number
     23, and I say one more, it's really not the last
     one, but I'm going to be quick, it is the 4812
     instruction on causation.  "Reasonable reliance on
     the concealment of a material fact is a legal cause
     of loss, injury, or damage if it directly and in
     natural and continuous sequence produces or
     contributes substantially to producing such loss,
     injury, or damage, so that it can be reasonably
     said that but for, but for the reasonable reliance
     on the concealment, the loss, injury, or damage
     would not have occurred."
          But for the concealment, Mr. Schleider would
     not have developed lung cancer and died.  That's
     the connection they cannot prove.  And what did
     they do to try to prove that?  They tried to prove
     that with generic testimony.  Dr. Proctor came in
     here, as Mr. Bayuk told you, what, 14 hours I think
     he said, no connection, no connection at all
     between the conduct he talked about and
     Mr. Schleider.  That's the missing link.  That's
     what they can't do.  That's why their claims fail.
          They want you to infer reliance.  They want
     you to infer reliance.  They want you to connect
     the dots for them.  But they have to provide you
     evidence, and they have not done that.
          Now, Dr. Proctor, highly credentialed.  We
     heard it.  But he's also highly paid.  We heard 4813
     that in the last three months testifying in Engle
     cases just like this, he's made $240,000.  Over 2
     million in the last several years from testifying
     in these cases.
          And what's amazing is he said, you know, he
     went from one case straight to this case, and I
     said, well, where did you leave yesterday, you were
     on the stand yesterday, name the smoker in that
     case, and he couldn't do it.  Because it doesn't
     matter to him because he provides generic
     testimony.
          And what does that generic testimony do?  It
     does nothing except prove and reprove the Engle
     findings.
          Remember I asked him, I said, okay, so
     remember, your opinion, your opinion is what?  He
     said my opinion is basically that R.J. Reynolds and
     others conspired to conceal the health effects and
     addictive nature of smoking from the American
     public, he said yep, that's my opinion.
          Read the Engle finding.  That's the Engle
     finding.  He came in here and just reproved the
     Engle finding.  Not only that, he did it again for
     concealing information about the health effects and
     addictive nature of smoking from the public.  Same 4814
     opinion, Engle finding.  Generic evidence, no link,
     no causation, nothing to tie that testimony to
     Mr. Schleider or his actions.
          So there is no evidence that he relied on
     anything the tobacco industry, Reynolds, or anyone
     else said or did.  You heard from Mrs. Schleider,
     she never heard of the Frank Statement.  She didn't
     know if Mr. Schleider ever heard of the Frank
     Statement.  But importantly, she had never heard of
     Tobacco Institute, CTR, TI, any of those members of
     the alleged arms of the conspiracy that Dr. Proctor
     drew out on that chart one day, never heard of
     those.  All of that testimony, no link to
     Mr. Schleider.
          Now, I forgot to point out instruction number
     14, and this is simply that the Engle findings do
     not establish liability.  If he's a class member,
     you get the Engle findings, but they still have to
     tie those findings to Mr. Schleider, and that's
     what you see on instruction number 14, and that's
     what they can't do.  No evidence that there is any
     connection.
          And this is an important point because
     Mrs. Schleider on the stand, remember when I was
     cross-examining her, she was talking about he kept 4815
     saying that it hadn't been proven, that he believed
     the tobacco companies, he believed the controversy,
     and I asked her tell me what, can you tell me
     anything specific that he believed or that caused
     him to believe that.  And she couldn't.  And that's
     understandably.  But then she went on to say that
     all of those statements were from 1985 forward.
          Well, Mr. Schleider started to quit, according
     to the testimony, in 1985.
          So it doesn't make sense, because if he's
     trying to quit all the time, and remember the
     evidence was he was trying to quit because he
     wanted to be healthier and wanted to live longer,
     and he starts trying to quit in 1985.  How is he
     relying on this controversy that cigarette smoking
     had not been proven to be harmful?  He's trying to
     quit because he wants to be healthier, but yet
     somehow he's believing a story that it isn't
     proven?
          Her admission, her testimony defeats their
     reliance claim.
          Now, generic evidence, no tie, no link to
     Mr. Schleider.  And what's important, I'm just
     going to point out just briefly, that there is a
     lot of advertisements we've seen in this case.  And 4816
     they want you to infer, to connect the dots between
     all of those advertisements and Mr. Schleider's
     conduct.
          But remember, the brand he smoked, the only
     brand you've heard that he smoked, was Lucky Strike
     unfiltered, and that stopped being advertised in
     1966.  So how is he relying on advertising from
     1966 forward when it doesn't exist for the brand he
     smoked?
          And let's look back in time, because you saw
     these healthcare professionals, brands he didn't
     smoke.  You saw TV commercials.  Even today in
     closing argument you saw TV commercials for
     advertisements for cigarettes he never smoked.
          And one important thing that has got to be
     pointed out because on those television ads there
     was a heading that said, the co-conspirators
     conspired to make cigarettes seem attractive in
     their advertising, or something to that effect.
     Dr. Proctor said that there was no conspiracy for
     anything related to advertising or marketing or
     anything like that.
          But these weren't brands he smoked.
          Famous athletes, showed you lots of those.
     Brands he didn't smoke. 4817
          Doctors or movie stars, celebrities, again,
     brands he didn't smoke.  Cigarettes for the
     holidays, a lot of ads for those for brands he
     didn't smoke.  There were brands {sic} for Lucky
     Strikes, but there were lots of others they showed
     you, hours of testimony on brands he didn't smoke.
     Famous athletes.
          The fact of the matter is the evidence in this
     case from Mrs. Schleider was that Mr. Schleider
     made his own choice about the cigarettes he chose
     to smoke.  There is no evidence of any ad he ever
     saw from Mrs. Schleider, from any of the children,
     from Suzanne, Christopher, anybody you have heard
     from in this case, nobody can tell you about a
     specific ad he saw that he relied on or even that
     he saw.
          So one last point on the brands that
     Mrs. Schleider talked about, because all the
     evidence in this case is about Lucky Strike
     unfiltered.  And you'll recall when she was on the
     stand, we went over this sworn answer to an
     interrogatory that listed brands that Mr. Schleider
     smoked, according to Mrs. Schleider in her
     interrogatories, for 40-some years, brands with
     filters, menthol brands, all sorts of brands. 4818
          She couldn't even tell you that she ever saw
     him smoke one of those, but yet she swore under
     oath that he had smoked some of these brands for 40
     and 30 years.
          You've got instructions in front of you.  You
     have to assess what's credible and what's not.
          The only link in this case that's even
     attempted between the conduct and Mr. Schleider is
     provided by Mrs. Schleider, and it's inconsistent
     at best.  And for those reasons --
          Can I have the Elmo, please?
          I submit to you question 5, you would answer,
     reasonably rely, you would answer no.
          There is a question number 6 asking about
     1982.  Since you've answered no to number 5, you
     would answer that no as well on number 6.
          Number 7 is:  "Did Mr. Schleider reasonably
     rely on any act or omission taken in furtherance of
     R.J. Reynolds's agreement with the other tobacco
     companies to conceal or omit material information
     not otherwise known or available," et cetera.  You
     would answer that no based on the evidence.
          And, of course, if you answered that no,
     question number 8 would be no as well.
          So you've answered those questions.  I told 4819
     you I would go back to number 4, and that's what
     I'm going to do right now, and that's the
     comparative fault --
          I'm sorry, can I have the --
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Sure.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Thank you.
          This is the comparative fault question, number
     4.  The assignment of fault, some important points
     on this, the assignment of fault relates only to
     the actions that were a legal cause of
     Mr. Schleider's death.  And R.J. Reynolds cannot be
     assigned fault for actions that were not a legal
     cause of Mr. Schleider's death.
          And you heard argument today, which surprised
     me, because you heard a comparison in this section
     when talking about comparative fault, they asked
     you to compare the wealth and power of R.J.
     Reynolds with the actions of Mr. Schleider.
          And that's just not the standard.  You don't
     do that.  You don't look at that.  You look at the
     relative fault that was a legal cause of
     Mr. Schleider's death.
          It's not about wealth, it's not about power,
     it's not about the fact that he was a carpenter
     union or a boat mechanic or at-home Mr. Mom because 4820
     he was disabled.  It's about the actions and the
     reasonableness of the actions, that's what you
     focus on.
          Now, I want to talk about -- okay.  The
     admission.  The admission of fault plays a role in
     this comparative fault question because as you've
     heard over and over again, Mrs. Schleider admits
     that he did not try hard enough, he did not try
     often enough to quit.  And that means he was a
     legal cause of his death.
          And importantly she explained that to the jury
     when she said, the question was:  "But you agree
     that he had some responsibility and your husband
     can only be partially responsible for the injuries
     you are alleging in this lawsuit because he can
     control, he can control the frequency and duration
     of his efforts to quit?"
          And she said, "Yes."
          Now, if he controlled it, if he was
     persistent, if he was motivated and he quit, he
     could have prevented his death, because Dr. Proctor
     told you, that there were studies in 1977 that said
     that if a person quit smoking, the risk for
     developing lung cancer goes back to that of a
     nonsmoker. 4821
          He was aware of that on the historical record.
          Now, R.J. Reynolds could not have done
     anything that would have prevented Mr. Schleider's
     death.  Mr. Schleider is the only one who had the
     ability to prevent his own death by quitting.  And
     he's a hundred percent responsible for the choices
     he made.
          And for that reason, when you get to the
     verdict form on question 4 --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.  We heard
     argument about this yesterday, about assigning a
     hundred percent.
          THE COURT:  Why don't you just finish up how
     much -- because I -- you know, I probably should
     have given my clerk -- to tell me when you're done.
     How much more time do you have?
          MS. HENNINGER:  I've got a couple more
     questions to answer on the verdict form, probably
     15 minutes.
          THE COURT:  All right.  Finish up.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Okay.
          Can I have the Elmo, please, Robert?
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Sure.
          MS. HENNINGER:  So when you get to this
     question, remember, Mr. Schleider has admitted 4822
     fault, so you have to allocate fault toward him.
     The answer would be a hundred percent to
     Mr. Schleider.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection.  Excuse me, Judge.
     Did you rule my objection?  I object.
          THE COURT:  I guess it depends.  I think this
     is something we have to take up at sidebar.  All
     right, let's come up for a minute.
          Let me -- I know it's 1 o'clock and everybody
     is hungry.  Iramis has pizza for everybody.  I'm
     trying -- instead of taking a break, I'm just
     trying to get through this.  They're going to be
     done in about -- they're going to be done in a half
     an hour.  All right?  If not less.
          Then I'm just going to read you some quick
     deliberation instruction and I'm going to send you
     right in, instead of taking a break.  Is everybody
     already with that?
          Okay. before the
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I object.  I object.  What she's
     doing is asking the jury to return an inconsistent
     verdict.  Once -- under Douglas, once they
     establish I am a class -- my client is a class 4823
     member, they apportion fault.  It's not --
          MS. HENNINGER:  Can you keep it --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  It's not a hundred percent.
     There is clear case law in Florida that you can't
     do that.
          MS. HENNINGER:  We argued this last night,
     Your Honor, and Your Honor said that you were going
     to allow me to argue this because I specifically
     asked if I could argue this and you said I could
     and that if he wants to argue it's inconsistent
     later, we would deal with it at the time.
          I talked to you about the case where I had
     this allocation.  There was never a -- I mean, we
     talked about it and I was left with the impression
     that we ruled that I could do this.  And I don't
     understand why we're now having this discussion
     again.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  We're having this discussion
     because this can happen in the case.  There is no
     appellate review of that case, number one.  But
     there is plenty of case law that says you can't do
     this, you can't ask for an inconsistent verdict
     like that.
          And once there is a finding, okay, that you
     are entitled to damages, okay, that you are 4824
     entitled to damages --
          THE COURT:  Shhh.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  -- it can't be a hundred percent
     on the plaintiff.
          MS. HENNINGER:  They could come back and say
     zero damages.  I've had cases like that too.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Fine.  They --
          THE COURT:  That's true.  I think that was the
     discussion.  I think that's -- maybe it wasn't --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  No.
          THE COURT:  Maybe it wasn't completed
     afterwards.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Well, I'm just telling you,
     we're going down a bad path here.  They can't argue
     that, and I'm objecting to it.
          THE COURT:  Can you move on?
          MS. HENNINGER:  I'm done with it.  I'm going
     to move on.
          THE COURT:  Don't bring it back up again.
     Okay?
          MS. HENNINGER:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  I'm telling you right now, because
     between the two of you, you've got to be done by
     1:30.
          MS. HENNINGER:  Okay. 4825
          MR. ALVAREZ:  All right. in open
court before the Court and jury.)
          MS. HENNINGER:  May I have the projector,
     please, while I'm walking back?
          MR. PHILIPSON:  The Elmo or projector?
          MS. HENNINGER:  Projector.
          Can I skip the video?
          MS. SCHNEIDER:  (Nods head affirmatively.)
          MS. HENNINGER:  Let's move on to verdict form
     questions 9 and 10.  I'm not going to read them to
     you, but it's the damages question for both
     Mrs. Schleider and their daughter, Suzanne
     LeMehaute.  I believe it's LeMehaute is how she
     pronounced it when she got on the stand.  I'm doing
     my best, at least I've tried, right?
          So let's talk about the damages.  Because
     Mr. Alvarez spent some time talking about that.
     And the damages must be fair and just in light of
     the evidence.  There is going to be instructions,
     you are going to get those, you can take them back
     with you.
          And I want you to ask yourself to remember
     those things -- those instructions because number
     40 -- remember in voir dire I talked to you all 4826
     about sympathy and whether or not sympathy would
     play a role and you had to put that aside, and
     everybody agreed that they could.
          And there is going to be some sympathy toward
     both of these ladies.  They have lost a father and
     a husband.  That's understandable.  But that's not
     part of the deliberation.  What is, is based on the
     evidence that you've heard in this case.
          And let's be clear.  Plaintiff is not claiming
     damages related to any lost wages, financial
     support, medical expenses, funeral expenses, no
     damages for COPD, and no damages for
     Mr. Schleider's pain and suffering, all right?  No
     medical expenses, no funeral expenses.  It's the
     loss of companionship.
          And you heard both of the women testify and
     they described their losses for you.  And then I
     heard Mr. Alvarez get up here this after- -- this
     morning and talk to you and ask you for $18
     million; $11 million for Mrs. Schleider and 7 for
     Suzanne.
          And what I also heard, for the first time, was
     a description of the relationship that neither of
     those ladies provided.  Nobody talked about the
     desire to -- to raise grandchildren.  I mean, 4827
     that's natural, don't get me wrong, but that's not
     evidence in this case, that's argument.
          And you never heard anybody talk about that
     that was under oath that talked to you about those
     types of things that Mr. Alvarez did today.
          So the damages, that's up to you.  We would
     submit that you never get there.  And if you do,
     you have to use your common sense and put sympathy
     aside.
          Now, I'm going to pause for a second -- oh.
     Pause for a second on the last question.  Because
     Mr. Paige actually told you this morning that this
     is why we're here.  This is why we're here,
     punitive damages.
          Well, I thought we were here because they
     wanted to prove that Mr. Schleider was a member of
     the Engle class and this was Mr. Schleider's case.
     But you were told that this is why they're here and
     that this is important.
          He made a lot of inflammatory arguments.  He
     showed pictures of teenagers, he talked about plane
     crashes and thousands of people dying, all in an
     effort to make you angry, all in an effort to
     distract you from the issues in this case.
          We've talked about the issues.  The issues 4828
     involve Mr. Schleider.  It's not about Engle or
     re-proving Engle.  It's about whether any of that
     conduct that was tried, as Mr. Paige told you, for
     over a year here in Miami in the Engle case,
     whether any of that conduct that led to those
     findings applied or harmed Mr. Schleider.
          And they brought you no evidence that it did.
     But you heard all of this about plane crashes and
     thousands of people dying.
          Every question Mr. Paige asked you in this
     case, I mean, when he asked a witness, you know,
     was this all during when thousands and thousands of
     people were dying, all in an effort to distract you
     from the fact that they don't have anything to
     connect the findings to their client, to
     Mr. Schleider.
          Well, if this is why we're here, let's talk
     about it, because it's a very important question to
     us, too.
          Punitive damages.  These are all instructions
     you'll get.  You'll go back to the punitive damages
     can only be awarded for conduct that was a legal
     cause of Mr. Schleider's death.  They can only go
     to Mrs. Schleider.
          Punitive damages would be in addition to any 4829
     damages that you find compensate her for her loss
     of companionship, for Suzanne's loss of
     companionship.  These would be in addition to it,
     and it would go to Mrs. Schleider.
          Let's look at jury instruction number 31,
     because this is very significant.  You've heard
     about the burden of proof, and they put up the
     scales of justice and they said we only have to tip
     the scales.
          Not so on this question number 11.  They have
     to prove by clear and convincing evidence.  What is
     clear and convincing evidence?  It is "evidence
     that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion,
     and of such weight that it produces a firm belief
     or conviction without hesitation about the matter
     in issue."
          Very important, a high standard, higher
     standard that they cannot meet to get punitive
     damages.
          And very importantly, the Engle findings may
     not be considered in any way when determining
     whether punitive damages may be warranted.  That's
     an instruction you get in this case that will be
     back with you in the jury room.
          So you have to use the evidence in this case 4830
     and how it relates to Mr. Schleider.
          Jury instructions 32 -- 30 and 32, you cannot
     base punitive damages on strict liability or
     negligence.  I'll get to those in a second and give
     you some examples.  And you may not find that
     punitive damages are warranted against Reynolds for
     strict liability or negligence.
          Both of those instructions are up there and
     I'll explain what that means, because here we go.
     We heard days of testimony about cigarettes being
     inhalable, about ingredients, about flue curing,
     all sorts of things.
          Those things, Dr. Proctor told you first of
     all they've been inhalable before my client ever
     existed, we did not invent flue curing, but you
     know what we did invent?  A better way to do it and
     we went out and paid all the farmers to retrofit
     their barns, he told you about that.
          And we did not make it more inhalable.  And
     cigarettes today, that my client makes today, that
     Mr. Schleider smoked, those were just as dangerous
     and addictive as cigarettes from the 1800s.
          Additives, again, they don't make cigarettes
     more dangerous, they don't make it more addictive.
     Additive-free cigarettes are not any safer. 4831
     Ammonia, you heard about ammonia, ammonia, ammonia,
     pH, all of that.  Nothing makes them more
     addictive.  Nothing makes them more dangerous.  And
     you cannot impose punitive damages for that design.
          And all of those ingredients that we have
     heard about, remember the chocolate, the licorice,
     et cetera, Dr. Proctor -- all of those are governed
     by the FDA.  Dr. Figlar told you that; Dr. Proctor
     told you that.  They've never said hey, take
     anything out that's bad.  All of that is governed
     and it's all provided to the FDA.
          So instruction number 38 says you can look to
     mitigating evidence to see whether or not punitive
     damages are warranted.  Well, what is mitigating
     evidence?  It is evidence that may demonstrate that
     there is no need to punish with punitive damages.
          You've heard a little bit about some of the
     evidence in this case.  You've heard a lot about
     Council For Tobacco Research.  Mr. Paige said it
     was not legitimate doctors, but I'm going to run
     through this.  If it's not legitimate doctors, if
     it's such a bad thing, why is the Surgeon General
     citing it 600 times?  Why are there over 1600
     independent scientific research projects that are
     funded? 4832
          All of these things are co-funded by the
     institutes like Cancer Society, the public health
     groups.  This was not fraudulent research.  This
     was research that was in peer-reviewed journals and
     it was funded by R.J. Reynolds and the other
     tobacco companies.
          Now, we've worked -- Reynolds has worked to
     make cigarettes safer, to try to reduce the
     carcinogens.  You heard Dr. Proctor talk about
     that.  We pioneered ways to reduce the carcinogens.
     And we spent over a billion dollars trying to
     produce safer cigarettes.
          And how did we do that.  Well, this is very
     interesting because this was the Nordine Study.
     And I'm going to give you this Plaintiff's Exhibit
     number because it's 1820.  Mr. Paige said this is a
     very interesting document.  He showed it to you
     today.  It's very important.
          But they don't show you the third bullet of
     what Reynolds was considering.  And Reynolds said,
     "Provide other products, away from conventional
     cigarettes, which meet the same needs as cigarettes
     now meet, but without the negative effects," the
     health effects.
          And how did they do that?  They created -- 4833
     they spent money, they spent a billion dollars
     coming up with products that heated, not burned
     tobacco, and that was Premier and Eclipse.
          They are not very successful.  Premier has
     already failed in the market, Eclipse is still
     sold.  But they are trying.  They have
     alternatives.  And when you go back and you see
     these documents and it says, hey, we can go
     consider going out of business or doing this, there
     is a third alternative that is not shown to you,
     but the third alternative is what shows the
     evidence that was done, you have to ask yourself.
          The next --
          THE COURT:  Ms. Henninger, I'm sorry.
          MS. HENNINGER:  I'm done.
          THE COURT:  You have to wrap up.
          MS. HENNINGER:  So other instructions, 35, 39,
     I want you to go back, number 39 is important, this
     one talks about if you answered yes to this, we
     have to come back on Monday for another phase of
     trial.
          (Video clip played as follows:)
          DR. HAMMOND:  In my opinion, people should be
     warned of the dangers and they are being warned.
     What they then want to do, whether they wish to 4834
     smoke or not, is their own business.
          (Video clip stopped.)
          MS. HENNINGER:  I'm going to leave you with
     that and I just show you one more verdict form
     question, it's the last one I just talked about,
     punitive damages, the very important one that
     Mr. Paige referred to that I think is very
     important.  It's important that you check no,
     because plaintiff is not entitled to punitive
     damages in this case.
          I ran out of time.  I'm glad I thanked you in
     the beginning.  You guys have been patient.  Thank
     you so much for your time and attention.
