          MR. BARINGER:  Good afternoon, ladies and
     gentlemen.
          You heard the evidence in the punitive damages
     phase, and I asked to you consider when you started
     at the beginning of the day to consider whether
     there is any need to punish and deter the R.J.
     Reynolds of 2012.
          You heard Dr. Michael Borgerding.  You saw a
     man sit on the stand and tell you that for the last
     32 years of his life, he has dedicated himself to
     trying to make a difference, to trying to make
     products less hazardous, to trying to develop
     innovative products to reduce the risk to smokers.
     And he's characterized as a company man.  And yes,
     he is a company man of the R.J. Reynolds in 2012.
          And what I am asking you to think about as you
     deliberate, when you go back in the room, is to
     think about what told you R.J. Reynolds is doing.
     And at the end I'm going to ask you to ask 2893 yourselves a question.  What more could Reynolds do
     than it's doing currently?  What need is there for
     deterrence?
          Now, you heard Dr. Borgerding, and it wasn't
     that long ago, but I want to summarize what he told
     you, because rather than revisit the issues that
     you already decided in Phase 1, I want to
     concentrate instead on what you heard in Phase 2.
          The first question I think you need ask
     yourself is, Are punitive damages needed to force
     Reynolds to be open and honest with the public
     about addiction and the health effects of smoking.
          And I think the answer is no, because they are
     already doing that.  They have been doing that.
          You saw Reynolds' website.  It tells people
     that smoking causes disease.  It advises smokers
     that are concerned about their health to quit.  It
     tells people, if you are concerned about your
     health, rely on the Surgeon General, rely on the
     public health community.
          And its true, it doesn't have specific tips on
     quitting.  It has links to all of those
     organizations.  It has links to the American Cancer
     Society.  If they want tips on quitting smoking,
     they can go to the people that have been doing that 2894 for decades.  It's there.  Reynolds gives them a
     way to get there to do it.
          But what they say is don't rely on us.  Rely
     on the part of our society that is dedicated to
     that proposition that Reynolds refers them to.
          Is that wrong?  Is that the kind of conduct
     that they complained about in Phase 1?  It's
     exactly the opposite.  It's exactly what -- they
     are doing now what they were criticized for not
     doing in Phase 1.  They are doing absolutely that.
          They tell people that smoking is addictive.
     And they don't just -- they don't just do that.
     They go on and they tell people that if you are
     interested in quitting, there are two things that
     are possible.  If you -- if you want to quit, they
     advise people to do that, and they show them where
     to go to get the information to help.
          But they also recognize that there are a
     segment of people that want to use tobacco.  And
     what are they trying to do?  Remember the migration
     strategy?  They are trying to give them
     alternatives to smoking cigarettes which are the
     most dangerous.  Remember that danger continuum
     that Dr. Borgerding talked about?  They are trying
     to encourage people to migrate to products that are 2895 far less dangerous, not as an alternative to
     quitting, but as an alternative to smoking
     combustible products that have the most danger.
          And what else did Dr. Borgerding tell you?
     R.J. Reynolds, its sister company is now putting
     nicotine replacement products on the market to help
     people actually quit smoking.
          Is there a need to award punitive damages in
     2012 to make them more open with the public?  Ask
     yourself what else you would want R.J. Reynolds to
     say that it isn't saying on its website right now.
     What more do they want in terms of openness?
          Let me ask a second question.  Are punitive
     damages needed to force Reynolds to try and develop
     safer products?  You heard that the one thing that
     Reynolds website said is that cigarettes are risky
     and inherent dangerous.  It tells people that no
     cigarette has been proven to be less dangerous or
     less addictive anywhere in the world, not just at
     R.J. Reynolds.  And they tell smokers that.
          But what does Reynolds do?  What should
     Reynolds do in that situation?
          They are selling a legal product that the
     Congress of the United States has known since 1964
     causes deadly diseases and can be very difficult to 2896 quit.  And what did Dr. Borgerding do and what did
     he say?  What should you do when you are in that
     situation?
          Well, he said you do a number of things.
          No. 1, you make sure your products are not
     more dangerous.  And he talked about product
     stewardship.  No. 2, you try and make safer
     products.  And No. 3, you don't add nicotine to
     cigarettes.
          The first thing was that you try not to make
     the products that you make any more dangerous.
     Nothing you do during the design process, nothing
     you do in the manufacturing process, none of that
     makes anything more dangerous.
          And Dr. Borgerding talked about the
     stewardship program that they do that tests
     everything.  He said you have to understand the
     change, review the literature, assign a level of
     concern.  They do chemistry analysis, biological
     testing studies with smokers, review by expert
     toxicologists.  And what does he tell you that
     whole process is for?  It's to make sure they do
     nothing to increase the dangers.  And he told you
     if anything in any of those tests shows any
     possibility of increasing risk, the changes are 2897 made.
          He also told you one other thing, that this is
     Reynolds program, but they also have to have FDA
     approval to making a change, and they have to prove
     that it wouldn't make anything more dangerous.
          That's what Reynolds should do, and that's
     what Reynolds in 2012 does for smokers.
          We have talked about that's the first thing.
     Don't make anything worse.
          The second thing is try to make it better.
     It's fine if you don't make it more dangerous, but
     shouldn't you try and make it safer?  Of course you
     should.  And that's what Reynolds is doing.
          You heard that Reynolds spent more than a
     billion dollars over the past 30 years doing
     everything it could to try and make cigarettes
     safer.
          You heard the story of low nitrosamine
     tobacco.  Reynolds investigated, found out what was
     going on with nitrosamine in tobacco because of the
     curing process.  And what did it do?  It went to
     the farmers that were curing the tobacco.  It told
     them how to change the process.  And the result is
     that tobacco that R.J. Reynolds uses in every one
     of his cigarettes, in every one of its cigarettes 2898 uses this low nitrosamine tobacco.  Why?  Do they
     make more money on it?  No.  What they are doing is
     recognizing something that's a risk and trying to
     reduce it.
          You also heard about Reynolds talking about
     with the Now cigarette.  The Now cigarette has, I
     think he said, 90 percent less nicotine than a
     Winston.  Reynolds has put that on the market.
          You also heard about tobacco products that are
     alternatives.  You heard about Snus.  You heard
     about Niconovum and the nicotine replacement.
     That's the kind of thing that Reynolds is doing.
          And I want to spend just a few minutes back on
     Premier and Eclipse, the billion dollar project
     that Reynolds tried.  Reynolds got over 40 patents,
     spent over a billion dollars, invented technology
     to make it possible, and it put them on the market.
     And before it did that, they were extensively
     tested, not just at Reynolds, but outside tests.
     There were publications throughout the scientific
     literature, all about the concept.
          You remember Dr. Borgerding showed you that
     big book that was given to anyone that wanted to
     look at it that could look at what Reynolds was
     trying to do.  It showed that Reynolds reduced the 2899 chemistry, the bad components, suspected
     carcinogens by over 90 percent.  They tried to do
     that.  Premier didn't work.  Did they give up?
     They went on to Eclipse.  Eclipse has reductions of
     70 do 90 percent of those compounds.  They did
     animal testing, they did testing with smokers to
     see if in the body the biomarkers that he talked
     about, if the body showed that there was less
     exposure to those carcinogens from smoking Eclipse.
     And the answer was yes.
          Reynolds put those cigarettes on the market.
     You can buy Eclipse cigarettes in the State of
     Florida.  You can buy them all over the country.
     Reynolds loses money on every pack of Eclipse it
     makes or sells.
          Is it all profit motive?  Did they spend a
     billion dollars on the process because they
     couldn't have done something else with a billion
     dollars?  Does that make any sense?  Does it make
     any sense that they keep a product on the market
     that's available if someone wants to try it and
     lose money doing it if they are all about profit
     and nothing else?
          Ask yourself whether you believe that R.J.
     Reynolds went through and developed Premier and 2900 Eclipse if it had no concern for its customers, if
     it had no concern about harm.  That makes no sense.
          There was discussion about nicotine and
     addiction.  Dr. Borgerding talked about what
     Reynolds has done.  Mr. Wichmann in his closing
     said that Dr. Borgerding said they don't use
     additives in their cigarette, and he put up the
     chart with Kool cigarettes and said diammonium
     phosphate, ah-ha, he's lying.
          Dr. Borgerding did not tell you that Reynolds
     doesn't use additives or add ingredients to
     cigarettes.  That wasn't what he said at all.  He
     said yes, they use them.  And you can find them on
     the website and it will tell you what they are.
          And by the way, diammonium phosphate is not a
     suspected carcinogen, as he told you in his
     opening -- or the in first part of his closing.
          Diammonium phosphate, ammonia, Dr. Borgerding
     explained to you why they use it, because of flavor
     and the other parts.  And we'll talk about it more.
     But Dr. Borgerding told you that it does not
     increase the addictiveness of cigarettes.  That's
     not why it's used.  And you don't have to take R.J.
     Reynolds' word for it, because the regulatory
     environment has changed.  That comes specifically 2901 under the regulation of the FDA.  The FDA has the
     power to order Reynolds or anyone else to stop
     using diammonium phosphate or any other additive or
     ingredient.  But they haven't.  That hasn't
     happened.
          Now Congress.  We talked about Congress in
     1964 addressed the question of should cigarettes be
     allowed to be sold in the United States.  And it
     said yes.  And Congress recently revisited that.
     Congress decided in 2009, once again, to allow the
     sale of cigarettes, knowing full well they are
     addictive, knowing full well they can cause deadly
     diseases.  But what did it do this time?  It added
     the power for the FDA to regulate these products.
     The Family Smoking and Control Act of 2009.
          It reaffirmed that they would continue to be
     allowed to be sold, but it gave the FDA regulatory
     power.  It gave the FDA the power to do all of
     this, to regulate manufacturing, packaging,
     marketing and sale of tobacco products.  Regulate
     nicotine yields.  But they can't mandate its
     complete elimination.  Regulate yields of harmful
     and potentially harmful constituents.  Regulate
     additives used in cigarettes.  The FDA has the
     power to ban the use of any additive.  Regulate any 2902 changes made to a product prior to it being sold,
     just like Reynolds' stewardship program.
     Inspecting the manufacturing plants.  And you know
     they have already inspected R.J. Reynolds.
     Regulate the introduction and advertising of less
     harmful products.
          The FDA has the power to do all of that.
          And this is a public health issue.  The FDA
     thus far has not mandated the removal of additives
     like ammonia or menthol.  They have the power to do
     it, but they haven't done it.
          The FDA has the power to mandate whether
     cigarettes should be made with higher or lower pH
     levels.  It hasn't done it because there has been
     no evidence that it affects addictiveness.  It
     hasn't happened yet.
          Decisions made about design issues haven't
     been made, but the process is in place.  Dr. Hurt
     can make recommendations to the FDA.  Anyone can
     make recommendations to the FDA.
          The point is, ladies and gentlemen.  Your
     purpose in thinking about punitive damages today is
     not to answer those questions.  That's not the way
     our system works.  Our system, through
     Congressional action is to vest those questions 2903 with the FDA.  That isn't the purpose, intent or
     proper use of your verdict in this case.  That's
     their responsibility, the way we've decided to
     handle it as a society.
          Ladies and gentlemen, I think the evidence
     overall shows that in 2012, R.J. Reynolds is a
     socially responsible tobacco company.  It is very
     different in 2012.  It now agrees that it causes
     deadly disease.  It recommends that smokers go to
     the public health community.  All of Reynolds'
     documents are publicly available on the website.
     Anybody can go get them.  You saw the product
     stewardship program that makes sure they don't make
     anything worse.  You saw that Reynolds has
     developed and marketed safer products.  And you see
     that now Reynolds is marketing nicotine replacement
     products to help smokers quit.
          You also know that Reynolds no longer
     advertises in magazines or newspapers.  Yes, there
     was concern in 2007, there was concern about Camel
     9.  Remember?  The FTC asked for information, and
     they ended up taking no actions.  And yes, you
     could -- at one time there was an issue about what
     kind of magazine was appropriate and what kind of
     magazine wasn't appropriate for cigarette ads. 2904 That's over.  It doesn't matter whether it's 85
     percent, 50 percent.  It does matter.  It doesn't
     matter if somebody young picks up any magazine
     that's published in the United States.  There will
     be no cigarette ads in those magazines, and they
     won't be in newspapers.
          And remember that whole list of advertising
     restrictions from the MSA?  That covers all kinds
     of other areas.
          It does not happen in 2012.  And that's the
     issue in this phase -- what's going on today.  Is
     there a need today to deter Reynolds from doing
     those things?  And ladies and gentlemen, I submit
     the answer is no.
          I want to talk about punishment for a minute.
     Anybody that's lived for a while, raised kids,
     knows that the subject of punishment comes up once
     in a while.  And I would suggest to that you for
     punishment to be valid, it has to accomplish a
     purpose.
          What would the purpose of punishing Reynolds
     be in this case today?  Would it make people more
     aware of the dangers of smoking, more than they
     already are, more than the efforts that Reynolds is
     making to make them aware now?  Would it change 2905 that?  If these kinds of cases did that, it should
     have happened a long time ago.  A lot of these
     cases have been tried here in Florida.
          Would it improve the public health in some
     other way?  Think about it.  What -- what would it
     accomplish in terms of serving the public health.
     Would giving Mr. Schlenther more in punitive
     damages in addition to the full and fair
     compensation that you have already awarded him,
     would that improve the public health?
          Would it make cigarettes safer?
          Would it stop people from starting to smoke?
          Would it cause more people to quit smoking?
          Would it make cigarettes illegal?
          Would it make the companies, including R.J.
     Reynolds, any more transparent than it already is?
          Would it serve a valid purpose?
          Would punishing R.J. Reynolds, with men and
     women like Dr. Borgerding who work everyday to try
     and make a difference and try to make things
     better, would it serve anything to punish Dr.
     Borgerding and the people that are working on that
     at R.J. Reynolds today?
          The evidence you heard from Dr. Borgerding
     about what's going on at R.J. Reynolds today, I 2906 think, yields a fair answer that no, it would
     accomplish none of that.  You've already sent a
     message with your judgment based on Reynolds's past
     conduct and the fact that it harmed
     Mrs. Schlenther.  You've already sent that message.
     There is no need to deter R.J. Reynolds today.
     It's already doing everything that I think you
     could reasonably ask it to do in response to the
     things that you found caused Mrs. Schlenther's
     harm.
          I think a fair verdict in this phase of the
     case would be zero punitive damages.  And that's
     your option.  Remember the instructions?  You have
     to decide whether to award any, and if so, how
     much.
          I do want to talk about the "how much" part,
     because you may well disagree with me and decide
     there is some need to add to the amount of money
     Mr. Schlenther will receive.  And I want to talk
     about what would be proper.
          It's kind of difficult.  You know, most people
     don't walk around everyday thinking about, Well,
     jeez, how would I figure out what's an appropriate
     amount of punitive damages?  And I think it really
     again is invested to your good common sense. 2907      In Phase 1, you decided that the total damages
     were $5,000,000.  Fifty percent of that was
     Reynolds fault, 50 percent of that you attributed
     to Mrs. Schlenther.
          Now, Mr. Wichmann said, you know, a nice
     reasonable number would be $25,000,000.
     Reasonable?  Under what -- what set of
     circumstances?  Under what basis?
          I think if you think about what you have done
     is you've held R.J. Reynolds responsible for $2 and
     a half million dollars of the $5 million dollars in
     damages that you said were done by
     Mrs. Schlenther's COPD and death.  And I think that
     you have to start there as a basis of that's how
     much you've already held R.J. Reynolds responsible
     for.  If you decide that you need to award more,
     what's reasonable?  Five or 10 percent, maybe 20
     percent of what you have already awarded?  Would it
     make a difference?  Does the amount after that make
     a difference in the message that you want to send?
     Obviously, Mr. Wichmann wants you to award as much
     money as possible.  But what will it accomplish?
     What will it really achieve?
          I think that represents a fair range of what
     would be appropriate under the circumstances. 2908      And I'm just about done.
          I want to you keep in mind, this is 2012, and
     you have to now think about, How does R.J. Reynolds
     do business today?  It tells smokers that smoking
     is dangerous.  It tells them that it can lead to
     deadly diseases.  It tells them that nicotine is
     addictive.  It tells them they should rely on the
     Surgeon General and the public health community.
     It gives them a means to get to those sources to
     find out anything that they want to find out that's
     available on the subject.  You know that R.J.
     Reynolds no longer advertises in the way it did in
     the past.  No more magazines, no more newspapers,
     none of the things that are presented -- that are
     prevented by MSA.
          And I'm going to leave you with two questions.
     What more do you think R.J. Reynolds should do in
     2012 than what it's doing now?  And would punitive
     damages in this case force Reynolds to do something
     that isn't -- it isn't currently doing?  I think
     the fair answer to those questions is no.
          You have been extraordinarily patient with me
     all during this case.  And I do want you to
     understand that we appreciate and respect what you
     have done here.  Ladies and gentlemen, thank you 1
