          MR. WICHMANN:  Thank you, Judge.
          The purposes -- or the purpose for punitive
     damages is twofold.  It's to punish and to deter.
     To punish Reynolds for the harm that they did to
     Beverly and to Harry Schlenther and to deter them
     from this conduct in the future.
          Now, if you go under the dictionary and look
     company man, there you are going to see him.  He
     just came down here.  That's the epitome of a 2885 company man who sat there and told you they are a
     changed company today.
          Does anybody seriously believe that?
          He said Oh-ho?  Additives to increase
     addiction?  No.
          Well, we heard three weeks of that.  We saw
     the list of additives.  We went through this whole
     thing.  But no.  He sat here with a straight face
     and looked at you and said, No, Reynolds doesn't
     put any additives in their cigarettes.
          Baron, could you put up the slide, please?
          Well, hello.  Let's don't go back and talk
     about the 1980s and 1970s, let's talk about today.
     The cigarette brand that Beverly Schlenther smoked
     up at the top.  Kool.  This is off the website
     today.
          What do we have?  Diammonium phosphate.
     Causes cancer.  We heard that.
          What's the next one?  Ammonium hydroxide.  The
     same ingredients in cigarettes that you heard were
     back in cigarettes in the late sixties that Beverly
     smoked.  They haven't changed.  They haven't gotten
     the message.
          Well, he was asked, on your website that he
     was touting, your addicted smoker customers, are 2886 there any tips on the website on how to quit
     smoking?
          Well, the company man told you, No, no.  We
     tell them go see their doctor.
          What did we hear for three weeks in this
     courtroom from Reynolds?  You don't need a doctor
     to tell you if you are addicted.  Use your own
     common sense.
          And guess what?  They didn't bring a single
     doctor in here in the first phase.  Now we found
     out that they have changed.  In 2012, you go on the
     website they say, Oh, no.  Don't come to us if you
     get addicted to our products that cause death and
     disease.  Go see your doctor for help.  We don't
     have any money in the budget for that.
          Remember the train that they were all talking
     about?  The train.  She got on the train all by
     herself.  Well, Reynolds wants their customers to
     get on the train because their cigarettes still
     contain nicotine.  The point is they have no way to
     get off the train once they are on it.  That's the
     way it was back in the sixties, seventies,
     eighties, nineties, and that's the way it is today.
     Why?  Because the more people that smoke their
     product, the greater the profits to the company. 2887      And that's what this is all about, ladies and
     gentlemen.  And that's why you have to punish them,
     because the only thing that makes a difference to
     this company is the pocketbook, their profits.  And
     that's what this phase is about.
          The company man stood up and told you, Yeah,
     well, the Surgeon General said in 2012, 443,000
     Americans die from cigarette-related diseases.  But
     guess what?  There's new figures out there.
          And he was all ready to take credit.  He's all
     ready to take credit for less Americans dying.
     Well, he didn't tell you less Americans are
     smoking.  The consumption has dropped.  We're
     finally getting the message, no thanks to them.
     They blocked the message year after year after year
     after year, but finally Americans are getting the
     message, and less Americans are dying.  And the
     company man, he's all ready to take credit for
     that.
          What percentage, what percentage of the
     Reynolds total budget goes to research and
     development?  Well, I read the stipulation.  It was
     $7 thousand million was the net worth.  Simple
     language, that is a $7 billion company.  Out of a
     $7 billion company, the company man told you, $80 2888 million is in the budget for research and
     development.
          Now, try to figure out what percentage that is
     of the net worth of the company.  My calculator
     doesn't go that small.  But they are a changed
     company.  A changed company.
          Changed company.  Told you.  Not Reynolds.  We
     don't market to teenage girls.
          I said what, What?  2007?  Your Camel No. 9
     ads.  Where were they?  They were in Glamor
     magazine, right?
          Oh, yeah.  That's right.  He said sure.
          I said, Cosmopolitan?
          Oh, yeah.  Right.  That's true too, he said.
          And what was the other one?  Vogue.
          He said, Yeah, we did it in 2007, but teenage
     girls don't read those magazines.
          Hello.  Hello.  I held up to him and I asked
     him all about the pediatrics article that you had
     heard about before, the American Academy of
     Pediatrics, dedicated to the health of all American
     children.  What was their finding in 2007?
     Credible evidence exists that the Camel No. 9
     cigarette advertising campaign has targeted
     underaged girls. 2889      Somebody has to tell them to stop.  Somebody
     has to give them the message.
          Now the company man stood up and told you, Aw,
     the old Reynolds is gone, the new Reynolds is here.
          I said, Yeah.  Well, where were you in 1980,
     pal?
          Well, I was working for the company as
     chemist.
          Oh?
          Ask yourselves, why didn't he go down the hall
     and knock on the door of the boss and say, You know
     what?  We've got a product that we are selling here
     that's addictive, and it's causing disease.  We've
     got to do something about it.
          No, no.  The opinions just evolved over time
     from Reynolds.  And all of a sudden there was this
     thunderbolt and this magic study that in 1999 and
     2000 we changed our --
          Well, that is the Minnesota case, folks.
     That's what it took.  That's what it took finally
     to get them to tell the truth.
          Now, it's the same old company if we don't
     send them the message.  And the only message that
     they are going to receive and listen to is they
     need to be financially punished. 2890      Now, we could sit here and we could say they
     came up with $80,000,000 for research and
     development, and that's such an outrageous number,
     award that.
          No, no, no.  Here is -- here is our,
     suggestion.  Reynolds, we read the stipulation.  In
     simple English, we had to read it in this millions
     that -- I couldn't figure it out.  Simple English,
     the company's value is $7 billion.
          Let me get the stipulation out to make sure
     that I don't make a mistake.
          Their net income in 2011 was 1.342 billion
     dollars.  By my math, that breaks down to income
     that Reynolds makes of $3.6 million a day.  Every
     day we're sitting here, the company is making $3.6
     million.  Go back and check the math maybe your
     calculator is better than mine.  But seven days of
     that amounts to about 25 million.
          We're suggesting to you, don't go over that.
     Don't go over that.  Even though it's a $7 billion
     company, we think that if you all send a message in
     that range, no more than $25 million, we think that
     hopefully that message will deter them from this
     outrageous conduct that they continue to engage in.
          And I would like to call your attention to 2891 page 488, chapter 5, of the 2012 Surgeon General's
     report.
          In 2006, cigarette companies spent an
     estimated 28.9 percent of their revenues, net, net,
     after state and federal cigarette excise taxes on
     their marketing efforts up somewhat from an
     estimated 25 percent in 2003.
          So, folks, they are spending more today on
     marketing this product that causes addiction and
     death than they are in research and development and
     trying to find a safer cigarette that, by the way,
     the company man came down here and told you doesn't
     exist.  We can't -- it just doesn't exist.
          Now, the purpose of this phase is to focus on
     the harm to Beverly and to Harry, but also to deter
     this company from doing this again.  They are not
     changed.  They are doing the same thing.
          Remember?  Remember?  Remember?  Replacements
     smokers.  Sending letters out to the kids.  They
     lured her when she was young, and she got addicted
     and died.  And they need to be punished for that,
     and they need to be deterred so that they don't do
     this again.
          Thank you folks.
          THE COURT:  Thank you, Mr. Wichmann. 2909 for your attention.
          THE COURT:  Thank you, Mr. Baringer.
          Is there any rebuttal, plaintiffs?
          MR. WICHMANN:  Very brief, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Wichmann, you may proceed.
          MR. WICHMANN:  Let me answer his question for
     you.
          In 2012, the Surgeon General's report back
     there in evidence, page 164.  This finding is
     consistent with the idea that tobacco companies are
     successfully targeting young people in advertising
     and promotional efforts to attract new smokers.
          What will punitive damages in this case
     accomplish?  It will send them a message so the
     so-called socially responsible company stops,
     stops, doing what the United States Surgeon General
     says they are doing in 2012.
          Page 155 of that very same 2012 Surgeon
     General's report, quote:  It is noteworthy that the
     tobacco -- that the tobacco industry has
     diversified its portfolio in novel ways in recent
     years and now offers a variety of flavored and
     emerging tobacco products that appeal to youth.
          Socially responsible company?  What will
     punitive damages accomplish? 2910      Ronald Reagan used to say, Here they go again.
     Well, he talked about Eclipse and Premier as being
     their less dangerous brands.  I'm not going to hold
     it up again gave you the page and line number from
     the 2010 Surgeon General report earlier that said
     that Eclipse and Premier both were tobacco nicotine
     delivery devices, and they were no safer than
     conventional cigarettes, and that the smoke caused
     cancer just like conventional cigarettes and they
     fought it.  Okay?
          So this is their great big effort.  This is
     their answer to the problem while they continue to
     market their product to teenagers in America in
     2012, folks.
          He forgot all about Beverly.  He forgot all
     about Harry.  I didn't hear a single word about
     them.  All I heard about was Reynolds.  Don't
     forgot about the harm that they initially inflicted
     on Beverly and Harry, because part of this is also
     to punish Reynolds for that.  He says they're a
     changed company.  But you must also punish them for
     what they did to Beverly and Harry.
          It's been a long, long trial, and I think you
     can see how much your deliberations meant to us
     yesterday.  Please, this a simple, one-line answer. 2911 And I know it has to do with money.  And it's an
     uncomfortable -- it's an uncomfortable issue for a
     lot of people.  But it is to send a message to a
     company that, despite what you heard today,
     according to the Surgeon General, still doesn't get
     it.
          So please, folks, consider that, the harm to
     the Schlenthers, in sending a message to the
     company to stop with the youth of America, Stop.
     Enough already.
          Thank you very much.
