MR. RAINER: Thank you, Your Honor. And I
would like to start by thanking all of you for giving up so much of your lives to listen to this for weeks now. I know I speak for everyone involved in the case, obviously, certainly Mr. Sermons and his family in thanking you for your service and for being willing to do that civic duty which you have so generously undertaken here.
I just want to, again, I want to thank you on behalf of myself as well and as well as the others who have been working on the case.
As His Honor said, I have a chance now to give an argument to try to put together from the perspective of the plaintiff all of the evidence that you have been hearing. And to, frankly, try to persuade you to enter a verdict for the plaintiff.
I would like to begin with a topic we talked about at the beginning of the trial, which is, responsibility. And you heard yesterday in connection with the examination of Dr. Ticknor, you may remember him saying something like, Ms. Sermons was somebody who played by the rules. Ms. Sermons was somebody who was responsible.
I wonder if we could put up the first slide.
All right. Thank you.
So there she is. Ms. Sermons, Myra Sermons,
was someone who took on and fulfilled her responsibilities, beginning when she was 18 she, I guess not too long thereafter was a mother of two children, spent most of the next 20 plus years taking care of them and particularly helping Michael's younger brother to get through high school and get to a point in his life where he could have a job.
After that -- that's Rusty and as you recall, after her sons were grown she took on to be a small business person. She had, as you heard, you know, from half a dozen to a dozen employees whom she was responsible for. She continued, of course, to be a wife, a mother, and to be responsible for her family, her children, grandchildren. And in this case, the plaintiff has said, and I think as his mother would, that she bears some responsibility for what happened to her.
Now, I say that, again, in the spirit of a person who as we expect people to do in this country, takes responsibility. And I say that in connection with two claims, two of the claims that we brought. A claim for negligence and a claim for strict liability. And we just went through some of these things are and what you're going to be asked
to decide about those things and as to those claims, the plaintiff acknowledges that Ms. Sermons bears some measure of responsibility. On the other hand, the defendants, defendants in this case, Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds, are denying any responsibility for what happened to Myra Sermons.
These are two substantial tobacco companies, as you heard, Philip Morris as it grew it took over one of its competitors, Benson & Hedges. R. J.
Reynolds, as it grew, it took over American Tobacco Company, actually it took over Brown & Williamson, which had taken over American Tobacco Company. And what's happening here is that even though they made a product, which was deadly that caused untold numbers of people to get disease, including lung cancer and emphysema, they denied that they have any responsibility for Ms. Sermons' injuries.
Now, I would like to talk a little bit about why we believe they have responsibility. And I would like to begin by talking about the time period when Myra Sermons first began to smoke. And you've heard evidence that it was about 1950. She was just 18 years old. She had gotten married to her high school sweetheart, Gerald Sermons, two years older.
She had been -- you remember this. She had
been a cheerleader, he had been a football star in high school. They got married at a time when athletes, when people were -- when it was acceptable, when smoking was normal. When role models were seen very publicly and were themselves smoking and very -- some cases promoting smoking.
At that point in time people smoked everywhere. We talked a little bit about people were smoking in hospitals. They were smoking in airplanes. People were smoking in all social settings. People smoked, as I said, doctor's offices, doctors smoked. We talked about -- we've heard evidence about percentage of -- majority of doctors smoked. This was obviously a different era from the one that we're in.
It was also an era in which the tobacco companies, including these two companies, that are the defendants here, were spending very large amounts of money advertising their products. They were, and we'll come back to that graph that we looked at showing how the steady increase in the number of people smoking.
They were building their customer base. And they were building their customer base with young people just like Ms. Sermons. You've seen some of
these ads. There were themes that were designed to appeal to young people, you see some of the models -- we've seen some of these ads. We've also seen the internal records of the tobacco companies talking about their effort to sell to young people.
It was not a coincidence. It was a very deliberate marketing campaign that was designed to, for example -- and these notice showed high school students, 56 percent, 58 percent, 62 percent, 64 percent of the classes, junior and senior high school classes were smoking.
Forgive me for a minute. I haven't been pointing out to you something that I think it's going to be important when you go back in your deliberations. You're going to get the exhibits that have been introduced in evidence. I'm sorry. Which of the buttons is the -- this?
Okay. For example, this PTO4014, PT03570, they're exhibit numbers. And you're going to get binders that contain these documents so that if you think it's important to your deliberations, you can actually look at some of these original records that we told you at the beginning of the case we were going to show you the internal records of the company and you'll get to see, you know, things like
this study where they were very -- where the company's basically saying they wanted to market to young people internal memos that they didn't expect we would be -- any of us would be seeing.
And so you'll get those when you go back there and, you know, obviously you'll be able to see for yourself exactly what it says. You won't necessarily be limited to, you know, how I want to summarize it. You'll be able to evaluate it for yourself.
So, the point I was trying to make is, this was a very deliberate, conscious designed effort to sell cigarettes to young people. The documents talk about ages 14 to 24. Ms. Sermons was 18. And as we said, the ads were designed to appeal to young people. We picked out one of these, originally it's a Camel ad but I thought you would be interested to think about the comparison, think of it as a Pall Mall ad and think about who it was designed to reach. They were targeting Myra Sermons. And she responded. She became a Pall Mall smoker.
You will recall at the very -- towards the beginning of the testimony we heard a videotape from James Sermons, which is Gerold Sermons' younger brother, who testified in a -- one of those video
tapes. I think it was one of the first videotapes that you saw.
And he told you -- he was asked, when did she start smoking? He said after high school. He was asked, do you know what she smoked? He said, she smoked Pall Mall for 40 years. That was his testimony.
And you've also heard testimony from others about -- including Michael and others about her smoking Pall Mall. And she became the -- she became that young smoker that we were seeing in the ads.
She smoked -MR. WALKER: Objection, Your Honor. I object to the continuing display -- it's taken down, the Pall Mall ad. It doesn't exist.
THE COURT: It's overruled. Continue.
MR. RAINER: Okay. She became the -- she became a person who smoked in the house, smoked at the beach, smoked by the Christmas tree. She was, I think you'll agree, the picture of what was being promoted to young people at the time.
She continued as a young adult, as a mother of growing children, throughout the fifties, the sixties, into the seventies to be a two to three pack a day smoker.
She went to work, as we've discussed, continued -- she smoked at work. She smoked for fun. She smoked on vacation. She smoked visiting her sister. She smoked at the Easter egg hunt. She smoked all the time. She smoked when she got up in the morning, before she had her coffee, while she had her coffee, after she had her coffee, all morning before lunch, after lunch, all afternoon, before dinner, after dinner, before bed.
You heard Dr. Ticknor. She enjoyed a cigarette with coffee, as though that was all she did. No.
She smoked all the time. I think as you review the testimony that you heard, I think you'll find that's what happened.
Now, this is, again, in her home, later in life. And sadly, she still smoked after she had lung cancer. She still smoked after she -- you could say got a second chance. And she was asked, why? Why are you still smoking? She said, I can't quit. I'm addicted.
MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor. Objection, Your Honor, and a motion.
THE COURT: Sustained. All right? Again, the argument you just heard about the references to a statement that I'm still addicted was not evidence
and should not be considered as evidence. It was not placed before you as evidence, all right? And it's simply a statement by counsel and, again, which is not to be considered by you as evidence.
Continue.
MR. RAINER: Forgive me. I shouldn't have said that. You may consider her statement I can't quit and evaluate it whether you believe from the evidence whether she was addicted. Because that is indeed the question that you need to decide.
So, first question you have to answer: Was Myra Sermons addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and/or emphysema?
As you go about deciding this question, obviously I ask you to consider some of the history I was just going over. And I would also ask you not to be diverted by other questions. Whether she's addicted, as you heard from two expert witnesses, turns on the well-established variety of factors which I'm going to go through and which you've heard already, you've heard a lot of testimony about.
One of the -- so, you see here, we heard you not -- in deciding that question, not to focus on some other things that you may be asked to consider.
This is not a question of what brand she used. This first question about whether she was addicted is a question of whether she was addicted. Not which brand she used. The question of whether she was addicted -MR. REILLY: Your Honor, I have to object to this. It's a mischaracterization and I object to it. The instruction reference to choice is definitely -- it's in the parameter of your instruction. Your instruction is your instruction.
THE COURT: I think this is fair argument, all right? Which obviously you can argue to the contrary. So it's overruled.
MR. RAINER: Whether she knew about the dangers is a question that you will be asked to evaluate.
But that's not the question of whether she was addicted. Whether she was able to quit, okay, may be closer. Could she? Was she addicted?
You did hear from Dr. Ticknor, the defendants' own expert, that there's a lot of different things that aren't at issue with addiction. He kept talking about -- well, let me just say. He did not say that addiction, that the precise issue of addiction is choice. He did say -- I will say he did use the word motivation.
And as we get into these factors I would like you to pay attention to whether the word motivation appears in these factors which he asked you to consider. And I respectfully submit you are going to find that it's not there.
So we would ask you in deciding the question of addiction to consider what you heard from witnesses, what you heard about Ms. Sermons' conduct, the package of facts about whether she was addicted and not be diverted to other issues.
So addiction is a legal cause of disease if it -- I think you're going to hear Mr. Reilly constantly say -MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. RAINER: I ask that you focus on whether it was a legal cause of Ms. Sermons' disease. And you have and will get an instruction that it's a legal cause of the disease if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing the disease so that it can be reasonably said that but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the disease would not have occurred.
And you will be considering, I submit, in
deciding whether it substantially contributes, did addiction play an important role.
And I would like you to think as you're answering that question, if she was not addicted to nicotine, would she have smoked two to three packs per day for over -- I'm sorry, this says over 45 years. I think it should be over 40 years, and even after she developed lung cancer and emphysema?
You will also and have heard an instruction in order to be regarded as a legal cause addiction need not be the only cause. You may think it was important in testimony, whether there was testimony about other things that might have influenced her smoking besides addiction. But it can be a legal cause of disease.
Addiction, even though it operates together with other factors in her life, as long as the addiction contributes substantially to her getting sick.
Now, very important. The defendants have known for decades that nicotine was keeping smokers smoking. Some of these internal documents that I talked about, and you see the numbers here, PT 3615, PT 2044, PT0 4791. What they were saying internally about this.
In designing for the typical smoker -- I'm looking at the second one. "For the typical smoker nicotine satisfaction is the dominant desire. In designing any cigarette product a dominant speculation should be nicotine delivery."
"Internal memo. Tobacco products contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug, with a variety of physiological effects. Our industry is based upon design and manufacturer and sale of attractive doses of nicotine."
This is what the defendants were saying.
It's a drug.
"Nicotine addiction is the biggest factor, is, according to their records. That's what drove their market. We cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. If the exit gate from our market should suddenly open we could be out of business overnight."
This is what they think about the importance of addiction.
Okay. What is it? What is addiction?
"Chronic relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive drug seeking use despite harmful consequences."
What are some of the facts? I've mentioned some of them. I'm going to mention them again and I'm going to go through the chart. Smoked first thing in the morning. Smoked two to three packs a day. Smoked around her children.
If she's smoking two to three packs a day she was getting over 400 doses of nicotine every day.
She smoked everywhere. She smoked in her car. She smoked at work. She smoked all the time. She chain smoked. She switched to filtered cigarettes because she thought that might help her. She tried to quit.
She tried a nicotine patch. She tried nicotine gum.
She tried lollipops. She tried and tried and tried to quit smoking. And yet she still smoked after she got sick.
All right. Time to talk about this list.
THE COURT: Counsel may move if they need to.
MR. REILLY: Thank you, Your Honor.
MR. RAINER: All right. You heard from two experts about these factors. As I said, as you are looking in the factors, I hope you will take note that Dr. Ticknor's word motivation, as though he wanted to add a factor. He also testified, you may recall, words to the effect of, well, just because you have withdrawal symptoms doesn't mean you're
addicted. And yet, withdrawal is one of the factors. Factor number 11.
He said just because you have cravings doesn't mean you are addicted. And yet, craving is one of the factors. So I'm not sure what he was talking about. I'm not sure what he was talking about. And I would ask you to consider when he -- after he testifies at length about the DSM-5, I asked him, do you think this is an authoritative treatise and he said, well, not so sure. So, I'm not sure exactly what you should take from Dr. Ticknor's testimony. Although I will point out one thing. When he started to go through this list, he said -- he was asked, was the evidence regarding her clear and unequivocal smoking history clear and unequivocal? He said, no, it wasn't.
Dr. Ticknor found that Ms. Sermons had five factors. Those were these checkmarks over here on the left, 2, 3, 4, 9, and 10. He also said, if you get six, you're addicted. So you may recall I asked him about some of those other factors. And so the middle checkmarks that you see here, the ones in the middle, those are the ones that Dr. Warner found.
And obviously she found many more than Dr. Ticknor. But really, with evidence that is equivocal, is
there really much of a difference between five and six? I mean, he's asking you to find she was not addicted because she had five even after we went over the fact that there was evidence that could be considered about her spacing out her cigarettes, whether her smoking amount was more than intended or over a longer period than intended. He was asked about whether it caused social and interpersonal problems because she continued to smoke. And we talked about how she was getting into conflict with her son and daughter-in-law. She was hiding. She was crying to her niece.
I ask you to decide. Apply your common sense.
Did she have social conflict over -- as a result of being addicted with members of her family? I respectfully think you can easily find that the answer to that is yes. And once you find factor 6 or factor 7, there are six factors.
Respectfully, I think you can consider the testimony of Dr. Warner. If you consider the factors that she checked off, there's really not much question. Myra Sermons was addicted.
We also talked, you may recall, about another test, the Fagerstrom test which you may have heard from the Philip Morris witness, Mr. Lipowicz.
Philip Morris has used, under the Fagerstrom test, as Dr. Warner explained, she got points for how much she smoked.
Do you all think -- I ask you to consider in your deliberations, should you take into account whether she smoked two to three packs a day in evaluating whether she was addicted? Does that make sense to you? Should you take into account, what was the first thing she did in the morning when she got up? What's the very first thing she did?
Should you take that into account in deciding whether she was addicted? Well, Dr. Warner certainly thought so. And I ask you to find that is true.
Do you find it difficult to refrain from smoking in places where it is forbidden? Well, as you heard, that tended to be more of an issue for her later in her life when there began to be more restaurants and places where you couldn't go, but it was also true that she wasn't going to indoor movies. If she was going to the movies she would go to a drive-in because she could smoke outside.
There was also the question, number 6, do you smoke even if you are so ill that you are in bed most of the day? Unfortunately, and you heard the
testimony of the pastor, even when she was very, very sick, he asked her, you know, are you still smoking? And she said, I'm struggling, struggling with that. Pray for me. This is a woman who was truly, no question, she was so ill that she was in bed most of the day.
Ladies and gentlemen, I don't think you should have any trouble finding this factor, finding that Ms. Sermons was addicted. I mean, certainly if you apply the test, you know, the -- I mean, the technical scientific test, she certainly was -- had a high level of dependence.
But I ask you just to apply your common sense and what you heard of the facts in deciding that question because I think if you do, you're not going to have any trouble finding she was addicted.
So, we've talked about how addiction is a legal cause. If it directly in natural sequence of -- I'm not doing this right -- in the natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing disease. All right. So let's talk about what this addiction to cigarettes did to her.
It caused her to continue to smoke and her continuing to smoke caused her to get lung cancer.
There was no question, you didn't hear evidence from anyone, disputing smoking causes lung cancer. You didn't hear any testimony that smoking did not cause Ms. Sermons' lung cancer. You heard testimony that smoking did cause Ms. Sermons' lung cancer. You heard it from Dr. Strauss, you heard it from Dr. Rogers, who was her treating oncologist at the Mayo Clinic. You saw her testimony on videotape.
MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor. There was no Dr. Rogers in this case.
MR. RAINER: Dr. Johnson.
THE COURT: It's sustained.
MR. RAINER: Dr. Johnson. Thank you very much. Sorry. Got a name wrong. I've done that throughout.
What this slide is asking you to pay attention to was some of the evidence you heard about the fact that there are carcinogens in cigarettes. And that they are known, again, as you heard, to cause the development of lung cancer.
You saw the slides. I know we had that rather long video deposition with Dr. Burns. He had the slides which showed the progression of how the -how lung cancer develops in the lungs from the constant overtime exposure to the toxins in
cigarette smoke. And he talked about how the first cilia at the top of the lungs would be worn away and then little by little the cells within the lungs would become malformed. And eventually you would get to the point where there was cancer growing in those cells.
This is a list of some of the carcinogens found in cigarette smoke. And a lot of these ingredients were found, determined by Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds. They knew that these things were in the products that they were selling. It's in their internal memos which you are going to get when you go back to deliberate.
So, consider, she's addicted to nicotine.
She's smoking two to three packs a day, which is something like 20,000 -- over 20,000 cigarettes a year, or a million cigarettes over 40 years. If you can consider how many puffs that is, ten puffs per cigarette, 10 million puffs of those toxins over 40 years.
Did smoking cause Ms. Sermons' lung cancer?
Yes.
This was the diagnosis from 1990. Again, you'll get this record when you go back to deliberate. It's among the medical records. It's
the record -- one of the remaining records of her diagnosis and you see that, December of 1990, a non-small cell carcinoma diagnosed from an evaluation of tissue from her lungs. Something like those pictures you were looking at.
And you heard that what happened as a result of that, is, they did a procedure and fortunately did it right away and they took out this left upper lobe of her lung. So somebody asked, well, is that lobe bigger than the other lobes? And I think Dr. Strauss explained, well, no, it's not necessarily bigger. It is more than 20 percent of the heart because this lobe is smaller. So she was losing, let's call it, 22 percent of her lungs as a result of lung cancer.
And you heard testimony from Dr. Strauss, what does that mean? It means that they made a huge incision, they -- she was, you know, under the knife for hours. They actually cut out this portion of her lung. She was in the hospital for several days, at least. She had a recuperation period which, as you heard, is expected to be three to six months.
As you heard in her case, it was almost that. She has residual pain, as Dr. Strauss explained. What is the consequence of having this surgery? Well, of
course you're going to have pain from being cut open and it is normal to have ongoing pain in breathing as you're learning to breathe with a now reduced pair of lungs.
This record from Dr. Johnson was a later in time record but it simply memorialized that she was initially diagnosed with non-small cell lung carcinoma in December 1990 following a screening chest x-ray and underwent a left upper lobectomy.
She received no post-operative radiation or chemotherapy.
Well, as Dr. Strauss explained to you at that time, the procedure for adjutant chemotherapy had not actually -- was not actually conventionally being applied to lung cancer that, as he told you, as a result of some research he was involved with and others, that has become a procedure. But at the time it was not. So we can't necessarily deduce anything from the fact that she received no post-operative radiation or chemotherapy, but it certainly was the hope at the time when she had her lung cancer surgery that she would be able to recover and that the cancer would not come back.
Now, you heard from at least one witness, maybe more, that her odds of recovery, assuming, and we
don't know this, but assuming that it was the least extensive kind of tumor that one could have, the stage 1-A, assuming that, she still had a 20 to 30 percent chance that the cancer would come back.
And you heard testimony from Susan Sermons that Ms. Sermons was kind of worried about that. She was expected to go for quarterly screenings and every time she went, I'm worried the cancer is going to come back. She was actually worried even the day when they all went to the hospital to celebrate Christmas with her.
You know, people -- I know that there was testimony about, you know, giving her good news, good news they had, you know, successfully removed the lobe of her lung, but nobody, and especially not Myra Sermons, knew whether that was going to come back.
All right. You also see in the record here that during 1994, and there's more than one date relevant to this, she noticed progressive worsening of her breathing and had evaluation for possible treatment for emphysema.
Well, you probably, and when you look at this record, which appears in the medical records that you will get, on page 85, page 86, you will see the
record of Dr. Johnson in which she talks about it was basically according to the patient history and the information they gathered at the time at Mayo, somewhere between the time that Ms. Sermons was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1990 and 1994, that there was a formal diagnosis of emphysema.
Unfortunately we don't have the actual record of when she was diagnosed. But we know she had emphysema. And you saw and heard testimony from several witnesses, one of them was the one where Mr. Satin was playing the role of Dr. Krowka, a doctor from Mayo Clinic, who evaluated her and looked at her Pulmonary Function Test, looked at a test where she was required to do -- climb stairs and decide whether to test the extent of her ability to breathe, to gauge the ability of her ability to recover from exercise, they also did, as you may recall, it was a chest x-ray which showed what two of the witnesses referred to and corrected my pronunciation of emphysematous changes in the lung, holes in the lung.
For some reason Dr. Frazier didn't want to call it holes. I don't know what -- Dr. Krowka called it holes. Dr. Rosenbaum called it holes. We're talking about holes in the lungs that develop as a
result of, again, the assault on the lungs from years of smoking.
And, again, not much question that Ms. Sermons' emphysema was caused by smoking. Dr. Johnson, when asked, she said, emphysema causes -- I mean, smoking causes emphysema. Dr. Krowka said he thought it was reasonable to assign responsibility for her lung cancer, for her emphysema, to smoking. And Dr. Rosenbaum who came in here and testified to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, smoking caused Ms. Sermons' emphysema.
Again, I respectfully submit there's really not much question about that.
Now, so, on this question on the verdict form, did addiction to nicotine in cigarettes cause Myra Sermons' lung cancer and emphysema? Absolutely.
I put up here a photo image of Dr. Lipowicz who -- a designated witness of Philip Morris, who told you on that videotape, addiction to smoking leads to continued smoking. The addiction to nicotine in cigarettes leads to continued smoking, leads to disease.
And I think you may recall from the early presentation we had with Dr. Proctor that the Surgeon General of the United States has made
completely clear that the addiction to the nicotine in cigarettes causes disease including lung cancer.
And I guess we can queue this up. Everett Koop.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
Two major reports on smoking. One on the dangers of secondhand smoke, the other on nicotine addiction. The tobacco industry disputes both reports as more political than scientific.
We have been told so frequently by the cigarette industry that smoking is a matter of free choice. You start when you want and you quit when you want but anybody who's ever smoked knows that is not true.
I think the studies in all of the world, in every country and every culture, the younger you start, the greater the addiction and the more difficult it is to quit.
You said that you considered tobacco as addictive as cocaine or heroin. Isn't that an over statement?
No. I think the evidence is very clear if you understand what we're talking about. Addiction is a
specific physiologic problem. And the manner in which you become addicted to nicotine is exactly the same manner in which you become addicted to cocaine or to heroin. And that even after you have quit and you think you're clean, that there's a tremendous tendency to relapse.
There is no such thing as a safe cigarette.
There's no such thing as a quality death.
(Videotape ends.)
MR. RAINER: So, was Myra Sermons addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? And if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and/or emphysema? Yes.
Okay. If you find that she is a member of the class, then as His Honor explained to you Engle findings, Finding 1, cigarettes cause lung cancer and emphysema. Finding 2, cigarettes are addictive. Finding 3, Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. Finding 4, Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or
both. Finding 5, Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds entered into an agreement with Brown & Williamson Tobacco Company, American Tobacco Company, Lorillard Tobacco Company, Lorillard, Inc., Liggett Group,
Brook Group, the Council for Tobacco Research and the Tobacco Institute to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature or both with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. Finding 6, Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds were negligent.
All right. You're going to have to decide whether cigarettes, because of addiction to each of the defendant's cigarettes was a legal cause of Ms. Sermons' lung cancer and/or emphysema.
What evidence do you have about that? Well, I think I mentioned already James Sermons, Myra Sermons' brother-in-law, testified she smoked Pall Mall for 40 years. And you heard testimony that in the later years Pall Mall was more like an occasional thing for her. I think you heard Susan Sermons testify she would sometimes take a Pall Mall from her husband, Gerald. You also heard testimony from Michael that as long as he could remember there were always Pall Mall cigarettes in that drawer in
the house where they kept their cigarettes.
You also heard testimony about what did the pack look like? There were two kinds of packs.
Michael told you there was a red pack and that's the same red pack that we've seen over and over in the ads, and there was also a gold pack which was the filter tip pack. And there's evidence that she switched to filters.
And we're going to talk about that a little more but there's no question that Myra Sermons smoked Pall Mall cigarettes for decades. There's no question either that she smoked Benson & Hedges cigarettes. You heard testimony, same brother-in-law, James Sermons, in her later years, smoked Benson & Hedges. Mike, how long do you remember seeing these Benson & Hedges packs, the teal colored Benson & Hedges packs in that drawer in the house? About 20 years. Not exactly but about 20 years.
You heard testimony from Hugh Butler she smoked Benson & Hedges. You heard testimony from, I believe, almost every witness that had a memory about her brands remembered Benson & Hedges.
So as you consider, did addiction to the defendant's products cause Myra Sermons' lung cancer
or emphysema, I ask you to consider a number of things. First of all, the number of years she smoked those cigarettes. As you heard from Dr. Burns, there's an ongoing assault on the lungs.
More and more times that the cells of the lungs are being exposed to toxins, the more it causes damage. You have testimony that Myra Sermons continued to smoke Pall Malls up until the end of her life so, yes, it's true she was smoking Pall Malls when she was young. It's also true she was continuing to smoke them when she was older right up to and past the time she had her lung cancer.
So I respectfully submit there's no question that smoking Pall Malls, the addiction to cigarettes, the addiction to Pall Mall cigarettes caused Myra Sermons to have disease including lung cancer and emphysema.
Same with Benson & Hedges. Really no question that she smoked Benson & Hedges for years, including, at the time and after the time she was diagnosed with lung cancer. So are both defendants liable? Absolutely.
Fraud by concealment, agreement to commit fraud by concealment. Okay. So, I won't read -- you'll have this question to decide. Did she rely in any
way on statements that the defendants omitted material information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature? And did they form an agreement, conspiracy to try to keep information to omit material information?
Okay. Again, frame of reference. Both defendants were selling cigarettes for years, promoting them, aggressively promoting them to get people to buy their products from a young age so that they would be customers for life.
We saw some of the advertisements that were at the time of Myra's becoming addicted, we're going to show you just a couple of them.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
What cigarette do you smoke? You'll be interested to know the brand doctors of America picked most was Camel. Yes, according to this survey, more doctors smoke Camels than any cigarette. Do you inhale? Then you're better off smoking Philip Morris. And here's how you can prove it. Light up a Philip Morris. Don't miss the fun of smoking. Smoking is a pleasure with Pall Mall. Don't miss the fun of smoking. Don't miss the fun
of smoking. Mildness is a pleasure with Pall Mall.
And Pall Malls' natural filter, greater lengths, fine tobaccos filters the smoke and makes it mild. Winston tastes good like a cigarette should. You get a lot to life with a Marlboro filtered. Fred, okay, how's about taking a nap? I got a better idea. Let's take a Winston break. That's it.
Winston is the one filter cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. Winston's got that filter blend. Yeah, Fred.
(Videotape ends.)
MR. RAINER: So, promoting their cigarettes and ensuring they can continue to do that. You heard, I know, at perhaps too great a length, from Dr.
Proctor about the enterprise. And we talked about -- Dr. Proctor talked about how the executives from the tobacco company met at the Plaza Hotel in 1953 to figure out what were they going to do when scientific studies were beginning to be published that were linking cigarette smoking to lung cancer. What were they going to do to address the concerns people had about that?
On this side we've paired the Plaza Hotel,
1953,	with testimony that you saw and will see again shortly in 1994. And we asked you to find that for
over 40 years there was a very conscious, very deliberate effort to conceal the dangers and addictiveness of smoking.
You saw the memo that was exchanged about how this meeting was going to be set up and how much they viewed the risk from this new science that was coming out.
You saw the statement that they published in newspapers around the country saying there's no proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer. No proof, they said. At the time of those studies, that caused them to get together to meet for coming out. They say, we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration or business. And they pledge that they're going to aid in research. They establish the Tobacco Industry Research Council. They tell the world we are going to make a legitimate effort to find out whether cigarettes are the cause of cancer and they did exactly the opposite.
What they actually did was, create a campaign to deny at every opportunity and every way they knew how that cigarettes were dangerous or addictive.
And though they said we will cooperate with public
health authorities, they fought the public health authorities. They said -- they told -- they pledged that if they found out that there were things in their products that would -- were causing disease, they would do something about it right away.
And as I said, they established this committee which is really, as you saw from the later records, a front. A front organization to protect their profits. They absolutely knew that cigarettes cause lung cancer. How do we know that? Well, when their records, when the records, the internal records of the tobacco companies came out, there was, among other things, a record which -- it's this PT number. This one up here. 3289.
If there's one record that you look at when you go back there, that I ask you to look at, 3289.
That's that one right up there. That's the record of a report of scientists who came from England to meet with and met with executives at the American Tobacco Company, at R. J. Reynolds, at Philip Morris. They met with the scientists and people at those companies who were studying whether smoking caused lung cancer. There was one person not from any of those companies I just mentioned who said no, and every one, the individuals we met with, believed
that smoking causes lung cancer. That's May 12,
1958. These were the internal scientific people at all those companies who knew and agreed that smoking caused lung cancer in 1958.
Other internal records, I put some of the numbers up there. Again, I hope you'll, if you have the chance to look at them, you're going to see internal records from Philip Morris, internal records from R. J. Reynolds that they never thought people would see that concluded carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke.
Another one, the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming.
So, what was going on? What was going on in the sale and consumption of cigarettes? Well, you saw this chart. Probably way too many times. But I do want to just one more time talk about how there were these dips, all right? So 1953 at the time of the Plaza Hotel meeting, there was a dip. And that was responded to with this very deliberate effort to hide what was known about smoking, people were quitting, more people were starting.
Again, 1964. There's a Surgeon General's
Report, again, people were quitting. More people are starting. Those public service ads which you recall seeing, Mr. Reilly showed you some of them, lots of public service ads, the one like the one with Larry Hagman and, again, people are quitting. Again, a vigorous response by the industry. People -- more people starting than quitting.
This quote, this holding strategy, brilliantly conceived. This is their internal memo talking about how successful they've been in keeping people smoking. They created doubt about whether there was -- they wanted to say, well, there's still a question whether cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. It's not concluded. It's still an open question.
But what they really thought was, we got to give people a crutch and a rationale to continue smoking. There's all this information out there saying smoking is bad for you, we're going to tell them something so that they feel okay about continuing to smoke. How about this? Doubt is our product. It's the best means of competing with a body of fact that exists in the mind of the general public. And it is the best -- it is the means of establishing a controversy.
So their whole game plan was that in the face of mounting and overwhelming scientific evidence, they said, oh, there's a question, there's a doubt. There's a controversy. They want to make it easy for people like Myra Sermons to keep smoking.
So this is just an example. This is something we got from the Florida Times Union. This is around the time that the Sermons are moving to Jacksonville. And this is a situation where Doctors Hammond and Horn, who were some of the scientists who were studying lung cancer, and right there, Tobacco Industry Research Committee, right on target saying, hey, hold on, this new research does nothing to -- doesn't -- really doesn't add anything. It doesn't -- the study is open to criticism as to method, selection of subjects, unsupported assumptions.
There they are. The causes of cancer are not yet known to medical science. This is how they immediately respond in being reported in the paper that Myra Sermons was reading, saying, hey, there's doubt.
Here's another one. It's from the Jacksonville Journal. This is from 1969. This is around the time that Myra Sermons is having that conversation
with Michael. May be a little bit later but right around that time when they're talking about how he shouldn't start smoking. And the question is, well, what did she understand, what did she know at that time about this well? What were they doing? What was the industry doing? They were spending $48,000 for a six-week advertising program in support of its contention that cigarette smoking is not necessarily harmful. Full page advertisements sponsored by the Tobacco Institute. Again appearing in leading newspapers on Friday. Again, raising the question, raising the question when they knew the answer.
They knew the truth.
What were they saying on national news? This is Howard Cullman who was an industry spokesman, also a member of the board of Philip Morris at the time of this interview.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
I don't believe that most people who smoke get lung cancer. We are now in an era, as you know, of moderation. We have smoking habits, which incidentally are today changing the type of cigarettes from regular cigarettes to filters. I
don't think the industry admits there are any bad elements. If there are bad elements, throughout our laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts of God, luck, we hope we may find them. And if they are found. They will be removed.
We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that. Because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
(Videotape ends.)
MR. RAINER: That is Joseph Cullman, Chairman of the Board of Philip Morris, the manufacturer of Benson & Hedges.
This is what they were putting out to people. They are in a holding strategy to defend themselves. This is the memo, PTO 2050 that I talked about where they were congratulating themselves on how brilliantly conceived and executed this strategy had been to deny the science. These are memos in which, again, they are acknowledging that excessive smoking is bad for you. They don't want people to begin to sue them. They are concerned that lawyers may one day be looking at their memos. And perhaps one day
a jury will be looking at their memos. They're talking about how they have to maintain their position through efforts, public relations efforts, the efforts of the Tobacco Institute, the Tobacco Research Committee, the Council for Tobacco Research, the subsequent name of the TIRC. They are at the same time telling people they're conducting science. They're telling people they're conducting science about smoking and health and they're actually conducting science about just about everything but that. They're also trying to change their records.
You saw some of those memos where they talked about can they get rid of certain things from their files. Can people publish studies that might be linking cigarette smoking to disease? Remember that memo? There was going to be an internal study about whether nicotine had -- there were effects of withdrawal from nicotine.
And let's take a look at it. But if the results with nicotine are similar to the ones we got with morphine and caffeine, we will bury it. This is how they went about keeping out any information, trying to internally, knowing full well their products were dangerous and addictive and at the
same time telling the world the opposite.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
Turning a significant health question into a publicity stunt is an insult to serious science.
I cannot point to anything that I would consider that caused cancer of the lung but the behavior of the disease does not support the idea of cigarettes being the causal agent.
The case is still open. The jury has not come
in.
It may not be harmful. You're not convinced.
It may be or it may not be. We don't know. Insofar as the correlation between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are concerned, no one knows. It may, it may not.
Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or
no?
It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. It has not been causally established.
There is not unanimity of opinion in the community of science on these issues. Some are convinced in one direction. Others take an opposing view. And still others say that we have no business
prejudging the scientific controversy. We need more information.
Our tobacco industry continues to earmark millions of dollars annually on an ongoing basis in unrestricted arm's length research to answer the very questions raised in the Surgeon General's Report.
Do cigarettes cause cancer?
I don't know if they do or not.
I'm not in a position to give you a does or does not answer.
The data that we have been able to see has all been statistical data that has not convinced me that smoking causes death.
We don't know what causes cancer in general right now so I think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven.
(Videotape ends.)
MR. RAINER: Here's another thing that was going on. When they saw that there were ways that people might exit from smoking, such as Nicorette, their first response was, let's try to put a lid on that. And where were people as they were making these statements?
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
I've been reading a lot about it in the paper but I don't know anyone actually who has gotten cancer because of the fact that he was a smoker. It hasn't been proved in black and white.
If they come out and say, well, you're going to get it, I'll stop then. But when they keep on saying some say you do, some say you don't, I'll just keep on.
(Videotape ends.)
MR. RAINER: So, I mean, again, you've seen this. But what were they saying about -- we just saw what the executives of the tobacco company were saying about the dangers of smoking. What did they say about addiction?
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
Let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. Let me ask you first, I would like to just go down the row whether each of you believe that nicotine is not addictive. I heard virtually all of you touch on
it. Just yes or no. Do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
Mr. Johnson?
Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction.
There is no -We'll take that as a no. Again, time is short.
I think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. We just would like to have this for the record.
I don't believe that nicotine or our products are addictive.
I believe nicotine is not addictive.
I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
And I, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive.
(Videotape ends.)
MR. RAINER: All right. So, you're going to be asked to decide, did Myra Sermons rely in any way on this -- on the statements that they were making?
Did those statements omit material information about the health effects or addictiveness of their cigarettes? Is that a hard question? You were
supposed to evaluate whether there was information that she had that was of importance to her in making her decisions about smoking.
Well, consider the effort to promote filters.
Very consistent, deliberate effort beginning after the 1953 meeting at the Plaza Hotel and carried out to extensive advertising campaigns throughout the country with the effect that the sale of filtered cigarettes went through the roof. The percentage of the market taken up by filters, and you see here from the mid-fifties through into the sixties and continuing in the seventies, takes off. The companies are telling people that these filters are better for them, they're safer.
What did, for example, the President of American Tobacco Company that made Pall Mall -- what did he say about how the company expected his customers to rely on what they were telling their customers?
What did Mr. Heimann say? You will recall that you saw the testimony played to you. You will recall Mr. Heimann saying, we spend all this money on advertising. We expect people to rely on it.
That's what they wanted. That's what they expected. They were telling people about these safer products.
You saw the Pall Mall ad where they're talking about how it was longer and how the cigarette was going to filter out by its length. You saw those ads.
And the companies were monitoring what they -people were saying. They were trying to see, did people believe what they were putting out there about filters and what they found and, again, here's a memo. PTO 1215. "Health reasons are apparently the primary reason that people are saying that they're smoking filters."
And it turns out that more women than men are in fact choosing these filters. They think it's going to be healthy for them.
What did the companies know? What did they know about filters? You'll remember we saw a memo where they're trying to design the color of the filter so that it looks like it does something when they say in the memo it doesn't.
How about this memo? This memo where they are talking about how to market to people who are concerned, who are worried about their health and they say, "the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration."
In other words, they know perfectly well the filter was not protecting people. Their internal
records, their internal science tells them they can't filter out the carcinogens in cigarettes and yet they're putting out there that this is better for them.
As we all know, the smoker who switches to a high filter cigarette ends up smoking more of it.
They talked about, from their internal musing, about how they're going to have triple, quadruple, quintuple filters but they really are just trying to keep people smoking their cigarettes.
So, you heard the testimony, two important pieces of testimony. Myra Sermons, I'm smoking filters because I think they're better for me or at least more safe for me. There was no question she shifted over to filters. Michael told you about it.
How the cigarettes in the ashtrays that had the lipstick on them went from unfiltered to filtered.
And never went back.
Myra Sermons was being told through aggressive campaigns that cigarettes, filtered cigarettes could be better for her and she bought them.
What else?
This is a memo about -- that Philip Morris put out about what to tell your kids about smoking if you're concerned about their smoking. "It's a myth.
You can't talk to me about smoking when your teen judges you because you smoke. You should explain you don't want him to use tobacco. Talk about why you started smoking. Don't be afraid to admit that you might have made a different choice had you understood then what you do now."
Just what Myra Sermons said. Just what she said. Did Myra Sermons rely on what the tobacco companies were doing?
I ask you to say yes. You can consider that they knew their product was causing harm. You can consider that they knew their products contained dozens of carcinogens. You can consider that people were and the science was beginning to show the number of people suffering from smoking related disease going into the hundreds of thousands. They were marketing their cigarettes to teenagers, to young people. They were manipulating the level of nicotine in their cigarettes to keep them -- keep people smoking. They knew that their cigarettes were addictive and they knew that filters did not make cigarettes any healthier.
How do I say these things? Well, you may recall we saw what kinds of statements were being made by the people within these companies whose
records show clearly that they knew -- what they knew about the dangers of their product. And I'm going to ask you, I know you sat through it. I'm going to ask you to sit through a little bit again of what these people, what the folks at Philip Morris were telling.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
As manufacturer of the world's biggest selling cigarette, are you concerned that the World Health Organization says that cigarettes are the cause of a worldwide epidemic of a disease that at present kills hundreds of thousands of smokers every year?
Am I concerned? I'm concerned possibly in a different way than you might think. I'm concerned that people make claims, including those against our products, without adequate knowledge. There has not been the sort of research really that would permit anyone to say that.
I think I'm a fairly reasonable human being and not in any way removed from the other members of society. I certainly wouldn't be in the business if I thought cigarettes were harmful to people. I think it's important that there be a lot of us
around who are trying to keep the research honest and open. I think the real dishonesty is telling people things that are not so.
(Videotape ends.)
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
None of the things which have been found in tobacco smoke are at concentrations which can be considered harmful.
But the components themselves can be considered harmful; can they not?
Anything can be considered harmful. Applesauce is harmful if you get too much of it.
I don't think many people are dying from applesauce.
They're not eating that much.
People are smoking a lot of cigarettes.
Well, say it this way. The people who eat applesauce die. The people who eat sugar die. The people who smoke cigarettes die. Does the fact that the people who smoke cigarettes die demonstrate that smoking is the cause? I'm not in a position to say that. I don't know what harms a cigarette smoker or what doesn't harm him. I really, honestly don't
know that. You must be trying to get me to admit that cigarette smoking is harmful. I think that if the company as a whole believed that cigarettes were really harmful, we would not be in the business.
We're a very moralistic company. I think that the management of Philip Morris is sincere in this position.
(Videotape ends.)
MR. RAINER: Fraudulent concealment?
Absolutely. Conspiracy to hide what they knew? Absolutely.
Okay. Two more topics. Apportionment and fault. I mentioned before that if you were to find connection with our claims, negligence and strict liability, that the defendants have responsibility, you will then be asked to decide how much. How much should this responsibility be shared? And that is going to be entirely up to you.
I can make an argument, and I will, about how you should go about it. But we understand that that is your call.
As you're considering it, I obviously would ask you to consider all of this evidence we've just been talking about, about what the companies understood about their products and how dangerous the products
were.
I ask you to consider, for example, the carcinogens in the products, the dangerousness of these products. I ask you to consider the increasing number of deaths going on at the time that these sales are going on. What is happening with lung cancer from -- at the same time as they're promoting this.
MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Hold on.
MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor. Harm to others.
MR. RAINER: I'm moving on, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Hold on. I'm going to overrule. Go ahead.
MR. RAINER: I ask you to consider the -- what is understood at the time that they -- what they understood about the dangers of their product as they're selling the product? I ask you to consider what ordinary people according to the Surgeon General are understanding about the dangers of the product.
As of 1990, 30 to 40 percent either did not believe that smoking increases these risks or that cessation reduces risk.
I ask you to consider their telling the public this is a free choice when there is a reality, as you heard from Surgeon General Koop, of addiction.
I ask you to consider these factors in deciding how to apportion fault.
Now, Myra Sermons smoked Philip Morris cigarettes, as we said, for 20 years. She smoked Pall Mall cigarettes for 40 years.
Now, Mr. Walker said he was going to be in the back, going third throughout the trial, but I do have to ask you to consider not where he was sitting but how much Ms. Sermons smoked, how much of those cigarettes that she was smoking all those years were Pall Mall cigarettes when you try to decide how to apportion fault.
Now, we've said Myra Sermons bears some responsibility. I said -- I put up here 10 percent.
You may think it's more. You may think it's less.
We acknowledge, I said this before, that when it comes to the claims of negligence and strict liability, Ms. Sermons had responsibility.
And we understand that your job, if you find them responsible, is to make an allocation.
All right. Now, if you find that the defendants are liable, they are responsible in some
way for Ms. Sermons' lung cancer and her emphysema, we do ask you to award damages. And damages is a subject that is up to you. It is going to be up to you. And all I can do is to make an argument about what you might consider for damages.
I ask you to consider in reaching a number how lung cancer and emphysema, how that affected Ms. Sermons' life. And we talked a lot about the fact and we acknowledged that Ms. Sermons died from colon cancer and we understand and acknowledge that and we are not asking you to award damages for her colon cancer. We weren't asking that and I'm not asking that. Plaintiff's not asking that. Certainly the defendants are not asking that.
So you are being asked -- one of the things Your Honor is asking you to do is to try to figure out if you can apportion some amount of what she was going through, what Ms. Sermons' pain and suffering and other consequences were, can you come up with a percentage? How much of it was attributable to the colon cancer and how much was attributable to her smoking related injuries, the lung cancer, and the emphysema?
And as you are doing that, I do very much want you, and I ask you specifically if you can in the
jury room to look at what Dr. Johnson wrote in May, May 24, 1996. I believe it is page 28 of the medical records. The medical records, by the way, are not long. The main set of medical records from the Mayo Clinic are only 100 pages long and this record is about page 26.
In this record Dr. Johnson is talking about what was going on with Ms. Sermons after she had that colon surgery. So this is after the colon tumor is taken out, what was going on with her. And she says, "her primary symptom at this time is her dyspnea."
And you heard dyspnea is shortness of breath.
Her primary symptom at this time is she's short of breath. And you will recall that we heard and we saw from a number of witnesses, but including the defendants' witness, Dr. Frazier, we saw this memo from Dr. Leventhal who was treating Ms. Sermons at this time. This is May 5, 1996 and he talks about what were the reasons that she had shortness of breath. And he makes a list. And he says, the number one on his list is her emphysema. That's his first number. Number 2, the previous left upper lobectomy for non-small cell carcinoma of the lung. Top two on his list, emphysema and lung -- the
removal of a part of her lung due to lung cancer.
She's got 22 percent less of her lung. He talks also about an overload that happened of fluid as a result of her recent colon surgery and he talks about the decreased vital capacity of her surgery and he talks about her surgery.
And you will remember when Dr. Frazier was here, that's defendants' expert, I said to him, can you assign a percentage to these different things?
Do you have an opinion? Can you go about differentiating amongst these things? And he said, no. I drew this little chart with him. You probably remember my wonderful hand scratching here. I pointed out the smoking related things, emphysema, left upper lobectomy, the colon cancer, recovery from surgery, fluid overload, and then anxiety.
And Dr. Frazier agreed her anxiety had many causes. It was not just colon cancer. She had trouble breathing. You heard testimony she had panic attacks when she had trouble breathing.
So, ladies and gentlemen, if you find that you can allocate between the two, you are asked to do that. If you find that you can't, then His Honor has instructed you that you are to award to her for her pain and suffering the damages she suffered from
her shortness of breath. You are to award that.
And what were those things? What did that consist of? How do you go about assigning some value to that? Well, there are a number of subparts to it. And I'm going to make a humble effort to go through them. One of them is, we talked about pain and suffering. And you will see in that same record of Dr. Johnson, pain, eight on a scale of 0 to 10.
You will see records of pain reported over and over again. You heard testimony about her pain. Pain as a result of the removal of a portion of her lung.
Pain as a result of recuperation from that surgery.
Pain as a result of having to learn to breathe with less of a lung. Pain as a result of having trouble from emphysema in breathing. Pain as a result of having trouble just walking ultimately from one room to another, first trouble getting from the car to the store. Little by little getting to the point where she could barely get from the car to a table in the restaurant. Consider at the end, trouble getting from one room of the house to the other room of the house.
You were asked to consider the loss of capacity for the enjoyment of life. Very difficult. How do you measure that? Well, here's a thought. Consider
she makes the trip to Daytona Beach to see her grandson, to spend time with her grandson, and then fortunately is able to spend time with her grandson. They go for a walk on the beach. She can't walk back. She can't make it back. They have to go and pick her up. Consider that she only has limited opportunities to see her grandchildren. Does she get to? Does she get to spend time with them? What's the quality of her life at that time when she gets -- the few times she gets to see them?
Consider her anguish.
Okay. So we've talked about Rusty Sermons. We've talked about him. We've tried to put it in its appropriate light. Not that you are not asked to decide to award to Rusty Sermons. I want to be clear about that. We're not talking about that.
We're talking about what did it do to Myra? How did it affect her life that she was worried about it?
Well, you heard the testimony. You heard that she was worried from the first time of that -- as soon as she had that lung surgery she was worried. Am I going to be able to care for him? How am I going to -- what am I going to do?
Each time she goes for a CAT scan, am I going to be all right? Am I going to be able to carry out
this role I've been carrying out my whole life in helping him with the things he has to do? Am I going to be able to help him deal with his business affairs? Am I going to be able to help him deal with getting a license? Am I going to be able to help him to not fall into a bad lifestyle? Am I going to be able to care for him as I have, as the evidence is she did all her life?
And I ask you to consider how difficult that was for her. That was a big thing in her life.
That was mental anguish. And I ask you to weigh that in deciding how she suffered.
Physical impairment. We talked about her difficulty walking. We talked about her pain from the surgery. We've talked about her having oxygen. We've talked about all of the things, all of these things, disability, disfigurement, inconvenience.
Okay. So you see the chart. I know you've all been looking at it. What are these pennies? What is this all about?
Okay. We are saying to you, take the smallest unit of money and consider the smallest unit in time, a second. And for each second from when she first had this lung cancer, assign a penny a second.
MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Yes?
MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: I didn't hear what you said the second part.
MR. REILLY: Motion.
THE COURT: Let me see you side bar real quick.
(The following took place at the bench:)
MR. REILLY: It's a motion for mistrial, Your Honor, based on counsel telling this jury that there is a formula for determining pain and suffering. It has -- I waited. He put the demonstrative up. It has a penny times various multiplications. It's a formula. But I waited until he actually said it to the jury. Here in Florida we can't do that. There is no formula for determining pain and suffering.
And it's a golden rule.
THE COURT: All right. Response?
MR. RAINER: Your Honor, I would not have undertaken this had I not consulted with others who have tried these cases here in Florida and been reliably informed that this is indeed one of the ways that has been argued. Acknowledging that different territories had different rules -- I undertook to examine the question before I would have stood here and done such a thing.
THE COURT: All right. I'm overruling the objection and denying the motion for mistrial. All right? You can do this type of analysis, okay?
It's kind of a per diem, I guess they call it, or whatever. But you have to be very clear that, you know, I mean, I had already instructed them a standard instruction, I thought, that there's no formula for this. Okay? And you have to be very careful to make sure that that is in fact what's going on. I haven't heard him say at any point in time that this is the way you have to do it.
MR. RAINER: Nor to the contrary, Your Honor.
I began by saying it is up to you. And I will reiterate that.
THE COURT: I understand. It's overruled.
But, you know, let's make it very clear that, again, that it's -- there is no set formula and Mr. Reilly is absolutely correct. You have to be careful with that, okay?
MR. RAINER: I understand, Your Honor. Thank
you.
THE COURT: At 12:30 you will be at two hours.
MR. RAINER: I am almost finished.
THE COURT: I was trying to finish because I want to get them to lunch and get back.
MR. RAINER: I'm going to be very quick.
(Bench conference concluded.)
MR. RAINER: I want to say again, it is up to you, ladies and gentlemen, to decide how to go about assigning a number to pain and suffering. And all I am permitted to do is to make an argument. Our approach is one way that you could think about it.
And if you assigned a penny a second in the first year, as you will recall, there's testimony each year there was more pain, there was more difficulty, there was more shortness of breath. There was more disability there was more impairment. Accordingly, if you increase the pennies as those years went on, we suggest that one could consider two cents the second year, three cents in the third year, four cents in the fourth year, five cents in the fifth year. And we, taking that approach, added up all those pennies and we are here to ask you to reward a number for Myra Sermons' pain and suffering, of $4,730,400. And we ask you to award that amount for her pain and suffering.
Now, that's the line on that form.
Last topic. I know you've been patiently listening to this. Are punitive damages appropriate? At this phase you will not be asked to
assign a number. You have to decide first is there any entitlement to punitive damages? Has there been conduct shown to make it fair to award punitive damages? And there are a number of ways of looking at that.
Was the conduct of the defendant so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard for human life? I ask you to find that it was. I ask you to find that the conduct of these defendants selling a product that killed hundreds of thousands of people a year when they knew it would do so?
MR. WALKER: Objection, Your Honor. This was the argument that we addressed in chambers.
THE COURT: All right. Let me see you guys side bar real quick on this issue.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. RAINER: As His Honor instructed you, in determining whether punitive damages are awarded or warranted you may consider similar harms suffered by other persons who are not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility or wrongfulness of defendants' similar conduct if you find it is proven in this case. You can't punish them for the harms they did to people other than Myra Sermons but you may punish them for those harms that she suffered that were caused by the punishable conduct.
So when I refer to the deaths of cigarettes, I am asking you to consider whether the deaths from those cigarettes are similar harms suffered by other people that gives you information about how reprehensible, how troubling, how reckless their conduct is. That's how I ask you to consider that.
And I ask you to consider whether their conduct shows such an entire lack of care that they were consciously indifferent to the consequence of their action. Was their conduct a wanton or reckless disregard for the safety and welfare? And did they show such reckless indifference to the rights of others, to the rights of Myra Sermons as to be the same as an intentional harm to her? I ask you to please consider those things in deciding whether to award damages, to award punitive damages.
And as you are doing that, I ask you to consider this enterprise you heard so much about. I ask you to consider whether people have died. I ask you to consider what they knew, what they knew about the dangers of nicotine, that they knew it was addictive. That they knew people were going to get hooked on their product so that they could keep them as customers.
Did they target young people? Did they target Myra Sermons? You saw a lot of evidence about all the things they did to get young people smoking.
And, again, you can consider that as to the question of considering what they did to others in considering how wrong it was. They wrote letters to 4th graders about whether cigarettes were bad.
They had studies to figure out how are they going to reach the 14 to 20-year-old market. They had memos about how to increase the base of our business in high school students. You can consider that in deciding whether to award punitive damages and I ask you to do so.
Another memo. You can look at some of these memos. This one's 1433-A. About 5th grade students writing in, are cigarettes dangerous.
Please consider their internal memos from the 1980s. Each of these companies wrote a memo, that's this 3405 and 3400, describing exactly how they were going to keep their business by getting young people hooked on smoking. And they kept track of how it helped our products.
You will see if you look at 3291 and 2056 how they were controlling the level of nicotine in their products to get -- to keep people addicted, including this whole issue of whether ammonia was going to help with that.
When there were people who wanted to bring out what was known about nicotine, but they got in the way. These memos, PTO 1153, PTO 1154, PTO 2009. I don't even have to say anything. I ask you to read it.
Did they know, did they know that what they were doing could be considered false or misleading? Our basic position in the cigarette controversy, saying it's an open question, saying there's doubt, saying there's a controversy. "Our position is open to the charge that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of our products."
That's what they said. I ask you to award punitive damages. I suggest the evidence is clear and convincing and when you get to that box on the form, I ask you to put two marks and say yes.
Thank you.
THE COURT: All right. Ladies and gentlemen, it's 12:30 right now. We're going to break for lunch. We'll do our normal hour. I ask you to be back here at 1:30, ready to go.
It's important that you not talk about this case among yourselves at lunch. Again, we're still not at the point where -- it's important that you not talk about the case, again, with anyone. Even though now you've heard one of the closing arguments, you still haven't heard the other closing arguments and concluding instructions.
Please do not conduct any research or investigation into any of the issues related to this
case. Or any of the people or places involved in this case. With that, leave your notes face down, have a nice lunch. Come back here and be ready to go at 1:30. Thank you.
