MR. REILLY: Thank you, Your Honor.
Well, good afternoon, everybody.
THE JURY: Good afternoon.
MR. REILLY: I thought I might be addressing you in the morning, but I'm sorry. I've had you after lunch, after you've had -- well, let's hope I can keep your energy up and you don't just sort of fade on me.
You know what? I thanked you for your service in my opening statements, so I'll keep that very brief. Thanks. You've been here three weeks now. It's been a full three weeks, and that's a long time. Big service. So thanks.
Let me begin by talking about what this lawsuit is about and isn't about. You've heard it, but let me just go over it in a little greater detail.
Is that level? Level enough?
THE JURY: Yeah.
MR. REILLY: All right. You know that this is a lawsuit brought by Mr. Sermons as the personal representative of the estate of his mother. And in this lawsuit, he's seeking money damages. You heard the number now. He's seeking $4,700,000-some-odd
for his mother's lung cancer and the emphysema, the lung cancer that was treated in 1990 and the emphysema that was originally diagnosed, apparently by an x-ray in 1990 but then really became symptomatic to its moderate degree sometime in 1994, and up until, unfortunately, Mrs. Sermons passed away from colon cancer in June of 1996.
All right. So what isn't this case about?
Well, this case isn't about Mrs. Sermons' death due to colon cancer. You all know now that Mrs. Colon -- I'm sorry -- Mrs. Sermons unfortunately died of colon cancer.
Yes, the doctors misdiagnosed it for about a year and three months, but then when they did the surgery in March in 1996 they realized the mistake that they made and they recognized that she really had colon cancer. And that, while they missed it, they found it, and unfortunately she passed away from it two and a half months later.
This isn't a lawsuit brought by Mrs. Sermons or her husband. You've heard -- you heard Mr. Rainer in his closing arguments say that they were admitting that Mrs. Sermons had responsibility for the decision she made about smoking. And we'll talk more about that as I go through this closing
argument. But he said they did it because that's what Mrs. Sermons would have done.
Well, quite honestly, is there really any evidence in this case that Mrs. Sermons wouldn't have said, You know what? My decisions were my decisions. This was my life, and these were all my decisions.
This isn't a lawsuit brought by Rusty Sermons for losing his mother.
It's not about the death of Michael's father or his brother or even his mother.
This is not a class action. This is not a class action, nor is this sort of an exercise against the tobacco industry in general.
You know, this isn't a lawsuit in which you guys are being asked to decide did Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds or other companies in the tobacco industry or who are related to the tobacco industry, did they always make correct decisions? Did they cling too long of the notion or the position that smoking hasn't been proven?
That's -- that's not the issue in this case.
This isn't a case in a vacuum about the conduct of Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds.
This is a lawsuit about one person and one
person only. And who is that? This is a lawsuit about Myra Sermons and the claims that are being made about Myra Sermons and the decisions that she made in connection with smoking, and whether or not Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds played some substantial role in those decisions.
Matter of fact, when you get to the verdict form, there isn't a question on it that says, Gosh, did Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds always make a right decision?
Every question relates to the decisions of Myra Sermons. Every one of them.
And yet so far today, how much of you heard about the decisions of Myra Sermons? And this is closing argument. This is after all the evidence has been gathered. And how much did you hear about, for example, the decisions that Myra Sermons made in 1950 at -- they stipulated that she began smoking at age 18. You heard that stipulation just this morning. But you heard it. It's in instruction 8.
It's been stipulated that she began smoking as an 18-year-old adult here in the state of Florida.
And it was undisputed that, here in Florida in 1950, the legal age for deciding whether you were going to smoke or not was what? 18.
And so only as an adult, as our society, our Florida society had determined what's the right age to allow you -- this is -- this is one of the freedoms that we have here in the state of Florida. It's throughout the United States, but it's a freedom that we have here in the state of Florida.
And what is that? It's to decide for ourselves at certain ages when we're going to smoke cigarettes, buy other tobacco products, and use them.
At a different age, we're going to decide for ourselves whether we are going to use alcohol, another substance that comes with a significant health risk, right?
Different age, but these are the ages that as a society there's been a determination what age are we going to let you make that decision?
But along with the freedom to make that decision, what else comes along? The responsibility that goes along with it, right? And there's no question about that.
All right. And that brings me back around to, well, if -- if all of these things aren't what this case is about, then what did this case turn out to be around -- about?
Well, this is the board I put up in my opening
statement. And I said, You know what? At the end of the case, you're going to get pages of instructions.
And you are.
And I said they're going to be filled with legal terms.
And they are.
And I said you were going to get pages of a verdict form.
And you are.
And I said they too will be filled with legal terms.
And they are.
And, unfortunately, sometimes, in spite of the best efforts by lawyers and judges, the phraseology that's here is frequently complicated. Law students go to law school for three years to try to figure this stuff out. And we ask you guys to come in off -- from your jobs and from your lives and read this stuff and get it, right? To get it?
And that's a -- that's an awesome task. Awesome.
But we'll walk through it. I'll do the best I can to -- to help you understand it to the extent that I understand it.
And so -- but remember I said I think we can boil all this down into two words.
It this too loud? This seems very loud to me.
Yes.
Can we turn this down?
THE COURT: Which?
THE BAILIFF: I'm not sure which one.
MR. REILLY: I could just turn it off. I think you guys could hear me without it. Let's try that. Okay? Still hear me? Not so annoying. Okay.
Can you hear me, Your Honor?
THE COURT: I can hear you.
MR. REILLY: All right. Thank you.
All right. So I said, look, this case is really about control and responsibility. Control, who was in control of Mrs. Sermons' lifestyle decisions? And of course in particular her decisions about what? Smoking.
Who was in control of her decisions whether she would begin to smoke, whether she would take a second cigarette, continue to smoke, become a regular smoker? Who would decide whether or not she would continue to smoke and enjoy the pleasures of smoking?
And you heard from that witness stand,
everybody that came here that had any expertise in the field said smoking is pleasurable. And it is.
There's no doubt about it.
And then the -- the other question -- and they've acknowledged -- now, they only acknowledged to -- what was the number? 10 percent? That the person who made the decision to begin smoking and continue smoking and -- and become a regular smoker and then decide when and if and how much motivation she would apply into quitting smoking? And then did she ultimately quit smoking altogether? -- that she would only -- Mrs. Sermons, if she were here today, would only say I was only 10 percent responsible for all the decisions that I made?
They said, well, obviously that's not in debate whether or not Mrs. Sermons is responsible for the decisions that she made, the freedom that she had and the responsibility that she exercised with it.
But they said there's a claim being made here that Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds have responsibility as well, responsibility beyond the simple fact that that they made the cigarettes that she liked the best out of all the available cigarettes.
You know, you guys -- there's an instruction here that says you can apply your common sense and
your common experience.
There are literally hundreds of available choices of cigarettes. And Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds -- Philip Morris made Benson &
Hedges, R. J. Reynolds made -- or an earlier company made Pall Mall. And there is no debate that.
So they have to have more responsibility than simply making the brands of cigarettes that Mrs. Sermons enjoyed the best out of all the ones she could have chosen.
And so that's what this whole presentation, this whole trial, has been about, is is there something that connects the dots between whatever the criticisms were by Dr. Robert Proctor -- you remember him? The guy from California? The first witness who was here for days? But you remember the -- the one glaring problem that Dr. Proctor had? Yes, he's been paid $4 million to appear in courtrooms and criticize the tobacco industry. No question about it. There are moments in time. They cling too long to the notion that it hasn't been proven. No question.
They disagreed with the Surgeon General from 1988 to 2000 about whether smoking was really addictive. Okay.
But you have to do more than simply prove that. In this lawsuit, and we'll show it to you in just a little minute in the instructions from Judge Daniel, you have to connect that dot to Mrs. Sermons and her decisions. I'll show you the exact language. This is not a case in a vacuum. This is about the decisions of one person and whether Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds influenced her.
All right. And I put this board up, and I said when you knew the answer to the question of control, then you could move on to the question of responsibility, right? And that is what we're here about.
And I suggested to you that, while you were listening to the evidence in this case, that you look for who was in control of Mrs. Sermons' decisions to begin and continue smoking:
Did Mrs. Sermons enjoy smoking? Could Mrs. Sermons quit smoking when she wanted to?
Did R. J. Reynolds or Philip Morris control Mrs. Sermons' decisions to begin and continue smoking?
Now, I said -- I put this board up. I said you're going to have to -- in order to know the answer to all these questions, you're going to have
to hear what? Hear the life story of Mrs. Sermons, right? That's what you were going to have to hear.
And I said where is that testimony going to come from? Well, it certainly wasn't going to come from Dr. Robert Proctor.
You remember I said to him, Dr. Proctor, you don't know anything about Mrs. Sermons, do you?
And he said: I don't know a thing about her.
I think his phrase was something along the lines of, I'm not a personal historian of Mrs. Sermons. I don't know anything about her.
And you remember I put up -- I didn't bring it here today. But you remember I brought that timeline, and I was marking on the timeline things that he was critical of the tobacco industry for.
And I kept saying, well, there were people -- and the facts that I was giving him were the facts of this case. The facts of Mrs. Sermons' life.
And I said, There are people who were like this in this time frame, weren't there?
And he said, Yes, there were.
Well, the people who were like this in that time frame were the people who were not being influenced by Philip Morris, not being influenced by R. J. Reynolds, not being influenced by anybody in
the tobacco industry.
And I'm going to walk you through that in just a minute.
Where did the evidence come from that really did pertain to Mrs. Sermons?
It came from, of course, Michael Sermons, the personal representative of the estate, the guy who is seeking the money.
His current wife, Susan, who is in the gallery here today.
His first wife, Sandra Crow, who Mr. Rainer said, Gosh, you shouldn't believe her. You shouldn't believe her when she testifies because she's the ex-wife and they had custody issues.
Neighbor and friend, Hugh Butler.
You remember Hugh Butler? What an interesting character. What a character. What did he say? He said, Those warnings on the packages of cigarettes are just the government trying to control you. And I still don't believe that smoking causes -- I mean, he's -- maybe it's the wrong term, but I call him crusty. He's a crusty old coot. But he's an interesting guy. You would love to have a conversation with him, right?
Brother-in-law James Sermons.
But you remember what he said. He got that great look on his face -- and we'll talk about it -when he said Mrs. Sermons said she enjoyed smoking, he had that look on his face. And then the other time he had that look on his face was when he said,
I was going to win that bet.
That was an interesting moment.
All right. Then there was the niece, Susan Brown Mercer.
And Pastor Andrew Pietrylo.
You've looked at some medical records. We didn't need to look at financial records because, when I was examining Mr. -- Mr. Sermons, I said, Look, your parents expressed how they felt about Philip Morris, didn't they? Because they owned stock in Philip Morris.
We don't have to guess about how Mrs. and Mr. Sermons felt about Philip Morris. They felt strongly enough about it to own a piece of the company. To receive the dividends. To own it. And they owned it right up until the death of Mr. Sermons. What was it? A year and a half or two years after the death of his wife.
And who received the proceeds from the sale of that stock? You remember what Mr. Michael Sermons
said. He said, No, I didn't actually receive the stock because we liquidated the Philip Morris stock and the Coca Cola stock, and I got cash and divided it with my brother.
So we know how Mr. and Mrs. Sermons felt about Philip Morris. They speak to you through their actions. They speak directly to you through their actions.
MR. RAINER: Your Honor, I object.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. REILLY: So that's where the evidence about Mrs. Sermons came from in this case.
Now, to help you follow along with the evidence as it's coming in, I put up my timeline, right? And I said, This is just to help you follow along with the evidence in the case.
But I said, Remember, everything above this timeline was going to be about the story of Mrs. Sermons, and the things below the timeline were going to relate to what was being communicated to the American public about smoking and -- and its pleasures and its risks.
And while our discussions with Dr. Proctor went back well before the '30s, I'm going to focus you now on what was being communicated to the American
public -- you remember back in 1900 cigarettes were illegal here in this state? Illegal because of health concerns.
Remember I asked Dr. Proctor: Isn't it true that, since the beginning of the use of tobacco products, several things have been constantly known? There's nicotine in tobacco, and nicotine is what creates the pleasure that causes people to want to use cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, the whole -- the whole shooting match.
They've known all along. Mr. Rainer said Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds knew that there was nicotine in tobacco. That's never been a secret.
Never.
Remember I talked with Dr. Proctor about you could go in 1930 -- you could look in the encyclopedia and you could see an article just in the encyclopedia or in Reader's Digest about if you smoke, it can shorten your life. It's nicotine that causes you to want to smoke. Don't smoke. Don't smoke.
And we've put -- Hassia and I have put into evidence just examples, just examples of the Reader's Digest articles that appeared. And you know from the testimony in this case that Mrs. --
Mr. and Mrs. Sermons took Reader's Digest. They took the local newspaper. They took magazines.
Life Magazine. They were intelligent. Well read.
So you'll be able to see -- now here's -you'll be able to see the kinds of things that were being communicated to the American public about the health risks of smoking.
Now, before the '40s -- before the end of '40s, before the '50s, they're not really talking about so much about lung cancer because that connection hasn't yet been made. But Dr. Proctor did provide us with an important piece of information about students here in Florida going to Florida schools, which is exactly what Mrs. Sermons did.
Now, none of you are old enough to have been going to high school in the '40s, but Dr. Proctor, because of his research, knows that it was the law in Florida that, if you're in high school in Florida, you got educated on the health risks of smoking. You got educated: Don't smoke. You got educated about nicotine being in tobacco. That nicotine was widely -- why people smoked. That if you begin to smoke, it could be very hard for you to quit. And that smoking is bad for your health. All of that being taught to students of which
Mrs. Sermons was one in the 1940s. And the '50s.
It doesn't stop in the '40s. It's the same. Here's the '40s and here's the '50s.
All right. So let's go above the line and move through. Okay. Let's tell the story of Mrs. Sermons and see if Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds played any significant role other than making the cigarettes that she chose out of all the available brands to smoke.
You remember that she was born on October 11th, 1932, Pensacola, Florida. The dad was Ned and her mom was Alma Anderson.
But what did they do for a living?
You heard from Mr. Sermons they had a grocery store. They had a grocery store, and they sold cigarettes in the grocery store. It was a regular grocery store. Sold cigarettes in the '40s.
We know that both her parents were smokers.
She had a younger sister, Annette. You know she's ultimately going to be a smoker too.
You know that she was popular in high school.
You saw the pictures. She was on the cheerleading squad. She was smart. She was -- I said popular.
She was dating the quarterback, the star of the football -- high school football team. And she's
dating him when she's a sophomore and he's a senior. Right?
And you know that he graduates in 1948. He goes on to work at the paper mill and to play semi-pro football.
But what you also know is that, sometime after he graduates from high school, what does he start doing? Not as a high schooler, but after high school. His brother testified. I put his name up there: James Sermons. James says, My brother started smoking after he got out of high school and was playing semi-pro football.
Now, how about -- I've already shown you that, so I won't bore you with that board. Sometimes my story moves faster than my boards.
Okay. So let's go to the '50s because this is an important time frame in this trial.
You remember that Mrs. Sermons, in the middle of her senior year in high school, married Billy Gerald Sermons. But she goes on -- she's not going to drop out of school. She goes on to graduate from high school, right?
And you heard that she did not -- it is stipulated that she did not begin to smoke until after she was 18 years old, after she's 18 years
old.
Mr. -- here's a perfect example, perfect example of criticizing Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds and yet it having nothing to do with the Sermons case.
They talk about -- Mr. -- Mr. Rainer just got through putting up a whole bunch of -- of old documents from the '60s, '70s, and '80s about writing letters to schools in Oregon about -- to -to schools in Oregon or New York or somewhere about marketing to -- or focusing on people between the ages of 14 and 24 or whatever.
How old was Mrs. Sermons in the '60s? The '70s? The '80s? The '90s? How old was she? She's in her 30s, 40s, 50s, 60s. So does that have something to do -- I'm not saying that everything that Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds ever did was the right thing to do, but what does it have to do with this case? With this case? Nothing.
She graduates from high school, and sometime after graduating and sometime after turning 18,
Mrs. Sermons began to smoke.
Now, as a further follow-on to what I was just talking about, was there one person who came here and said that Mrs. Sermons began smoking because of
an ad for cigarettes? Nope. Not one person.
What home does she go to at age plus 18? She goes to live with her husband who is a smoker.
Now, is it any shock to you that she begins smoking with a husband who is smoking? Did anybody come here and say Mrs. Sermons ever said that she smoked a cigarette in the '50s, '60s, '70s, '80s, or '90s because of an ad that she saw? Nobody came in here and said that. Not one witness.
You know that in 1950, what Dr. Proctor, their expert, their witness said was the beginning of an avalanche of articles appearing in the media reporting on the advances that were -- that were being made in the medical community linking smoking with lung cancer, linking smoking with lung cancer.
So now you know -- matter of fact, Mr. Rainer acknowledged that Mrs. Sermons was a reader of newspapers, a reader of magazines, a watcher of television, a watcher of the news.
You know, back in this time frame, we only have three channels. This is the infancy of television, right? I know. I look at your faces and there's no way that any of you know that, but it's true.
And so I say we've put in evidence, just a little sampling, we're not going to burden with you
tons of articles from newspapers and magazines, but just a sampling of the type of coverage that was occurring starting in 1950, starting in the same time when Mrs. Sermons is making what decision? The decision whether she's going to smoke with her husband or not.
And what is her decision? Her decision is yes, she is going to smoke. She is going to smoke.
Now, do we really know today what brand she began smoking? I don't know. Maybe it's Pall Mall; maybe it's not. I honestly don't know the answer to that.
But what we do know is that there's only one person that made that decision, and that's Mrs. Sermons. There's only one person that made the decision to continue to smoke.
But what do we also know about Mrs. Sermons? We know from Sandra Crow that years later, when she is talking to Sandra Crow about how careful she was during her pregnancies, how careful she was, that she stopped smoking during both of her pregnancies. Why would you not believe that? I mean, that's a -that's a positive statement for Mrs. Sermons. She said, I want you to know, I stopped smoking through both my pregnancies because I didn't want to cause
harm to either of my babies.
Wonderful. But what does that tell you?
Number one it tells you that she was aware that -- I mean, it's no surprise. She learned it in school.
You can read it in the paper. You can see it in magazines. Reader's Digest, Time Magazine, smoke gets in the news. These are all in evidence.
And Mrs. Sermons, in 1950/'51 time frame, stops smoking because she's pregnant with Michael. And then in the 1950 time frame, she stopped smoking because she's pregnant with Rusty.
That tells you, you know what? She's aware of the health risks of smoking. She can control her smoking. She can quit when she wants to. And if she decides that she wants to resume, she can resume. She's in her 20s. She's certainly old enough to decide whether she's going to continue to smoke or not.
This is Mrs. Sermons' story. This isn't some vacuum. This is Mrs. Sermons' story.
Is the American public getting the message about what's being reported in the media about the connections -- this avalanche of information that's flowing?
You remember I said to Dr. Proctor,
Dr. Proctor, there's -- there's polling being done about whether or not people are getting the message. A poll is being taken. Have you heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lungs?
Yes. No.
Is there some reason to believe -- in light of the actions of Mrs. Sermons, is there some reason to believe that Mrs. Sermons belonged to this group?
No.
We showed you a clip.
Michael, can you do that.
Remember the program -- this will come up on your screens.
Remember we talked about the television show Edward R. Murrow, "See It Now," and this was just an example of the kind of media coverage about smoking and health and the ever growing information connecting smoking with lung cancer.
This was two nights, and I forget whether it was an hour each night or two hours each night, but it was filled with people, some that were saying it's established, some that were saying I'm not convinced, some that were saying I'm going to live my life.
And we showed you -- matter of fact, I think Mr. Rainer may have shown you this. This was E.
Cuyler Hammond from the American Cancer Society, as I recall. And he's telling you -- he was reporting to you about whether the message is getting out to the American people and whether at that point, in light of the message, that's being communicated to the American public. What does he say?
He says, It's up to you now to decide for yourselves. Are you going to smoke, are you going to begin smoking, are you going to continue to smoke, or are you going to quit?
This is a decision every person gets to make for his or herself.
Could you play that, Michael.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
This is "See It Now," produced by the partnership of Friendly and Murrow.
Tonight, the first of two reports on cigarettes and lung cancer.
In 1952, Drs. Hammond and Horn of the American Cancer Society began an extended study of the smoking habits of American men. Here is Dr. Hammond reporting on the results of the first two years.
It is now established, in my opinion beyond a reasonable doubt, that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer.
In my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers. And they are being warned. What they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business.
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. REILLY: Whether they want to smoke or not is their own business.
That was true then. It remained true throughout Mrs. Sermons' life.
Now, did Mrs. Sermons enjoy smoking? Nobody questioned that.
Did Mrs. Sermons say, I enjoy smoking? Yes. Multiple witnesses who came here and were asked that question responded yes, Mrs. Sermons said she enjoyed smoking.
Who said it? Michael Sermons did. Sandra Crow did. James Sermons did. And Hugh Butler definitely did. Definitely did. Emphatically did. He smoked with her. Her husband smoked with her. Her relatives, her parents, her husband, her sister, they all smoked together.
Did they all talk about the warnings? Did they
all talk about they ought to stop? Did they all say we shouldn't do it? Yeah, they all did that, and then they lit cigarettes and smoked some more, playing cards.
You remember the -- the story that Hugh Butler told about how -- and he was laughing about it. He said, You know, Mrs. Sermons, we'd be playing cards, and she would have a cigarette going here, a cigarette going here, and he would say to her, Are you going to smoke those? And she would say, Oh, I got one here. I guess I better -- you know, I'll do something about it.
People get preoccupied when they're playing cards and having fun. It's just -- it's life.
That's life.
Mrs. Sermons -- Mrs. Sermons told people that smoking relaxed her and helped her deal with her everyday stresses and the anxiety of her life. And it is what smoking does. But it comes with a risk.
It comes with a health risk.
1957. You heard that the Surgeon General of the United States was doing exactly what E. Cuyler Hammond did. He went to the media and said, You know what? The American public should be told and they are being told about the health risks of
smoking. And then they have to make up their minds whether or not they're going to smoke or not.
The same statement by the head of the National Cancer Institute.
And what's happening? Well, Mrs. Sermons quit in '51 -- '50, '51, and she quit in '53, but she resumed smoking.
There are lots of people, 10 million people who quit and quit for good.
You heard from their expert Dr. Rosenbaum that if she had quit and stayed quit here in the '50s, she would never have gotten lung cancer and she would have never gotten emphysema.
Now, whose decisions determine whether or not she's going to get lung cancer or emphysema?
And that's just here in the '50s.
Who did Mrs. Sermons enjoy smoking with? I already gave you a list but here's a few more. With coworkers at the awards shop, with friends while playing cards, with relatives.
But you heard all that. You were here for it.
Now, here is a plain and simple fact, and that is all the people that came here that knew Mrs. Sermons and testified, not one of them said that Mrs. Sermons ever told anybody that she had so
much as heard even a statement from Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds or any related company, not the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, not the Council For Tobacco Research, not the Tobacco Institute.
Mr. Rainer talked to you about The Frank Statement that was published here in January of
1954.
Did anybody come here and say Mrs. Sermons ever said that she had read or even so much as heard about The Frank Statement? Nobody. Nobody.
Did anybody come here and say that, for the remainder of her life, that Mrs. Sermons ever said as much as I ever heard any position taken by Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds or anybody else about the health risks of smoking? No, she never did.
Did anybody say that in the '50s Mrs. Sermons had any question about the health risks of smoking?
How could she? Of course the answer to that is no, but how could she in light of her actions here in the early '50s. How could she? She couldn't.
But nobody came here and said Mrs. Sermons had any uncertainty, any doubt, any question about whether or not, if you smoke, it comes with a potential health risk. Nobody said that. Nobody said she was somehow unknowing or uncertain. And that becomes
incredibly apparent when we move to the evidence of the '60s.
Remember, that avalanche of information keeps flowing. I started this in 1964. I could have gone back here to 1960, but 1964 becomes what -- the water shed of smoking and lung cancer and smoking and lung diseases here in the United States.
This is the point in time when their expert Dr. Proctor said for adult smokers the per capita consumption of cigarettes has peaked and is now declining precipitously.
What is the per capita consumption of cigarettes? It's on a head count. It's not the total number of cigarettes sold or smoked because what? Because our nation is growing.
Our nation in -- in the '50s is a hundred and -- what? -- 160 million people? But we're multiplying. And so, sure, the number of total cigarettes sold is increasing but on a per capita, on a per head basis, it peaked in 1964 and now we're going down. Now we're going down.
The Surgeon General's report. You remember we showed you the news coverage? ABC, CBS, NBC. They all had a special report. They all were telling you the Surgeon General has determined once and for all
that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer and other diseases. That filters don't help you. That, if you smoke, no one is going to tell you that it's good for you but nobody is going to tell an adult that you can't -- this is a free country. Nobody is going tell you that you can't go by a pack of cigarettes.
Nobody is going to sell you that because it's legal here. This is a legal product. This is a product that we know the risks, but we as a society continue to allow you to go and decide whether you want to smoke it or not.
The same holds true for cigars, chewing tobacco. They're legal products. Do they come with danger? You bet. So does alcohol.
Legal product. We let you as an adult make up your mind whether you're going to take the chance in exchange for enjoying the pleasure, right?
The special coverage -- it's going to come up on your monitors again. Mr. Rainer just showed you this interview from Howard Cullman. It takes about a minute. That's the whole interview. It takes about a minute.
Well, the whole program was two hours that night, so out of two hours there was a minute of a
guy saying I don't think the tobacco industry agrees that -- that they're hazardous.
But the whole rest of the program is the Surgeon General and his committee and announcers like Harry Reasoner telling you this:
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
This is a "CBS News" extra on smoking and health. The findings of the Surgeon General's committee.
Almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked. But the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report by the Surgeon General's committee. This, in summary, is what the committee says: Cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the same way.
Cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis. Cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases.
Male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it's not proven that smoking is the cause.
On the question of filters, the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but it didn't exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed.
In short, the committee says if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. The sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are.
The Surgeon General's committee presented its report at a news conference in Washington.
After a long and exhaustive deliberation, the committee has reached the overall judgment that cigarette smoking is a health hazard of sufficient importance to the United States to warrant remedial action. This overall judgment was supported by many converging lines of evidence as well as data indicating that cigarette smoking is related to higher death rates in a number of disease categories.
More specifically, the committee states on page 61 of the report, and I quote:
In view of the continuing and mounting evidence from many sources, it is the judgment of the committee that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from certain specific
diseases and to the overall death rate.
In this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. No one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it's good for him either. The decision is his. The decision and the health that may depend on it.
This is Harry Reasoner. Good night.
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. REILLY: And now you've got to make a decision. You've got to decide. Mrs. Sermons has made her decision 15 -- 14 years at that point. And she's continuing to make the decision every day, right?
You know that the warning goes on the packs in 1966. Here's the warning. It says:
Caution: Cigarette smoking can be hazardous to your health.
And while some people may have been confused, you know from the conversation that Mr. Sermons has with his mother. Is it that year or the next year?
I think you remember it. He couldn't remember whether it was when he was 16 or 17, but he remembers that his brother, Rusty, got caught smoking. Remember this story? Rusty gets caught
smoking. Mrs. Sermons reads him the riot act.
That's what my mother used to call it: Read you the riot act.
And now Michael isn't even a smoker, and that is 50 years ago this year. 50 years ago. And yet even though it's 50 years ago, he can still remember exactly how long the conversation was with his mother. 20 minutes he told you. For 20 minutes she read him the riot act and said, Don't you smoke. Smoking is bad for your health. If you start, you can't stop. Don't smoke.
He doesn't remember all the words she said, but he remembers that. And that's a -- imagine remembering that message from your mom 50 years later. Was there any doubt in his mother's mind about whether or not smoking was bad for you?
And you remember what he did? They had -- they had the warning, and he said, Well, mom, then that warning applies to you. Everything you just said to me applies to you.
And you remember I was standing right there, and I said, Mr. Sermons, didn't she say, I know, I know back to you?
And he said, Yeah , that's what she said. I know. I know.
So this is a case about one smoker's decision and one smoker only. And now the question is all this stuff about Mr. Rainer telling you about doubt and confusion, was there any doubt or confusion on the part of Mrs. Sermons at any time? Was there even one moment in time when someone came in and said there was doubt in her mind about what she was doing and whether it came with a health risk? Not once.
You remember the public service announcements begin to run in 1967, 1,300, Dr. Proctor said, Yes, 1,300 in just one year.
And you remember -- you're going to see this.
If you would do the -- just do the Perry Mason prosecuting attorney.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
This is the house we lived in. That's Billy.
He's pretty handy to have around. Steve, home from college. Barbie, looking after her brother Timmy. Debbie, who will soon graduate from high school. Susan, our youngest. And my wife, Peggy, who looks after all of us.
And that's me, Bill Talman, with a friend of mine you might recognize.
You know, I didn't really mind losing those courtroom battles, but if I'm in a battle right now I don't want to lose at all, because if I lose it, it means losing my wife and those kids you just met.
I've got lung cancer. So take some advice about smoking and losing from someone who's been doing both for years. If you don't smoke, don't start. If you do smoke, quit. Don't be a loser.
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. REILLY: Mr. Rainer put up a number. I don't really understand why you put up a number for advertising that runs to 2000 when Mrs. Sermons dies of colon cancer in 1996, but there is no question that Philip Morris, R. J. Reynolds, and the other cigarette manufacturers spent a lot of money advertising and promoting their products. There's no doubt about it.
But you remember I asked Dr. Proctor -If you could turn on the ELMO, Michael.
I asked Dr. Proctor: Americans can tell the difference between an ad and a public service announcement? An ad and an article? An ad and a report that says smoking causes disease, can't they?
And you remember that I put -- this was their magazine, the one about the astronauts and how there
were some astronauts that still smoked. And I said: Well, the president of the United States is still smoking today, right?
And he said, Yes, he does.
I said: Here's an ad for Salems. The American public can tell the difference between an ad for Salems and an article reporting that smoking causes lung cancer, can't they?
And he said: Yes, I think generally they can.
And that's -- I guess if you get an answer like that, that's how you earn $4 million.
But there you go. You can tell -- is there any reason to believe on this planet that Mrs. Sermons couldn't tell the difference between an ad and an article?
Is there some reason to believe that ads for -Mr. Rainer put up ads for Camels, for a whole bunch of brands that Mrs. Sermons never even smoked. Philip Morris brand cigarettes from the '50s. She never smoked any Philip Morris brands from the '50s. But is that any reason to believe that somehow diluted the knowledge of Mrs. Sermons about the health risks of smoking?
Did that dilute the message that she gave to her son when Rusty got caught? Did she say, Gosh,
you know what? I think they might be bad for you but -- so, Rusty, I'm -- I saw an ad. I saw an ad for Salems or I saw an ad for Pall Malls. I'm not so sure.
No. That never happened. She said, Don't smoke. I don't know if she smacked her hand.
All right. So public service announcements. How many of those do you need to see? How many times do you need to see that ad to know that, if you smoke, you run the risk that you're going to contract lung cancer or some other terrible disease? How many do you really need to see? Those are powerful, and they're running all the time.
But she's enjoying smoking. They're laughing about the warnings. But it's kind of dark humor, right? You know what you're doing, but you're not going to stop.
You saw that. All of that. I know, I know.
I'm going faster than my . . .
Oh, and here is Mr. Butler. Here is Mr. Butler. The government's trying to intervene again. Don't trust the government, period. An advertisement is an advertisement. Don't believe none of it.
I thought that was pretty cute.
All right. So by the end of the '60s,
30 million Americans have quit smoking, quit for good, right?
You remember Sandra Crow said, My step-dad was among the group when I started dating, and then finally when I married Mr. Sermons, my step-dad started to interact with my mother-in-law. And my step-dad was the only one out of that group who quit smoking. He quit cold turkey. But my -- my dad -my step-dad quit.
And she recalled a conversation between her step-dad and Mrs. Sermons in which he reported to her that he had quit. And what was her response back? She said, I'm happy for you, that's great.
But where's my next cigarette? I'm not quitting. I can't quit. Words to that effect.
And that's okay. You get to make your decisions.
30 million Americans have decided that they're going to quit.
Let's go to the '70s. A new warning goes on the packs:
Warning: The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous for your health.
There's that warning.
Did Mr. Sermons see it and talk to his mother about it? He testified he did. He said, Yeah, I brought it to my mother's attention. He said, I had a running discussion -- respectful -- a running discussion with my mother for the rest of her life:
Don't smoke, Mom. Stop smoking. Don't smoke. Stop smoking.
So is she aware of this change in the warnings? Sure. Sure.
Did she ever express doubt about the correctness of the warning to Michael? Did he ever say, My mother said, I'm not sure. I don't know?
No. Never once. Never once.
You remember that cigarette advertising on television and radio ends in 1971. That was big news too. Everybody knew why it got taken off the air.
In the early '70s, this was kind of a very interesting event in Mrs. Sermons' life. It tells you a lot. That's when Mr. Sermons and Mrs. -- I'm sorry Mr. Butler and Mrs. Sermons, next door neighbors, are challenging one another. You remember that? And there was the bet. No money, just a bet.
And Mrs. Sermons was confident enough about her
ability to control her smoking that she said, I can outlast you.
Now Mr. Butler was positive about himself too, so he said, No. I'll bet you I can outlast you.
So what was the incentive necessary to have Mrs. Sermons stop for five weeks? It took nothing more than a bet. A bet with a neighbor for no money, and she stopped for five weeks.
Did she want to smoke during that period of time? Sure. Sure. It's pleasurable. Her husband is still smoking. I think at that point her son Rusty is still smoking. Her family is still smoking. Her friends are still smoking -- except for Mr. Butler and her. So everybody that she sees that is enjoying smoking, what are they doing? They're still doing it. They're still doing it.
So of course it's hard. You remember there was a question: Did Mrs. Sermons ever throw away her cigarettes? And this is sort of a fundamental step if you're -- oh, and by the way, was this a bet -was this a bet that they said to each other, I'll bet you I can quit forever? Was this a bet that said, I can quit and never smoke again and you can't? No. It was a bet that I can quit longer than you.
And you remember the look on Mr. Butler's face when he was asked, So what about it?
And he said, I was going to win the bet.
I can't speak with his accent. But he said, I was going to win the bet, and I did. I just knew I was going to last longer than she did, whatever time frame it was. I was going to quit, and she wasn't going to beat me.
So could Mrs. Sermons stop when she was -- I mean, sufficient motivation a bet with your neighbor? Okay.
1972. The warning goes on every ad whether it's a billboard or a magazine.
1972. This is -- let's add a little name here because this is when Susan Mercer was coming over, and she said, We were kids, and we would go under the table, and we would listen to them. And we heard them talking about it, and they were all saying we ought to stop. We ought to quit.
And you remember the one thing she said that really was important to this case? She said they all knew -- they all knew smoking caused lung cancer. They all knew that, if they were smoking, they were running the risk that they were going to get lung cancer. They all knew it. They knew it
forever. That was her testimony.
And the bet, quit smoking for five weeks -- oh, she had -- did anybody mention whether she had any withdrawal symptoms during that five-week time period?
You know, you heard from Dr. -- well, you heard from both doctors, Dr. Werner and Dr. Ticknor, that within 24-48 hours, all the nicotine's is out of your body. If you're going to have -- no one reported that she had any of those withdrawal symptoms -- anxiety, nausea, irritability, insomnia. Nobody reported that she had any of those things, but they're all -- remember you heard it's like the flu? They're toughest at the first couple of days and then they start to decline and decline, and then by the time two or three weeks or four weeks is up, they're gone. They're gone. And how long did she stay quit? For five weeks.
All right. Is she a smart lady? Yes. She is a very smart lady. I don't believe anybody would say different. Nobody would.
She goes to college, and she takes bookkeeping courses because what does she want to do? She wants to became a business owner. She wants to run her own shop, run her own life. It's been a desire,
and. So she buys the award shop and runs her own business.
Is she smoking filtered cigarettes in this time frame? Well, nobody's really sure, but at some point she begins to smoke Benson & Hedges cigarettes.
Did she ever tell anybody why she switched and began smoking Benson & Hedges? I understand Mr. Rainer said that she continued to smoke Pall Malls, but there's no debate that she began smoking Benson & Hedges cigarettes as well. It's a little unusual to go from nonmenthol to a menthol cigarette. They said she was smoking Benson & Hedges in the teal pack. You so that that was a menthol cigarette. That's kind of unusual to do that.
But then later we heard that she was smoking Benson & Hedges in both the teal pack and the gold pack, so maybe that makes some sense.
But anyway, does anybody really remember when she began to do that? No.
Mr. -- Mr. Sermons thought it might have been as much as 20 years before she died, so that would have been sometime in the mid-'70s.
I'm not going to dispute it. I'm not going to
dispute it.
Did she switch to filters because she thought they were safe? Nobody said that.
Did she switch to filters instead of quitting? Nobody said she did that.
Did she say, I think these might be a little less dangerous for me, a little less bad for me?
Yeah. And what did Michael say in response? Mom, it's still a cigarette. It's still a cigarette.
And what did she say response? I know. I know.
And did she ever say, You know what? I'm switching to Benson & Hedges with filters because Philip Morris told me this is a safer cigarette? No she never said that. Never said that.
All right. I -- I asked Dr. Proctor about people like David Burns, public health figures, saying in 1975 that more people know that smoking causes lung cancer than can name the president of the United States? I think the president of the United States in 1975 was Gerald Ford, but don't told me to it. But he agreed with it, yes? That was probably true.
That's the best. I've already told you about
it.
These are the symptoms of withdrawal. We've talked about those with the experts: irritability, frustration, anger, anxiety, difficulty concentrating, increased appetite, restlessness, depressed mood, insomnia. Did anybody say that from five weeks that she was a nonsmoker that she had any of these symptoms? Nobody.
I've already told you about all that, conversations between Michael Sermons and Mrs. Sermons, conversations around the dining room table about the health risks of smoking. They all knew about the health risks from Susan Mercer. All talked -- oh, yeah. I shouldn't overlook that.
Sandy Crow said when she was talking about all this conversation around the table, she said, "You know, it was a lot of talk and very little action."
And that's okay. Remember, I am not criticizing anybody. I'm not criticizing Mr. Sermons -remember the -- the recollection is that Mr. Sermons never wanted to quit. Never wanted to quit. His son didn't even talk to him about quitting.
But she said the only person who ever took any action, any real action was, my step-dad.
We've already seen that. I've already talked
to you about that.
Let's go to the '80s. I know you are looking at all those boards and you're thinking, Will he ever get through that?
The answer is yes. We're moving along.
You remember in 1981 she had a hysterectomy? And Dr. Ticknor told you that when you have a hysterectomy you go to the hospital and you can't smoke. Couldn't smoke in the hospital in '80/'81.
No indication that she violated the hospital rules. So when she comes out of the hospital, just like when she finishes her five-week quit period, you have to make a decision whether you're going to resume smoking, and you know that she did. There's no -- no question that she began smoking again.
The public service announcements were running in the '60s, the '70s.
You need to show us -- show us Yul Brynner. I don't think they've seen Yul Brynner in this trial.
This is very much like the -- the prosecutor's ad, but this is from the '80s.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
Ladies and Gentlemen, the late Yul Brynner.
I really wanted to make a commercial when I
discovered I was that sick and my time was so limited. I wanted to make a commercial that says simply, now that I'm gone, I tell you: Don't smoke. Whatever you do, just don't smoke.
If I could take back that smoking, we wouldn't be talking about any cancer. I'm convinced of that.
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. REILLY: Powerful. I mean really powerful. You don't need to see that twice.
Did she go to a hypnotist? Not so. Did she ever throw away her cigarettes? No. Her ashtrays?
No. Her lighters? No.
You heard Dr. Ticknor and, actually, Dr. Werner as well -- they she talked about there are things that, if you really want to do something, you've got to change your behavior. Dr. Ticknor said -- he gave that personal example of saying, you know what? I bought my membership at the gym, and I was dead set on going there -- how many times? And then he went -- what did he say? -- for a week? And then it was once every other week and then it was once a month and . . .
You got to change your behavior. And it's no different for smoking. You really have to change your behavior, and you have to -- you can tell if
somebody is really committed to the process. I mean, if you wanted to give up drinking, would you keep all the whiskey around the house? No, of course not. The first thing you'd do is say, You know what? Gone. Gone.
The warning change in '85. We know that Mr. Sermons talked about the warnings with his mother. They include these rotating warnings that specifically indicate that quitting now greatly reduces the serious risk to your health: Smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy.
This is the '90s. You can tell I'm at the end of the timeline.
Unfortunately, Mrs. Sermons is diagnosed with lung cancer in December of 1990 with that fortunate change of gynecologists and demand for a chest x-ray. The identification of a spot. She goes in. They biopsy it. She goes in and has lung cancer.
They surgically remove the cancer; and, yes, they apparently do tell her -- I mean, you saw her, didn't you? You saw the sign high sign. They apparently tell her it is good -- I mean, come on.
It's good news to be told you have a 70 or 80 percent chance of having a cure. Why do you think
they're going like this with big smiles? Because they're depressed? A picture tells a thousand words, right? And I won't bore you with a thousand words. A picture tells you a thousand words.
And, yes, I'm sure that they had quarterly returns. And would you be -- would you be a little nervous every time you went back, or would that recede over time as you are -- as you are being told, Nope, nope, nope.
And let's not forget: It never came back.
Lung cancer never came back. She was cured.
Did she continue to smoke after the lung cancer surgery? You know what? There's no question -- no one is disputing that she again smoked at least one cigarette.
Is it any surprise that she's smoking a cigarette at the funeral of her brother-in-law? A stressful time? Sure. Did she continue to smoke in between? Maybe so. If she did, nobody saw her.
Michael said he suspected that she did. He thought she never quit.
That's all right.
Does she quit smoking? You know, that's an interesting -- I'm not really sure the level of importance of this question in this case because
she's already been diagnosed with lung cancer here, and based on the medical records, apparently when they looked at that chest x-ray, they also said, You have emphysema.
So she apparently had both here in 1990, November of 1990.
Does it do her any good to continue to smoke? No. But does it do her any harm? Nobody said that.
But does she quit smoking? You know, that's -that's a good question. And maybe that's a credibility question. I don't know. It must be because you know that in the medical records, which you're going to see -I don't think we have that record. Or do we have it? Maybe we do.
In January of 1996, she tells her doctor, face-to-face, face-to-face, I have quit smoking four years ago.
She's been told a year earlier that she has terminal cancer. There is no cure. You are going to get palliative chemotherapy. It's just to hopefully extend your life a bit and make you more comfortable. That's palliative.
But she's known for a year at that moment that she is dying, dying. And here we are in January of
'96, what incentive did she have -- and nobody said that Mrs. Sermons was a regular liar. What incentive does she have to not tell the truth to her doctors? I don't know. I mean she's -- she's -she's six months away from, unfortunately, dying of her cancer.
Mrs. Susan Sermons says, I never did see her smoke again after this one episode in September.
And she said, You know, I was going -- first of all, for a period of time we weren't in the same store. And then -- but in '92 we were in the same store. But then I was going to school. I was a part-time student so -- and she closed her door. So maybe I just didn't ever see her smoke.
But Michael said she smoked two or three packs a day.
Mrs. Sermons said, Well, I wasn't over at the house all that much, just once or twice a month.
But, I mean, two or three packs a day is what Michael said.
So I don't know. I don't know.
We do know that in the end of 1996, during her hospitalizations and her during her outpatient care, you heard Dr. Ticknor say, You know, they're doing lab work, and they're getting results from the labs
that are showing that she is not smoking. Her carbon monoxide levels -- or her oxyhemoglobin, I think he said, those values are for nonsmokers. And those medical records are in the record.
So at least for the last six months, we have concrete proof from the time she meets with her doctor in January until she unfortunately passes away, we know that she's not smoking in that time period.
All right. Now, I did have that medical record. There it is.
Social history is notable. A two- to three-pack-a-day smoking habit that she discontinued four years ago. No alcohol use.
There you go. January 30th 1996.
All right. I told you the term control -- I told you the term control wouldn't appear on the verdict form. It doesn't. It doesn't.
But responsibility does. A lot. And what I'd like to do now is just walk you through.
There's an issue in this case about reliance, and I'll show you that here in a little bit. But just to sort of review -- since we just walked through her story, just to review:
Did Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds influence
her to begin smoking?
No evidence of that.
Did Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds influence her to keep smoking?
No evidence of that.
Did she ever say she blamed the cigarette companies for her illness?
No.
Did she ever bring a lawsuit?
No.
Did she ever say she was misled by Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds?
No.
Did she ever mention the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, the Council For Tobacco Research, or the Tobacco Institute?
No.
Did she own stock in Philip Morris?
Yes.
For purposes of this youth marketing stuff, was she a teenager in the '60s, '70s, '80s, '90s?
Did she ever say, I think filtered cigarettes are safe?
Did she ever say, I'm relying on a Benson & Hedges ad?
The only one that is a yes is she owned stock in Philip Morris, along with her husband.
All right. Here's the first question you have to answer; and, in fact, it's actually two questions at once. There's a break.
Was Mrs. Sermons addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?
Okay. Well, it's interesting that Mr. Rainer started talking about the Fagerstrom test because both his expert and our expert told you that neither one of them find the Fagerstrom test to be the test to determine whether or not someone is addicted or not. So I don't know why we keep talking about the Fagerstrom test.
They both agreed that there was one test to determine whether or not you are or not addicted. And this is a medical diagnosis. And this is diagnosing you with a mental disorder. And this is a big deal and not taken lightly and not done in cookbook fashion.
So who came here to talk about it? Because you're going to get an instruction . . .
You're going to get an instruction -Michael, can I have the ELMO?
You'll get an instruction on experts. It says:
Expert opinions, instruction number 5.
You have heard opinion testimony on certain technical subjects from persons referred to as expert witnesses.
You may accept such opinion testimony, reject it, or give it the weight you think it deserves, considering the knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education of the witness, the reasons given by the witness for the opinions expressed, and all the other evidence in the case.
So I just did a little comparison -I need to lose some weight.
I just did a little comparison between Dr. Ticknor and Dr. Werner. You remember that Dr. Ticknor teaches medical students at the University of Texas School of Medicine how to diagnose nicotine addiction at the University of Texas. Dr. Werner gives lectures to people who want to testify about what clothes to wear, how to dress for success in front of juries, how to look at juries or take your eyes away and be sure and come back to the juror.
I am violating every rule she said about how to dress. Not intentionally, but I just know I am.
Dr. Ticknor has spent 20 years as a board
examiner determining whether or not people who are sitting for the Texas medical licensing board are qualified.
Dr. Werner failed her medical license exam twice. You remember I asked her, How many times did you fail it? And she couldn't even remember how many times she failed. That is a heck of a memory.
Dr. Ticknor was criticized because he only sees 30 or 40 patients at a time who are there just to come to him for quitting smoking, whether they're addicted or not.
Yet Dr. Werner is somebody who is currently seeing patients in a crisis. You remember I asked her, You mean when you interview these people, there's a guy that will come in in handcuffs and he's on methamphetamine and you ask him, Are you a smoker? Are you interested in quitting smoking?
MR. RAINER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: All right. Sustained. I do not recall that line of questioning.
MR. REILLY: I asked her whether or not, when people came into her facility in crisis, in crisis, whether or not she interviewed them to determine whether or not they were smokers and whether or not they met the DSM-5 criteria for being addicted.
In crisis.
So, yes, they did both use -- they did both apply the DSM-5 criteria, and they agreed on 7 of the 11 criteria. They did. And they disagreed on 4.
And they each gave their reasons for why they disagreed on the 4. And, quite honestly, you guys are challenged with deciding which explanation made more sense to you. And that's what it all boils down to.
The judge isn't going to give you anymore information about how to make the determination as to whether or not she met the criteria or not. You guys are just challenged. We're turning each of you into psychiatrists. And I realize that's a challenge, but we made you lawyers, now we're going to make you psychiatrists.
Well, criteria number 1: Tobacco taken in larger amounts over longer period of time than intended.
Dr. Ticknor said no. He said, You know what?
We don't know what Mrs. Sermons intended when she was beginning smoking.
And so the question was then posed to him,
Well, how about all those times that she said she
wanted to quit and -And he said, You know what? That's a different criteria. And I gave her that. That's the criteria about persistent desire to quit. I already gave her that. This is a different criteria.
Dr. Werner said, Well, she was bumming her cigarettes from her husband when she was running out of cigarettes, or she might go to the store to get some.
Now, you guys have to decide for yourselves:
Is that really satisfying tobacco taken in larger amounts over a longer period of time than intended just because she didn't go to the store? I mean, does that really and truly satisfy that in your minds?
Number six, continued tobacco use despite having persistent or recurrent social or interpersonal problems.
Now Dr. Ticknor said, No. That Mrs. Sermons liked to smoke with family and friends. She had respectful conversations with Michael. There was no yelling, screaming, or threatening.
You know what? What he's telling you here is you want to know about a serious persistent or recurrent social interpersonal problem that's when
your wife really lays down the law and says, You either quit or I'm getting out of here. Or -- I mean, it's really a serious problem.
Not when your son comes to you and says, Gosh, Mom, I would really like you to quit. I would really like you to quit.
Did they get in little squabbles because she said I can't or I'm trying. You get to put on your psychiatrist hat.
Important social, occupational, recreational activities were given up or reduced. The whole thing here was she limited her stays when visiting her son's home. She said she could go outside to smoke any time she wanted because she was not allowed to smoke in the house and would go outside. She's limited the time she spent at church because she would immediately get in her car and leave.
But Dr. Ticknor told you, Look, if you really what to have -- and this is a mental disorder. If you really want to know if somebody can't handle this and what that really means is you don't go to church or if you go to church, you can't stay there.
You can't control yourself. You got to get up and leave.
You guys are the psychiatrists. You make up
your minds.
Withdrawal. Nobody reported that she had withdrawal symptoms at any time. At any time.
Dr. Werner said the first thing she does after being at her car -- out of church is get in her car and leave so she can smoke and stop having withdrawal symptoms.
That really comes back to this very same situation over here.
But as you saw in the criteria, there was no indication of her having withdrawal symptoms that I showed you the list of a little earlier. Nobody reported that.
All right. So how about: Well, she smoked a lot of cigarettes over a long period of time?
That doesn't get it. If that's all you needed to know, then both experts would have said, You know what? We all agree. All you need to know is how many cigarettes did you smoke and for how long.
Well, she's a two- to three-pack-a-day smoker.
How about if -- how about if she cries when she isn't successful at quitting? Because we heard that testimony. Dr. Ticknor told you, You know what? People get upset when they aren't successful at something that they try to do but that doesn't mean
you're addicted. People get upset when they don't do -- don't succeed at stuff they want to do all the time. Doesn't mean they're addicted.
If that's all you needed to know, then we wouldn't need to go through this whole DSM-5 process, right?
So there you go. You guys have to decide this.
Who has the burden of proof? Well, the burden of proof rests on the shoulders of the plaintiff.
Philip Morris, R. J. Reynolds don't have that burden of proof.
What is that burden? The burden of proof, as you're going to see in the instructions from Judge Daniel is the greater weight of the evidence for these issues.
What does that mean? Does that mean that they just have to have a little tiny bit of evidence?
No. It means they have to come with more persuasive evidence, more powerful evidence than what we've presented to you. From a better authority? No.
That's their burden.
Okay. The second half of that question -- the second half of that question is -- because you're not done: If you are -- you know, I think the evidence shows that she wasn't addicted, but if you
conclude that -- as psychiatrists, if you all unanimously conclude that she was addicted, then you have to go to the second half of the question because your work is only half done. And then you have to decide whether the addiction was a legal cause of her lung cancer and/or her emphysema.
MR. RAINER: Your Honor, I object to the remark.
THE COURT: All right. I'm not -- I -- I don't know that there is a basis for this. Overruled unless you want a sidebar. I'm not sure what you're talking about.
MR. RAINER: If I may, Your Honor?
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
[#DELETED RECESS#]
MR. REILLY: Thank you, Your Honor.
I had no idea I had taken so long. Sorry.
If we go back to where I was.
The second half of this question is: And if so, was such addiction a legal cause of the lung cancer and her emphysema?
Okay. So now we're going to make you lawyers because you're going to have to understand what legal cause means. And this is the easy-to-read instruction you're going to get.
It says -- I'm standing in everybody's way, I know. It says that addiction is a legal cause of disease if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing the disease that it can reasonably -- so that it can reasonably be said that, but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the disease would not have occurred.
It just rolls off the tongue, doesn't it?
This is -- all right. So let me just highlight a few words here to help you with this.
Legal cause. Addiction is a legal cause of disease if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially -- it could do either one -- to producing the disease so that it can reasonably be said that, but for an addiction, the disease wouldn't have occurred.
Okay. What's really key about this? What's really key about this is that addiction has to be an important contributing reason why somebody smokes. How important? Well, this is actually -- these are actually the two key words: "but for" being addicted. And in this instance what does it mean in this application? It means that but for being addicted, Mrs. Sermons wouldn't have smoked and gotten lung cancer and emphysema -- or emphysema.
That's what that boils down to.
There's another instruction that goes along with it called concurring cause, where something else could contribute as well but the addiction still has to be a "but for" reason why she continued to smoke, smoke long enough to develop lung cancer or emphysema.
So what does that really mean? That means that
if she -- if you conclude that she was addicted, and that's the first step, you guys, as psychiatrists, you may conclude no, she wasn't. Because you may conclude that they have failed to carry their burden of proof. That when you compare the opinions of the doctor that came from the University of Texas versus the doctor that came from the Medical School of the Caribbean, that one bears greater weight than the other one for you, you may conclude that.
And then you may conclude that the answer to this question is already known.
But then if you get past that, then you have to answer the question: Well, would she have quit smoking if she hadn't been addicted and quit in time to avoid developing her disease? Would she have given up the pleasure, the satisfaction, the stress relief, the socialization with her husband, with her friends, with her family? Would she have done all that?
And if you're not persuaded that the answer to that is yes, she would have, then the answer to this question is no again.
Now these are questions that you guys have to answer unanimously. And it may be that some of you say, Well, I don't think she was addicted, and some
other ones say, Well, even if she was -- I think she may have been, but I don't think it was a legal cause of why she developed her disease. Then the answer here is still no. You don't have to be unanimous on the issue itself. You just have to be unanimous on the answer to the question.
Okay. Now, if you answer this question no, then you'll see on the verdict form it tells you don't go any further. Your work is done. You needn't go any further.
If you answer this question yes, then you have to answer this second question. And I'm -- I don't think you get any further than question 1, but because you have a verdict form and because I don't know how you're going to vote, I'm going to go through all the questions. Except I'm not going to cover the -- the damages issue. Hassia has warned me that if I steal her thunder I'll be in big trouble.
So the second question is: Was smoking cigarettes because of addiction to each defendant's cigarettes a legal cause of why she developed lung cancer and emphysema?
And this is kind of a funny question in a case where she smokes Pall Mall -- she only smokes two
brands of cigarettes with any regularity, right?
So -- and she smokes, she gets lung cancer, she gets emphysema.
Well, this is really just a question of proof.
Did they carry their burden of proving that cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris were actually a legal cause of why she developed cancer, emphysema. And that's -- that's really for you guys to decide. That's a legal-cause question.
The same legal standard, you know, the same legal standard.
Here's what you're going to read about that.
And I realize this concept, you don't encounter it in your normal lives. You've never been asked to make a decision like this ever before in your life.
But when you raised your hand and took the oath and became jurors, you took on this responsibility.
So once again it says:
Smoking because of addiction to a defendant's cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of her lung cancer or emphysema -- again, the key words here are "but for" that smoking, her lung cancer or emphysema wouldn't have occurred.
And if your answer to these questions is no, then once again you don't go on and answer any more
questions, your work is done.
If -- these are like stop signs: stop sign 1, stop sign 2. If you get beyond those two questions, then you have to answer question 3. And that is: What percentage of responsibility, fault, was a legal cause of Mrs. Lung Cancer -- Mrs. Sermons' lung cancer and emphysema that you charge to Philip Morris, R. J. Reynolds, and Mrs. Sermons?
Now, Mr. Rainer told you that these numbers are like 35 percent, 55 percent, and 10 percent. He said -- I guess what he was saying is that if Myra Sermons were here, she would tell you, I'm only 10 percent responsible for all the decisions I made in my life about smoking.
But you know that Myra Sermons didn't bring this lawsuit. If Myra Sermons were here, would she say, I have only 10 percent of responsibility?
Truly? When I made the decision to begin, when I made the decision to continue, when I made the decision? She's not addicted when she began. She's not addicted when she continues.
You have to really ask yourself, would Myra Sermons have said -- in her whole life, in her whole life did she say to anybody that somebody else is responsible for the decisions I made? Did anybody
come here and say Myra Sermons said Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds or somebody else is responsible for the decisions that I made?
Sitting there, you know the answer to that question.
Mr. Rainer says, Well, Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds aren't accepting any responsibility.
Ladies and Gentlemen, this is a case about one smoker. This question doesn't say did Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds ever do anything wrong? I told you in my opening statement, Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds did stuff that they wouldn't do today. You wouldn't -- nobody would do today. But that's not this question.
It says:
Percentage of fault that was a legal cause of Mrs. Sermons' lung cancer and emphysema.
This isn't a general inquiry as to whether or not they clung too long to the position that smoking hadn't been proven or that they were incorrect when they disagreed with the Surgeon General in 1988 about whether or not smoking was addicting. It doesn't say that.
What it says is you have to determine whether or not but for some action by Philip Morris or
R. J. Reynolds they have a percentage of responsibility for the fact that she developed lung cancer and emphysema.
And I'm not going to walk you back through the story. I walked you through it. I walked you through it. Nobody else.
So would she have said, No. Somebody else shares this responsibility. If you think she would have said that, then put a number there.
You remember they've admitted that she would have said, yes.
Oh, and one other thing you need to know in answering that question. The judge has instructed you that after 1969 the warning labels placed on the cigarette packs by Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds and the other Engle defendants complied with federal law, and Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds and the other Engle defendants had no legal obligation to place additional warnings on their packaging, advertising, or promotional materials.
You know, that's why I guess it's really important to point out that Mrs. Sermons never smoked a cigarette made by Philip Morris that didn't have the warning label on it.
So I leave those percentages to your sound
discretion under -- in these circumstances -- in this case.
Questions 4 and 5: Did Mrs. Sermons reasonably rely -- reasonably rely to her detriment on statements by each defendant?
First of all, this requires that Mrs. Sermons heard a statement by Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds. Where in all of this trial did you hear anybody come here and say that Mrs. Sermons even heard a statement much less -- much less relied on it to her detriment?
What does to her detriment mean here? Well, it must have impacted her smoking decision, right?
Where in this whole trial did somebody come in and say Mrs. Sermons said she heard a statement much less relied on it to her detriment?
Mr. Rainer said, Well, but she said she thought -- she told her son that she thought that filtered cigarettes were a little less dangerous.
She never said where she got that idea. She never said she got such an idea from Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds or that she ever heard a statement from them to that effect.
In fact, if you look at an ad for Benson &
Hedges cigarettes -- I think there are probably some
in evidence -- they don't say that these filtered cigarettes are safer than somebody else's cigarettes -- an unfiltered cigarette.
You heard from Dr. Proctor that the public health community was telling people in the '60s, '70s, '80s, '90s, until 2000 that in fact filtered cigarettes were a little less risky in terms of lung cancer. But Mrs. Sermons never said and, in fact, relied on it.
What did Mr. Sermons say? He said, When my mother said that to me, what did I say to her? I said, Mom, it's still a cigarette. And what did she respond? I know.
The same with Mrs. Mercer.
So what is the answer to this question? No and no. Because it has to have -- with such reliance, it has to have been a cause of her lung cancer and/or emphysema.
And the same is true for this conspiracy. She still has to have reasonably relied on statements by either Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds or some other company there was still no evidence of any kind to support this claim. None.
So the answers to these questions again is no and no.
All right. I'm getting very close, and you've been very patient with me.
The last question on the verdict form -- I don't think you'll ever get here, but I'm going to go through it with you:
Under the circumstances of this case, are punitive damages warranted against each defendant by clear and convincing evidence?
Clear and convincing evidence.
Here's another easy-to-read definition of clear and convincing evidence. I'm sorry. This is when punitive damages are warranted.
The key here to this is it has to have been conduct causing the loss to Mrs. Sermons. And you have to ask yourself: Is there any connection between any action of Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds other than the fact that they made the cigarettes that Mrs. Sermons smoked? The ones that she liked the best. Remember, she liked the taste, the feel. She liked them best. No question.
So they want to -- you have to decide whether or not -- well, you know that it's a legal product, and you can't hold them liable for punitive damages just because they made cigarettes. That can't happen. That can't be the basis. No debate.
So are punitive damages warranted in this case? No. Because there is no connection between whatever the conduct that they're complaining about, marketing to youth in the '70s, '80s, and '90s when she's 30, 40, 50, 60 years old.
It says making cigarettes with ammonia or with additives. You remember I asked Dr. Proctor, I said, Dr. Proctor, are cigarettes made with ammonia any more dangerous or addicting than cigarettes that aren't? He said no.
I said, Are cigarettes made with additives any more or dangerous or addictive than cigarettes that aren't?
He said no.
He didn't even tell you whether or not Benson & Hedges cigarettes are made with ammonia. He didn't even tell you that. There's no evidence of that.
Marlboros. He talked all about Marlboros. Did Mrs. Sermons ever smoke Marlboros? Nope.
Clear and convincing evidence, a much higher standard.
Clear and convincing evidence differs from the greater weight of the evidence in that it's more compelling and persuasive. Greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive and convincing
force and effect of the entire evidence in the case.
In contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction about the matter in issue.
I am sure that in your lives -- and you don't leave your common sense at the door. Matter of fact, the instructions tell you use it. There are times in your lives when you're called on to deal with things with precision. You know what that means. You apply it in your own lives. And that's what this standard is.
So what's the answer here? No and no.
All right. By the way, the Court also instructs you -- you know those findings by that jury in the earlier Engle trial? They have no application in determining whether or not punitive damages are warranted in this case. None. That's a specific, explicit instruction. The only evidence you may consider on this issue is the evidence presented to you in this trial.
And the only connection between Mrs. Sermons and Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds is we made the cigarettes she smoked.
And although you've heard about the number of
deaths from smoking, you can't seek to punish Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds for any harm suffered by any persons other than Mrs. Sermons, only for the harms suffered by Mrs. Sermons which were caused by the defendants' punishable conduct.
So if you get that far on the verdict form, the answers here are no and no.
Now, the Court's instructions go on from there they say: If you answer those questions yes, then there will be another phase of this trial.
And I think the Court indicates to you that there will be openings, witnesses, evidence, deliberations, and there will be a request for even more money than the compensatory damages for Mr. Sermons as the representative of the estate of his mother.
All right. That concludes my closing argument. And I just want to say thanks again. Sorry I took so long.
Hassia's turn.



MS. DIOLOMBI: Thank you, Your Honor.
Good afternoon.
THE JURY: Good afternoon.
MS. DIOLOMBI: As Ken mentioned, I'm going to be talking to you about the compensatory damages. The damages that plaintiff wants you to award in this case.
Now, quite frankly and candidly, as Ken mentioned, we don't think you get that far in the verdict form. But if you do get that far, it is the determination of each and every one of you as to whether or not you will provide money damages in this case.
And since plaintiff addressed the issue, let me respond.
The one and only question on the verdict form that's going to relate to compensatory damages is the one that you can see on your screen which says:
What is the total amount, 100 percent, of any damages sustained by Myra Sermons?
And that question is about Myra Sermons and Myra Sermons alone. There is no claim for damages in this case for Billy Sermons; for Rusty Sermons, who you heard a lot about; or for the plaintiff,
Michael Sermons.
And what this question is also not about, it is not -- and Mr. Reilly told you, it is not about any damages related to Mrs. Sermons' colon cancer.
This question is about Myra Sermons and any damages plaintiff has proven to you by the greater weight of the evidence is related to her emphysema, which we know was moderate, and to her lung cancer, which we know was cured by her 1990 lobectomy.
So if you get to this question, you will have to decide if you're going to award any money for that and that alone.
So let me start with her lung cancer. We know that in 1990 Mrs. Sermons is changing gynecologists. Her daughter-in-law, Susan Sermons, refers her to a doctor in her doctor's practice, and he tells Mrs. Sermons, I will not take you on as a patient unless you get a chest x-ray. Why? Because you're a smoker.
So you know what? In 1990 she does go in, and she gets a chest x-ray in December. They find something in her lung. They remove tissue from it, and it turns out to be cancerous.
Within a couple of weeks, she goes in for surgery, and she has the left upper lobe of her lung removed.
Now, you've heard from Dr. Frazier, Dr. Burns, that that upper lobe -- or, actually, Dr. Frazier told you that -- upper lobe represents a fifth of her lung. 20 to 25 percent of her lung.
You heard from both Dr. Burns and Dr. Frazier that we have enormous excess lung capacity.
Dr. Frazier, if you recall, described it or used the example of if you took the lungs and you were able to spread them out over a tennis court, they would cover the surface area of a tennis court.
Dr. Frazier told you that a person who loses up to 20 to 25 percent of their lung the way Myra Sermons did can lose that much lung and have no symptoms.
Now, we know that Mrs. Sermons' doctors did an amazing job and they caught all the cancer with that surgery. And Dr. Frazier told you they would have told her that. They would have told her that.
What Dr. Frazier also tells you is that she's going to learn after they've removed that portion of her lung and that they've gotten all the cancer, that she's not going to need chemotherapy or radiation. She doesn't need any further treatment.
She's going to learn that, you know what?
There's a 70 to 80 percent chance that her lung cancer will not recur. And with each passing year, you heard from Dr. Frazier, that chance of it not coming back is going to get greater and greater.
And she's going to know that.
And do we have to guess what her reaction is to that type of news? No. You heard from Pastor Pietrylo, he said when he met her after her lung surgery, she was optimistic.
We showed you photos. You can see them on your screen, but photos of Mrs. Sermons days after her surgery. How did her daughter-in-law describe her?
She said she was dolled up. This was a woman who took care of her appearance. She has her makeup on, her hair done. She's wearing the red dressing gown set that her husband buys her.
And look what she's doing. She's giving the "A okay" sign. Her son Michael Sermons, there he is. They're all smiling. She's waving at the camera, "A
okay."
Now, if you look at these pictures, she's opening presents. She's not on oxygen. And there's no evidence in the records that Mrs. Sermons was ever prescribed oxygen at home after her 1990 surgery or at any other time.
There is no question that Myra Sermons underwent major surgery. There's no question that that surgery was not going to be easy, right? It's going to be painful. It's going to leave a scar.
But there's also no question that she's told, as I said, 70 to 80 percent chance of no recurrence.
And you know what? She's going to have to go in for -- every several months for a period of time to find out if that cancer has come back.
But what is the evidence in this case? The evidence is that every time she went in she got the good news -- and, yes, it's good news -- that there is no cancer in her lung. Each and every time she went back.
How do we know that?
THE COURT: Hold on.
MR. RAINER: I wish to be heard, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Okay.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MS. DIOLOMBI: Madam Court Reporter, where was
I?
All right. So we know that for a time, as she's going in for these follow-up visits,
Mrs. Sermons is going to be told that the doctors see no cancer in her lung.
And you know what? We know also if you look at the records, Mr. Rainer put up one of the records, her doctors find out she doesn't have lung cancer when she's passing away from colon cancer. It's undisputed. It's in the stipulation. The judge
read it to you. It will be in the instructions that you have.
Now, you know, plaintiff and his wife and his niece tried to maintain or did maintain that after the lung surgery, which they knew was successful, which they knew had gotten all the cancer, mom's not on oxygen, she's not receiving chemotherapy or radiation, they maintained that she was sad after the lung surgery, that her life never went back to normal, right?
Susan Mercer said she stopped going to the beach. She stopped going to the zoo. They talked about her not going to restaurants anymore, not being the life of the party, not being able to shop, barely being able to walk without assistance.
But on cross-examination, Mr. Reilly went through photographs with Mr. Sermons showing his mother doing all the things that she apparently wasn't able to get back to in 1991, 1992.
I mean, she's going to restaurants. She's still going to Pensacola to visit her family. She's going to the beach with one of her grandsons. They said she couldn't do that. She's out eating with her family.
1993. Here she is. That's her sister.
They're out somewhere having a good time.
There she is in 1993 at a park with her grandson at the zoo. At the mall for clown day.
Do you have another picture, Mike?
But, anyway, so we see that these are the activities that she's doing after her lung surgery.
You know what? Pictures tell a thousand words, and sometimes you don't remember things until we go back and we look at the pictures that we have, and it reminds us.
What these pictures are telling us is a very different story.
And you know what? Susan Sermons told us that Mrs. Sermons went on a several-day trip to Branson, Missouri, with her sister. She -- I showed her a photo, and I said, Where is that? Branson,
Missouri. So she's still going on vacation. She's still enjoying time with her family.
What these pictures show is a woman after lung cancer surgery who's being told year after year that there's no recurrence of cancer in her lung, enjoying the same activities after the surgery that they this told us she enjoyed before the surgery.
You know, talking about photos, I showed you some other photos of Rusty Sermons.
Mike, if we could do that.
You heard a lot about Rusty Sermons. Yes, he did have hearing disabilities, some hearing impairment. But you know what Mrs. Sermons' worry was about Rusty Sermons, as you heard from her daughter-in-law? What was she worried about? What stressed her out? What caused her to smoke more was Rusty riding motorcycles, hanging out at biker bars, drinking too much, she thought. Of course, as a mother. Smoking. Those were the things she worried about.
What did Pastor Pietrylo say? She starts worrying about Rusty really taking care of him at the end of her life when what is going on? She is dying from lung cancer, and there's no claim for damages.
MR. REILLY: Colon cancer.
MS. DIOLOMBI: I mean colon cancer. I apologize.
She is dying of colon cancer of which there is no claim for damages for in this case.
Thanks, Ken.
You know what? I forgot. Another thing Pastor Pietrylo told us, when they say that she wasn't able to walk without assistance? What did he say? He
met her after her lung cancer surgery. She spent four years going to church on Sunday, coming to church, leaving church on her own with no assistance. That was what Pastor Pietrylo told us.
So then let's talk about her moderate emphysema.
You know, I submit it's not the moderate emphysema that's interfering with Mrs. Sermons' life in those last years captured in her medical records which you're going to have back in the jury room with you.
How do we know that? Well, because Mrs. Sermons' life really took a dramatic and drastic downturn. Because what happened? In January 1995, they find out that she has liver metastasis. She's got endstage incurable cancer.
Now, there is no question that initially her doctors thought that she might have had a new growth in her lung, and that that recurrence might have come from her lung cancer. They did think that.
It's in the medical records.
But there is no question, the plaintiff agrees -- again, the judge has read it to you -that they ultimately find out that what is going on is colon cancer.
And you know what? When they found the liver metastasis -- and remember, she had multiple lesions growing in her liver. They're growing and they're causing her liver to enlarge and taking up space in her abdomen. But you know what else was there? A colon mass. A large colon mass.
They actually tried to biopsy it. They knew they didn't go deep enough. But you know what? Her condition was terminal at that point, so they left the colon mass alone. They knew it was there. They knew it was growing. It wasn't until March of 1996 that she goes into severe pain and they have to surgically remove that mass.
Is she experiencing shortness of breath? Of course. That's what happens when you're dying.
The records -- Mr. Rainer put one up. The records show that she's complaining that the shortness of breath might have started in 1994. There's a record that dates it maybe to 1993.
Do we know how long the colon cancer had been growing? No, we don't know. We don't know exactly when it started growing. We don't know exactly when her shortness of breath started.
But what Dr. Frazier told us is that, you know what? To be endstage the way she was in January of
1995, to have that cancer spreading the way it was with all those masses in her abdominal area, the cancer had to have been there for a while.
Now, remember, shortness of breath is not a disease. It's a symptom. It's a symptom of something going on. And you know what?
Mrs. Sermons' doctors would have to try to find out, figure out what's going on. Why is she short of breath? Why she experiencing shortness of breath?
But does she immediately go in to get it checked out? No. You know why? Because we are dealing with -- really, truly, what's her most pressing issue in 1995? And that is that endstage colon cancer.
So they try to treat it. They know there's no cure. So what does she get? Palliative care, palliative chemotherapy, palliative radiation to try to ease her pain. Not pain from her 1990 lung cancer. Not pain from her moderate emphysema. Pain from cancer. So they're radiating the rib lesions that she now has. She's got spinal lesions. She starts receiving chemotherapy and radiation.
And really it's not until April of 1995 -Mike, do we have that record?
As you'll see, in April of 1995, she declines
to see Dr. Millstone for a pulmonary evaluation.
She declines to. Is it any surprise she declines?
This same record tells us that she's been receiving treatment for her cancer.
At this point she had been diagnosed with her cancer for about two and a half months. That's what she's dealing with.
So she doesn't go in for a consult to see a lung specialist to find out if there's anything going on with her lungs causing her shortness of breath.
It's really -- it's not until a year later,
January of 1996 and February of 1996, that she has a step test done. You heard about that. And she has a pulmonary function test done.
What do we know about pulmonary function tests? You heard from plaintiff's expert -- or actually the treater, Mrs. Sermons' treater, Dr. Krowka, who was taking care of her long before any lawsuit was filed. You heard from him by deposition that was read to you. You also heard from Dr. Frazier: When you are taking a pulmonary function test, you have to give maximal effort.
And what happens? The people giving the test cheer you on. Cheer you on to give your best
effort. Because what did Dr. Krowka tell us?
Dr. Krowka said that if you're weak, if you're ill, if you're under performing, it's going to impact the quality of that test.
And what do we know is going on with Mrs. Sermons when she's having her test done? She's dying of colon cancer. She's weak. She's ill.
So what's the result of the pulmonary function test? What is the result, when she is dying of colon cancer? Despite having a lobectomy? Despite having emphysema? Dr. Leventhal -- if you read along on your screen. So as a part -- she gets an evaluation. She had some pulmonary functions. And it goes down:
The previous evaluation at Mayo Clinic on February 5th, 1996, showed only -- his words -moderate emphysema and normal vital capacity.
Normal vital capacity and moderate -- only moderate emphysema.
Remember Dr. Frazier told you emphysema can be mild, moderate, severe, or very severe. So her emphysema isn't severe, and it's not very severe, even as she's dying of colon cancer.
You know, there is a record from Dr. Johnson.
You heard her by deposition on her video. She said
that -- in 1996 there's a record where she said severe emphysema, but in her deposition, she's clear: She overstated it. And what it should have said is moderate, moderate emphysema.
Now, Dr. Frazier told you what symptoms he would expect to see in one of his patients with moderate emphysema. If you recall, he said what he would expect is that a person with moderate emphysema would be able to walk the length of a football field, the length of a football field before getting short of breath and take a rest and then resume. A person with moderate emphysema could take a flight of stairs and then get short of breath, take a pause, and then resume.
What does Dr. Burns, plaintiff's own expert, tell us about lung capacity again?
Dr. Burns says, in his video that you saw, that you have to lose 70 percent of your lung function or capacity in order to be short of breath.
70 percent. Even with her lobectomy, even with her moderate emphysema, no one came in here and said that Mrs. Sermons had lost even close to 70 percent of her lung function or capacity. That's not in the medical records. It's definitely not reflected in her pulmonary function test.
What's really going on with Mrs. Sermons: Worsening decline from her colon cancer which started -- took a year and a half before she died.
Again, the massive growths in the abdomen, which ultimately have to be surgically removed, so then the pain of those lesions spreading, growing.
The pain of the surgery to address her colon cancer. She's anemic. She's losing weight rapidly. You hear that she becomes cachexic. She's wasting away.
You know, as Mrs. Sermons' cancer progressively worsens, what happens to her moderate emphysema? Does it get worse? No. It stays stable.
But unfortunately what happens with death her shortness of breath continues to worsen. Do we know why it's worsening? Yeah. We saw -- you know what? Mr. Rainer put up a record from Dr. Leventhal with the different factors. There were five. He split them up and put the anxiety for both lung cancer and then for her colon cancer. Those -- those five things were not the only thing going on with her.
They're not.
Yes, her lobectomy and moderate emphysema were two of the factors. But you know what's telling?
Mrs. Sermons is given inhalers and nebulizers to use. They make her jittery. And what do the
records tell us?
Well, if you look right at the bottom, it says:
She's current on Atrovent inhaler from which she gets only minimal relief.
This record also tells you that she's incredibly anxious. Why? She tells her own doctors she's incredibly anxious, breathing rapidly, and concerned about dying. Dying from colon cancer.
She reports some pain in the right upper quadrant, which on a scale of 0 to 10 is an 8.
What did Dr. Johnson say in her deposition?
That pain on a scale of 10 being an 8 is directly related to her colon cancer, not her emphysema.
Not -- not her lung cancer from 1990.
She doesn't have an appetite. Yes. She's shortness of breath. She's dying. She was going to pass away -- this is May 24th, '96. She dies June 9th, 1996, two short weeks -- actually, days, two weeks from the date of this record. Is it any wonder she's short of breath?
And we know that she gets a blood transfusion.
Mike, do we have that record?
She gets a blood transfusion why? You don't get blood transfusions for moderate emphysema. You don't get blood transfusions for lung cancer that's
no longer there. What she gets a blood transfusion for is anemia. Anemia.
So the inhalers and nebulizers for emphysema are giving her minimal relief. But you know what does give her relief? A transfusion. Following the transfusion for several days -- right? -- she improved moderately following the transfusions for several days. And what does she do? She goes shopping. She gets her hair done. The things she enjoys.
It's not the emphysema treatment that's giving her relief. It's the treatment addressing the issue she's having from her colon cancer that give her some relief.
So you saw the record about her being anxious. Anxiety causes shortness of breath. And she's -- I showed you she's telling her doctors because she's dying. We know that she's dying of colon cancer.
What else is making her anxious? You've heard over and over this is a woman who took great care of her appearance, and now she's got a colostomy bag that's helping her with bodily functions. And she tells her doctors that that is causing her great anxiety. Having that bag is causing her great anxiety.
That's what's causing her anxiety weeks before she passes away.
Again, the anemia, the cachexia, the anxiety, the abdominal surgery. We have a list.
Mike, if you could pull that up, please.
Abdominal surgery to remove the large colon mass. The placement of her colostomy bag. Her enlarged liver, the chemo, the radiation. Her pain on a sale of 8.
Ladies and Gentlemen, each and every one of those things can alone cause shortness of breath.
And each and every one of those things alone are related to her colon cancer. They're not related to her emphysema, which was moderate about 14 weeks before she passes away. And none of those things are related to her lobectomy, which was cured in 1990, because they never find anything in her lungs, ever.
With all of those things going on, is it any wonder she's short of breath and experiencing pain? Really?
The records paint a picture of a woman who, in the end, is really suffering from metastatic colon cancer that's ravaging her body. And we know it ultimately takes her life.
Not related to her 1990 lung cancer. Not related to her moderate emphysema. It just isn't.
Now, based on this record, all her medical records, what you've heard in this courtroom, you can absolutely separate out any damages from moderate emphysema and a lobectomy that cures a 1990 lung cancer from all the things she's suffering from as a result of her colon cancer. You can. You can parse them out.
You know, after hearing everything that Mrs. Sermons went through, it is completely natural for us to feel sympathy for what she underwent because we're human. So the judge and the instructions are going to tell you that any damages award you choose to award, if you get there, and if you do, can't be based on sympathy.
Now, Mr. Rainer in his closing asked you for close to $5 million. And to really put that number in context and perspective, he gave you a hypothetical. Let me put it in a little perspective.
It would take a family making $50,000 a year almost a 100 years to earn that type of money.
How did Mr. Rainer come up with the number? Obviously, I don't know. He gave us the chart. But
you know what? It's plaintiff's burden to prove damages, to prove every dollar amount that he asked for by the greater weight of the evidence.
So what's the evidence to support the number? Here's the bottom line. Whether to award plaintiff compensatory damages, and if so, the amount, is ultimately a determination for each and every one of you to make. Each of you has to decide what's appropriate. But it's a determination that not only has to be fair and just in light of the evidence, and you'll see that in your instruction, it has to be based only on evidence plaintiff produced and proved by the greater weight of the evidence.
I submit there isn't any evidence to support the close to $5 million number Mr. Rainer gave.
Those numbers could very well have been pulled out of the air or out of the hat. He could really just as easily have said $50,000. Neither number is really based on any evidence that you received in this case.
And you have an instruction that tells you that there's no exact standard for fixing compensatory award. There is no exact standard.
I submit that 50,000 would be a much more reasonable number in this particular case based on
the evidence. But you know what? Again, it's in your discretion. It's for each of you to determine, and only for each of you to determine and decide the amount, if any.
I'm done. Thank you each for your time and attention. Appreciate it. Thank you.
Your Honor, thank you.



MR. WALKER: Thank you, Your Honor.
Good evening, Ladies and Gentlemen.
THE JURY: Good evening.
MR. WALKER: You know, I'm last. I'm always last. I'm third here. And while I didn't get you right after lunch like Mr. Reilly did, I'm getting you at the end of the day when you are usually probably starting to think about what you might be having for dinner or something like that.
In any event, I want to thank you the way everyone else did. I was over there listening and, frankly, Mr. Reilly, Ms. Diolombi have already covered almost every reason that you have, given you all the tools that you need to come back with a defense verdict.
It's still my job to address some of the issues
that relate to R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and to American Tobacco Company, but I wondered if you-all noticed something that I noticed while I was sitting over there listening to Mr. Reilly.
And just like during opening, when he was giving his closing argument here, it starts thundering outside. And I enjoyed working with Mr. Reilly in this case. It's not the first time I've worked with the two of them. But he won't share with me the secret that he has to make it thunder when he's talking.
So I don't think it will happen while I'm here, but maybe right at the end when I ask for a defense verdict, maybe there will be a big thunder from outside.
Let's see. So in opening I started off by telling you kind of why I'm here. How Reynolds fits into the case. You've probably heard it a gazillion times now. The primary reason you didn't hear as much from me is because Mrs. Sermons was really never an R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company customer. But over the years -MR. RAINER: Sidebar, Your Honor.
THE COURT: All right. Sustained.
Can I see everyone at sidebar.
(Sidebar was held outside the hearing of the
jury:)
MR. RAINER: I want sanctions, Your Honor.
This is outrageous.
MR. WALKER: He cut me off before I finished, Your Honor. She didn't -THE COURT: What were you going to say?
MR. WALKER: I'm here standing in the shoes of the American Tobacco Company. I'm Reynolds -MR. RAINER: I want -THE COURT: Slow down, slow down. Okay.
MR. RAINER: Okay.
THE COURT: Okay. What are you -- where are you going with this?
MR. WALKER: She didn't smoke Winston. We're not here because of any product that Reynolds made. We are here because I'm standing in the shoes of the American Tobacco Company. That's the exact same thing I said in opening.
THE COURT: Well, you still have issues with the conspiracy and everything else.
MR. WALKER: But, factually, Your Honor, I don't believe those are real issues for Reynolds from a factual matter.
THE COURT: I will tell that you I don't -- I
think that crosses the line. And really, you know, you can explain that -MR. WALKER: I'm trying to.
THE COURT: Well, the way you said it is worded we're only here because.
MR. WALKER: I didn't say that. I said the primary reason, which is the exact same -THE COURT: What you said was the reason why we're not really talking a lot is because she really wasn't a customer of ours.
MR. WALKER: And the very next thing I was going to say -THE COURT: It's sustained, okay? I don't think it's a fair comment.
MR. RAINER: Your Honor, I respectfully request that Your Honor, for the third time, instruct the jury that R. J. Reynolds has assumed the liability of American Tobacco Company.
MR. WALKER: That's absurd, Your Honor. That was the next thing I was going to say. And to now ask you to give an instruction -THE COURT: I am going to instruct the jury -we're going to remind them of my instruction that I gave earlier concerning, you know, the -- the -MR. RAINER: We've already worked it out.
THE COURT: And I will just edit some instruction number -MR. RAINER: It was early, as I recall.
THE COURT: It's number 13. I'm just going to remind them of instruction number 13.
MR. WALKER: I object, Your Honor.
THE COURT: All right.
MR. WALKER: Thank you.
(Sidebar was concluded and the following further proceedings were held:)
THE COURT: All right. Everyone settle back.
I sustained the objection, and I just want to call to the attention again of the jurors my instruction I've already given you. It's number 13, and it's simply this:
R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is the successor corporation to the American Tobacco Company and Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corporation.
Accordingly, R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is legally responsible for the conduct of both the American Tobacco Company and Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corporation and for any harm caused by cigarettes manufactured by American Tobacco Company and Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corporation.
All right? With that, you may continue.
MR. WALKER: Thank you, Your Honor.
So you've heard it now for the fifth or sixth time. I am hear answering the charges for Reynolds, Brown & Williamson, and the American Tobacco Company.
With respect to Reynolds, during Mrs. Sermons' lifetime, she was never interested in R. J. Reynolds Tobacco's offering. You saw some ads for Camel. You've heard a little bit about Winston. The facts of this case are that she never was interested in those brands that Reynolds was selling, making, marketing, none of that.
That is not going to be -- you're not going to hear any evidence, you haven't heard any evidence that anything about Camel or Winston or any of those Reynolds brands had any effect, any impact at all on Mrs. Sermons.
What's the other company you've heard about? Brown & Williamson. She never smoked Brown & Williamson products except maybe at the last two years when they were basically just Pall Mall products. But other products that Brown &
Williamson Tobacco Corporation made during Mrs. Sermons' lifetime didn't interest her.
Products like Kool and other things like that.
The main reason that I am here is that I am standing in the shoes of the American Tobacco Company. That is the company that made the Pall Mall cigarettes that she did smoke. And that is why, while I was sitting over there as Mr. Rainer said at the edge of the table, in between when I was walking back and forth up for the sidebars, I did really two things during this trial. Occasionally I would ask some questions if I thought that there was some testimony that you needed to hear to be helpful for the job you have to do at the end of this case.
A lot of times I didn't ask any questions because the witness didn't say anything about Pall Mall or about the American Tobacco Company.
The rest of the time, however, when I was sitting over there, I was listening, I was waiting,
I was keeping track of whether or not the plaintiffs put in any evidence about the American Tobacco Company. I had a sheet of paper, I wrote American Tobacco Company at the top, and I tried to keep a list.
Mr. Rainer in his closing was just talking to you about internal documents, internal memos that the authors didn't expect anyone to see.
So I kept track. There's some Pall Mall
smoking in this case. American Tobacco Company is implicated in this case because of that Pall Mall.
So I kept track. Where are the internal documents for the American Tobacco Company that I'm here to answer for for the Pall Mall? And you found out when I stood up to talk with Dr. Proctor that there were only two of them.
Setting aside jury selection, you've been here two weeks. Dr. Proctor was on the stand for about three days. You saw exactly two internal documents written by anyone at the American Tobacco Company. Dr. Proctor agreed with me, and I'm going to review those with you here very shortly.
Before I do that, though, I want to show you something on the verdict form.
Can I have the ELMO?
All right. I told you at the beginning of this case that this case was about one and only one smoker, and her name is Myra Sermons, and that every question that you would have to answer at the end of this case would be about her.
Question number 1 about Myra Sermons. Question number 2 is about Myra Sermons. Number 3, Myra Sermons. Myra Sermons in question 4. Question 5, Myra Sermons. Question 6, Myra Sermons. And then
question 7 doesn't have Myra Sermons on the verdict form, but in the instructions that the Court gave you about punitive damages, you'll see that even that question is also about Myra Sermons and any conduct, if there was any, that caused injury to her.
As Mr. Reilly went over with you, there can only ever be any punishment if there's any at all for the harms suffered by Myra Sermons.
Every single question.
And that's why, even though you've heard about all of these different companies that at one time or another became part of R. J. Reynolds -- you might have begun to think that Reynolds is the place where the tobacco companies go to die, the retirement home for failed tobacco companies -- the one that you should really be paying attention to is the American Tobacco Company, because that's the one that made the Pall Mall cigarettes that she actually smoke.
So what did you learn about Pall Mall cigarettes? And how is that going to come up on the verdict form?
Several of these questions -- and you'll see that some of these boxes are already filled in "no," because I never get to fill out verdict forms, and
when I was listening to Mr. Reilly, I took the liberty of checking no. So . . .
But, for example, question number 2 asks about R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. That question can't really be about Brown & Williamson or any product Reynolds made because Mrs. Sermons didn't smoke it. That's really about the American Tobacco Company.
The same with number 3. Same with number 4. And it's the same at the end with number 7.
Each of these questions is asking you something specifically, not just about cigarettes generally, not about the industry generally, but about -- but about the defendants who were in this case.
MR. RAINER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: All right. It's overruled. I don't see that that's improper.
MR. RAINER: May I be heard, please,
Your Honor?
THE COURT: You may.
(Sidebar was held outside the hearing of the
jury:)
THE COURT: Yes.
MR. RAINER: I don't have realtime, Your Honor, so perhaps I just heard, but I thought Mr. Walker just said that they could not answer responsibility
for R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company as though only R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company conduct was an issue.
MR. WALKER: I didn't say any such thing.
THE COURT: He was saying that with R. J. Reynolds being on the verdict form, it's on there because they're answering for the conduct of American Tobacco. And that's what we were talking about. That's what -- the statement you made.
MR. WALKER: Correct.
MR. RAINER: All right. It seemed to me that the suggestion was being made that somehow there is again a suggestion that there is some separation between R. J. Reynolds and American Tobacco. But I don't have the verdict form, I don't have the realtime, so I can't look at the transcript.
THE COURT: Well, I don't -- you can scan down.
MR. RAINER: Thank you so much, Your Honor.
He was pointing, Your Honor, to the question that -THE COURT: I'm sorry. I can't hear you.
MR. RAINER: I was of the understanding, and, again, perhaps I'm mistaken, that he was talking and concluding about the questions of including the conspiracy question.
MR. WALKER: You are mistaken.
MR. RAINER: All right. Thank you, Your Honor, for the sidebar.
THE COURT: That's all right.
(Sidebar was concluded and the following further proceedings were held:)
THE COURT: You may continue.
MR. WALKER: Thank you, Your Honor.
Let's pick up with what we were just talking about.
So I pointed out all the places on the verdict form where you will be asked separately about R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, and each one that you're going to see is asking with respect to R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, American Tobacco Company, whether the company did something that was a legal cause of Mrs. Sermons' lung cancer and emphysema.
That phrase "legal cause" comes up in each of these questions. And we saw on the instructions where it comes up for punitive damages as well.
So here's the issue:
What did you hear in this case about whether Pall Mall cigarettes, whether the American Tobacco Company did something that was a legal cause of harm to Mrs. Sermons? What did you hear about Pall Mall
in general? You heard pretty much what I told you in opening statements you would hear, which is that no one knows exactly when Mrs. Sermons started smoking Pall Mall cigarettes but that it was her primary brand for a period of time.
No one knows exactly when she started switching to another brand, but there's going to be -- there was evidence that she continued to smoke Pall Mall throughout this period, but then into the later years, some of the witnesses that you heard from didn't even remember seeing her smoking Pall Mall. Butler, for example, the neighbor, he mentioned only another brand, not Pall Mall.
Mrs. Sermons when she took the stand, she said, yeah, she -- she smoked some Pall Mall, but it was really just when she was bumming it from her husband, who was smoked Pall Mall cigarettes.
Importantly, you also heard a description of what the Pall Mall cigarettes were that Mrs. Sermons was smoking. Over and over again from more than one witness you heard that she smoked the Pall Malls that were in the red pack with white letters, and we reviewed Mr. Sermons testimony, his sworn testimony, that it was red pack, white letters, with a warning label on it.
And you know from the other evidence in the case what that warning label was:
Caution: Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health.
That was the first one.
MR. RAINER: Your Honor, may I be heard again, please?
THE COURT: You may.
(Sidebar was held outside the hearing of the
jury:)
MR. RAINER: These are not in evidence.
MR. WALKER: It's just a demonstrative,
Your Honor.
MR. RAINER: It is not.
MR. WALKER: It's a picture of the boxes that he showed in ads with the warning label on it. I don't have to use it.
THE COURT: If they were pictures used in -entered into evidence or shown to the jury, that's one thing, okay?
MR. WALKER: I won't use it, Your Honor.
THE COURT: All right. It's sustained.
MR. WALKER: Very well.
THE COURT: Okay.
(Sidebar was concluded and the following
further proceedings were held:)
MR. RAINER: Yes, Your Honor, I would actually ask that Your Honor give an instruction concerning what the jury was just shown.
THE COURT: All right. I -- I think it -- it's not -- I'll go ahead and state that was not -the -- the demonstrative aid which was just shown to you was not something that was actually entered into evidence in this case and so therefore it should not be considered by you in your considerations of the arguments by the attorneys.
All right. You may continue.
MR. WALKER: Thank you, Your Honor.
What you can consider is the testimony that you heard repeatedly from Mr. Sermons, particularly when I showed him his transcript that the Pall Mall cigarettes that he remembered were unfiltered Pall Malls in a red pack with white letters with warning labels on them.
You heard what those warning labels have been over time. I just read the first one from 1966.
The one after that was:
Warning: The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health.
So if we look at these two questions, number 2
and number 3, both questions ask -- call upon you to review the evidence collectively in your deliberations about whether there was some connection between a company that Reynolds was responsible for as a legal cause of Mrs. Sermons' lung cancer and/or emphysema.
Then you have to ask yourself what evidence did you hear about that? It's not going to be any product made by Reynolds. She didn't smoke them. It's not going to be a B&W product. She didn't smoke those. What you're left with, once again, is Pall Mall.
So on this first question, what witness came and testified that Mrs. Sermons was addicted to Pall Mall cigarettes?
No one.
What witness came and testified that the Pall Mall cigarettes that she clearly smoked for some period of time were a "but for" cause or a substantial contributing factor to her lung cancer and emphysema?
Nobody.
The fact of the matter is, the plaintiff called several witnesses about this. They called Dr. Werner. She gave a general opinion about
addiction. She was never even asked whether Mrs. Sermons was addicted to Pall Mall cigarettes.
They brought this Dr. Strauss, the oncologist.
They asked him about lung cancer just kind of generally. He was never asked whether or not the Pall Mall cigarettes specifically that you have to answer this question about were a substantial contributing cause of any of her injuries.
They brought Dr. Rosenbaum. He was the doctor who came in and talked about emphysema. They asked him a general question about whether or not cigarette smoking of all brands at all times was a cause of her emphysema, never even asked him whether the Pall Mall cigarettes that you have to answer these questions for were a "but for" legal cause of her injuries.
I want to show you this instruction that the judge has given you that you'll have to go back with you when you're deliberating.
It's talking about the duty of jurors to answer the questions on the verdict form, and it says:
Your job is to determine what the facts are.
You may use reason and common sense to reach conclusion. You may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence. But you should not guess about things
that were not covered here.
What is a thing that was not covered here in terms of answering these questions? All of the things that I just mentioned.
I don't know why the plaintiffs paid those experts to come all the way down here and answer questions for you without asking them these questions. I don't know what they would have said. You don't either. Your duty is not to speculate about that.
What about this next question -- actually, before I do that, I want to show you, you actually heard a little bit more about Pall Mall cigarettes.
You just didn't hear what you needed for that question. But I want to review with you one other thing.
All right. One of the documents the plaintiff showed you was not an American Tobacco Company document. It was this Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corporation document that I asked Proctor questions about.
Well, while we were looking at it, you saw this information which is in evidence. This says:
One company attempting to report on the nicotine levels in the cigarettes of another
company.
The key company to look for here, again, is American Tobacco Company. And you might remember that, for each of these periods where this was shown from 1960 through 1963, for each and every year the American Tobacco products had lower -- lower nicotine levels than the industry average every period.
Dr. Proctor agreed with me that, for each of these periods, American's cigarettes, which would include Pall Mall, were actually the lowest or second-lowest nicotine levels for every one of those periods.
Here's another one. This is a Reynolds document. Again, not an American Tobacco Company document, but a Reynolds document that plaintiff showed you. It's in evidence. And they showed you this trying to make a point about this idea about smoke pH. This idea that something was being done with the pH level of cigarette products to try and increase something about the delivery of nicotine.
And that document shows -- or says, anyway -that:
As the smoke pH increases above about 6.0, an increasing proportion of the total smoke nicotine
occurs in free form.
And you heard testimony about that.
What you didn't see at the time that you can see if you want to in this document is that, in the back of the document, there's actually a chart. And the chart shows, at least according to the author of this document, what the smoke pH levels were for other companies' products; in this case, Pall Mall.
And Pall Mall is the cigarette brand that's represented by those little triangles.
And remember, it said that only when you get above 6 does this argument about pH levels have some impact. And you can see, because I've highlighted -- I hope you can see the highlighting -- that these -- this triangle line that represents Pall Mall at every step of the way is below 6.
What does that tell you? It tells you that the American Tobacco Company was not doing anything with the pH levels of their cigarettes to try to make them go above 6. Any allegations you heard about pH manipulation, about nicotine manipulation, we've now seen two documents that show that those allegations have absolutely nothing to do with American and with the Pall Mall cigarettes that Mrs. Sermons smoked.
All right. What about this next question about
fraudulent concealment? Question number 4. Same question:
Was Reynolds or a company that Reynolds is responsible for -- did they do something that was a cause of injury to Mrs. Sermons? What have the allegations been about fraud?
Well, one of them was this idea about filters.
Oh, you know, somebody was putting out the idea that filters would be safer for you. Mr. Reilly has more than adequately reviewed for you the evidence that those allegations have absolutely nothing to do with Mrs. Sermons.
But when it comes to the American Tobacco Company, they are even less relevant if that's even possible, because the American Tobacco Company, you heard from Dr. Proctor, did not even come out with a filtered version of Pall Mall cigarettes until 1965.
So each time that Mr. Rainer showed you that consumption chart and he tried to say filters came out in the '50s and people were reassured by that and started smoking filters, they weren't smoking Pall Mall filters because they didn't exist until sometime in the 1960s.
So what happened when the Pall Mall filter came out? Did Mrs. Sermons switch to that?
You were shown a picture of a filtered package of Pall Mall in a gold package. Well, that was shown to you in the testimony of Mr. Sermons, and he wasn't real sure about the smoking history, I think you all probably agree.
But after he left the stand, his wife took the stand. And she said -- I'm sure she loves Mr. Sermons very much. But she said, I'm a better historian than he is when it comes to this stuff.
I said, Okay. What kind of Pall Malls did she smoke?
Red package, white letters.
Same as what we just went over.
I said, Well, you mentioned something about this gold pack. Did she smoke other cigarettes out of the gold package?
She said, Yes, she did.
And I said, Those cigarettes that she smoked out of the gold package, were they Pall Malls?
She said, No, they were not.
The best read of the evidence that you have heard is that Mrs. Sermons smoked unfiltered Pall Mall cigarettes in a red pack for years and years and years after filtered cigarettes came on the market.
She didn't start smoking filtered cigarettes until after Benson & Hedges -- until she started smoking Benson & Hedges, which was sometime in the 1970s.
What does that tell you? That tells you that filtered cigarettes had been on the market for 15 to 20 years before there's any testimony that Mrs. Sermons started smoking them.
That is not the portrait of somebody who was so interested in being reassured by filtered cigarettes that she jumped on the bandwagon as soon as they came out. It didn't happen. And it didn't have anything to do with the unfiltered Pall Malls that she was smoking that were made by the American Tobacco Company.
But there's more than that because Dr. Proctor, when I talked to him about this issue about the filters, he started to describe something different, at least in his mind, at $50,000 a case, something different even in his mind about the American Tobacco Company. He said that the American Tobacco Company, according to his description, was one of the more honest companies in the industry when it came to filters.
He said, A -- I just mentioned they didn't even
come out with a filter for ten years -- until ten years after other people had switched to filters, but more than that, he said that the American Tobacco campaigns, some of which were shown to you by plaintiff's counsel, said, Look, tobacco is its own best filter.
You might remember him saying that. And then Dr. Proctor said that was actually true.
This is their fraud claim. And the man that they paid $6,000 a day came to you and said the American Tobacco Company did not jump into his -it's not even real. You've already heard the evidence on that from Mr. Reilly. But even according to Dr. Proctor, American Tobacco Company wasn't a part of it.
They didn't come out with this filtered cigarette. And what they were doing is advertising a cigarette that he said was true, used tobacco as its own best filter.
What about advertisements? Well, if you were to go back into the jury room with the exhibits that you'll get from the clerk and you were to lay out all of the tobacco ads that the plaintiffs have put into this case on the table, you would find that the overwhelming majority of those ads are for product
Mrs. Sermons never smoked. They have nothing to do with her.
So then you saw something in closing that, if you were to sit on a hundred bored juries, you may never see again. You saw Mr. Rainer put up an advertisement for Camel cigarettes and before your very eyes Photoshop that ad into a nonexistent made-up ad for Pall Mall cigarettes.
Why would they do that? They have the burden of proof. They brought in a witness who said he's got access to 85 million pages of documents. He said he has access to 40,000 advertisements for all of the different companies. Why would it be necessary to take an ad for a product that she didn't smoke and Photoshop it into an ad that never existed?
The reason is if you're trying to make whatever point was trying to be made with that ad and there is no American Tobacco Company ad that helps you make that point, you just create one. How else can you do it?
If they had advertisements for Pall Mall cigarettes that said the things that they want you to award damages for, that said:
Smoke filters, they're better for you.
Smoke filters, they're safer.
Said anything that was fraudulent, they would have shown you that and not shown you a manufactured, fabricated ad that no one saw, not just Mrs. Sermons.
The bottom line for all of those reasons and the reasons that Mr. Reilly mentioned is that the answer to these questions should be no. And that -no responsibility assigned for R. J. Reynolds on question number 3.
Now, on this last question about punitive damages, I want to take a step back and talk about the American Tobacco Company generally.
And I want you to focus on a word that you heard a lot of during this case, you heard a lot of during closing, and probably when I sit down and it's not my turn to talk anymore and Mr. Rainer gets another shot, you're going to hear again, and that word is they.
There is a claim on this verdict form for conspiracy, and I'm sure Mr. Rainer will tell you all about how, for that claim, you don't need to distinguish between the different companies, what have you.
Right now I want to focus on all these other
questions that say R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company in them. And I want to point out to you that when the arguments are made to you to support punitive damages, to support their request for $4 and a half million in damages, they resort to the word they.
Let me tell you what I mean by that.
These are the same two documents, 1044 -plaintiff's 1044 and 2809. These are the two documents that I looked at with Dr. Proctor where he agreed with me that, in three days of testimony, these are the only internal tobacco company documents that he showed that were written by someone at the American Tobacco Company. They are there's two, okay?
Now, when Mr. Rainer made his argument, though, he had a lot more points than he wanted to make about company conduct, including about things that aren't discussed in these documents.
Let me give you an example. He said that they knew that smoking was addictive. And I assume he means believe it; that they believed that smoking causes cigarette -- cancer -- lung cancer and were telling people otherwise; that they were marketing to teenagers; that they were worried about being accused of making false and misleading statements;
that they believed internally that filters did not make cigarettes safer.
When you use a word like they, it lets you kind of skip over the fact that you can't prove that for the American Tobacco Company because there is not a single document anywhere in evidence in this case that the American Tobacco Company believed that filtered cigarettes were of no benefit to smokers; that they believed they were interested in marketing American Tobacco products to teenagers; that they believed that cigarette smokers were addicted to cigarette smoking or any of the other things that he said.
Sometimes when you want to make a point but the 85 million pages of documents don't give you a way to make that point about the American Tobacco Company, you just fold it all up together. They did this. They did this.
But the judge has instructed you:
That's all fine and good for argument, but in your deliberations, you will consider and decide several distinct claims. Although these claims have been tried together, each is separate from the others, and each party is entitled to have you separately consider each claim as it affects that
party. Therefore, in your deliberations, you should consider the evidence as it relates to each claim separately as you would had each claim been tried before you separately.
So what are these two documents that they gave
you?
There's one. This is a 1935 document from the American Tobacco Company talking about Lucky Strike cigarettes.
Mrs. Sermons didn't smoke Lucky Strike, and she wasn't smoking in 1935 when she was three years old.
All right. This other document is one that we went over. This was a telegram from Paul Hahn at American Tobacco Company where he is suggesting to at least the president of Reynolds, maybe others, to have this meeting that you heard about, and I'm going to come back to this document in a moment.
You've now seen their entire case for American Tobacco Company internal documents in the 10 seconds it took me to show you those two documents.
So then, when Dr. Proctor was here, I showed them this. They had this on a big board, right?
Tobacco conspirators, 1953 to 2000. And I said, How many people are on this demonstrative, Dr. Proctor? About 50?
Yes. 50 people.
How many of them actually were employed by or worked at the American Tobacco Company?
He said, Only three. This gentleman here,
Robert Heimann, and Paul Hahn. Three out of these 50 people.
So then I said -- and I know it's a little hard to see, but I'm going to blow it up for you in a second. So then I said, Okay. Well, out of these three people, who were the ones that were actually running the company at any point in time?
Only two: Robert Heimann, you saw the video from, and Paul Hahn.
What did you learn about these two people?
We've looked at the documents. Let's look at the people.
Paul Hahn was the president of the American Tobacco Company at the time that The Frank Statement came out. So there was a suggestion that they were going out and saying something publicly that they did not believe privately. The suggestion was that someone at American Tobacco Company believed that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer and then went out and said the exact opposite.
So when Dr. Proctor was here, I asked him about
that. We looked at this document from December 15th, 1953, background material on the industry client, and looked at the part that says the group was called together by Paul Hahn, president of American. And the position of Paul Hahn and the others present was spelled out in this document.
And this is what they said -- and before I show this, Dr. Proctor and I talked about cherry-picking.
He agreed with me that a fair and balanced review of this issue would include this important document:
The industry is strongly convinced that there is no sound, scientific basis for the charges that have been made.
This is the same type of internal memo that, as Mr. Rainer described, no one expected anyone to see.
These are the private thoughts of these people, including Paul Hahn.
So what about this idea that American Tobacco Company was going out and telling people that he didn't believe that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer because of this conspiracy that they say was hatched in December of 199- -- in 1953?
Well, we showed you a press release from before there was any meeting. American Tobacco Company,
November 26th, 1953, before there was any enterprise or conspiracy or whatever you want to call it. And this Paul Hahn said publicly the very same thing he said privately the next month: Believing as we do that cigarette smoking is not injurious to health.
The very same thing that was said privately.
Frank Statement comes out. Public statement is made: We believe the products we make are not injurious to health.
Paul Hahn, the very same thing he said privately that the evidence is, he believed.
And then you saw this letter between the president of R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company to Paul Hahn talking about this private correspondence, the unverified, unjustified, and unsubstantiated claims of the anticigarette fanatics. And they are describing, at least from their point of view, that that connection was a lie and the only way to correct it was with the truth.
These are internal documents, private documents. They're not saying, Hey, our conspiracy worked. We fooled everybody. We all believe that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, but now we've put the word out and it's the exact opposite.
That's not what they were saying.
Right or wrong, the evidence is that Paul Hahn at the American Tobacco Company believed that cigarette smoking had not yet been proven to cause lung cancer. And if you say something that you believe, that's not a lie. It's not fraud. It's not misleading. And it's not a basis for punishment. No one should be punished for having an opinion. No one should be punished for having a view on a -- on debate. Even Dr. Proctor said that at this point in time the scientists, never mind people who are the laypeople, smokers and so forth who are reading the press, the scientists were still having a debate about this. And Paul Hahn was -was somebody who believed that.
What about Robert Heimann? He was somebody who was president of the American Tobacco Company later.
You never saw a video of Mr. Heimann going on CNN or NBC or any "Face the Nation" sharing his views with anyone. So there's no chance that Mrs. Sermons could ever have heard anything that this Mr. Heimann had to say because the clip that you saw, again, in this case about Mrs. Sermons, was of statements that he made six years after he retired from the company in some lawyer's offices in the state of Mississippi.
Now, what did he really say in that deposition?
He said he still believed that the link wasn't proved but in spite of that, American Tobacco Company complied with federal law and put the warning labels on their packages. That's pretty much it. That's what he said.
There's no evidence that anything that Mr. Heimann or Mr. Hahn did had any effect at all on Mrs. Sermons.
Let me show you another document about Robert Heimann. This is a document plaintiffs put into evidence for a different purpose, but it has this in here about Mr. Heimann. And this is on the subject of the Council For Tobacco Research that they said plaintiff's counsel said they wanted to use as a way of doing fake research, pushing the scientists, directing them to research things that really weren't important to anything.
That's the claim about what they were doing.
Here's what this document says about American Tobacco Company and Robert Heimann. This is 1978:
You will remember Mr. Heimann's letter dated December 6th to Add Yeaman. The letter took strong exception to the program of directed contract work, under which the staff of CTR plans and directs the
research. Heimann says CTR should be a grantor organization and nothing more.
In Heimann's view, CTR should make grants to reputable scientists who are exploring areas of interest in the smoking and health controversy, and the grantees, as opposed to CTR, should be responsible for the plan of research.
That was Robert Heimann's position and that was American's position. All right.
And of course I forgot to go back to this telegram that was talking about suggesting scientific research being done by people who have a true interest in the true facts as he believed them to be.
All right. The evidence about those two people and those two documents is all there is. When it's my turn to stop talking, I'm sure Mr. Rainer will try to show you documents written by other people who make assertions about what people who weren't running the company at American had to say about smoking causation.
I've showed you all the evidence of the people who were actually setting policy, what they were saying, okay?
But for this question about punitive damages,
you have to decide not just whether the American Tobacco Company did something that warrants punishment. It would have to be something that harmed Mrs. Sermons. But the company today who will have to write a check if any punitive damages are awarded is R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, and they've made some serious allegations about Reynolds that, while they have nothing to do with Mrs. Sermons, we responded to some of those in the evidence as well.
Let me give you some examples of that. They made this accusation that R. J. Reynolds was trying to target people under the age of 18. And you've already heard from Mr. Reilly that that has absolutely nothing to do with this case because Mrs. Sermons did not smoke under the age of 18.
But because those allegations were made, we showed you these documents that you only saw when it was my turn to ask questions of Dr. Proctor.
Remember this one?
The objectives of RJR's marketing activities are to convince existing smokers to select our brands rather than competition's. It is not our business to motivate people to start smoking, particularly minors. To smoke or not to smoke is a
personal decision which we do not try to influence.
If you're trying to make an argument that they were going after minors, can't use any American documents. There aren't any that say that. So then they go to R. J. Reynolds.
But if you want to make that argument, you just don't show these documents. Of course, when it was my turn to ask the questions, you got to see them.
It was this document. Here's another one they didn't show you. I just showed you some documents that said 14 to 17, but they didn't show you this one from 1980:
Smoking behavior of 14- to 17-year-olds is analyzed in order to improve our ability to forecast future trends. It is not designed to be used as a tool for developing marketing strategies for this population.
That's one of those documents that Dr. Proctor said a fair and valid presentation would have included, but his presentation did not include it.
Last one.
RJR's consistent policy is smoking -- is smoking is a matter of free, informed, adult choice which the company does not seek to influence. However, in order to plan our business, we must
consider the effects those choices may have on the future of the industry. If we are to compete effectively, we must recognize the imperative to know and meet the wants of those who are 18 and have already elected to smoke, as well as those of older smokers.
All right. Now, we have addressed this allegation about marketing and minors.
Well, what was Reynolds doing? That's who they want to punish. That's who would be writing the check. I've already addressed these allegations about American. What about Reynolds? What did you hear about -- I showed what you Reynolds wasn't doing. What was Reynolds doing?
Well, you heard about a couple of people at the company: Claude Teague. He was the idea man, the brainstormer that Dr. Proctor talked about. And I bet that at each and every place where you all work now or at least in some place where you have worked before there is at least one person there who believes it's his or her job to tell other people how to do their jobs. Almost every place there's someone like that.
At Reynolds it was Claude Teague. He wasn't in the marketing department, but he's writing memos
about marketing. He wasn't in the -- one of the memos that Mr. Rainer talked about, about the color tips for filtered that he wrote when he was in his 20s. You can write whatever you want. The company never picked it up. That was Claude Teague.
There's not much more to say about him.
Alan Rodgman that you heard about -- Alan Rodgman, Dr. Proctor said, was a very talented chemist. And a lot of the information that the scientific community learned about what was in cigarette smoke came from the work of this Dr. Rodgman at Reynolds. He did the work in Reynolds' laboratories, but he also published about it. And I showed you, when Dr. Proctor was here, the speech that Dr. Rodgman gave publicly to the American Chemical Society where he was actually drawing the diagrams of the different carcinogens in tobacco smoke, including the ones that they -- that they were talking about from one of his documents.
But it doesn't stop there. You heard that in the 1970s and 1980s, Reynolds actually spent -Reynolds scientists -- well, Reynolds spent the money. Reynolds spent a billion dollars trying to develop less-hazardous cigarette -- cigarette products. Products that instead of burning tobacco,
because when you burn something, anything, it creates carcinogens, a product that heats it instead of burning it. That product was called Premier that you heard about.
And Dr. Proctor agreed with me that the test results on the Premier cigarette developed during Mrs. Sermons' lifetime showed 99 percent reduction in polycyclic hydrocarbons, some of the constituents in smoke that people were worried about.
But when that failed in the marketplace, Reynolds, they people they want you to punish, went back to the drawing board and came out with this Eclipse cigarette product that included a little bit of tobacco in there just to try to improve the taste because, as it turns out, as Mr. Reilly was explaining, smokers want taste. They want a cigarette that tastes like a cigarette and smells like a cigarette, gives you the pleasure you get from a cigarette.
And even though the Premier cigarette was safer, less hazardous, smokers didn't want it. So Reynolds continue develop -- to develop this Eclipse cigarette that still reduced some of those harmful carcinogens by 70 or 80 percent and put that product on the market.
This is the company that they want to punish.
The successor to the American Tobacco Company, about which you heard almost no evidence except about two people who appeared to believe what they were saying.
You saw Robert Heimann. He was -- I won't call him an old coot the way Ken called Mr. Butler. He may -- I'm not sure he was an old coot like that gentleman. But he certainly was a little stuck in his ways. You could see that just listening to him answer the questions.
And he told you it's because the people at American had been thinking about this issue going back to 1911. And for all those years, they believed that their products didn't harm people.
Heimann was one of those people. So was Paul Hahn. That shouldn't be punished.
Reynolds, that they want to punish, is developing all of these technologies and sharing it with the public. The research on the Premier cigarette, the Eclipse cigarette, that was all publicly available. Came out with a big book, the "Premier Monograph." Made all of that information available for anyone to see.
Now, I may have lost my verdict form here, but
I think I can find it again.
All right. So the question -- the answer to these questions on the verdict form is no. Zeros there. No for question 4 and 5. For all the reasons that Mr. Reilly explained, this requires reasonable reliance. And I've been focusing on American and Reynolds, but the evidence is Mrs. Sermons didn't rely on anyone in the industry -- American, Reynolds, Philip Morris, anyone.
No to punitive damages.
I just want to go back, then, to this very first question. This is the question that if you answer no, your job will be finished.
And the only reason I want to go back to it is to point something out to you in the instructions about causation.
This is the class membership instruction:
Plaintiff must prove, by the greater weight of the evidence, that Myra Sermons was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and if so, that such addiction was a legal cause of her lung cancer and/or emphysema.
Now, remember, during their case and during closing, Mr. Rainer spent the majority of his time
trying to persuade you that Mrs. Sermons was addicted. But that's really not even a key question you have to answer.
The key question here that you have to answer is whether she had an addiction that was a legal cause of these injuries.
Addiction is a legal cause of disease if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing a disease so that it can reasonably be said that but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the disease would not have occurred.
And that language contributes substantially.
But for cause is repeated throughout this instruction, and Mr. Reilly already covered that with you, and I'm not to go back over it.
But I do want to show you a different part of
it.
The addiction has to be something that directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing the disease.
Cause and effect. Now, when I was listening to Mr. Rainer's closing argument, I noticed that when talks to you about addiction, he's focussing almost entirely on things that he says happened in the
1990s. He's focusing on the evidence for and against that Mrs. Sermons smoked a cigarette or cigarettes -- some amount of cigarettes or no cigarettes after she got lung cancer.
He's focused on what this Pastor Pietrylo, if I'm saying that right, talked about when he was visiting Mrs. Sermons long after she had been ill.
Here's the point that I want to make: Whatever point Mr. Rainer wants to make about addiction after Mrs. Sermons was already ill could not possibly have caused her illness. Anything that happened to her, whether she was addicted -- these arguments that they're making -- after she was ill could not have directly and in natural continuous sequence produced an illness she already had.
So the right time to look at it is not anything that happened after 1990, she was already -- she already had her lung cancer by then. The real question is what happened before then? Why didn't she quit before then?
You've heard all the evidence already that she knew the risks. That she enjoyed smoking.
Mr. Reilly covered it for both companies. I'm emphasized it for American Tobacco Company that she wasn't fooled or tricked or misled by anybody.
And no one forced her to smoke. And when Dr. Strauss was here, their oncologist, this is one of those moments where I thought, you know, maybe I can ask some questions that will help the jury's understanding on this.
And I said to Dr. Strauss, I said, If Mrs. Sermons quit smoking for nine months in 1951 and stayed quit, made a different decision than the one she did make to go back to smoking, would she have gotten lung cancer?
The answer was no.
Dr. Rosenbaum gave the same response. I asked the same question for 1953, I asked the question for 1966, when the warning labels went on the packages.
I asked same question for the early 1970s, when that old coot, Mr. Butler, said that they stopped for five weeks. If she had stayed quit at the end of those five weeks, would she have gotten lung cancer and emphysema? The answer was no every time. I just picked four dates. I didn't even go back to all of the things Mr. Reilly showed you about what aired on "See It Now" in 1955. All the press coverage with Harry Reasoner in the '60s, those PSAs, every single one of those moments in time presented an opportunity for Mrs. Sermons for
Mrs. Sermons to make a different choice than the adult choice she had been making.
And if she had made that choice, we wouldn't be here talking about lung cancer or emphysema.
At the end of the Burns video that you saw,
Dr. Burns agreed that Surgeon General Koop made the following statement:
Cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior. No question about it. But even though cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior, the individual smoker must still decide whether or not to continue that behavior.
The question you have to ask yourselves, especially for question 1, but throughout the verdict form is the individual smoker who has to decide whether to continue that -- continue that behavior was Mrs. Sermons.
The American Tobacco Company could not decide for Mrs. Sermons whether to continue this behavior. Reynolds couldn't decide that, Philip Morris couldn't decide that. None of the people they showed you on videos from different companies could d