MR. RAINER: Is that a good spot? The tie.
THE BAILIFF: Put it on the tie, yeah.
MR. RAINER: Does that sound okay? All right.
First of all, thank you very much. Thank you again. Thank you again. I know we've -- you've put up with us for quite a while now, and people have given up vacation. They've had their paycheck picked up at the last minute. I mean, we understand
that all of you have made a huge sacrifice of your time to listen to all of what we had to say. So I thank you again.
You know, as you will recall in the — in the first phase of the case, you were asked to find and — let's see now. Where am I? — you did find that Mrs. Sermons was addicted to cigarettes and that she was caused harm by both of the defendants' products.
In that first phase, you were asked to and you did assign responsibility, substantial responsibility to Mrs. Sermons. We heard you.
You also did indicate that you -- that she did suffer some -- some damage, and you indicated that we would present information and that you would hear us about punitive damages.
Now, you checked off:
Under the circumstances of this case, are punitive damages warranted against each of the defendants?
And so in this phase of the case, the focus is not on Mrs. Sermons' conduct. The focus is on the defendants' conduct, which is why we spent most of the day yesterday talking about the defendants and what they did.
And an important thing for me to say to you is I'm not going to go back over everything we talked about in the first phase of the case, but I am going to ask you to consider obviously the evidence that you heard in the first phase because that was part of what went into the process of deciding that there should be punitive damages and it's part of how we ask you to decide how much they should be.
You heard from His Honor that you are to be considering what conduct of the defendant affected Mrs. Sermons. And there's several things of the conduct we talked about.
Sorry. So I have to organize myself just a little bit differently for a second.
Okay. Sorry.
In looking at this, you are looking for conduct that was so gross and flagrant as to show reckless disregard for human life. You're looking for an entire lack of care of conscious indifference to the consequences. Conduct that was wanton or reckless to the safety and welfare of the public. You're looking for a reckless indifference to the rights of others.
These are all — these are all awards. It doesn't have to be all of them. It could be any of
them.
So what: did we talk about? What did you hear? We looked at this a whole lot how the defendants were — were selling billions of cigarettes. How they were — every year for decades they were selling more and more and more cigarettes.
And that other line, that — that second line was something that happened, that followed the rise of the sale of cigarettes, and it was the rise of lung cancer. People were getting lung cancer. The more cigarettes that were being sold, more people were getting lung cancer.
Did that affect Mrs. Sermons? Of course it affected Mrs. Sermons.
You heard that the defendants came to know that their product was hurting people, that it was causing lung cancer, that people were dying from lung cancer. You heard that they came to know that.
And you heard in their own words how they felt about that.
This is a memo — and I respectfully submit, Ladies and Gentlemen, this is one of the most amazing memos that I, in my professional career, have ever seen.
MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. RAINER: All right. My opinion is not important. The memo is important. How you view the memo is what's most important.
Internal company memo acknowledging that nicotine — that the product that this company was selling was addictive. They're in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug, and they knew that that had consequences. They refer to them — this is — this is -- this is an internal corporate memo saying there were certain unattractive side effects, unattractive side effects: Lung cancer and emphysema.
This is the words in which this company — in this case, Reynolds — this is the words in which they were talking about what they were doing to their customers: Certain unattractive side effects. Lung cancer. Emphysema.
What did Philip Morris — what did they say?
How did they talk about their customers who they knew were getting affected by this dangerous product that they sold? They refer to them as rats in a cage. Put a hungry rat in a cage. Put a lever on the cage. Make it push on the lever so it will deliver a pellet of food. The rat will try and get
the pellet. The rat is going to associate the lever with the food pellet.
Consider the smoker. Smoking the cigarette is a lever press. The effect of a smoking act on a person is the award. The effect reinforces the smoking act. He'll come back 10 to 60 times a day.
This is how they were talking about their own customers. This is how they viewed the concept of the product that they were selling, that they knew hurt people, and this is how they thought about what they were doing.
MR. WALKER: Excuse me.
Objection, Your Honor. May I have a continuing objection on the sale of cigarettes issue that we discussed?
THE COURT: All right. That's fine. It's overruled.
MR. WALKER: Thank you, Your Honor.
MR. RAINER: All right. Now, yesterday I asked —
MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: It's overruled.
MR. REILLY: Harm to others, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Pardon me?
MR. REILLY: Harm to others.
THE COURT: All right. Overruled.
MR. RAINER: Yesterday I asked about — I asked Mr. — Dr. Lipowitz, the witness from Philip Morris, about some Congressional findings, whether he agreed with them — whether Philip Morris agreed with them. They agreed that cigarettes cause over 400,000 deaths each year and 8.6 million Americans with chronic illnesses.
Now, yesterday we were not talking about years ago. We were talking about what's happened — we're talking about now. We're talking about the 2000s.
We're talking about what's happening now.
So this is not -- this is not just about something that happened long ago. This is still happening. They're still selling a product that is causing harm. 400,000 deaths a year.
Okay. Now, we spent time — I know you — you listened to Dr. Proctor probably way more than you wanted to. We saw lots of advertisements, and there was a lot of talk about years and years and we ran videos and commercials, but I can sum it up with this one slide.
This is what they were spending to get people to keep buying this dangerous, defective product. This is before 2000 they were spending — they spent
$200 billion on some of these ads that you saw. It was product promotions. They spent billions and billions and billions of dollars to get people, get Mrs. Sermons — like Mrs. Sermons, people just like Mrs. Sermons to buy their product.
Are they still doing that? Has that changed at
all?
Dr. Lipowitz: I don't know the exact number.
I asked him about the $13 billion number from the Congressional findings.
I don't know the exact number, but it was billions. They're spending billions a year on keeping people buying their product. Buying this deadly product that they're still selling.
He told you that. Told you the product is just as dangerous as it was for all those years.
So was R. J. Reynolds. Dr. Alderman came here. He had his demonstration boxes. He showed you all those other products. But when it came down to it, he had to admit that the products that they're still — the gross portion of their business is these traditional cigarette products, what he called the high-risk products, the Pall Mall, the Camel.
And Pall Malls, the brand that Mrs. Sermons smoked.
Okay. So just -- just these few facts. Just
these few points that I've made to you about what they've been doing. They've been selling this dangerous, defective product that they know hurts millions of people, including the one involved here.
Is that comment that is so gross and flagrant — forgive me — so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard for human life, is that conduct that shows an entire lack of care, a conscious indifference to the consequences, is that conduct that has disregarded the safety and welfare of the public, has it shown a reckless indifference to the rights of others?
It's all of those. It's all of those.
Rats in a cage?
It talks about — what was it? — unattractive side effects, cancer and emphysema.
Is that reckless indifference? I say yes.
All right. Let's talk about filters.
Mr. Reilly, Mr. Walker are going to get up here and they're going to say -MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. RAINER: I'll have my chance to respond to them later. Right now I'11 say what I said before: That they sold a product. They developed this
concept of filters. Both companies, not — when I say they, both companies, all three companies American Tobacco, R. J. Reynolds, Philip Morris developed filters. This is — this is a Reynolds memo.
Filters: We must, in the near future, provide answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking.
What did they do? They added filters.
MR. WALKER: Objection.
THE COURT: Hold on.
MR. WALKER: Objection, Your Honor. May I be heard? I'm sorry, Your Honor.
THE COURT: You can.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. RAINER: So I just want to be clear because I believe when I started about this document I misidentifled it. It is a Philip Morris document.
I just want to be clear. That is to say -- that is to say this document as well as — this is also a Philip Morris document.
So I'm focusing on the subject of filters, and I began to talk about how filters were developed as a psychological crutch to keep smokers smoking. People were — when the information began to be known in the 1950s and 1960s about the dangers of smoking, the companies developed something to try to keep people using products, using the products.
In this case they developed filters. And they understood that people looked at the filters as something that would be healthier, would be safer for them. They were putting something on the cigarette that people were understanding would be healthier and safer for them.
In fact, the defendants understood that the —
the perception of safety was an illusion, they even use that word. This is a Philip Morris memo. They use the word illusion:
The illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration.
So the defendants in this case — to be precise, Philip Morris — was using filters, and they — they were offering this product to their customers as a safer product.
And you heard testimony that Mrs. Sermons used
it.
Now, let's flash forward to the present because, again, one of the questions you're going -you're being asked to decide in awarding punitive damages: Is this still something that's — is this conduct that you should consider?
And — but, Dr. Lipowitz was on the stand, a representative of Philip Morris. I asked him some questions about it. And I asked him in connection with this Congressional finding, those who use products sold or distributed as modified-risk products that do not, in fact, reduce risk; in other words, products like filters that people might think are safer but that actually aren't safer. And so rather than quitting or reducing their use of the
tobacco products have, in fact, substantially increased their chances of suffering some harm or premature death.
That's the concept, that was the Congressional finding that I asked Dr. Lipowitz about. And I asked him — I talked actually about something that happened post-2000. This whole issue about did the FDA send them a letter about using the word lights, and were they still using ventilated filters on their products as a way of trying to convince people that this was a safer product that they should continue to use? And -- and you heard his testimony about that.
R. J. Reynolds. Dr. Alderman, I'm sure -- I don't remember how long he was here showing you his displays of the reduced risk of the Premier and Eclipse product, and I hope you'll recall, and I ask you to recall after his long demonstration about how these were reduced-risk products, that the company is asking you to consider their efforts to move in that direction, their migration to reduced-risk products.
I asked him, What did the Surgeon General say? And — and the Surgeon General said these products provide no clear benefit to users over conventional
cigarettes.
So in both cases, I'm asking you to consider the conduct of these two companies with respect to their efforts to sell products that were supposedly reduced risk or supposed to be safer in some fashion for people that weren't and I'm asking you to consider that as you decide, you know, how much is an appropriate punishment.
Again, is this kind of conduct, does it show a reckless disregard of human life? You know, is it consciously indifferent to the consequences? I mean, I ask you to consider what I was asking Dr. Lipowitz about, that it was going to lead -- is it going to lead to suffering and premature death?
All right. Next topic. Last of — last of really three. Okay? And — and this is about nicotine manipulation.
And, again, you've been very patient. I know you heard a lot of talk about — I keep bringing up nicotine manipulation. Even yesterday I was asking you to look at a memo of the tobacco -- of the American Tobacco Company when they were referring to nicotine as Compound W in their internal records and they were — they were having — they were painting nicotine on the outside of the cigarettes.
They were experimenting with how to deliver nicotine because they were — they understood, as did R. J. Reynolds — and this is — I can accurately say this is an R. J. Reynolds memo in which — dated from 1959 where they were talking about how to come up with the — how to apply the optimum amount of nicotine to extracted tobacco. They wanted to come up with the amount that would meet the physiological requirements of the smoker. They are trying to come up with the amount of nicotine that would keep people coming back, keep them hooked on this product.
And — and this is part of the conduct that's gone on — this is a memo from 1959, the American Tobacco Company document that you1 re going to get back when you — you get the exhibits from — from this phase. It also dates from the 1950s and '60s.
And you know it isn't just R. J. Reynolds and American Tobacco. It was also Philip Morris. You saw in the early phase of the case there were pages and pages of internal studies by Philip Morris explaining how to manipulate the nicotine. How — studied what ways it can keep people smoking their products. And the candid acknowledgment in one of these memos, without that chemicals calendar
compound, that nicotine, the cigarette market would collapse and we would all lose our jobs and our consulting fees.
They understand that nicotine and the manipulation of nicotine and how nicotine was sold to their customers were critical in maintaining their profits.
The other memo here, again, that's another R. J. Reynolds document: At the exit gate when our market opens, we'll be out of business overnight. That if we're not selling a product that keeps with the nicotine — the right nicotine amount, we're going to lose our customers.
Now, what's happened present day? Just bringing it back to the present day.
You're going to be asked to consider whether there's conduct since 2000, some things that have happened since then that should mitigate whether punitive damages or how much the punitive damage award should be. You're going to be asked that.
And I'm asking you to consider that they're still manipulating nicotine. We — I pointed out — Mr. Walker had shown up on the board one particular Pall Mall product that had a number of additives, things that we all probably know, like licorice,
sugar. And I pulled up the other — the other Pall Mall product, and there was this ammonium hydroxide. And you had heard the testimony about how this is something that is designed to effect the release of nicotine.
I'm actually going — this was the — this was an internal Reynolds memo that explained that, as the pH increases — and Dr. Alderman said that. He said that ammonium hydroxide affects the pH. As the pH increases, then there's more nicotine in free form, and that's going to be absorbed by the smoker and against this nicotine kick.
So this is not something that just happened back in laboratories in the 1950s. This is the testimony of the witness you heard yesterday talking about the product that they are still selling and how they manipulate nicotine to get the nicotine kick.
Now, we spent a lot of time on the migration that Reynolds is trying to do to these other products, the Eclipse product, the Vuse product, the SNUS product, the — you know, the claimed modified-risk products. And I've already made the point, you know: Is Eclipse really actually any safer?
But these are all — all these are nlcotlne-dellvery products. That's what they are.
And the main ones, the growth brands, what R. J. Reynolds itself told you, what they tell you on their website, they showed you from the website, the brand that is for their long-term, accelerated growth in profit, those traditional brands, the traditional -- they call it the high-risk brands, Pall Mall and the Camel. And you heard the evidence that in 2014 they added the Newport. These are all — this is -- this is the growth, by their words, of R. J. Reynolds. I'm using their words as to what — what they're saying is the direction that they're going with their products.
All right. Now, on the question. The question for you how to decide what is an amount appropriate amount of punitive damages.
And you will recall on the Friday afternoon when — when everybody was hoping to get out of here, you were wise enough to stay and listen to the witness who would come in from out of town to talk about the numbers. How much these companies make.
And he presented several different — three different economic indicators of the companies' financial resources which is, as you saw and we'll
see again when you look at the instructions yourself, one of the things you are expected to consider in deciding the amount of punitive damages.
In one year's sales, R. J. Reynolds took in $8.6 billion. And of that, after they subtracted out their expenses, including — as you heard from Mr. Mills, including those payments that they asked you to consider, the payments that they make to -for government regulation, for — for the master settlement agreement, for the FDA. When they subtract those out, they still have a profit of $3.4 billion for one year.
And we put on here how much that — I'm sorry. We put on here how much that translates into as a net revenue. That's per net revenues per day. You take the profit number and divide that by 365 and you get how much profit they have per day. This is — this is — 23.6 million is the sales divided by 365.
Okay. What are the numbers for Philip Morris? In the last year, they made $22.1 billion in annual sales on which they earned a profit of $4.7 billion. And, again, that profit, that 4.7 billion is after they make all — they — they make all the payments that they were talking about, the payments that they
had to make. Dr. Lipowitz told you that that was — that every year they made those payments to the FDA, every year they've made the payments for the master settlement agreement, Philip Morris still earned billions of dollars in profit. Dr. Lipowitz told you that.
So how do you go about deciding what is a fair amount for this case?
I'm going to skip over this because they're going to talk and then I'11 have a chance to come back and talk a little bit about what they — I'll have a chance for rebuttal. So for now I'm just going to skip on to what -- what we would ask you to consider.
We ask you to consider, consistent with the instructions, the nature, extent, and degree of the defendants' misconduct. And those are the subjects I've been talking about. I'm talking about the — the use of manipulation of nicotine, the use of filters, the sale of — of a defective product.
You're allowed to consider their financial resources, those numbers that we presented to you, and you're allowed to consider mitigating evidence, which as I say we'11 be talking a little bit more about this morning.
And you can consider an amount that would deter these companies and others — other companies — from engaging in such misconduct in the future.
So how do you figure that -- how do you figure that out? What -- what -- what do you do to figure out how to punish a company, these — these relatively, you know, big companies with large financial resources? What do you do?
So we came up with — with an idea.
This is a form. That's the question you're going to be asked: What is the total amount?
That's — that's the only thing — last time you had a whole bunch of questions. This time it's just this one.
We came up with this idea.
MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: All right. Do you need a sidebar?
MR. REILLY: Yes.
(Sidebar was held outside the hearing of the jury:)
MR. REILLY: You can't equate this activity to criminal behavior. What he's got up there is a parking violation, which is criminal behavior.
MR. RAINER: No, that's civil. I'm talking about a civil —
MR. REILLY: You can't compare —
MR. RAINER: Of course I can.
MR. REILLY: — some calculation for punitive damages based on some sort of penalty. It can't be done.
THE COURT: Where are you going with this?
MR. RAINER: Your Honor, a $15 parking ticket to a person who earns $50,000 a year, what is -what's a parking ticket to a company that earns $4.7 billion?
MR. REILLY: You can't equate this function of determining a punitive damage amount based on a parking violation, a criminal act. You can't do it.
MR. RAINER: First of all, Your Honor —
THE COURT: Why not?
MR. REILLY: Because this is not — first of all, this is not a civil penalty. This is a punitive damage amount. This is — and who is this hypothetical person, the $50,000? This is not a calculation that bears any relation. The law in Florida, as it is elsewhere in this country, is it has to bear a reasonable relationship to the amount of compensatory damages. This calculation bears no relationship to a — to the compensatory damages in this case.
THE COURT: Some of the arguments we touched on again this morning, which is — and there's some uncertainty as to -- while you obviously state an accurate — your statement is an accurate statement of the law, where you felt like there are other aspects to this calculation in the determination of punitive damages from a constitutional standpoint, Mr. Walker, you can weigh in.
MR. WALKER: I don't have anything to add,
Your Honor, to Mr. Rainer's response.
THE COURT: Yeah. Any response?
MR. RAINER: I would just like to say for the record, Your Honor, that a parking violation is certainly a civil violation. It is a — it is a minor punishment. That is exactly — we're asking for a minor punishment in the scheme of the multiple factors that we believe that the jury is allowed to consider.
THE COURT: Well, I'm going to overrule the objection. All right?
MR. WALKER: Thank you, Your Honor.
(Sidebar was concluded and the following further proceedings were held:)
MR. RAINER: Okay. So a person earning $50,000 a year gets a parking ticket, a $15 parking ticket.
Consider how that affects them. Consider how — you know what — what impact does that civil fine have on their overall livelihood.
And so consider what would that number be, what would the equivalent of $15 be for a company that earns $4.7 billion?
That's the answer. $1.4 million that's what it would be like for a corporation to get a parking ticket.
Now, we heard — we heard your verdict in phase one. We heard you say that the damages in this case that — that were not at the level that we had suggested to you -- you went ahead and thought about what you thought was a fair compensation for her physical injuries after — for being addicted, and we understood what you said.
So now we're asking you to consider what is a — what is a punishment — what is a parking ticket for a company that earns this amount of money?
What -- they came to you at the beginning of this phase, and they said, We heard your verdict.
Well — well, I respectfully submit that the only way a company that earns — with this many employees, that has this amount of money coming in,
the only way they're going to hear what you say as a punishment, as a punitive damage award, is if you give them — if you award an amount for punitive damages that would be like if they got a parking ticket. At least if they got a parking ticket.
Maybe more, but at least that.
How does this number play out for Reynolds? They're annual profit, $3.4 billion that would be 1,020,000.
And there's one other thing that I would ask you to consider. In the time that we're going to be here presenting — we'll call it two and a half hours. In the time that we're going to be here presenting our closing arguments to you, just -just a fraction of all the time you've given up, in that time, in profit, these two companies are going to be earning the amount of money that I'm asking you to award. That's another way of thinking about it. Just in those two and a half hours, in profit they're going to get numbers like a million and 1.4 million.
So is that a reasonable number? Obviously that's up to you.
Are there other factors to consider? I'm going to talk a bit about mitigation when I have a chance
to come back and talk to you more, but in terms of have we presented evidence of conduct by the defendants that is punishable? That — that gives rise to punitive damages? Is there conduct that was reckless disregard? Is there conduct that is — showed reckless indifference to public safety? Is there conduct that should support your giving them an award — giving an award of punitive damages?
Absolutely. And we ask you to do so.
I thank you.



MR. RAINER: Thank you, Your Honor.
All right. So this is my chance to respond to the other two arguments, and I'm going to try to focus on that.
Okay. All right. I guess I'll do the first -- do the first one.
Okay. All right. So I just -- a lot of what Mr. Reilly talked about was things that have happened, regulation that's happened since 1999 or 2000. And he said that you need to consider, for the purposes of mitigation — I think he kept saying — he said — at one point, he said "see change." He also said "light years." The company with light years away from the one that you had heard about before. It was a "see change" in the company.
And I would ask you to consider a somewhat different picture. When Dr. Lipowicz was on the stand, he talked about how they had established the website. I said, well, hang on. Didn't you establish the website after you got sued by 50 Attorneys General?
He said, yeah, it was after but it was voluntarily. It was after but it was voluntary.
Well, I respectfully ask you to consider almost everything that you've heard — that you heard from Philip Morris were things that they were being required to do or -- or compelled to do as a result of lawsuits,
as a result of federal regulation, for example, the master settlement.
So Mr. Reilly talked about how they required the disclosure of the internal documents of the company.
Well, that's a big one. They were required to do that. We — that's what — when I asked Dr. Lipowicz, were you required to do that, he said, yes, we were required to do that. They were required to make payments to the states.
They say, well, we should get -- we should get credit, in your eyes, in — in mitigation for these actions, but they were required to do these things.
They were sued by 50 Attorneys General. And — and they took — I guess Dr. Lipowicz will — you know, was there some scientific development that happened between when you came to the company in 1988 and all these changes?
He said, no, it wasn't a scientific development.
There was a lawsuit by 50 Attorneys General, that's what happened in between. So when they say, you should consider in mitigation, we say not mitigation.
They talked about they can't have stadium signs. They can't have billboards. They don't have transit. They don't have sponsored concerts. They don't have merchandise anymore. They were required not to have
those things. Was this — are they — should they be getting credit because they were required after they got sued to do these things? We say no.
They say they're making all these payments, these millions of dollars of payments, which as you heard from Dr. Lipowicz, they make plenty of profit after they make these payments, and they're required to make these payments, not mitigation.
The FDA, they talked about how they're required — under the new law, they're required to disclose their ingredients. Now, they say, well, we actually disclosed some before that. Well, think about it. They said they disclosed them in 1999 or — I think he said somewhere in '99, 2000 that Philip Morris put that up on their website. Well, hang on. If they were actually disclosing everything that should be disclosed, how is it that when it comes time to pass a federal law, they're being asked to disclose more things? Now, could be a number of answers to that.
But I ask you to — to consider if there's — if everything that had to be done — I asked Dr. Lipowicz. Are you sure? Do you know what was exactly — do you know exactly what you put up then versus now? I think I asked Mr. Alderman that too.
If -- if everything that they're saying to you,
all this good faith they're asking you to consider, really — you know, if there was — everything was out there — then the federal government comes along and says, hey, you've got to do more to disclose your agreements. And I think Dr. Lipowicz said there was more required.
They were required -- they're being required to open up their plants for inspection. They're being required to respond to requests, like, hey, did you stop making these statements about light cigarettes?
These are not things that they are doing voluntarily. He's asking you to give them credit for things that they are being required to do, and we say, no, this is not mitigation.
They — they're being required to have their ingredients. They're required to have testing. They're being required to evaluate any claimed new risk product. Mitigation? Not mitigation. They're required to do it, not voluntary.
They're required to make payments for FDA regulation. I agree, these are — there's a lot of money. These are large numbers. Mr. Reilly says, oh, you've got to consider these large numbers, but, no, don't consider the fact that we also still, after all that, are making billions of dollars, not millions of
dollars, billions of dollars, after they make these payments. They want you to consider this, but do they want you to consider how much they make when they're done making all those payments? I'd say respectfully, this is not mitigation either. This is payment they're required to make.
This is basically just going back over. Paying money for regulation, is that mitigation? Not mitigation. Paying money for regulation, not mitigation.
All right. Let's talk about -- let's talk about Mr. Alderman, who came here. He — he did his demonstrations for you. He talked about science that he's working on. Mr. Walker says that's the face of R. J. Reynolds. That's what you need to consider.
Well, I'm sorry. But that's not the only thing that you can consider. You can — and indeed the instructions say, you're to consider what happened in Phase I of this case. This is not just about the -- the day of testimony we had yesterday and Mr. Alderman with his demonstratives. You're allowed to consider that Claude Teague and Alan Rodgman and the executives, the chief executives of R. J. Reynolds, for years, took a different approach. You are allowed to consider that in deciding whether punishment is important — is
appropriate here.
You are allowed to consider whether after — after those people are — those people — I believe I asked Dr. Lipowicz — I'm not sure I asked Mr. Alderman — did people get punished? Did some of these people that the company would like you to say, well, they're gone, and Mr. Walker talks about they're grabbing them around the neck — I mean, yeah, you can consider the fact that they're gone, but you certainly can -- and I ask you specifically to consider that the people who were at this company at the time when Mrs. Sermons was getting her cigarettes are the people who you saw, who you read about, who you heard from Dr. Proctor about, who you see in those documents, those documents that talk about the unintended, the unattractive side effects, like lung cancer and emphysema, talking about the them as though they're — these are their customers. Those are the people that Mr. Walker says, well, you — you can't do anything to the company. Those people aren't there.
The company's still there. The company's still making billions of dollars. The company's still making billions of dollars selling Pall Mall cigarettes.
Now, if -- you've been instructed it's a legal product, but I'm also allowed to ask you to consider
whether, with all the things that you've learned over these weeks, not — as I say, not just yesterday but including yesterday, when people at these companies are making this product that — this legal product that they're selling, are they putting on the market a product that was unreasonably dangerous? You are allowed to consider that.
Indeed, you were asked to consider that in Phase I. Were they — could — did they have choices to make? Remember my first opening? Did they have choices? Were there things that they could have done to make their products safer? Were there — were there ways they could have legitimately offered something that reduced the risk? Were there ways that they could have designed this product so that it didn't have the consequences it did? Can you consider that when you're deciding whether to impose punitive damages and whether by awarding punitive damages, you will send a message to other companies about what is expected when you sell a product?
And I respectfully submit that in deciding whether to — to impose a punishment such as punitive damages, you can consider whether it should be expected of a company that when they are selling a product, that they will sell a product that is not unreasonably dangerous
or defective in a way that hurts people. And that is very much part of what you should consider here, and I ask you to do so.
So I'm -- I'm wrapping up. I'm just going to take a moment or two more of your time.
Mr. Reilly asked you to consider the fact that the company supported federal legislation. He asked you to weigh that, and — and I understand why he would ask you to do that.
But I also ask you to consider something else important that you learned about the — what's happened under federal — the federal legislation that Philip Morris supported. Lock down. Remember that phrase, "lock down the products"? The formulations are locked down. That means that they were locked down, he said, in 2007. We're in 2016. That means that for nine years, those product formulations have been locked down. They are selling — I said this before and forgive me for repeating myself. They are selling the same product as before that law was passed. It's the same product.
It is the same, I respectfully submit, unreasonably dangerous product that they were selling before then.
You can ask yourself, well, why is it that — that Philip Morris supported that law? And think about that. Think about the fact that for the past nine years,
'they're still locked in to that same — the same product they've been selling. And so is R. J. Reynolds.
They're locked down. They're locked down into these products.
And as you heard, they added another one. They added one of the largest selling ones.
So when you think about the direction of this company, when Mr. Walker asks you, as he appropriately may, to consider some of the experimental things that Mr. Alderman's working on, including the two experimental ones that the Surgeon General said were no safer, were no more effective, would he ask you to consider that? I ask you to consider it. This is what they're still selling. This is — this is what they're — this is the unreasonably dangerous product that they're still selling.
So I'm going to come back to what I asked you.
And is it reasonable? Does it bear any relationship to what you've heard or what you should be considering?
His Honor talked — there's some factors here in the beginning of the factors in the instructions. The nature, extent and degree of misconduct and related circumstances. Well, that has to do with a concept in the law we call "reprehensibility," nature, extent and degree of misconduct.
MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. RAINER: And that is about what the choices that were made over the 50 years, what the choices that are still being made, what — what products are still being marketed. That's a big part of this. And did they manipulate nicotine to keep people smoking their product? Did they manipulate nicotine to keep people smoking their product? Did they try to keep people on smoking by selling filters that weren't safer? You're allowed to consider all of those things, and you're allowed to consider them because those were actions that affected the plaintiff in this case.
Finally — and I -- I said it before. I believe it's under the instructions. It is completely fair and I'm going to ask you specifically to consider their financial resources. And so when I come here and I talk to you about a large number, I talk to you about it because of their financial resources, because they are only going to hear your message if you send a message that bears a relationship to their financial resources, what they can afford. And so I do ask you to send that message.
And, again, I thank you so much for being so attentive and for listening to all of the facts. Thank
you.
