MR. REILLY: Thank you, Your Honor.
Good morning, everybody.
THE JURY: Good morning.
MR. REILLY: The last day.
I want to begin, of course, by thanking you as well. You've been here for three and a half weeks now, and I know that's a big toll on your time and on your lives. So, again, on behalf of Hassia and myself and Philip Morris, everybody, we thank you for your service. That's what make the system work, so . . .
And now we're into the question of what — and the Court has said this to you three times now — what, if any, punitive damages should be awarded in this case under the circumstances?
And let me take you back to the verdict form that you guys used in this case.
Now, this happens to be one that I was following along as the — as the clerk was reading your verdict, so this is my handwriting, not yours.
But what you guys did was you determined that Mrs. Sermons -- and, again, this is a case brought by the estate of Mrs. Sermons, right? And in phase one, you were determining whether there was — you were listening to two stories.
You were listening to the story of Mrs. Sermons, and you were listening to the story of Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds, and you were seeing whether those two stories intersected and whether or not there was fault on the part of Philip Morris, R. J. Reynolds, and Mrs. Sermons for the decisions that went into her smoking history.
Right?
So one of the questions you were asked was whether she was a member of the class, and you answered yes to that.
You answered yes to whether or not addiction to cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds was a legal cause of her illnesses, lung cancer and emphysema.
And then you were tasked with assigning a percentage of responsibility for those injuries, her lung cancer and her emphysema. And you assigned it unanimously. Remember that? You were polled by the judge, and you guys all said, Yes, this is our verdict.
And you assigned responsibility 80 percent on Mrs. Sermons, 15 percent on Philip Morris, and 5 percent on R. J. Reynolds.
Now, you also decided that Mrs. Sermons did not
rely on any statements by Philip Morris or
R. J. Reynolds or in any conspiracy that was alleged
in this case.
And then you assigned $65,000 in total damages. You — you guys in your — in your unanimous decision-making process said the value of her pain and suffering which she endured as a result of her emphysema and her lung cancer had a value — a dollar value of $65,000.
Now, because of your assignment ---I apologize
for not getting this very straight. But because of your assignment of 15 percent to Philip Morris and 5 percent of the responsibility to R. J. Reynolds, that $65,000 judgment -- I'm sorry -- dollar amount resulted in a responsibility, a dollar responsibility, to Philip Morris of $9,750 and for R. J. Reynolds of 3,350 — I know I'm telling you stuff you already know. I know that you guys read the instructions. You know exactly what you did.
So now — now you're being asked -- because you indicated that there was a potential entitlement to punitive damages in this case, you now are tasked and we are making you once again — last time I gave a closing argument, I said, We are making you guys into psychiatrists and we're making you into
lawyers. And now we're giving you an advanced legal degree in the law of punitive damages in the state of Florida.
Okay. Your question at this point is:
What, if any, amount of money is necessary — and the instructions say is necessary — to punish Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds — but I'll be talking about Philip Morris, but you'll hear me say Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds over and over again — Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds to punish them for their past conduct and — and deter them and others — that means other individuals and other companies who are potentially similarly situated; people who have done things in the past and may be thinking about, gosh, should I change my behavior? Should I not? What will happen if I do?
In other words, deterrence on into the future.
So the evidence that you were focused on previously all related to conduct going back -what? You remember you went back — you had evidence of — oh, it went back hundreds of years, but really it focused on the time frame that Mrs. Sermons was a smoker, right? 1950 to roughly 1996, at the time of her unfortunate death.
So you were looking back at conduct over that
time span. But now, because you're being tasked with the job of determining not just an amount of money for punishment, but also an amount of money, if any, for deterring similar conduct into the future.
Now, before I leave this verdict form, there's — well, I'll do it this way.
Here is a little walk through the most important points. Okay? You're going to get a set of those instructions from Judge Daniel when you go back to deliberate. So you're going to have exactly the language that he just gave you. It's only slightly over two pages long, so it's not nearly so — so burdensome as the last set.
But in this set you're going to read that you can only punish Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds for harm done to Mrs. Sermons by the specific conduct of Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds that was the basis for your finding of punitive damages are warranted against that defendant.
Well, because you said no to the fraud and conspiracy to conceal counts -- whatever it was, whatever evidence that came in in connection with those claims, can't be the basis for a punitive damage award in this case because that's the Court's
instruction, and you're going to see it.
So something that the Tobacco Institute said or Counsel For Tobacco — none of that has any application in this phase of the trial.
Any misrepresentation and any false statement has no application in this phase of the trial. And that's the -- that's the law that the judge has just given to you.
You can't impose punitive damages to punish Philip Morris for harms caused to others whose causes are not before you.
You just saw a reference to 400,000 deaths a year or to a number — another number for people who have an illness related to smoking. You cannot punish Philip Morris for punitive damages or R. J. Reynolds for harms to 399,000-something other people. It's inappropriate.
You may not consider evidence of conduct that has no connection to the conduct that injured Mrs. Sermons. That's what I was just talking to you about a minute ago.
And any punitive damage award must bear a reasonable relationship to the compensatory damages that you awarded in phase one.
Gosh. Now that's not in the instructions, but
that is the law in Florida. No one is going to debate it. Your award on punitive damages —
MR. RAINER: Your Honor, I object.
THE COURT: Pardon?
MR. RAINER: I object.
THE COURT: All right. I'm going to sustain the objection. All right? I want to see counsel at sidebar real quick. Okay?
(Sidebar was held outside the hearing of the jury:)
THE COURT: Here's why I'm sustaining the objection. I think you can absolutely mention it, but I think to be more accurate it's one of the factors, not that's the law and that's it. I need you to clarify that it's one of the factors that they can consider.
MR. REILLY: I will.
THE COURT: Okay. And, in fact, I may just -I'm compelled to, I think, give just a slight curative instruction and just say, Look, that -that's one -- one factor you may consider as to reasonable relationship to the compensatory damage you awarded in phase one.
MR. REILLY: All right.
MR. RAINER: Your Honor, while we're up here,
may I be permitted in rebuttal to say they may consider reprehensibility.
THE COURT: I think you can. Okay?
MR. REILLY: That was for phase one,
Your Honor. That's not for phase two. Reprehensibility has no place —
THE COURT: Well, you can consider, though, the language -- the misconduct. That's what it says. That's right there. Number one of the first factor is misconduct. So that's what you're talking about, I think, when you say reprehensibility.
MR. RAINER: Well, I'm seeking — I'm praying Your Honor's specific guidance. I would like to say the word reprehensibility.
THE COURT: Nature and extent and degree of misconduct.
MR. RAINER: All right.
THE COURT: Which I think is probably — that term reprehensibility has been somewhat confusing, and I've expressed my confusion to it. But I think if you're saying it -- you're saying it in the same manner of the nature and extent and degree of misconduct, that's the instruction.
MR. RAINER: I understand, Your Honor. Thank
you.
THE COURT: Thank you.
(Sidebar was concluded and the following further proceedings were held:)
THE COURT: All right. While everyone is settling back, I've sustained the objection. And I'll — because I want to make sure that I clarify this for the jury.
Counsel has just stated, you know, some of the — one of the fact — or a factor to be considered is that any punitive damage award must bear a reasonable relationship to the compensatory damage amount you awarded in phase one.
I want to make sure that it is clarified that that is one of the factors that you are to consider. It's not the only factor, but it is a factor for you to consider. All right?
You may continue.
MR. REILLY: Thank you, Your Honor.
I'm going to give you lots of other factors to consider when determining whether or not punitive damages are to be awarded, if any, in this case.
But it is one of the factors to consider.
And let me just stop right there and say: You know the amount of damages that you awarded, and now you've just been asked to award $2.4 million in
punitive damages in this case.
That is — 2.4 million, that is — have you got a calculator?
MS. DIOLOMBI: Yes.
MR. REILLY: Divide 13,000 into 2.4 million, if you would.
It sounds like almost 200 times. I did that in my head, but I think I'm pretty close.
MS. DIOLOMBI: Close.
MR. REILLY: 200 times would be 2.6 million.
You were asked to award 2.4 million. So that is two — slightly less than 200 times the amount of compensatory damages that you awarded in this case.
The million four against Philip Morris is something like — I don't know — 150 times the amount of compensatory damages you awarded in this case.
So I don't know about traffic tickets. I don't know about $50,000-a-year people. But I do know that those are the numbers that are involved in this process at this moment.
All right. So what else has the judge explained to you in his instructions — Judge Daniel:
In determining an amount of punitive damage, if
any, against: the defendant, you should consider the following — these are other factors. Your Honor just mentioned there are other factors to consider, and there are, and here are some of them:
The nature and extent and degree of misconduct in the related circumstances; the financial resources — let me stop right there for just a minute.
There is no question that Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds make a lot of money. That's actually the reason why these big numbers are thrown around. And just to show you how big those numbers were, instead of even talking about that profit, what number did Mr. Rainer put up? He put up as a daily number the daily net revenue, not even the net profit, just to get a bigger number in front of you. And any mitigating circumstances.
And obviously the mitigating circumstances which are described by the judge in the next instruction says:
Mitigating evidence is evidence which may demonstrate that a reduced amount of punitive damages should be imposed against the defendant.
And that's obviously why I brought you Dr. Lipowitz, so that you would understand that the
environment in which Philip Morris has functioned — and that's why John brought his company witness as well, so that you would understand that the environment in which we're living today, from a cigarette and tobacco standpoint, is light years from what it was going back to the '50s, the '60s, the '70s, the '80s. And there's no question about that.
The environment of Philip Morris and the environment in this country is so substantially different.
And that's why I brought this to your attention, because in your discretion, you may decline to assess punitive damages at all. It's because now, in looking at these issues, you get to address whether or not — you get to consider whether and the extent to which Morris's conduct has changed.
There was a conversation with you by Mr. Rainer about how Philip Morris is still making cigarettes. Yes, they still make cigarettes. We'll talk more about that in just a minute, but you just heard the instruction from Judge Daniel about that.
You can consider the changed environment for smoking today.
Let: me just: talk about that generally.
Going back to 1950 when Mrs. Sermons began smoking, you know that smoking was everywhere. Many men — a huge percentage of men and women smoked. I think the number was, like, 60 percent or more for men and 30 or better percent for women.
Today you heard — or yesterday you heard from Dr. Lipowitz that the number is something like something slightly less than 15 percent of all adults smoke, and only, I think he said, roughly half of them are regular daily smokers.
You know from phase one testimony that, beginning in 1964, the per capita consumption of cigarettes by adults in this country began a precipitous decline. You know from your own experience — and you don't leave your experience at that door. You know from your own experience you can't smoke in this courtroom. You can't smoke in this building. You can't smoke in virtually any public venue in this city, in this state, in this country.
You know that there is extremely limited advertising. I'm going to talk more in detail about that because it results from the master settlement agreement, the — the voluntary acts by Philip
Morris, and it's also controlled by the Food & Drug Administration legislation. We'll talk more about that in just a minute.
And you now know — you now know that, both because of the master settlement agreement and because of the Food & Drug Administration legislation, Family Smoking and Protection and Tobacco Control Act enacted in 2009, which I'll talk more about in just a minute — you know that this is a highly regulated industry. Philip Morris,
R. J. Reynolds are highly regulated -- highly regulated today.
And you also know that, through the MSA, through the FDA, this is in perpetuity. This is not a temporary situation. This is not a partial situation. This is the future.
You know at Philip Morris there is different management, different employees, and a wholly different environment. And you saw that change.
You saw that change occur beginning in 1999, 2000. You saw things like the website go up. You saw — you saw a sea change at Philip Morris. And I'11 talk more about the employees at Philip Morris at the end of my closing argument.
Let's quickly run through — whoa.
I've either had a bad night or that is not in focus.
Michael?
Thank you very much.
Well, apparently it wasn't my night.
All right. You know that the master settlement agreement provided for significant payments in the billions of dollars to states, including Florida, because -- and was this a voluntary thing? No, this was not a voluntary thing. Every state in this country sued the tobacco industry for health care cost reimbursements. And to resolve that litigation, the master settlement agreement was -it involved 46 states and then four individual state settlements, including the Florida state settlement, resolved the litigation but resulted in huge payments being made by Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds. Philip Morris's number through present day is $70 billion nationwide. Florida's number from Philip Morris is $4 billion.
And you know that those payments go on in perpetuity, you know that it dramatically reduced the public visibility of cigarette advertising. It disbanded organizations like the Tobacco Institute and the Center For — Council For Tobacco Research.
It prohibited the tobacco companies from making any false or misleading statements about the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes. And it has 50 — 50 Attorneys General monitoring the behavior of Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds to ensure they don't violate any of the provisions of the master settlement agreement.
And you heard, and it wasn't disputed, that this master settlement agreement went into effect in 1998. And you heard that there has never been a violation by Philip Morris of one provision of the master settlement agreement.
What kind of advertising restrictions occurred as a result of the master settlement agreement?
They can't advertise on billboards. They can't advertise on stadium signage. No more sponsorships of concerts or sporting events. No more Virginia Slims tennis tournaments. Can't produce branded merchandise. No more caps or jackets or gear of any kind. Can't place products in TV or movies. And they can't do sampling.
You know — you know, as you walk down the street, as you drive your car, you know how dramatically the advertising scene has changed in terms of cigarettes. You know that because you no
longer see — you no longer see signs on buses, taxis, billboards. The only place you can see an ad for a cigarette is if you walk into a convenience store and there's the array of cigarettes and you can see a little ad for Marlboro or something like that. That's it. Or maybe a sign in the window that says, We're selling cigarettes at a discount.
And, in fact, that reminds me: Once again you saw another huge number, $13 billion for advertising and promotion. But don't forget Dr. — Dr. Lipowitz explained to you: What is that number? That is price discounts given because it's a highly competitive price situation. Cigarettes are constantly being discounted so that Reynolds brands are more attractive than the Philip Morris brands. It's a highly competitive business. Not for advertising.
Voluntary acts -Voluntary acts. Voluntary acts by Philip Morris. You saw this page from the website. I realize it's not in color and it's not nearly as pretty as the one we put up. Michael has that, but I won't ask him to put it up. That would take too much time. I'm trying to be economical with your time.
You know that this is not mandatory. You know that this website includes — went up in 2000 — actually, I think the website went up in 1999, but the language on the website has been there since 2000 that says:
Philip Morris-USA agrees with the overwhelming medical and scientific consensus — sorry — that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and other serious diseases in smokers. Smokers are far more likely to develop serious diseases like lung cancer than nonsmokers. There is no safe cigarette.
You know that they also say:
PM USA agrees with the overwhelming medical and scientific consensus that cigarette smoking is addictive. It can be very difficult to quit smoking, but this should not deter smokers who want to quit from trying to do so. Learn more.
And you know that, from this website, if you want to go on it — and there have been — what? —
I think the number was 200 — 2 million hits and tens of thousands of hits just on this page alone.
If you want to link over to the Surgeon General's reports or the CDC, Centers For Disease Control, or the American Heart Association, you can link from
right: here because they offer you that opportunity so you can find out what the public health community is talking about in connection with smoking.
If you want to — if you want to quit smoking, you have links to what they call QuitAssist, and you — it will link you to government locations, government websites where they tell you how to get help, how to go about quitting, what to do, how to do it, where to go.
All of that is entirely voluntary on the part of Philip Morris.
What else? What's another voluntary act on the part of Philip Morris?
Well, you know — you heard that there were no more ads in magazines by Philip Morris as of 2005.
Is it permitted to advertise in magazines? Yes.
But does Philip Morris do it? No. Is that an entirely voluntary act? Yes. Yes.
So now you've got to ask yourself: Is this the way that you would like to see a cigarette manufacturer functioning now, today?
This is a serious question. This idea — this idea of looking at the conduct of Philip Morris since 2000, since 1999, looking into the future, is really an important issue in this case. There's no
question about it.
And so we turn then to the rest of the regulatory framework, and that is the Philip Morris — I'm sorry — the Food and Drug Administration regulation through the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act of 2009.
And you heard that Philip Morris supported this legislation, began supporting it in 2000. It took Congress a while to figure out what it wanted to do, but then in 2009 it sent a bill to President Obama. And when it did, even though Philip Morris may not have agreed with every statement contained in the bill, it supported it.
Here's the letter. It's in evidence. Here's the letter from the then-CEO of Philip Morris, Michael Szymanczk, urging, encouraging President Obama to sign the law, to make it law.
And not simply because of the urging of Philip Morris, but President Obama did sign the legislation and made the enactment turn into law.
Why did Philip Morris support it?
Mr. Szymanczk said in his letter:
We believe this comprehensive national regulatory framework implemented thoughtfully can provide significant benefits to adult consumers by,
among other things, establishing a common set of high standards for all tobacco manufacturers in the United States, providing a framework for the evaluation of tobacco products that are potentially less harmful than conventional cigarettes, and creating clear principals for accurate and scientifically grounded communications about tobacco products to adult consumers.
And you heard that, with that authority, the Food & Drug Administration has created a specific center to address cigarette and tobacco products in particular. And you know that they are currently funding — I think the number you heard was $250 million worth of research, looking at things like what level of nicotine should be permitted in cigarettes? What ingredients? What additives?
What — what can be or what should be the allowable constituents that go into making a cigarette?
What's the appropriate design?
Those are the kinds of things you would expect the Food & Drug Administration to do.
In the meantime, the Food & Drug Administration has told Philip Morris, told R. J. Reynolds, and every other cigarette manufacturer, You are locked down. You cannot vary how you make your cigarettes
right now. Locked down. That's the phrase that you heard. That's the FDA's phrase.
The FDA has complete authority to regular cigarettes from soup to nuts. What goes into a cigarette; what comes out of a cigarette. How cigarettes are advertised. How cigarettes are promoted. What the cigarette companies say or can't say about cigarettes. That's entirely within the control —
If the Food & Drug Administration determines that — I think they said — Dr. Lipowitz said they can't require that every — every piece of or every — every ounce of — not an ounce. That's not right. I'm sorry — all nicotine can't be removed. He said we can't even scientifically do it anyway. But they could take it down to 99.9 percent of the nicotine be removed, but they haven't decided that that's good idea yet. Matter of fact, there are people who are proposing put more nicotine in, take nicotine out, leave it where it is. There are all kinds of suggestions going on to the FDA right now from public health organizations, and we're going to have to wait and see what they finally come up with.
Okay.
MR. RAINER: That's not in evidence,
Your Honor.
THE COURT: Is there an objection?
MR. RAINER: Sorry. I neglected to say the word: Objection.
THE COURT: All right. It's overruled.
Continue.
MR. REILLY: Can the FDA — can the FDA inspect manufacturing facilities? Absolutely. Have they done it already? Multiple times. Do they do spontaneous inspections unannounced? Absolutely.
You heard that doctor from Dr. Lipowitz.
You heard that they can and do require that Philip Morris provide their research papers, whatever experimentation they're engaging in. All of that is accessible to the FDA.
A great question was asked whether or not these — the scientific work done by the tobacco companies in years gone by or that's currently occurring today, is that accessible to scientists today so if they want to replicate that work, they could do that? Absolutely.
You heard about the PM docs site, where all that old research is, and the FDA has the ability today to access any experimentation that's going on. Any research project that's going on at Philip
Morris today, they have complete access to it. So if a scientist — and you heard that Philip Morris is publishing its research today.
If scientists want to take a look at that, if they want to replicate it, or they want to investigate it further, they have the absolute right and ability to do it.
Seize products. Did they — does this legislation give teeth to the FDA in its regulatory capacity? Absolutely. They can shut down plants. They can recall product. They can tell Philip Morris to stop making the product. They can issue fines and penalties. They can do all of that.
And I already told you they can establish the levels of constituents in smoke.
How about information about what goes into a cigarette? Philip Morris — oh, I forgot to mention Philip Morris voluntarily puts on its website, voluntarily, all the ingredients contained in cigarettes. If you want to know what's in a Benson & Hedges cigarette, you can go to the website and look it up.
For the FDA, they actually did the FDA exactly the same information, except in addition to that, they give the exact formula; in other words, the
recipe for what makes a Marlboro a Marlboro, what makes a Benson & Hedges a Benson & Hedges. So the FDA has all of that information.
And the FDA can make determinations — if they wanted to say, You know what? You can't have ammonia in the manufacture of your cigarettes, they could order that. They could order that tomorrow if they wanted to, but they haven't.
They can prohibit new products. You can't just come to the market today and say, Hey, I've got a new product, I want to start selling it, and make some representation about it. That's completely controlled by the FDA.
All right. I told you about this already.
They can restrict what Philip Morris and the others say about their product as well.
This is soup to nuts.
All right. I'm about done. Let me summarize.
Mrs. Sermons began smoking in 1950. I don't know because I haven't had an opportunity to talk to you and I may never have the opportunity to talk to you. At the end of this case, the judge is going to tell you you don't have to talk to anybody about how you made your decision in phase one or phase two.
But — so I don't know exactly what it was that
caused you to check the boxes yes on the punitive damage entitlement question in this case. That's known only to you guys. But whatever it was, I'm reasonably confident that, with what you've just seen, that conduct can't occur, hasn't occurred, and won't occur on into the future.
Now, your award of punitive damages in this case, it sends a message. And who is your audience? Well, I think you have two.
You certainly don't have the people who authored the documents and things that you saw in phase one of this trial that we went through the laundry list of their names. They're dead and gone. So they're not your audience.
But the people at Philip Morris today are your audience, and they are listening to what you say. There's no question about that. And these are the people — quite honestly, these are the people that are operating the company today and on into the future.
So now you have to ask yourselves: Okay. What message do I want to send to them? Do I want to send them a $2.4 million punishment note? Or do I want to send to them a more nuanced message, one that bears a reasonable relationship to the amount
of compensatory damages I awarded in this case? One that recognizes where we are today and where we're going in the future.
And you get to ask yourself, because the judge has given you this instruction: Do I really need to award any punitive damages in light of what the entire environment is today? That's a serious question.
But if you decide that you do, then I suggest to you that the number that you begin with, the one that bears a reasonable relationship to the compensatory damages that you awarded, is that $13,000. And then you have to work from there and decide for yourselves: Okay. What kind of credit do I give — what kind of mitigation credit do I give for where the company — Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds are today? What message do I want to send to the folks at Philip Morris today?
And who is your other audience? The other audience are who's ever watching. Now, the idea there is there may be people who may be similarly situated. There may be people or companies who have been misaligned in the past or done something wrong in the past, and now they're looking to see what happens if we change? What happens if we change?
We do some of It voluntarily, some of it involuntarily, but it's permanent and it's forever?
Obviously, the MSA, as I said, was not entirely voluntary. Let's not kid ourselves. But asking for FDA regulation, that's entirely voluntary. Nobody made Philip Morris do that.
And making the changes that you saw in the website and revealing all this information, that's entirely voluntary.
So now that's the tough question, and I'm glad we have the jury system to provide an answer.
And I want to thank you. There are — before I ignore this, I just want to remind you that you've fully compensated — this is money on top of the compensatory damages award that you've already given her. This amount of money, whatever it is, won't be reduced by the 80/15/5. It wouldn't be reduced. That's in the Court's instructions to you.
So whatever the amount of money is that you award, if any, against Philip Morris or R. J. Reynolds, that's the number.
There are 2,860 cases pending. I don't know what the number would be if you multiplied 2.4 million by 2860. That's a huge number. Huge number.
So you're left: with this question.
And I'm done, and I want to conclude this by again thanking you for your service and telling you both audiences are listening for whatever your decision is.
Thank you very much.



MR. WALKER: Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. THE JURORS: Good morning.
MR. WALKER: Like Mr. Reilly said, this will be probably my last time that I'11 ever get to speak with you-all, unless the judge says you can talk to us.
So I'm not going to use the ELMO like I've been using at other points in trial. Each time I did, it
seemed like I just made a big mess of this area. I'm just going to talk to you and try to give you, once again, Reynolds' perspective on everything.
I do want to thank you, though, each and every one of you, like everyone else has, for the hard work you've put into this case and the balanced consideration you've given to each side.
I want to tell you now, just like I did when we started this phase of trial, Reynolds has heard your verdict. Reynolds respects your verdict and is taking it very seriously, including your collective decision to take us into this phase.
We know from your verdict that it reflects your considered finding that Mrs. Sermons wasn't defrauded, that she didn't rely to her detriment on fraudulent statements, that she bears a lot of the responsibility for — for the emphysema and lung cancer that she developed but that the companies who are defendants in this case also bear some responsibility for that, even — even though it may be a limited responsibility, a limited role here.
You determined by your verdict that there was a need to make the plaintiff whole, that there was a loss to be compensated and you've done that. You've done that by your verdict in the first part of this case. As
the successor to American Tobacco Company, Reynolds Tobacco company is here to answer for that. I've been here answering for that this entire trial.
We are now in the second phase, and in this phase of trial, your work, compensating for that loss, is done. It doesn't mean that the facts and the harm that was caused to Mrs. Sermons is no longer relevant. You heard the judge's instructions that you can only punish for the harm that these defendants caused Ms. Sermons.
But the task that you have during this part of the trial is to determine whether or not there is an amount of money that's necessary to punish and to deter.
Mr. Reilly spent a lot of time talking about both of those subjects, especially and including the -- the -whether there's a need to deter these cigarettes companies, really any cigarette company that's under the watchful eye of the Attorney General and the FDA and all of that.
So I want to spend a few minutes, at least initially, focusing on the other half of that, this question about punishment. And the one thing that you know now that you probably didn't know, at least not to the same extent when you checked that box in Phase I, was that the people that you'd probably most like to
punish, the people who did the things that you saw in the documents and that you heard about in the first phase of this case that led you to believe that there might be a role for punishment, those people are not at Reynolds anymore. Most of them are dead, have moved on, are not going to be affected by an award against R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company today.
And, quite frankly, there's nothing that I would have liked more than to be able to grab Claude Teague or Alan Rodgman or any of those people by their ear, drag them into that witness box and tell them to explain themselves to you. But I can't do that. That can't happen. Those people will not be punished by any award that you may come to in this case, unfortunately.
That raises the question, though, if you come back with an award against these defendants, against Reynolds, who does feel the loss? Who will feel the impact of that punitive damages award and who will be punished? And the answer is it's a company that's composed of people like Steve Alderman. That's why I told you in the opening, I would bring someone from the company, a scientist, a manager at the company, part of the leadership, to let you get to know this company, to see what really makes it tick.
Are these people who are sitting around,
cooking up ways to hook people on cigarettes, to trick people into continuing to smoke cigarettes that are harmful to their health or something else?
And I think that each and every one of you looked into Dr. Alderman's eyes, either while he was over there or he stood over here and probably stood a little close to you, even though I told him to take a couple steps back. He was a little nervous. But I think that each and every one of you saw there was not a malicious bone in Dr. Alderman's body. And it's not just Dr. Alderman. It applies —
MR. RAINER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Pardon?
MR. RAINER: I object.
THE COURT: All right. Overruled.
MR. WALKER: It applies to all of the scientists at Reynolds. Dr. Alderman is a well —
MR. RAINER: I object again, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WALKER: Dr. Alderman, as you saw, is a well-meaning hardworking scientist.
MR. RAINER: May we have a sidebar, Your Honor?
THE COURT: You may.
(A sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:)
MR. RAINER: I didn't object initially when Mr. Walker was vouching for the witness. Now he's not only vouching for the witness; he's describing characteristics of the witness to the entire company of witnesses, of people that the jury has never seen. He's asking them to treat Dr. Alderman as the company and his personal characteristics with respect to how he approaches — how he conducted him — carried himself, Your Honor. I think this is improper argument.
MR. WALKER: Judge, the jury had an opportunity to observe the demeanor of the witness. He described not only his own work at the company but also the work of his fellow scientists, people he's worked side by side with, people he has supervised. He talked about how him and other scientists in the company have been proud of the work they've done trying to make cigarettes less hazardous, and he was here as a representative of the company, both as a scientist and as part of the company's leadership.
THE COURT: All right. Objection's overruled.
You know, as long as you don't stray into personal belief and opinion.
MR. WALKER: Yes, Your Honor.
THE COURT: All right. They're asked to judge the credibility and the validity of the testimony.
MR. RAINER: My specific objection, Your Honor, is not a malicious bone in his body. That is purely vouching by Mr. Walker.
THE COURT: First of all, this isn't a criminal case, so we don't get into vouching for -- if it -- it's not — it's not a criminal case, where you worry about, you know, vouching for the credibility of the witness. Okay? It's a -- it's argument, closing argument in a civil case.
MR. RAINER: Your Honor, I would not have risen had he not — had Mr. Walker not ascribed an intent, not a malicious bone in his body. That is over — him saying besides himself, he was a scientist, other than he talked about the work as a scientist. I don't object to that but not a malicious bone in his body.
MR. WALKER: Specifically, Your Honor —
THE COURT: I overruled the objection. All right?
I will say you might want to temper the comments.
MR. WALKER: I will.
MR. RAINER: Thank you, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Okay.
(The sidebar conference was concluded and the following proceedings were held in open court in the presence of the jury:)
MR. WALKER: So we were talking about Dr. Alderman
and you saw him. You had a chance to lay eyes on him, observe his demeanor, listen to his testimony, his background, how proud he is of the work that he personally has done and the work that's been done by Reynolds. And you saw him to be, as the company is, hardworking, well-meaning scientists, people who are very interested. This is a person who lives and breathes by the science.
I had to get him to stop talking to you about biomarkers and aerosol science and try to get him to speak English but this is his world. This is the world of the scientists who work at Reynolds.
And I think that you saw that people like Dr. Alderman are people who are using their talents for good, not for evil. He didn't say anything about trying to manipulate nicotine or keep smokers hooked.
Mr. Rainer said, well, I found on the website where there was a reference to ammonia, and Dr. Alderman said, yeah, we used that to manipulate. He didn't say anything like that, not one word about that.
The fact of the matter is that Dr. Alderman, like the people he worked shoulder to shoulder with and the people he supervises at Reynolds are hardworking people who are in an industry that makes a legal product that is known to cause harm to the people who choose to smoke
it.
Now, there isn't a single thing in the jury instructions that you heard from the judge and that you received that will allow you to punish Reynolds or any company for simply continuing to be in business. In fact, after you heard a lot of argument from Mr. Rainer that kind of implied that there's something wrong with continuing to be in business, continuing to keep the company's doors open and making Pall Mall cigarettes, the instruction that you heard —
MR. RAINER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WALKER: — the instruction that you heard from the judge was just as I said. Cigarettes are a legal product. Making them, advertising them, selling them in this country is a lawful activity, and you can't punish either of these defendants just for doing that.
So the real question is in a country where adults are allowed to make the choice for themselves whether to smoke or not, in a country where you can have a tobacco company, a cigarette company, that it's a lawful activity to make and sell products for people who want to smoke them, what do we expect of the companies that choose to be in that business?
How should they behave? Would we expect them to
be up front with their consumers, with the public about the risks of their products, put it on a website so everyone can see it? Would we expect them to be up front about the possibility that using that product would cause you to become addicted? Would we expect them to tell the public what's in the cigarettes, put it online, brand by brand?
Would we expect a company that's in this business, a reasonable company, the kind of company that's doing what we would want to see happen, would we expect them to work hard and spend a lot of money, including some of the money that comes from selling the more dangerous products, to use some of that money to look for ways to make cigarettes less hazardous? Would we expect a company in that industry to try to develop other types of products that might be appealing to cigarette smokers but that also involved less — or lower hazards to health?
Would we expect a company that's in this business to offer ways to people who are smoking to stop smoking, things like e-cigarettes, things like nicotine replacement therapies?
Aren't those the things that we would want a company in that business to be doing? Those are all things that you heard in this case that the
R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company of today is doing.
And yet that is the very same company that you're being asked to punish and to deter to the tune of $1 million.
Now, as I said, you didn't know all of that information until we got into this phase. You hadn't heard from Dr. Lipowicz, who talked to you about all the watchdogs, all the people who are really just waiting for the tobacco companies to make any kind of misstep to jump right in and stop them before anyone is ever harmed. You heard that.
But you didn't know that before. You didn't know when you brought us into this phase that you would meet Dr. Alderman, and he'd tell you all the things, the good things, the company is doing today.
But you know that now and you can and should take that into account in assessing, in this phase of trial, whether or not any punitive damages should be awarded because an award should be no greater than the amount you find necessary to punish and to deter. And the law recognizes that you hear things in the second phase that maybe you didn't hear in the first phase. They weren't relevant then. They're relevant now. That's why you get the instructions that tell you that you may, in your discretion, decline to assess punitive damages. That's
why that's there.
Even on the verdict form, the question you're asked is what is the total amount of punitive damages, if any, which you find should be assessed against each defendant? That, if any, is to capture the possibly that you could hear things in this phase that would demonstrate to you that there is no need today to punish and to deter the defendants. And it even tells you how to do that. If you elect not to assess punitive damages, you should enter a zero as the amount of punitive damages.
And that's what I'm going to ask you to do here because I believe that what you have learned — let me start that over.
What you have learned about R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, the kind of company it is, the kind of people it's composed of and the regulatory environment in which it operates today is not a company that is deserving of punishment or deterrence.
Mr. Rainer told you -- asked you to award a million dollars against R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. And you should know that the judge's instruction was the award, if there's to be one, should be no greater than the amount you find necessary to punish the defendant for the harm caused to Myra Sermons.
You've already decided that when It comes to both defendants — and I'm going to be a little more specific to Reynolds now — that Reynolds' contribution — either by itself or as the successor to the American Tobacco Company, Reynolds' contribution to what happened to Mrs. Sermons was limited. The number that you came up with was 5 percent.
What you are being asked to do by Mr. Rainer, by Mr. Sermons is to award 300 times the damage caused by Reynolds' contribution to Mrs. Sermons' injuries. And I submit to you that based on everything that you heard that that's not fair. It's not right and it certainly isn't necessary to punish or deter Reynolds.
I want to say, in the first phase of this case, I am confident that all of you, individually and collectively, were very fair to the American Tobacco Company that existed during Mrs. Sermons lifetime, even the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company that existed back then. I know that you'll be fair now to R. J. Reynolds of today, 2016, and, in fact, I'll count on that.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Judge.
