ClOSING ARGUMENT 
MR. ALVAREZ: May it please the court, Counsel, Mrs. Sherman.
First of all, on behalf of Melba Sherman and Gary Paige and Adam Trop, we want to thank you ver much for these two weeks or a little bit over two weeks of service you've all put into this case. We have noticed how attentive you all have been, and it hasn't escaped our attention.
You've weighed and looked at both sides with equal vision, and we do appreciate that. We are really, really appreciative of your service, so thank you on behalf of my client and my partners.
I am going to split up my time. I will go for half an hour, and then Mr. Paige will come and address you for half an hour, and then Ms. Parker
will have an hour and 15 minutes to address you, and then I will come back for the last 15 minutes and address you. That is how it will work out.
But let me tell you about where we started because sometimes it is always best to start a story right at the beginning. You've seen a lot of evidence. You've heard a lot of things, but it is important to kind of put things in perspective, you know, what you are here to decide, how do we get here, and I think it's best to start at the beginning, okay?
Let's remember the very first thing that the judge told you. He said, "This trial will be conducted in phases. In this first phase, you will be asked to decide whether Mr. Sherman was a clas member. In this phase, the issue for your determination is whether Mr. Sherman's death was a result of addiction to cigarettes that contained nicotine. During phase II, you will be asked to determine the issues of fault, comparative fault, damages, and entitlement to punitive damages."
This is important, because in this phase, you are not here to decide who is at fault, whether Mr. Sherman could have quit, whether they are responsible, how much each side is responsible.
That issue of comparative fault, that is not before you today. That is not what you are here to decide.
You've heard a lot of evidence about this, a lot of evidence, but that is for phase II. Phase I is very limited in what you have to decide, very limited.
In fact, the judge will instruct you that you are to follow -- the following facts are not in dispute, because there are things that we are not disputing or things that they are not disputing, okay? One, cigarettes that contain nicotine are addictive. That is not disputed by anyone. Two, smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer. Three, Johr Sherman died of lung cancer. That is not disputed. Even Dr. Barsky who came in here today did not dispute that. Four, John Sherman's lung cancer was caused by smoking cigarettes that contained nicotine. That is not in dispute either. We even have the death certificate that has been introduced into evidence. Dr. Barsky, even their expert, admits that for smoking as many years as Mr. Sherman did, that's what caused his cancer. Okay. It was from smoking. There is no dispute. There's no environmental factors. It is not in
dispute. He died from smoking cigarettes for ovei 50 years. That is what caused his death. They are not disputing that.
In fact, the question that you have to decide, in a little while, the judge will read you some instructions, and you will be able to take it back in the jury room and look at the instructions in case you have a question, but one of the instructions he will give you is going to say the issue for your determination is whether John Sherman was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, whether such addiction was the legal cause of John Sherman's death? That is the question. That is the question. Was he addicted and was the addiction the legal cause of his death? Was he addicted and was it the legal cause of his death?
Now, we know, and they've stipulated, and their own expert admits, that what caused his death, what caused his death, was smoking cigarettes. That's what caused his death. We will submit to you that the legal cause of his death has already been established by the facts and by the testimony. There is no one disputing that, so we believe that the only thing that you really need to
decide in this case is, was he addicted? Was he addicted?
Facts proving legal cause. It's undisputed that Mr. Sherman died of lung cancer caused by smoking cigarettes that contained nicotine. No disputing that. No disputing that. The only cigarettes that he smoked from 1953 to 1997 were made by R.J. Reynolds. No disputing that. No disputing that. No other brands. That is not in dispute.
This phase is about addiction, not fault. We can find yourself wanting to say back there, well, listen, he could have quit. He could have tried to quit. He could have tired harder to quit. Stop. Think wait a minute. That is for phase II. We are going to decide who is responsible and what percentages of responsibility.
MS. PARKER: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: Okay. That is not for this phase. Okay. That is not for this phase.
You will not hear one word from the judge instructing you that you are supposed to decide who is at fault in this phase. Follow the law and the judge's instructions and just decide if Mr. Sherman
was addicted to cigarettes that contained nicotine that caused his death. That is solely your job today, to follow the law on this issue. We will have time to dispute and argue tomorrow or the nex day phase II about who is at fault. That is not what this phase is for. That is not what you're supposed to decide, okay? And if you find he was addicted, you will later decide fault.
Well, listen, let's look at the facts. This case turns on facts. Let's look at the facts of whether this person was addicted. Let's look at the facts. He started smoking when he was about 1 years old in 1940.
Fact number two, by 1942, he was smoking between two to four packs per day, and he did that for the next 50-plus years.
Fact number three, his wife had to buy him shirts with pockets on the breast or he wouldn't wear them. Why? Because he needed to have cigarettes in there.
Fact number four, he smoked everywhere and all the time. Listen to his friends and listen to his family that testified here. A lot of them they played for you. This man was always smoking.
Fact number five, he often woke up in the
middle of the night to smoke.
Fact number six, the first thing in the morning before getting out of bed he would smoke, and that is extremely important, because if you remember Dr. Glassman, he said that is the most important factor or indicator on deciding whether someone is addicted or not, how early or how soon after you get up in the morning do you smoke. He did it first thing in the morning before he even got out of bed.
Fact number seven, he would smoke with coffee. He would have another cigarette and have breakfast with his coffee, and after eating breakfast, he would have another smoke.
Fact number eight, his wife also packed his lunch box for work. She would pack two brand-new packs of Winstons in his lunch pail, and he would put a fresh one right in his breast pocket.
Fact number nine, he kept another one in his glove box. He kept another one in the glove box just in case those three weren't enough.
Fact number 10, when he came home from work he had another pack. With dinner, watching TV, before he went to bed, he would smoke another pack
Fact number 11, he was a chain smoker. He
lit one right after another.
Fact number 12, he smoked in church. Well,
the fact that he only did it once was enough. He was embarrassed, but that shows he's not in control. He is not in control. That's addicted.
Fact number 13, they would go to drive-in movies because they allowed smoking.
Fact number 14, he quit his job at J.M. Pontiac because of his limited access to smoking. He went from a big company with benefits to a small mom-and-pop store. You saw the deposition where she says he left because he got a manager's position, and for other reasons, too.
Those other reasons are because they had an open bay, and he could smoke.
Fact number 15, he loved his wife's family, but he avoided going to their house because they wouldn't let him smoke.
Fact number 16, he was admitted to the hospital with a colapsed lung, and he couldn't stop smoking.
Fact number 17, it was painful for him to breathe. He was on oxygen. He pulled the mask off and smoked.
Fact number 18, the medical records confirm
he was a four-pack-per-day smoker for 50 years. There it is. It is in the medical records. We put them into evidence. She is not making it up. That was 1996.
Fact number 19, the medical records confirmed he had yellow cigarette stains on his fingers. See it there, "The patient has cigarette stains on his finger" on the bottom there. If he were alive today and he took the stand, and like every other witness, he would raise his right hand closest to you, do you know what you would see? You would s his yellow stained fingers.
Fact number 20, the last days of his life when he was in a semiconscious state, he would do this (indicating). He would reach for his pocket and reach for a cigarette. Does this sound like someone that smoked primarily because he enjoyed it?
Look at this picture. Does it sound like this man smoked because he enjoyed it or because he was addicted? He was addicted. We will decide fault and responsibility, and we are eager to. We will address those issues, but that is not your job today. That is not your job. Your job is to decide whether he was addicted.
We heard from Dr. Strauss, an oncologist and epidemiologist. He's a terrific, well-qualified
doctor, extremely well qualified. He went to Harvard and Yale University and is triple board certified in internal medicine, oncology, and hematology. He has 60 peer-reviewed articles and 50 books on lung cancer. This man knows his stuff. Lung cancer is the number one cause of death in the U.S., more than the number two, the number three and the number four and the number five combined. John Sherman had squamous cell carcinoma 95 percei caused by smoking. No issue. He is a four pack per day smoker. It is an enormous amount. One of the most he has ever seen. How can someone smoke four packs a day for 50 something years and not be addicted? How does that make any sense? It doesn't. He was addicted. He said that addiction to cigarettes caused lung cancer. He said no question. He showed you this graph. This is from the 2004 Surgeon General's Report. It is in evidence. It is here.
What do they say? Look at the first thing. Nicotine addiction, that's what starts it, nicotine addiction.
Scientific evidence, look at the Surgeon
General's Report. By the way, the Surgeon General's Report isn't a flippant thing that some doctor that's appointed by the President decides that he's going to write every year because he wants to and he wants his name in print. No, he is required by law and Congress mandates that the Surgeon General every year has to write this report.
What does the report say? Nicotine is a highly addictive drug just as addictive as heroin and cocaine. These are the conclusions from the '88 Surgeon General's Report. Cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting. Nicotine is a drug in tobacco that causes addiction. The pharmacologic and behavior processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine. This is the Surgeon General, the highest doctor in the United States appointed by the President and required by Congress to do this report.
Look at what they say. Highly controlled or compulsive drug use refers to a drug-seeking and drug-taking behavior that is driven by strong often irresistible urges. Does that sound familiar? It
can persist despite the desire to quit or even repeated attempts to quit. Basic observation and experimental research indicates that cigarette smoking is not a random or capricious behavior that simply occurs at the will or pleasure of those who smoke. Rather smoking is the result of the behavioral and pharmacologic factors that lead to the highly controlled or compulsive use of cigarettes. Sound familiar? That is the Surgeon General.
Look what they say about that. Two factors refute the argument that smoking is a matter of free choice. It's not about free choice. Once you become addicted to nicotine, it's not a free choice. You could quit, and we will talk about that tomorrow, but you're addicted.
It is not just us saying that. Their own web page says that no tobacco product has been shown t( be safe and individuals should rely on the conclusions of the Surgeon General's Report. They are saying you all should rely on the conclusion of the Surgeon General's Reports that we put in evidence.
The longer you smoke, the more likely you are to be addicted. That is just a fact. This man
smoked for over 50 years. Studies show the most predictive factor for addiction is how soon after you wake up in the morning do they smoke a cigarette. Before getting out of bed every morning, he was smoking. Two packs per day is an extraordinary amount of cigarette smoking, okay?
He smoked three to four. Two a day, two packs a day, is a lot. It is a lot. He smoked three to four, and that is in the medical records from 1996.
17 million Americans every year try to quit. Only five percent are successful. Even at the top clinics where they treat you to stop smoking, the success rate is only 20 percent. By the way, in 1996 when he passed away, guess what? They didn'1 have Chantix and all the other drugs that they have now. Smokers are genetically -- some smokers are genetically susceptible to nicotine addiction. Not everybody is the same. Not everybody's genes are the same. Some people can get addicted easier than others and some people can quit easier than others.
Who is Dr. Glassman? Well, we didn't go and find somebody who has never testified before or never written any articles on addiction. We went and looked in the library and found out who the person who knows most about it, and we went to
Columbia University in New York City, and we founi Dr. Glassman, who is a world-renowned expert in the subject. He was the first witness that testified the first day. He has published more than 80 articles on addiction -- on nicotine addiction.
This is -- he's the man. He's the man. He ran a smoking cessation clinic. He tells you two packs is a lot. He said it's inconceivable that Mr. Sherman was not addicted. He's a world-renowned expert, but if you can smoke two packs per day for a long time, you are addicted.
You can't convince me he is not. He uses the National Institute of Drug Abuse or NIDA's definition for addiction. He also told you that under any definition, he said just pick a definition, pick any definition you want for addiction. Guess what? This man, John Sherman, meets them all, all of them.
Dr. Glassman testified, and this made sense, common sense, that a man who smokes three or four packs a day for 50 years, of course, he is addicted. But who does R.J. Reynolds call? Who do they call? Dr. Shoba Sreenivasan.
Before meeting the tobacco lawyers, she never once primarily treated a smoker for nicotine
addiction. Does that sound like an expert to you? Does that sound like somebody that knows what the; are doing on this subject matter? She may be good at trying to profile a pedophile. She may be good at that, but you know what? She is not an expert on nicotine addiction. She just is not.
She is a psychologist. She is not a medical doctor. She is a psychologist. She can't write prescriptions for medications. She has never written a single article on nicotine addiction that. That's their expert, a person who has never written an article on nicotine addiction; never treated a single patient solely for nicotine addiction; does that sound like an expert to anyone? Never done a single study or research on nicotine addiction? That's who they bring?
In deposition, when we asked her, she didn't even know the definition of addiction. She didn't even know it. When we asked her, well, how does nicotine affect the brain? Well, I don't know.
I'm not a neurologist. I don't know. Well, you are supposed to be a nicotine expert. You don't know how this drug affects the brain and you're supposed to be the expert, and we're supposed to rely on you that he is not addicted? How does that
make sense?
She didn't know the data. She didn't know how many people smoked. She didn't even know the data. She disagreed that nicotine is as addictive as heroin and cocaine. She disagreed with it. She disagreed with the government, NIDA, the National Institute of Drug Addiction. She disagrees with the Surgeon General. She disagreed with the American Cancer Society. She disagreed with the University of Southern California where she works, where she works. She disagreed with U.C.L.A. when she graduated, where she got her Ph.D. and where she got her Master's degree. She even disagrees with them. The only people she agrees with is R.J. Reynolds.
What does she use? The DSM-IV. You know what? You cannot -- you are not supposed to use it for forensic purposes. You are not supposed to come into a court of law and use it for that reason.
It says that when the DSM category criteria and descriptions are employed for forensic purposes, there are significant risks that diagnostic information will be -MS. PARKER: Objection. Not evidence.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: -- will be misused or misunderstood. These dangers arise because of the imperfect fit between the questions of ultimate concern of law and information contained in the clinical diagnosis. What that is saying is, guess what, that you are not supposed to be using it for forensic purposes. That is what she is doing here. You can't use it for that purpose.
And you know what? It is not meant to go back and try to diagnose somebody who is dead already. It is not to meant to diagnose dead people. It says that the diagnosis of substance dependence requires, requires, obtaining a detailed history from the individual. How can you take a detailed history from somebody who is dead? Well, if you are going to use this manual, that is what you are supposed to do. It is curious that the manual that she relied on, she never once mentioned it on her direct examination, never once. We had to bring it up in cross-examination. Wait,
Dr. Sreenivasan, didn't you use this manual to evaluate whether Mr. Sherman was addicted? Oh, yeah, I used the manual. Never once mentioned that word in her direct examination when Ms. Parker wa:
asking her the questions, and it is curious, right?
In fact, this is another thing. She didn't say that Mr. Sherman was not addicted, but rather did not have enough data based on the DSM. She said something different here, and we had to cross-examine her and impeach her on it, because in her deposition, she said something different.
Do you remember when you were deposed in the first deposition on page 139, line 3 through 8, I asked you, as you sit here, you don't have enough data within a reasonable degree of psychological certainty to state whether or not he was nicotine dependent at all, and your answer was, no, my opinion -- no. My opinion is that there is not data in this case to support Mr. Sherman meets the criteria for nicotine dependence as articulated by the DSM-IV. Do you remember giving that answer? And she says yes. So when we asked her in deposition, it is one thing, and when we asked her something in trial, it is something completely different.
Let's follow her logic. Remember the Judge's primary instruction? He gave you some background about this case being filed in 1994 on behalf of all Florida residents, and he said in 2006, it was
determined by the Florida Supreme Court that individuals who allege that they are members of the class may file an individual lawsuit. Well, she says everyone can quit, so no one is addicted. If that were true, then the class action would have no class members, because if every one can quit -- she is saying everybody can quit, so no one is addicted. If that logic were true, there would be no members in the class. There would be no member in the class. Does that sound logical to you?
Let's talk about the DSM. The first one. Tolerance is defined by either the following: A need for marked increased amounts of substance to achieve intoxication or desired effect or marked diminish in the continued use of the same. Met that one. Two, withdrawals manifested by either the characteristics of withdrawal symptoms or -- or the criteria or the same related to substances is taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal systems. This guy would do it first thing in the morning because he didn't want a withdrawal system. He kept smoking because he didn't want to feel withdrawal. He met that. Number three, the substance is often taken in large amounts and over longer period than it was intended. Well, I think 50 something years,
four packs a day, you have to give him that one, two. Number four, there is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control substance. She said we didn't have enough information for that, so you know what? We will give them that one. Let's give them that one. Number five, a great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the substance, and it gives a lot of things here. It says chain smoking. He was a chain smoker. He met that one. Important social or occupational or recreational activities are given up or reduced because of the substance. The guy went to drive-ins, and the guy wouldn't go to his mother-in-law's house. All of those things he wouldn't do. He quit a job. He went to another job because it was easier for him to smoke. He met that. The substance used is continued despite the knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by the substance. This guy had a collapsed lung. He was dying with cancer and was smoking. He met that one, too. He is six out of seven, and according to her, you only need three. According to them, the standard that they use, you
only need three. He has six out of the seven.
The Fagerstrom test. Now, that is another test to define addiction, right. To determine addiction, guess what? When Mr. Paige asked her, well, you're familiar with this test, she said, well, I don't use it, but I'm familiar with it. He went down the list of all the things that that test included, and he met them, and the results by the scoring was highly addictive.
Addiction is a disease. She admits it is a disease. It kills over 400,000 Americans a year.
She said that it is unethical to tell people that smoking is safe, but yet that is exactly what R.J. Reynolds was doing for over 50 years. I may borrow some time. You knew that was coming, right?
That is exactly what they did from 1954 to 2000. RJR preyed on nicotine addicts' weakness telling them it was safe. That is exactly what they did. In TV, newspapers, movies, everywhere they could, they told Americans -- it is a controversy. It hasn't been proven. It hasn't been proven. That is exactly what an addict needs, right?
A nicotine addict who is smoking three or four packs a day, do you think the last thing he
needs to hear from the person who is making the cigarettes, hey, it is okay to smoke; it is not unsafe? Do you think that that's what he needs to be hearing? Well, why would they do that? Why would they do that? I think the answer is obvious.
They even encouraged him to use filtered cigarettes when they knew it wasn't safer. It was all a scam from 1954 to 2000 to keep smokers smoking.
And here is the hypocrisy of their position.
Here is the hypocrisy of it all. James Figlar took an oath. He is the executive who came in here. He had to admit that the first time it was confirmed it was 2000, 46 years after the Wynder study, 46 years after the Wynder study, 26 years after the Surgeon General's 1964 Report linking smoking to cancer, 12 years after the 1988 Surgeon General's Report said it was addictive, and 18,000,000 deaths in the U.S.
John Sherman, a high school -- he wanted you to believe yesterday or the other day or last Thursday guess what? John Sherman, a high school dropout, should know more than RJR. That is what he was trying to convince you, that this high school dropout should know it is bad for him, but
do you know what? We didn't know until 2000. Doe that sound right to you? Does that sound fair to you?
John Sherman had already been dead and buried four years before they admitted it. And so what do they do? They attack the Shermans. Have you ever heard the saying that the best defense is a good offense? Well, that is exactly what they are doing in this courtroom. They attacked John Sherman and his family. He went to the doctor -- he went to the doctor just to get out of jury duty. Remember that? She said twice in opening that he just went to the doctor to get out of jury duty. He didn't go to the doctor to get out of jury duty.
His lung was collapsed, and he knew he couldn't do it, and he finally went to the doctor, and he had a collapsed lung, and they diagnosed him with cancer of the lung. Very different story.
That is how they slight things. That is how they twist things. He was married twice before as a young man. What does that have anything to do with this case, the fact that he was married twice before he was 26 years old? He was married to this lady for 43 years. That is what is relevant.
He smoked because he enjoyed it, and he was
stubborn, and he was headstrong, and he wore the pants, and they are attacking him. The truth is that 80 to 90 percent of the smokers are addicted.
The truth is that only five to six percent are successful in stopping. The truth is you can't enjoy puffing on a cigarette when you are in so much pain because one of your lungs is collapsed and the other is covered with cancer. That is not enjoyment. That is not enjoyment.
They say he enjoyed it despite his wife nagging and nagging and picky, picky. I'm not apologizing for Melba Sherman. Melba Sherman did everything she could within her powers and abilities to get her husband to stop, and I don't think she should be attacked for that or turn it into something ugly.
Phase I is not about choice, but about addiction. Don't get duped. Don't be fooled.
When you hear choice, think phase II. This is about addiction, was he addicted?
MS. PARKER: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: We know he died of lung cance We know he died of lung cancer caused by cigarette smoking. That has been proven. The only real
question is, was he addicted? Don't be fooled. I want to have that debate about who is at fault. We want to have that debate. We want to have it. We are willing to have it. We can't wait to have it, but it is not today. Be patient. We will have it.
This phase is about addiction, not about fault.
You will get a verdict form that will say, we, the jury, return the following verdict: Was John Sherman addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of Mr. Sherman's death? And you know what? That is what it is because that is the truth. That is the truth.
I tender the rest of my time to Mr. Paige.



ClOSING ARGUMENT
MR. PAIGE: Good afternoon. Along with Alex, what he said I agree, and I know that Ms. Parker agrees. We really -- everybody, the judge,
Mr. Yarber, Mr. Walker, everybody really appreciates what you guys have done, and we've seei everybody taking notes, and it is amazing how closely you paid attention, and we do appreciate that.
For me, I am really honored to be here. I
know this is such an important case. It is important for R.J. Reynolds, and they have fine lawyers, they really do, and for Melba Sherman, this is important as well, so the fact that you all have paid attention and have been here for this whole time and set aside your jobs and what you do is appreciated by all.
And it doesn't matter -- you know, what matters really is that you listened, which did you, and you paid attention, and you all took your notes, and now all that's really left is that you follow the law. We know that you will do that. Everybody promised that you will do that.
You will remember early on in jury selection when we were speaking to everybody and we were talking about the cases and some people initially had some feeling about smokers. You will remember that. Everybody said they would keep an open mind and they would listen to the evidence and they would hear all of the facts and they would keep an open mind and do what is right. We all agreed that you six or you eight would be perfect jurors for this case. We know that everybody will keep an open mind, and everybody has done that.
The things that you've seen and the things
that you've heard you couldn't have known when you were sitting here during jury selection, but one of the things that I did ask everybody or I said or I asked was who knows or who has heard of somebody who had died or was injured or ill as a result of an addiction to nicotine? I don't know if you all remember it, but I remember asking that question, and everybody raised their hand.
Then I asked, does everybody understand what it means as to whether somebody died or was injured as a result of an addiction to nicotine, and everybody understood what that meant. I said, do you need a lawyer to explain that to you? Of course, everybody said no.
This is not a complicated issue, the first issue. We keep talking about phases, and there are different phases, and the judge told you at the very beginning that there will be a lot of information in the first phase that really is relevant to the second question you will be asked hopefully later if you return a verdict and include Mr. Sherman in this class of addicted Florida smokers.
So there is overlapping evidence, and I will tell you that the second phase when we talk about
phases is going to be very short, so when Mr.
Alvarez is talking about we will debate or talk about the responsibility of the parties, the responsibility of who bears more fault for their choices, you have to compare the choices that an addict makes.
MS. PARKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: It sounds like you are either giving an opening or closing on phase II.
Sustained.
MR. PAIGE: Okay. Part of the things that they weren't telling you about or you heard about Mr. Sherman, you know, about Mr. Sherman laughed when people told him to stop smoking or he liked smoking or he made a choice to smoke, and nobody i going to dispute that. You know, that is the evidence in this case, and, you know, it would be insincere for me to stand up here and say here was somebody who never heard that smoking caused cancer, he was oblivious to that, and when people told him to quit, he really wanted to quit and said I hate smoking, I hate smoking, but that is not normal. That is ridiculous. Addicts make their choices based upon their addiction. That is why they are addicts. They are not -- you can't tell
an addict this is bad for you, don't do it. If you tell a heroin addict it's bad for you, they say they like it. Even Dr. Sreenivasan said that. If you tell a cocaine addict it's bad for you, don't do it. They will tell you they like it. They want to be left alone. They are an addict. It is an addiction. It's a disease. It affects the brain.
And nowadays they have medications available. People back in the day didn't have that. The medication, you know, there are serious side effects to that medication. People accept the risks with the medications, the side effects, so they can quit their addiction. People do that.
And nicotine addiction is something serious, so when you talk about the choices that an addict makes, the decisions that an addict makes, he is making them because of his addiction.
And the class -- the irony of this whole thing is that we are spending all of this time and energy trying to convince you six reasonable fair-minded people that a gentleman who smoked three to four packs a day, day in and day out, first thing in the morning, in the middle of the night, on oxygen as he is dying in Hospice, and we have to convince you that he -- that he is addicted
enough to get into a class of addicted smokers?
There is a class that is for people who are addicted to nicotine. All we are saying is he is in the class. We shouldn't even be having this debate. The evidence is clear.
Even Dr. Sreenivasan, if you believe her that Mr. Sherman was not addicted to nicotine when she took her oath and looked you in the eyes and swore to you, swore to you, this is serious, this is serious. You know, you don't just take an oath and swear to tell the truth when you have somebody here who this means so much to, and when she looked yoi in the eyes and said, no, this man was not addicted, you know, if you believe her, that is okay. Then we will accept the fact that Mr. Sherman is not a member of the class, and we will -- we will move on, and Mrs. Sherman will movi on, but if you think that she was lying to you and not telling the truth when she said this four-pack-a-day smoker was not addicted, then he must be a member of the class. The next time I am going to do a PowerPoint because I have these notes, and it is always hard for me to read them.
I want to go over some of the evidence that was in this case. Here is a board. We all know
now -- you know, when you came here, you know, w all received a lot of education on nicotine throughout the course of this trial. We all know now that it is highly addictive, as addictive as cocaine and heroin, and nicotine addiction is a disease that affects the brain. You know, it takes 10 seconds for the nicotine to go to the brain. A smoker, like Mr. Sherman, will get 600 hits of nicotine to his brain each day.
Here is what R.J. Reynolds knew. This is another thing. It is ironic that they want to say now -- you know, it wasn't until 2000 that they admitted nicotine was addictive, so not so long ago they were denying publicly and in court or wherever they could that nicotine was addictive, and now they are saying, okay, we admit it; you have our documents; nicotine is addictive, but not if you come to court. If you come to court like Mr. Sherman, well, it might be addictive for everybody else but Mr. Sherman. It is not credible. It is just not credible. We are really spending a lot of time talking about choices he made. Could he have done things differently? Could he have done things better? Absolutely. I will never -- look. They put somebody on the stand who said that they never
concealed information or they did not conspire or they did not conceal the health hazards and the addictive nature of nicotine. They put a witness on the stand who said that their productive was not defective. They swore under oath that their product was not defective. I cannot wait to have that debate in two days from now because we will prove that that is not so, but I will never look anybody in eyes and say Mr. Sherman doesn't bear some responsibility for what happened here. He does bear some responsibility.
MS. PARKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: There are, you know, questions about could he have quit? Could he have tried harder? Everybody can try harder. Mr. Sherman is not perfect. He was not perfect by any means, but he was not a liar, and he bears some responsibility. We will talk about his responsibility gladly. But here is what they knew about nicotine. All of these documents are in evidence, and I know you guys wrote it all down on the notes, and I know you are familiar with these, but they knew how deadly their product was. It wasn't a secret to them. For many, many years,
they knew about it. They knew, you know, nicotine was addictive as far back as 1963. They know their business is selling nicotine. They know people smoke for the nicotine. That is the reason people smoke, and they are happy about it. That is what they are saying in this document, Exhibit 38. You know, our industry is based upon nicotine, and happily for us, happily for the industry, nicotine is addictive, so it's funny they are happy that people who start smoking their product are going to become addicted, and then when people come here an say, hey, you know, I have rights, and I want to be included in the class that I am an member of, they say, no, no, no, no, we are not happy to hear from you now. They were happy all of the years he smoked their product, but they don't want to hear from Mr. Sherman now. They deliberately downplay the role of nicotine to get people to smoke. That is what this document says. It is a very interesting document. If you read it, they are saying we are deliberately playing down the role of nicotine. Hopefully people will start smoking, and then we got them. Here they are talking about enjoyment of nicotine. Nicotine is enjoyment.
Then how they can manipulate the nicotine with the
pH regulations. They know they can manipulate the nicotine. They are going to tell you they didn't manipulate the nicotine. They swear they didn't manipulate the nicotine. They swore John Sherman wasn't addicted. You know, they manipulated the nicotine. They manipulated the pH levels. They did it so that people like John Sherman would continue to smoke it.
You know, very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine, how addictive it is, and it is a poison. Most of our customers would stop using it if they could. They know that. They know how highly addictive it is.
So here we are after two weeks of trial, and we are saying is John Sherman addicted to nicotine or are there other types of smokers who are really addicted? You know, being able to quit doesn't mean you are not addicted. That is not the test of whether somebody is addicted or not.
He smoked -- and, in fact, they keep saying, well, he knew it was bad for him. He knew it was bad for him. That is actually one of the criteria for addiction. The definition that NIDA uses and the definition of the DSM, both of them say continue using this product despite the fact that
they know it will kill them. Who in their right mind would continue doing that? Somebody who ji loves the taste of tobacco; they just love that taste so much that they don't care that they are going to die or is it somebody who is addicted?
So, you know, if you had two brothers who were both smoking four packs a day and both of their families were telling them to stop, and one guy threw his cigarettes out and never smoked again, and the other guy kept justifying his behavior and laughing it off and saying it is okay, you know, I want to smoke, I like to smoke, that is the addict. That's somebody who is addicted.
John Sherman was addicted. It is not even -you know, they want to talk about nag, nag, nag, you know, and what was it? Picky, picky, picky, nag, nag, nag. That is fair. His family cared about him. He tried to quit. It is not like he didn't try. I think there were three times they remember. The niece said he was constantly trying to cut down, but the things like the patch and the gum, they are weren't available until the '80s by prescription. By the '90s when he died, Chantix and Zyban wasn't even available to him, so the things that he used were gum and candy and cold
turkey. That is all he had. And, you know, it didn't work for him, but he was highly addicted, and nobody -- somebody can, but it doesn't seem credible that somebody can tell you that he was somebody who was not highly addicted.
Now, I am going to show you a couple of these. These are some of the things that they did to try to get people to continue smoking.
You know, you remember when the Frank Statement came out. You know, this was a choice. They talk about choices that John Sherman made. Choice is a two-way street. The choices that John Sherman made, in part, were based upon his addiction, but, in part, they were based upon the choices that this corporation made.
You know, this corporation, they didn't base their choices on addiction. They based their choices on what was best for their business. Knowing that the people were dying and that people were addicted, they made their own choices.
MS. PARKER: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: And their choices were, as you remember, they started with the Hill & Knowlton an the TIRC and the CTR, and Ms. Parker stood up in
her opening statement and told you what great organizations they were and how they provided all of this research to all of these universities and funded all of this great research. All along we knew -- you know, when she is making her opening statement, we have to listen to her. I can't stand up and say, hey, that is not true. I have to wait until I can show you the evidence, and this is the evidence. They were a front. They were a shield.
It was a public relations ploy. They were defending the tobacco industry. You know, that is all that it was.
So they hired these scientists. They told the world. They told addicted smokers like John Sherman we are going to get to the bottom of this. They knew all along what the bottom was, but we ar going to remove the dangerous ingredients, and don't worry about a thing. We have the top scientists, and we are looking into it.
And then the real reason that they did all of this was for doubt. They know, as Mr. Alvarez or Alex told you, that Dr. Sreenivasan said it would be unethical to tell an addicted smoker that what they are doing is not bad for them. You tell an addict that it is okay. You know, you have
somebody, and you say, hey, it is okay if you smoke. We are going to remove the dangerous ingredients. It is okay. We are making a safer cigarette. Somebody who is a 30-year smoker, they like to hear that. That is justification and rationalization for what they are doing. It gives them ammunition to tell their family leave me alone so I can laugh at you. Stop nagging me. Stop picking at me. I have good scientists and good people telling me that what I'm doing is okay.
Here is the Frank Statement. Very early on, they said there was no proof that smoking caused lung cancer. They knew about the proof at that time. Then this is interesting when they say we accept that people's health is a basic responsibility. They are saying that they are responsible for smokers like John Sherman. It is their product. They are saying we're responsible.
And now John Sherman's wife comes here and says c; I be in the class with all of the other addicted smokers, and they say, no, get out of the class because you made a choice and you're responsible. We are not responsible.
The whole thing was a ploy to create confusion, controversy, false statements, doubt,
controversy, doubt. These are all in evidence.
And, you know, if you think about this, these people who are writing it, you know, they had Dr. Figlar say, oh, it was just some guy in a back room that wrote one document. These people should be fired. This is really -- it is sick if you think about it. People are dying and people are addicted.
MS. PARKER: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PAIGE: People are addicted to their product. They know what is going on, and they have this campaign of doubt and confusion. Then they want to say, well, they want you to now be -- they want you to have doubt and confusion, and they want to -- it's clear that he is addicted to nicotine, and it is clear that you should not be manipulated; that you should go by the facts, follow the law, and include him in the class.
Tomorrow phase II will be so short. You've heard most of the evidence. We have a few more things to tell you, and then we will debate who bears more responsibility; a addict who bases his choices on his addiction or the corporation who made their choices for other reasons, what
motivated them to do this.
These are polls in evidence. It shows their doubt is working. You know, every year you can assume there are basically 50,000,000 smokers at all different times. Generally there is always that 25,000,000 people who are believing them and who believe cigarettes don't cause lung cancer.
Now, it's virtually nobody, but even in 1981, it was still 15,000,000 smokers that believed smoking didn't cause lung cancer, and that's because of their doubt and their confusion.
Addicts wanted to believe that it wasn't harmful, and this is probably people who started smoking in the '30s and '40s before everybody knew what we know now.
At the very beginning of the case, the judge asked you -- you know, you have to go back in time. You can't look at it in today's world. You can't say what does he believe; what does he know? Really those are phase II questions anyway, but you have to go back into the '40s and '50s when he started smoking. Do you have the one with the Santa Claus? This is the world he grew up in. You know, there were athletes, doctors, Santa Claus, smoking. You know, there was nothing wrong with
what he did. When he chose to start smoking, that was his choice. He chose to do what they told him to do. He used the product like they told him to use it. There were commercials saying inhale, inhale, and he did. He got addicted. That is what happened. He lived in a world where he followed their advice.
It is not like today where you turn on TVs and there are all of these truth ads with how bad smoking is. It was the opposite back then. There were ads saying how glamorous the ads were. Everybody knows that. The adds are in evidence. The only one who didn't know they were glamorous was Dr. Ford, the defense historian. He would not admit the advertisements were glamorous back then. They were. This is the time when kids would bring home ashtrays to their parents and say, daddy, I love you. Here. I love you so much that here is an ashtray. Go smoke away. That is unheard of today to have a daughter come home and say I made you an ashtray. Go smoke. It is a different time. Can I see 769 that is in evidence. This is the Surgeon General Koop.
(Whereupon, the following video was played:)
>> "I would say it is just as addictive as
heroin or cocaine. Our nation has mobilized enormous resources to wage war on drugs, illicit drugs. We should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 Americans each year.
>> Antismoking groups said this report was their fight on a new footing.
>> Because a finding that smoking is addicting knocks out the tobacco industry's number one argument that is that smokers smoke because of their free will."
It is not that easy. It is not like people think when you come here and -- you know, you com here today in today's world. You say if people smoke, they decide to smoke, and it is up to them, and whatever happens happens. That is not what happened in Mr. Sherman. He started smoking long ago. He was addicted for 20 years before the Surgeon General's Report ever came out. He had been smoking for 20 years before that ever happened, and after the Surgeon General's Report came out, they kept telling him for decades what he wanted to hear, what an addict wanted to hear, and they could have stopped. They should have stopped, but they kept telling him what he needed to hear,
what any addict needed to hear, and this is 1964.
This is Exhibit 283.
(Whereupon, the following video was played:)
>> "We want to be the detectives just as much as the Surgeon General, and we will cooperate in every way.
>> Are you saying then, sir, that there is something toxic about tobacco and which are removable by a filter?
>> Well, obviously a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. I don't think the industry admits there are any bad elements. If there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find them, and if they are found, they will be removed, but, at this point, we do not know."
And he smiles into the camera knowing, he knew, he knew, and he knew there would be addicted smokers who would be relying upon him.
In 1971, the next exhibit is 813 which is in evidence.
(Whereupon, the following video was played:)
>> "We do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. We do not believe
that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that because when, as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
>> Do you believe that cigarettes are safe?
Have they been proved to be safe, Mr. Cullman?
>> I believe they have not been proven to be unsafe."
The next exhibit is 803. This was in '83.
This is from The Tobacco Institute, so this is decades of their conduct.
(Whereupon, the following video was played:)
>> "We asked Philip Morris, R.J. Reynolds, Brown & Williamson and Lorillard to appear on this program. None would. They told us to talk to The Tobacco Institute. The institute said Ann Browder would speak for them.
>> The case is still open. The jury has not come in.
>> It may not be harmful; you're not convinced?
>> It may be or it may not be. We don't know."
Then the last one is an R.J. Reynolds
representative in 1984 which we showed the jury, Exhibit 817.
(Whereupon, the following video was played:)
>> "Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no?
>> It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. It has not been causally established."
And this is all along. I asked Dr. Ford this. I said either one or two things happened. Either they didn't know, which if they didn't know, how could they come to court -- I mean, they are making the product -- and say Mr. Sherman knew? Okay. That is not fair, or they knew, and they were lying for a reason, and the only reason to lie would be to tell addicts, people who are addicted to the product, that it was okay what you are doing. It is okay. Don't worry. We will take care of you. In either way, whatever it was, it doesn't take away from the issue that Mr. Sherman was a three- to four-pack-a-day smoker who was addicted to their product and that he should be included in the class of Florida smokers who are addicted to nicotine.
The legal instruction, do you have that?
This is the instruction you will see, and it talks
about legal cause, and the judge will explain it, but what it says is that in order for addiction to be the cause of Mr. Sherman's death, you know, it had to substantially contribute to his death, his addition to nicotine. That is why we had Dr.
Strauss talk to you about how addiction leads to lung cancer, but it also says that addiction need not be the only cause, and that is the whole issue about comparative fault. There are other causes. There could be other causes.
MS. PARKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: There could be other causes. It doesn't have to be all or nothing. In fact, during jury selection, I asked one of the jurors about comparative fault. Would you be okay with apportioning fault? She said to me that is the most intelligent thing you've said all day. And my partners remind me of that, whenever I say something stupid, but the truth of the matter is that is the law; that addiction need not be the only cause; that there could be other causes.
You know, whether they were negligent or whether their product was defective or whether they conspired to conceal information or whether
Mr. Sherman was negligent, you know, these are all concurrent causes to the addiction, but addiction, make no mistake about it, he would not have smoked three to four packs a day for 50 years if he wasn't addicted to nicotine unless you believe Dr. Sreenivasan, and you really believe that this was a gentleman who would wake up in the middle o the night just to have a cigarette because he couldn't do without the taste or he had to remove his oxygen because he just loved the taste of cigarettes. It's not even credible, and I really even apologize for having to make these statements to you because it just seems obvious what the answer is.
I also want to just talk about the fact of how addicted he was, and I want you to remember when we were talking about the DSM, there were certain criteria that Dr. Sreenivasan spoke about.
In this DSM manual, they talk about traits that people are highly addictive, traits that would make it -- she called them predictors as to whether it would be likely or unlikely somebody could even quit.
Some of those predictors were waking up first thing in the morning and smoking and the amount of
cigarettes you smoked and the number of years you smoked, and there was a few of them. I know there was one more. Oh, and smoking when significantly ill. He had all of those traits. He had all of the traits of a highly addicted person.
You know, we know five percent of the people quit. We know that people who do quit, and I think it is at the major universities now with medication that it's higher, it's 20 percent, but we also know that even according to their own expert that 75 percent of the people who quit relapse later. That happens. That is a risk of being addicted. It is a disease of the brain. And, you know, I congratulate anybody who quits, because I know it is not easy, but if you quit, that doesn't mean you are home free. You look at Peter Jennings. You know, they showed you a tape of Peter Jennings. H quit smoking in '88 and resumed later.
MS. PARKER: Objection, not in evidence.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: And then he died of lung cancer, so, you know, whether or not he would have been able to quit, whether or not it would have made a difference, whether or not he would have relapsed later, these are all issues for phase II bearing on
his responsibility, but we don't even know if that would have made a difference for this gentleman.
All we know is that he is addicted, and he is a smoker, and he was smoking cigarettes containing nicotine that caused his death, and he certainly, if anything, is certainly a class member of Florida addicted smokers, and to say otherwise, you know, would be to say nobody is a class member, and that is what they want. That is what they want. You know, if somebody is so addicted they don't try hard enough, they say, well, they are not really a member because they didn't try hard enough.
If they tried really hard, and they quit, they then are going to say, well, they proved they could quit. They should have just quit earlier.
It is their fault for not quitting earlier.
If they quit and relapse later, they say, well, they only went back because they liked it, so nobody is a class member. They don't want anybod to be a class member, and that is not fair or right or what the law is, and that is why you all promised to follow the law, and both sides know that you will follow the law, and that is very important.
The last thing I want to say, and I did say
this briefly, I really believe that you've heard all of the evidence. You are going to see the law,
and you are going to realize that this comes down
to whether or not you believe Dr. Sreenivasan or you believe Dr. Glassman, and if you believe Dr. Sreenivasan, Dr. Ford and Dr. Figlar and all of the people that raised their hand to tell the truth, that this man was not addicted, then Mr. Sherman is not a class member, and I will concede that. I will concealed that fact to you, but if you think that Dr. Sreenivasan raised her right hand and did not take her oath seriously and looked you in the eyes and did not consider what a serious, serious event this is for you and for the parties, then you cannot exclude Mr. Sherman from the class, and I want to show you Exhibit 460.
(Whereupon, the following video was played:)
>> "Let me begin my question on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. Let me ask you first, and I would like to just go down the row, whether any of you believe that nicotine is not addictive. I heard virtually all of you touch on it, and just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
>> I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
>> Mr. Johnston?
>> Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. There is no intoxicants.
>> Well, we will take that as a no. And, again, time is short. If you can just -- I think each of you believe that nicotine is not addictive, and we would just like to have this for the record.
>> I don't believe that nicotine or our products are addictive.
>> I believe nicotine is not addictive.
>> I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
>> I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
>> I, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive."
I just want to remind you at that time all of the tobacco people were under oath just like they were during this trial, and that was a serious event just like this.
They had no problem -- despite what all of their documents have said and that you've seen, they had no problem raising their right hand and swearing to our Congress that nicotine was not addictive, and I want you to consider that when you consider how forthright Dr. Sreenivasan was being
with you.
The evidence in this case is clear. They will say whatever they want to whoever they want tc get whatever they want, and that is not right.
That is not fair. That does not conform with the law. It does not conform with the evidence. This is a serious matter, and you all know that. We appreciate that.
Ms. Parker is a fine lawyer, and she is going to tell you about all of the times Mr. Sherman liked smoking and made his choices and should havi known better, and every time she tells you about the choices he made, and he should have known better, how much he liked it, and what a great company R.J. Reynolds is, I want you to remember all of the choices that they've deliberately made over 50 years, and the choices they made, and I know you will do that.
Again, on behalf of myself and my client and my partners, I appreciate your time and consideration and listening to me.
Thank you.



CLOSING ARGUMENT
MR. ALVAREZ: 10 minutes. It's not about the choices -- this phase is not about the choices that John Sherman made. It is not about that.
It is not about whether cigarettes are a legal product. It is not whether he's at fault.
It's not whether she is asking for money damages.
It is about following the law. This phase is about class membership. That is what it is about. It is not about the last hour and 15 minutes that you heard.
All we had to do was record that, and then play it back tomorrow, because that same closing argument that you are going to hear tomorrow is the same thing because all you have to decide in this
phase is was he a class member?
This is the verdict form. Look at the verdict form. It says, "Was John Sherman addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause to Mr. Sherman's death?"
Nowhere on that verdict form are you being asked to decide if he was at fault, about any choices he made, about whether this was a legal product, about whether he tried to quit, or how hard he tried to quit. There's nothing on there that says that, and you all took an oath to follow the law, and Mrs. Sherman is holding you to your oath to follow the law and answer that question whether he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and whether such addiction was the legal cause of Mr. Sherman's death. It has nothing to do with quitting. Nothing. This is just to establish if he is a class member. That is all this is for.
They want to manipulate this like they manipulated the levels of nicotine and the pH and try to be out by you answering no to this. That is what they are trying to do.
Don't let them fool you. There is nothing in there that talks about addiction. In fact, the
word "addiction" is mentioned there twice, addicted, addiction, not about choice, not about fault. It's not in there.
There will be another verdict form, another day, that is going to deal with those issues, not this verdict form. This is about whether he is a class member. That is all this is about.
This man smoked for over 20 years before the very first Surgeon General's Report came out, over 20 years. For almost 24 years, this man smoked before the Surgeon General's Report came out. He was addicted before the first Surgeon General's Report came out. They talk about he was strong-willed. There is nothing in there about that. There is nothing in there about being strong-willed, but think about it. I think that shows how addicted he really was, because if you are so strong and you are -- if he is that strong-willed, that just shows you how much stronger was the addiction.
A man like John Sherman, a tough man, a hare man, that worked with his hands every day, a man who wasn't afraid to get his hands dirty and work hard for a living, that is how strong this addiction really was that he couldn't beat it, and
that is what you are being asked to decide, the addiction, not the fault.
We welcome that debate. It's just not today. You know, the judge is also going to instruct you about legal cause, and let me show you -- there is another part of the legal cause instruction that is very, very interesting because they say, well, it is about choice. It is not about choice, but assume it was. Let's assume for a second that it really was. Let's look at what the law is, what the judge will read you in a little while.
THE COURT: A very little while.
MR. ALVAREZ: "In order to be regarded as a legal cause of loss, addiction need not be the only cause. Addiction may be a legal cause of loss even though it operates in combination with the act of another," so if you want to believe that choice has anything to do with this phase, but it doesn't, this instruction says, "That addiction can be the legal cause of loss even thought it operates in combination with the acts of another" like John Sherman.
"If such other causes occur at the same time as the addiction, and if the addiction contributes substantially to producing such a loss," so if you
think that quitting has anything to do with this phase, which it doesn't, because if you look at the verdict form, there is not one word about that in there.
This instruction makes it clear that you can consider that in combination with his addiction.
You know, you can't have your cake and eat it too. Ms. Parker said that our society was fully aware of the health risks, everyone knew, everyone knew, but if everyone knew, why did it take them until 2000 to admit it if everyone knew? I guess everyone knew at RJR. I don't know where the board went. Six simple truths. You know, six simple truths. It's incredible that RJR would invoke the word "truth." They said it is not serious. He wasn't serious about quitting.
What does that have to do with being addicted? Whether you quit or don't quit has nothing to do with whether you are addicted. Everybody can quit. That doesn't mean you weren't addicted. All her arguments about enjoying it, liking it, all those arguments are phase II arguments deciding fault. It has nothing to do to what you have to decide today or tomorrow morning, whether he was addicted and whether that addiction
caused his death. It has nothing to do with those things. Nothing. Phase II is not just about awarding damages. It is about fault and comparative fault and entitlement to punitive damages. It is not that you decide he was addicted and you vote yes and we come back for money damagi tomorrow. That is not what it is about. We get to decide comparative fault, the faults of both parties, and whether we have proven our entitlement to punitive damages against RJR, so it is not just about the money.
I heard Ms. Parker say over and over again that he just enjoyed it, and he just wanted it, and he just liked it, and no one was going to tell him otherwise because he loved smoking so much.
At the end, she said something that I agree with, which was use your common sense and follow the law. Does your common sense tell you that somebody with a collapsed lung and who is on oxygen and who it's painful for that person to breathe, that that person starts puffing on cigarettes because they enjoy it? Use your common sense.
Does that sound like something they would do if they weren't truly addicted? Use your common sense.
one or both of the alternate jurors are outside.
Go and tell them we will reconvene in the morning and ask them to go home or wherever else they intend to go. They need to be excused from the courthouse.
All right. So you are asking to be excused for the today. Okay. Since Tuesday morning is a difficult day, I think we can start at 9:30 if that is okay with you. It will take a little bit of the pressure off, so I know you've all traveled from a good distance. You don't have to agree. Who would prefer to start at nine o'clock? That was easy.
Too late.
We will see you at 9:30. I will remind you that you are not to discuss the case with anyone, and we will see you tomorrow morning at 9:30. Havi a good evening.
