MR. SCHLESINGER: Thank you.
Counsel. Good afternoon, ladies and
gentlemen of the jury.
I'm going to launch in and go really quick,
which I always do. The pleasantries and
niceties I'd like to give you will be truncated
because of the fact that we've already
experienced it together. You all have been
super patient.
You know, events larger than ours outside
this courtroom make me think about the
importance of this system, make me think about
the honor of being able to practice as an
attorney in the United States, in Florida. And
the power that a jury has as a great equalizer in courtrooms in America, it's really a bedrock
motion of our society.
The courtroom is a messy place and a
pressure cooker. Maybe not so much for you, you
guys are kind of laying back and watching it.
There are delays and time delays, they're not
your fault. They're part of what just happens,
okay. But somehow out of that mess, out of that
intensity, there is an opportunity for justice.
There is an opportunity for a just result to
emerge.
It's because we rely on you as a neutral,
detached, impartial observer of the facts that
His Honor decides which ones you get to hear.
He's trying mightily. He labors mightily to be
fair and see to it that what you do see is
relevant and appropriate and proper for your
consideration and protect you from seeing what
may not be. And so he's the judge of the law in
that regard. That's a monumental Herculean
task, especially in these types of contentious
events that are complex.
So I don't want you to hold it against
either side for the length and some of the
delays and some of the lengthy sidebars. This is how it happened. It happened that way. It
happens different ways at different times. The
Judge labors mightily.
Once he hands you those facts, you are the
Judge of what is true. You make the final
determination about what the truth is.
One of the determinations I hope you'll
make about my client is that you write on a
verdict form somewhere a conclusion that after
his life's work, after his dedication to the
American dream, being a successful businessman,
rising through the ranks, paying his dues, being
a productive member of society, demonstrating a
life of care, intensity, simplicity,
intelligence, safety in some of his activities,
that you assign him the role, you say we have
decided that you were a janitor. I hope you
don't do that. Because he testified that he
wasn't. But that's just a little piece of it.
When you all get this case, you'll be the
judge of the facts. We'll be on your time. And
then instead of us making you-all wait, you can
make us wait as long as you want.
And this case is a multi-phased trial.
There's more than one event that takes place for you to be able to complete the entire task of
the trial. There's a second phase. It's about
punitive damages. His Honor described that to
you. You-all have more power now than you'll
ever have again in your life. You will make a
decision in this first part of the trial as to
where you want to go. It all comes down to a
verdict form here.
It looks like this. I don't know if you
guys have it yet. I started filling it out real
quick. I can't show it to you that way.
THE COURT: They have one. They have jury
instructions and a verdict form.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Good. It has a bunch of
questions on it. You all are going to answer
it. But what I know you won't do is shirk the
responsibility that if we are -- if I stitched
this together for you in a way, if we carry our
burdens of proof so that Bob is entitled to
bring this claim, right through him, an
opportunity through him to get into what I say
are their richly deserved punishments, the
concept of them finding a penalty for decades of
deceit, decades of lies, a conspiracy that the
Engle determination, it's not over. That's the truth. That's the -- the Court has read to you,
those findings are yours.
You pick up as the Engle jury -- right
where the original Engle jury left off. Those
are the Engle jury findings. That's the law of
the case. You embrace them as if you made them
yourselves and determined them yourselves. So
hopefully, ultimately, if and when you determine
that not only is Bob a member of the class and
he's been hurt and you go through that
information and check off the boxes on the
verdict form, when you check off the very last
set of boxes, the very last question on the
verdict form, whether or not you find by clear
and convincing evidence that punitive damages
are warranted against the defendant, you check
off yes to all three, and we come back and we
continue this trial.
And I know it may be Friday afternoon, by
the time you get this case tomorrow, but it will
be your turn to make us wait. I know that
nobody here will shirk the responsibility if
they believe that's the thing to do. And if
you, as a collective body of decision-makers get
to that point, I'm hoping it won't be -- enough is enough -- play in both of their houses and
let's rush out of here. It's true that what
you've observed, even with the delays and
imperfections, there is an opportunity for
justice. You've seen enough evidence. You can
come to that as a collective body. I hope you
will.
The simple truth is that you've seen these
documents. These are secret internal documents,
never meant to see the light of day. I say we
have the goods on them now. You've had them
since the years of the late '90s and early
2000s. Litigation busted these things outside
of their vaults. And a lot of things they said
publicly, internally is quite hypocritical of
what was really about their business.
The business model is to addict those most
vulnerable to a powerful dependence-producing
drug and replace them when they get sick and
die. Knowing full well that it causes cancer
and choosing profits and choosing to make their
money over the lives of the customers that they
were sacrificing.
You know, I think about the book by Robert
Fullman, "Everything I Ever Needed to Learn About Life I Learned in Kindergarten." Don't
hurt people. Be decent. Be straightforward.
I reflect on these things and I see what
this type of case is. This is --
MR. EDSON: Objection to counsel's personal
opinion.
THE COURT: Okay. Sustained.
The jury should disregard the reference to
counsel's -- counsel referring to himself, and
that should be completely disregarded by the
jury.
MR. FURR: Your Honor, so that we don't get
off track, I'd ask counsel not to talk through
my objections.
THE COURT: Please do so. All right.
Let's proceed.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Thank you.
THE COURT: Please disregard that, jury.
Thank you.
MR. SCHLESINGER: This business proposition
was intentional, embarked upon with full
knowledge of what was going on and persisted for
many, many decades, all right?
So this is the truth here. It's no more
complicated than that. I mean, there is nothing about these, there is nothing about -- all this
is, is drugs.
Now, it's a hard concept to wrap your mind
around because they created the culture in which
we leave. They created an illusion that exists
to this day. To this day the vast bulk are
filtered cigarettes. This cigarette is safer
than that cigarette, when actually this
cigarette is more dangerous. That's why I did
this at the beginning of opening statements.
Look how hard it is to break that illusion.
This fraud exists to this day in the mind of the
public.
So when I say this is nothing but drugs,
that's all it is. That's all it is.
So the case is about Robert, because he's
one of the individual folks that fits right in
the slot. He's 95 years old. He's from the
cigarette century. He lived the rise of the
cigarettes in this country. If he is not the
right person for this case -- to bring this
case, then who could be?
The punitive damages considerations, His
Honor explained to you, are based on
reprehensibility. Is it odious? Is it malevolent? Is it beyond the bounds of human
decency?
We said, listen, we are a corporation and
we are entitled to be treated like a person. I
say that's fine. But when you are being treated
like a person, then you have to act like a
person. When you're being treated like a
person, you have the rights and responsibilities
of a person. You should be decent. You should
be humane.
These companies were never that way. This
is a great historic wrong. We're lucky to have
a man who's lived this long to present this
great historic wrong to you. Sometimes it takes
a long time to bring justice to a great historic
wrong. What did Martin Luther King say? The
arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends
towards justice.
Who more appropriate for that quote than
this case, a man at the far edges of what we
know to be human longevity, to be here for you
in this case.
So the punitive damages considerations are
not just about harm to Bob. All the other
people that have been hurt. You heard about 20 million deaths. You heard about over half a
million folks a year dying. The number one
leading cause of death in this country to this
day, to this day.
So all of the people that you heard and the
documents, all those names that you heard,
they're all acting in the course and scope of
their employment with the companies. That's why
the company is responsible. So the acts of the
corporations were reprehensible, but they were
done by people. They were done by folks who
conferred that responsibility to the
corporation.
I said these corporations, these entities,
Reynolds, Liggett, these are enormously powerful
companies. They are entitled to be treated as
humans, but they should be humane. What they've
been is not humane.
What would a humane company do that knows
that its product is causing cancer? It would
seek to cure, not cause cancer. That's what a
responsible company should do. We seek to cure,
not cause cancer.
Look at the things that were hidden from my
client and others that my client had a right to rely. Mr. Shulman had a right to rely, as
millions did, that these entities, these
defendants would not conceal material
information about their products.
The conspiracy was formed in the '50s, when
they knew full well it caused cancer and,
nevertheless, instead of doing what they said
they were going to do in the public statement,
the Frank Statement, we believe that the health
of the American public is paramount to anything
in our business, including our profits, but,
really, behind the scenes, they're hiring Hill &
Knowlton, a PR company, to jolly up a giant
story. We're going to get to the bottom of
this.
Look what they hid from my clients. All
these things. The poison. They knew full well
there wasn't a controversy or doubt. They knew
it was addictive. They manipulated it, they
made cigarettes. This highly engineered device
is as addictive as it could possibly be made.
They're defective and unreasonably dangerous.
They invented lung cancer. It's an
industrially manufactured disease. In the early
20th century, there was no lung cancer. You couldn't find it. They invented it. When those
cigarettes started becoming popular, when this
guy was a little boy, it was only 20 years later
when it started showing up in the '50s in such
large numbers that people were scratching their
head. The only thing it could be contributed to
was cigarettes. They knew full well when the
public health authority started finding out
about it.
So what did they do, they launched the
conspiracy. They didn't say -- they did
everything opposite of what they promised,
right?
They said there's no proof. The health is
our responsibility. It's not injurious. We
always will cooperate with the public health
authority. Tobacco is to blame for everything
over the years. We're going to have
unimpeachable scientists look at this. That's
what they did.
What world did Bob grow up in? He grew up
in a world where things were -- let's do this
one right now -- he grew up in a world where
people trusted their corporations, right? They
trusted them. There was no reason in the '20s, '30s, '40s, and '50s to think -- the cynicism of
today cannot be applied back in the past because
it would be violating what Dr. Proctor
explained, the concept of presentism. We've got
to put things in context. He grew up in a world
where, at first, cigarettes -- do I have that
slide?
Do we know the number? 114.
MR. BRENNER: Your Honor, may I stand over
there?
THE COURT: Yes, you may. The lawyers may
move around as needed.
MR. SCHLESINGER: He grew up in a world
where cigarettes, right, were healthy. Okay?
It was good for you. Remember Dr. Proctor,
medicinal health benefits. They were good for
you. You should do it -- it would cure your
ailments. That's how cigarettes first came out.
Nobody had the first clue they were bad for you.
Cigars, pipes, tobacco, they were around
forever. But the invented cigarette, the sugar,
juiced up cigarette later laced with the
intensive nicotine enhancement properties that
only a brilliant billion-dollar engineering
program could install in that device to create that hook, right, he didn't know that. He had
no way to know it. It's good for you.
They taught people how to breathe it in,
inhale. Your mouth where you puff the cigar,
that's the size of a tennis ball. Your lungs
are the surface area of a tennis court. That's
what unleashed this wave of addiction and
ultimately evolved lung cancer. But this is
what the tobacco industry has told folks,
breathe it in, inhale it, it's great.
Then when those first inklings came out in
the most subtle way, as Dr. Proctor explained,
in the '30s, '40s, right, all of a sudden there
was a lot of doctor advertising. Remember Bob
told you about the three doctors? I'll show you
that ad. In that time period, they're like
doctors are doing it, doctors are doing it.
That's like a subtle pre-conspiracy reassurance.
Well, the doctors are doing it, it can't be bad
because maybe there was some rumblings out
there. All along he is smoking, he's addicted,
he's been smoking since he was 12, millions of
people are doing it. Everybody is doing it. He
doesn't have any reason to know
anything different. Eventually, we got to the Frank Statement.
Our product is not harmful. They said we do not
believe our product is harmful in the Frank
Statement. In the '50s, the mouse painting
studies came out, the Wynder and Graham article
came out, and now LIFE magazine says this thing
looks like it's got cancer. They came out and
said no, it's not harmful. We're going to get
to the bottom of it. In the meantime, here are
filters, right? The illusion of filtration, the
psychological crutch. In the meantime, that's
what you're going to use.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. SCHLESINGER: You guys have been in the Engle findings already proved and you guys --
they can't be denied by the defendants. You
have to accept them. They are -- the Engle
findings prove these products are unreasonably
dangerous. They are a defective condition.
They are more dangerous than they ought to be.
MR. FURR: Objection.
Take the board down, please, sir.
Your Honor, totally inconsistent the way
you instructed the jury on the Engle findings.
11 (Thereupon, the following bench conference began.)
findings as the jury was instructed and I have
the instruction right here. It is not
inconsistent with how you instructed the jury.
litigated this during the instruction
conference. You determined that these were the
findings the jury would be instructed on.
Mr. Hammer, without showing it to us, just put
up a board that includes findings that you did
not approve the jury to be instructed on.
MR. GDANSKI: I'm not saying these are the
instructions. It's a demonstrative.
MR. FURR: These are definitely the
MR. SCHLESINGER: We can use the Engle
MR. FURR: Here is what happened. We findings. This is a demonstrative aid.
THE COURT: I've instructed the jury on
these. Tomorrow, if you want to bring in a
demonstrative that's consistent with these
instructions. Let's not use this demonstrative.
Let's bring in a demonstrative that's
consistent with the jury instructions. All
right. Thank you.
the clock again.
THE COURT: You may proceed. I'll start
9 (Thereupon, the bench conference concluded.)
The Engle findings are very clear that it's
a defective and unreasonably dangerous product,
that when you use the product as intended, it
will hurt you. But a little kid that is picking
up the habit, which is the basis of their
business -- remember, the base of the business
is the high school student and younger -- he
fits the pattern. He was a kid when he started
MR. SCHLESINGER: The Engle findings say
they are -- these are lethal products, right?
There's no socially redeeming benefit to
tobacco. It's not an old story because you are
hearing it now for the first time. Six jurors,
eight jurors at a time. smoking -- are youth and adolescence. That's
odious.
That's why when you look in the documents,
even in their own documents that they thought
would be secret forever, they had to adjust
their language to install the word "adult."
Remember that? From now on change young
smokers, which they characterize as 10, 12 years
old, 14 years olds, adjust the language and put
that word "adult" in there because the concept
of it is so malevolent. That were it to come
out at all -- even within the secret documents
they tried to build in a little deniability.
Because they knew it shows their intent, it
shows their understanding. They knew how bad
what they were doing was. They're the ones that
chose this path. They are the ones that choose
when they knew full well that they were -- that
their customers were dying from this product,
that the profits were more important. It wasn't
Mr. Shulman's choice to go into this business.
All he did was follow the crowd and do what
everybody was doing.
You would have been a strange person in his
age culture to not smoke when up to 80 percent of men smoked.
There was nothing about addiction that
anyone really knew in terms of the meaning of
the word. Like we know now words like
addiction. We hear that word. But like a
homonym, the same word may have different
meanings. Mr. Furr cross-examined Bob Shulman
about where you said you were addicted to
flying, and you were addicted to motorcycles.
Do you remember that? I heard that. I'm like
that's not the same thing.
The tobacco industry's part, what you saw
them do, is they tried to trivialize addiction
and downplay addiction. But you were addicted
to motorcycles. There's different words that
have different meanings depending on how you
apply them.
Parents love their children, right?
Parents can also read a book and love the book.
But is I love my son the same thing as I love
that book I just read? No, there's different
meanings. The fact that you said you were
addicted to motorcycles, what does that got to
do with the exceedingly complex neuroscience of
the chemical molecular brain-changing drug that is nicotine, whose chemistry was perfected by
these companies? It has nothing to do with it.
So what they said all the way along when
they could have been telling the truth was it's
good for you, breathe it, inhale it, the doctors
are doing it, our product is not harmful. Don't
worry, we'll get the answers. In the meantime,
here is a filter. What is the notion of a
filter? Purification. It will take out
whatever is bad for you, right? This is the
psychological crutch you can rely on. Then they
said there is no proof.
You know, it has -- the statistics, it's
epidemiology, mice is not men. This is all
public, when internally everything was
very different. Internally, they were like we
are devoting our business lives to the
propagation of lung cancer. Now, think about
that.
Let's say a fellow comes along, meets a
buddy on the street and says, Man, I've got this
great business. I've got this great new
business, special kind of something, pizza. And
people are not going to be able to get enough of
it. They're going to buy it. We're going to sell millions of sticks, trillions of pizza.
We're going to sell some that there's -- I've
got to tell you, there's something in them
that's going to kill the customers, you know.
But we're going to make a fortune in money.
Would anyone ethically or morally go into
that business? No. Would they? So should
they?
And what is it? Did they get a pass, that
they've done this all these years? It's like
it's too late. You caught us too late. The arc
of the universe is long, but it bends towards
justice.
This is the moment in time to take into
consideration what Mr. Shulman has lived in the
cigarette century and say, Yeah, you know, we
ratify, we honor what you're doing and how you
come before us.
This is why I say the word "justice." This
is not a joke. This is not game, some punch
line. You know, if you think that, if you feel
that way, if you are cynical, then we're going
to lose.
It's just that simple. Then we don't
deserve to win. If it's some sort of goof or joke or you're just here to get some money, if
that's what it is, then we don't deserve to win;
I don't want to win. That's not what we're here
for.
We're here in a great American moment with
a great American jury in a world that is in
turmoil. And it is well worth it to take these
things as serious as we do. I know you have,
because no matter how much we put upon you, no
matter how late we kept you, no matter what we
did, you have soldiered on and persevered. So I
feel that however you call it, it's going to be
because of diligence and desire --
MR. FURR: Objection as to counsel's
continued expression of personal opinions, Your
Honor.
THE COURT: I'll sustain that objection.
The jury should disregard any reference to
personal opinions by the attorney, and it should
be disregarded by the jury.
MR. SCHLESINGER: So just going through
this real quick again, eventually -- and this
was the world Bob lived in. He had every right
to rely that they wouldn't conceal, to rely
that -- the Engle finding says they did these concealments; they conspired to maintain these
concealments with the intent that the customers
would rely.
And both sides -- and they rely on each
other. In other words, his company -- and
Mr. Furr may be a nice guy, but he's not
Reynolds. He's not the company. He's the
lawyer with the obligation to represent.
They relied on each other. Bob was relying
on what they said and what they did and what
they promised just like they were relying on him
and millions of others like him to keep buying
and stay addicted and be part of that epidemic
of addiction and keep the sales going. The
reliance goes both ways. They both need each
other.
That overwhelming message of advertising is
so influential, the imagery. It's not the
little fine print on the side of the pack where
it's at. It's the beauty. It's the appeal.
We'll go through that.
What do they keep doing? They said, Can we
have an open debate? Can we keep the
controversy going?
You saw the videos with all the folks, the traveling through sky, the College of Tobacco
Knowledge. You saw those folks coming out to
try and keep that message of doubt, that
disinformation campaign going. Even in the
Waxman hearings, they changed it slightly. It
may, but it's not addictive. It's not
addictive. It's not addictive.
And then, ultimately, they got busted. It
all came out.
These documents are now the basis of why
we're before you today, is the truth of what
happened. When you come to the decision that
they merit punishment -- St. Augustine said that
punishment is justice for the unjust.
If you come to that, if you see it our way
and you come to that decision, then you will be
able to not only tell them, We reject -- we find
this inappropriate. We decent people, we reject
what you did and we ask you -- we want you to
be different. You make that message.
But it's also a deterrence to others, to
other entities, other corporate persons, other
companies that might act in a similar way where
they might deny the truth of the harm of their
products or of the damage they do to our environment or things that are campaigns of
doubt and denial that other companies may do.
Without juries like you, they could run
roughshod. There would be no counterbalance.
There would be no message from the citizenry in
the other direction saying, "No. This is
inhumane. This is indecent."
These are the basic principles from which
this case springs forth.
Finally, they knew after they got busted it
was all a lie. They knew. In the '60s they had
written that the time is going to come where
this "assumption of the risk" defense, right --
lie, deny, and blame it all on the smoker, where
it's all your fault, when that assumption of
risk was going to loom large, but it was being
whittled down by tobacco companies' utterances,
the fact that there is no risk or that it's
remote.
So the mantra in this courtroom from the
defense has been: What did he know? What did
he know? What did he know? What did
Mr. Shulman know? He knew. He heard it was
bad. He got in trouble. He was on the roof
with the tar. His mom didn't want him smoking. His wife thought it was a dirty habit.
He knew, what he knew, what he knew.
Right? What did they know? But when they got
caught, then here comes the big pivot. The big
pivot.
Everybody knew. Everybody always knew
everything about all the harms and dangers.
That was not the world he was in. And everybody
didn't know.
And they did everything they could to
dilute the message. They were a solvent. They
were a social solvent diluting that message,
making it confusing, spending more in one day
than the public health authority spent in a year
to try to overcome the message. They -- oh,
they steamrolled the message.
The filters, they advertised the filters as
being the miracle. So they knew.
So this business about what he knew in an
era where he couldn't have fully understood any
of those things, they did know. They weren't
telling.
They knew. So that's the big pivot.
Let's go back to where we were.
And that's why you heard so much about Bob in this courtroom, about -- I mean, how simple
is it? I give you a record right smack-dab in
the middle of the class period that says he's
got chronic obstructive pulmonary disease from
tobacco abuse. And the definition of "class
membership" is that in that slot between '90 and
'96, you come up with an illness that manifests
or a diagnosis of an addiction-caused disease,
addiction to the nicotine in cigarettes causing
disease and, boom, right there in the record,
the organic medical record done at the time,
nothing to do with litigation, a medical
doctor's diagnosis saying he has a
tobacco-related disease, an Engle
tobacco-related disease due to tobacco abuse,
which is addiction. That's what Dan Seidman
told you, doctor. We've got another Dr. Dan.
Dr. Dan Seidman. That's what he told you.
That is in one sentence. Class membership.
He didn't live in Florida. Really? Is
that the defense to this case? Is that the
microgranular defense to the case, that he did
not have a residency in Florida when we gave you
a deed that he owned a condo since 1983
continuously through 1997 across the entire class period? He was treated in Florida for all
of these diseases, bladder cancer and heart
disease and COPD, all within the class period,
all while he was an owner and spending -- you
saw the records -- at least six months a year
down here with a voter's registration card and
with a driver's license, Florida voter's
registration, Florida driver's license.
And they're going to tell you, But he
wasn't a resident? Is that credible? Is that
what this case is going to turn on? Not what
they did, but whether his -- whether he had a
residence here.
Folks can have residences in more than one
place.
MR. BRENNER: Objection; misstates the law,
Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: You're not going to hear
anything about that.
THE COURT: What's that?
MR. BRENNER: Objection; misstates the law.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: You are going to read in
there what if -- the Engle class definition
means what it means. And it says it's embracing.
Remember I said in opening statement that
word, "all"? All. It's not exclusionary. If
the tobacco companies had their way, it would be
exclusionary. No people, no citizens or
residents, nobody that got sick during '90 and
'96.
MR. FURR: Objection. Improper argument.
Plaintiffs have the burden of proof to
establish class membership.
THE COURT: Sustained.
The jury should disregard the last comment
from the lawyer.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Is that really what this
case turns on? There is no doubt that he had
residency and citizenship in the state of
Florida in the plain meaning of those terms,
which is all you're obligated to determine. And
we gave every piece of data to prove that. And
there's nothing to the contrary.
You will not hear from the jury instruction
or on the verdict form that he has to
exclusively live in Florida. That's not the
law. It's not the Engle class membership
requirements. It's not. But do you know what it is? It's a good
example of an extremely, extreme hyper, you
know, polarized position that the tobacco takes
that stretches the bounds of credulity.
MR. BRENNER: Objection; commenting on the
defense of the case.
THE COURT: Sustained. The jury should
disregard the last comments made by the
attorney, and they should not be considered by
the jury.
MR. SCHLESINGER: You can dismiss it out of
hand, and you can consider whether there's any
basis to make that argument because the law
doesn't say he has to be an exclusive resident.
The Frank Statement said what it said, but here
is the real reasons.
The real reasons were not that they
accepted a base of responsibility. But who
ain't for more money? And we're going to
capture -- they're talking about how much money
they're going to get for capturing the younger
adult.
Remember the weasel word I told you about,
the Pitman 1975 document, when they said, Start
sticking that word "adult" in there? Just put your finger over that, okay, because it ain't
true.
Younger smokers. That's just a word in
case it ever got into a courtroom for you all to
see. Right?
Younger smokers and holding them over time,
we're going to make $2 billion extra dollars by
getting 12-year-olds. This is just, oh, heck.
It doesn't meet with the bounds of human
decency.
And he said the priority was profits, not
the lives of the customers. This man is a
scholar. He is a hero. He is a brilliant man
who did -- spent an inordinate amount of his
life reading thousands, upon thousands of
documents and learning and digging into the
truth, bringing the historical truth of the
tobacco company to light, right?
He is what -- when you hear about experts,
that's what an expert is. He really is an
expert, someone who really knows the subject
matter. That's what an expert is. Not somebody
who comes in -- we'll talk about it.
I can do this closing argument just in
pictures. This is a flying saucer, right? Here is
the question. There's a difference between what
Mr. Shulman heard. There's a difference between
knowledge and awareness, right? Awareness and
knowledge.
And here is the point of the flying saucer
real quick. How many folks here have heard of
flying saucers? Everyone has heard of flying
saucers. How many folks here believe in flying
saucers? Maybe not so many.
So having heard cigarettes were bad when
the companies he thought he could trust, that
wouldn't be able to put out a product if it was
deadly, dangerous, in the era where you trust
your companies, the '50s, the "Leave It To
Beaver" era where everybody trusted their
companies and thought America was great,
post World War II environment. Everything is
great. We're a can-do nation. There's no
cynicism. There's no post Vietnam war cynicism
that pervades our culture today.
He was able to believe that message because
he might have heard it was bad, but that doesn't
mean he knew it was bad just like folks have
heard of a flying saucer but don't know or believe there's flying saucers. You know that
too.
How about this: How many folks here have
heard that this thing, this thing that we all
carry around like it's indispensable, causes
cancer? How many folks have heard that? Are
there reports out there? Are there articles in
the paper and government reports? Could you
find evidence right now that these things cause
cancer? How many people believe it? How many
people aren't using their cellphones.
So presentism distorts our understanding of
the past. Are we going to go back in time and
be able -- he's the oldest man in this
courtroom. He might be one of the oldest men
that any of us really knows. He was given the
gift of longevity, and it was marred by the
ravages of tobacco. It was marred.
The man had his manhood taken there him.
This was a guy that was a man, a real man. He
was out there doing stuff at an age where folks
didn't do it. He was a pioneer. He was an
aviator.
This was an interesting man, a successful
guy. And he's paid a major price for something that is really not his fault, not his choice.
Ultimately, you'll get to a point where you can
consider fault and you can assign blame and
percentages for, was he someone who has human
weaknesses? He should have tried harder? He
should have quit sooner? They said,
indisputably, he quit in 1975. And you know
what? If he did, then let's give him credit for
that.
Do you remember that I was the first person
to show you all those records that tied it in to
the late '70s that he quit? Perfectly
appropriate to do so because the case we're
presenting to you, the evidence we're presenting
to you the science we present to you by Dr.
Soloway is clear.
It isn't how long ago you quit. It's how
much you smoked. He smoked more than enough to
make him sick even as of 1975. He was smoking
since the '30s. That's over 40 years of smoking
deadly, dangerous cigarettes.
So give him credit if he really quit
permanently in '75. There's lots of evidence of
the '80s and '90s. But it's not the defining
issue in this case because the true medical experts, a man like Soloway who's got a
curriculum vitae as thick as a butcher's middle
finger with 450 articles or so and a
professorship in the same university as
Benedetto, their colleagues said in no uncertain
terms, This is not complicated. This is simple.
He smoked a lot of cigarettes. He got bladder
cancer.
And by the way, who brought you people that
know about bladder cancer as witnesses? We
brought a world -- the, perhaps the world's
authority. He told you he almost invented the
subject, the world's authority on bladder
cancer, Dr. Soloway. What did he charge 1,500
bucks, 1,500 bucks. That's the number I heard
from him. Yeah, I think I charged -- like money
matters at all to that guy.
And a treating doctor. Dr. Bernsley, who
treated him, organic, natural, not for purposes
of just coming into a courtroom, straight up in
the records. Of course, he had bladder cancer
from smoking. It was the number one cause of
bladder cancer. We're debating that point?
Sure, we are, because when you don't have a leg
to stand on, a good defense is a good offense. Try to break the other guy's leg.
And when it comes to the conduct of the
tobacco industry and the fact that all they did
was lie and deny and blame the smoker, it's
better to blame the smoker than to talk about
what you did. They can't talk about what they
did. They can't deny the findings. They're
stuck with them. We're all stuck with them.
You all are stuck with them, but they're yours.
You embrace them as if they're yours.
So Heimann denied that was warnings were
justified. He said the Surgeon General was dead
wrong. That was one of the CEOs of the tobacco
company at the time. So they weren't telling
the truth. Okay? They weren't telling the
truth.
Similarly -- I say this as a song. I'm
going to go into too much detail. There's a
song by Elton John called "Mona Lisas and Mad
Hatters." It's got a great line in there about
"I thought I knew, but now I know." It's
about -- it's just a great song.
But he says, "I thought I knew, but now I
know." You all came here. We had a week-long
jury selection with a couple of hundred of you with paddles like an auction room. And you all
were being asked about cigarettes and tobacco.
And some folks made some pretty wild statements.
I remember them.
I remember a hush coming over the room when
somebody made a statement. But you all were
probably, even when you walked into that
courtroom the first -- able to have in your mind
that there's something bad about tobacco.
There's something bad. I know there's
something. But you don't necessarily really
know.
So that's why I say, "I thought I knew, but
now you all know." Now you know. You've seen
what, even though it's public, very few have
seen, because who's going to take the time to go
digging through the Legacy website and figure
out how to read those documents?
You know, after this case is over, whatever
interest you have, you may pursue it. This is a
free country. But right now in this courtroom
with the evidence His Honor has allowed you to
see because he's decided that's what you should
decide it on, you have more than enough. With
those Engle findings, more than enough. They are culpable of a conspiracy to
conceal material information that he had a right
to believe they would not conceal. And that is
what -- that is why this is an industrial-driven
epidemic. It isn't the smokers. It's the
company driving that addiction.
They said, We will attack the Surgeon
General. We won't work cooperatively with him.
He will smear him, belittle him. That's what
they said they would do. They didn't work
cooperatively.
They said -- when the Surgeon General would
come out, they said what the Surgeon General was
putting out was, it was propaganda. Do you
remember that? Accusing the Surgeon General of
propaganda, that's going to lower the threat
level.
This is seductionism. Okay? That's what
this is, a form of seductionism.
What I do mean by that? Well, we know that
if somebody creates harm and scares everybody
and the threat of the harm is well outside
the -- disproportionate to the true threat,
that's not seductionism.
Seductionism is when you lower the threat level, when you get people to still instinctive
fears. Remember that document? They sought out
to still instinctive fears. Con quieto. Let's
calm this down. There was a cancer scare.
Let's settle it down.
They had an opportunity to tell the truth
in '53. Why didn't they do that? Bob wouldn't
have had bladder cancer. He wouldn't have heart
disease. He wouldn't have COPD. He'd have none
of those diseases.
He'd have a clear, definitive, true
message, truth in advertising. If Cullman came
out and said, We made these cigarettes as
dangerous as they could possibly be and those
filters, those new filters now are actually
going to make the cancer worse, truth in
advertising, that would have been incendiary and
critically important. And lots of things would
have changed in this country.
And that's a big difference than what
happened. That's why we're losing as many
people here as we're losing in this country.
Bob is one of those victims. He's a quitter,
all right, one of the 60 million. But you know
what? 60 million quit, no thanks to them. He was an American success story. He was a
tobacco success story. He fit right in their
slot. He did everything they wanted him to do.
He was the perfect customer. The only thing was
he got off.
Let's say he got off in '75. I have no
problem with him getting off cigarettes in '75
if that's what the facts and evidence show.
His son remembers differently. He
remembers differently, but that was enough, more
than enough. And Dr. Soloway said the relative
risk doesn't go back to normal. You're still
twice as likely to get it.
By the way, do you know what the relative
risk is of a man who smoked 40 years of
cigarettes and he gets cancer of the bladder?
For him, it's 100 percent. It's 100 percent.
You don't start looking for something else.
It's 100 percent.
In any event, these are some of the lies
they told. They said all those allegations
against smoking have been abandoned for lack of
evidence. And the fact is they were devoting
their lives to propagation of lung cancer. They
said they were trying to tell people they were going to let the scientists do the worrying.
They knew right here the evidence
accumulated from smoking as a health hazard was
overwhelming. Remember this? Still instinctive
fears. And they did it. They did it great.
Madison Avenue, the best you could ever do.
They had chills. They tried to tell you, We're
going to have a scientist of unimpeachable
integrity, of national repute. That was all a
fraud.
The co-conspirator organizations, the TIRC
and the CTR, acted as a shield and a front.
They weren't getting to the bottom of it. They
were hiding the truth of it with advertising.
That's what they were doing. And they
said, We're not interested in the truth. We're
interested in evidence which we think can deny
the allegation that smoking causes disease.
And they always knew it was a holding
strategy. Look how long it worked, over 50
years. Look how long it worked. It worked
great. They said it was brilliantly conceived
and brilliantly executed. They celebrated it.
They celebrated it because it was so great.
They shot those sales right back up. The little cancer scare, they shot those
sales right back up. Look at the lag time
between smoking and cancer. And look at the lag
time between quitting and cancer.
And you'll see a document, Claude Teague,
one of the masterminds of Reynolds, a brilliant
man, devoting his life to something that wasn't
appropriate, wasn't proper, wasn't decent, and
wasn't humane. He could have done brilliant
things to help humanity. But instead, he was
stirring that pot and coming up with a way to
make these more addictive and get those kids.
He said in the '50s -- and this is
something they didn't show you. He said in the
'50s that the lag time from the cessation of
smoking to the person getting cancer exceeds
10 years or more, exceeds 10 years or more.
You heard their experts. We'll talk about
them. You've got an order in your instructions,
a special instruction that allows you to reject
experts. You're going to hear something
about -- I'm the shot of espresso. You're going
to hear something about how you can decide how
you want to decide on witnesses.
But you can reject experts. And that instruction that lets you reject, completely
reject, roll them out of the courtroom what an
expert says, is the power the Judge gives to
you. So if you were saying to yourself or you
heard some of the witnesses, you might have
said, How can he let them say that? How can he
say that?
You may have on your own had some
disbelief. Our job on cross-examination is to
bring out some disbelief, just show if things
are not credible. We try to do that. We try to
reveal biases or prejudices or lack of knowledge
or an absence of foundation for the opinion.
You all may have already come to the
conclusion: I don't know if I buy this. I
don't know if I'm buying this. And thinking,
well, how can -- that person is there and
they're testifying. The Judge let them. How
can he let them do that?
Well, you've got a rule in your
instructions, in that thick packet of
instructions, that says you may reject the
evidence that is given by someone called an
expert. There's a special rule just for
experts, that you all can reject them. You're not bound by them.
You may say, I don't think this person is
really an expert and I reject it. So that's
very important.
The whole point of the conspiracy,
according to Proctor, was to obstruct, block,
hide, conceal, delay -- do everything in their
power so the truth did not come out. He talked
about leakage. Sometimes it did.
Here is something I think is very
important. They promised to talk about, did he
rely on their statements? Was there something
that happened with Mr. Shulman that would have
been a lot different?
Yeah, if they promised to stop making it.
Promise, promise. If they had stopped making it
when they knew it was bad and really done what
they said they were going to do, Bob wouldn't
have gotten sick; he wouldn't have spent the
last 20 years of his life disabled and not the
kind of man that he envisioned himself to be,
humiliated and feeble by the injuries that came
from smoking.
And Dr. Proctor said this goes to
reprehensibility, the fact that the same conduct hurts other people, millions of people.
Millions of lives were unnecessarily lost.
I know the number is numb. You know, the
number is numb. It's a such a big amount. It's
almost hard to wrap your arms around.
20 million people. That's the population of the
State of Florida.
MR. FURR: Objection. It's improper
argument, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: So imagine --
MR. FURR: Objection.
THE COURT: Okay. Do you need to approach?
MR. SCHLESINGER: No.
MR. FURR: Yes.
MR. SCHLESINGER: It's perfectly
appropriate.
THE COURT: Approach.
(Thereupon, the following bench conference
began.)
THE COURT: It's 5:00. Twenty-eight plus
18 minutes so far.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Okay.
MR. FURR: I believe you ruled pretrial on
this exact argument.
MR. EDSON: This is the order. That's the motion. The order granted --
MR. FURR: Pretrial, we made this exact
argument in our pretrial motion to preclude
Mr. Schlesinger from arguing that the 20 million
deaths over time were equal to the population of
the State of Florida.
THE COURT: Which ruling was that?
MR. FURR: That was 18 that you granted in
part and deferred in part. I know it's hard to
trace back exactly what it was, but it may
perhaps just refresh the Court's recollection.
THE COURT: Which part of it did I grant
and which part of it did I defer on?
MR. EDSON: You had deferred -- you granted
as to all parties if counsel believes the door
has been open to allow them to make an argument
that might otherwise be questionable --
THE COURT: May I see what you're reading?
MR. EDSON: It's paragraph 18 of your
order. We're supposed to approach before they
touch things in our motion.
THE COURT: This is just general, isn't it?
MR. EDSON: No.
MR. FURR: That was pursuant to this
motion, Your Honor. That included this paragraph next to the one involved with --
THE COURT: The argument is about
20 million people.
MR. EDSON: That's in evidence, Judge.
That's in evidence.
THE COURT: Isn't there evidence?
MR. FURR: The argument is not about
20 million here. It's about comparing that to
the state, the entire population of the state of
Florida.
MR. GDANSKI: We are allowed to reflect
what we all know and we are allowed to draw on
that evidence --
MR. FURR: It's --
MR. GDANSKI: It's closing argument.
MR. SCHLESINGER: It's closing argument.
We're trying to bring into context the numbers.
THE COURT: What did you say on the Caprio
case?
MR. BRENNER: That was in Caprio.
MR. EDSON: What we did in that order was
we had improper arguments that we were seeking
to preclude, and Your Honor granted it. This
was one of them. So the Court's order was they
were supposed to approach before they got into these areas.
THE COURT: All right. I'm going to
overrule the objection.
(Thereupon, the bench conference
concluded.)
MR. SCHLESINGER: May I proceed?
THE COURT: Yes.
MR. SCHLESINGER: In any event, so I was --
put up the slide. What we were talking about
was 20 million people. Big number. And I said
the number is numb. We'll come to a slide that
sort of illustrates the point. The number is
numb.
Think about the state of Florida. I'm a
born and raised Floridian. Think about the
state of Florida. It's got Key West all the way
up to Tallahassee, across to Pensacola, the
little towns and around Florida.
Just imagine, just imagine that you went
and you were driving around and there wasn't
anybody. There was nobody in the state of
Florida. You could drive. There was no traffic
on 95 or the turnpike and US 27, the Peace
River, the scenic 17. No matter where you went,
the 10, no matter where you went, the turnpike, there wasn't anybody. You could stop in
buildings, churches, hospitals, courtrooms, and
there wasn't a single human being. Right?
This is the context I want to give you to
the 20 million people that have died just since
the Surgeon General's report has come out in the
United States, the leading cause of death in
this country.
It's -- and that's the seductionism. We're
blind to it. We're inured to it. You don't
even see cigarettes in this courtroom except
what we bring. These things are hiding in plain
sight. It's irrational madness. It was almost
wistful when I saw Mr. Furr asking Dr. Proctor
about the end of cigarettes and are they on
their way out.
And Mr. Furr was like trying to make a
point, well, they're on their way out; you
shouldn't punish them. I remember that.
He was almost a little wistful about it. I
said, I remember the scene in the movie
Apocalypse Now where Robert Duvall was that
great captain that ran the helicopter, the
helicopter army. And he wanted to surf and
everything else. He was standing on the beach, and he was
like some day this war is going to end. Almost
wistful.
Well, if cigarettes are on their way out,
let's help them along. You know, let's send a
little message today from this jury.
MR. FURR: Objection. It's improper
argument.
THE COURT: Okay. Sustained. The jury
should disregard anything about sending a
message. That is improper argument. Sustained.
Please move on. The jury should disregard it.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Okay. So the point of it
is, I talk about imagine the state of Florida
like Charlton Heston in The Omega Man, just
empty. That gives you a sense of how many folks
have been lost to the scourge of tobacco
illness.
There are millions living in the United
States now with tobacco-related illnesses all
because of nicotine. All because of nicotine.
It's the number one leading killer in the United
States to this day. One-third of all cancers.
If you got rid of cigarettes, it would be
like curing one-third of all cancers. One in five -- if you went to a cemetery, one in five
graves is a cigarette-related death. Imagine if
there's a little "no smoking" sign on 20 percent
of every head stones in any cemetery that you
went to.
So, you know, I said and I think -- and you
know about this lag time. I talked about the
lag time. I showed the front and the back end
because even when you stop smoking, a long time
happens before the cancer comes. That's the
nature of it.
Cancer is genetic damage. It's
cellular-level damage. Atherosclerotic heart
disease in the heart, it doesn't disappear. It
doesn't go away just because you quit.
There is a reduction in risk because you
don't keep adding to your risk, but it doesn't
go away. Just like Dr. Soloway said like a
sunburn, Floridians, you get a sunburn as a
youngster, at 18 years old, 6 years old. I
remember I had a girlfriend with those
reflectors, when I used those reflectors when I
was a teenager and got a blistering sunburn.
Well, that can cause you to have skin
cancer even if you use sunscreen all the time for the next 30, 40 years, 20, 30, 40 years
later. That's the nature of cellular genetic
damage.
Cigarettes have 7,000 poisons in them; 60
carcinogens in them. You get exposed to that
much smoke for that long, even when you quit,
many decades go by and you can die.
They did control the future because in the
'50s, all they had to do was keep their
promises. What would have happened if all they
had to do was keep their promise --
MR. FURR: Objection. There's no such
evidence, Your Honor. There's no such evidence.
Excuse me.
MR. SCHLESINGER: This is inference from
the evidence. They promised -- it was proven
that they knew that it was bad.
MR. FURR: I need a ruling, Counsel. This
is improper.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Thank you.
The point being they promised to stop
making it. He had a right to rely on that
promise. They said it in the Wall Street
Journal. They emphasized how he read the Wall Street Journal.
And so when you reassure someone and say,
Hey, we would never do anything to harm you,
think of how different the world would have
been, this world, this country, if we didn't
have the scourge of tobacco disease, the tobacco
epidemic, the health care costs. Think of the
difference in the stress.
MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor. Health
care cost? Outside the what's in the record,
Your Honor.
THE COURT: I'll sustain the objection.
The jury should disregard the last comments made
by the attorney and completely disregard it.
Go on to your next argument.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I told you about the
number's numb. That's where I'm at. The number
is numb. That's why I made that graphic.
The state of Florida, I told you imagine
there's nobody there. We talked about the power
of the industry. They've got the power. You
know what? In this case we've got the facts.
We've got the facts. I would rather before this
jury -- I'm pleased to be able to present some
of those facts. MR. FURR: Objection to counsel's personal
opinion over and over.
THE COURT: Sustained. Sustained. The
jury should disregard the reference to the
attorney's personal opinion. It should be
disregarded completely by the jury. Please
don't consider it in deliberations.
Proceed proceed forward.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Yes. You've seen some of
the internal documents. Not all of them, but
they are the legacy of what this entity did.
And the epidemic would not -- we have an opinion
in the case from Dr. Proctor that the epidemic
would not have occurred.
So we talked about the 20 million deaths.
We talked about that this is -- what's driving
this is the industry which deliberately misled
the public on the risks of smoking.
That epidemic was created by them,
initiated, sustained by their aggressive
strategies. That's the evidence and what we
propose is the supportable truth in this case
and hopefully you can take that very seriously
in this case.
I told you that they celebrated it. They said that -- what they said was the Frank
Statement and the promise to find out the truth
was really an attempt to defend itself on the
major fronts of litigation and public opinion.
They celebrated brilliantly conceived and
executed. They won important battles. It was
always a holding strategy, but it was about
creating doubt.
Doubt is our product. Nicotine addiction
and the delivery device and doubt is our
product. The marketing arm, the advertising
arm, creating doubt, showing health, but really
causing the scourge of diseases and suffering.
That was the real strategy. I'm not going to
play this. They lied under oath that nicotine
is not addictive in 1994, and they had documents
going back to the '50s that said we're in the
nicotine delivery business.
This cigarette, it isn't even the product.
Okay? You think this is the package? No. They
said, This is the package. The product is the
nicotine, the dose of nicotine. This is a unit
dose of a powerfully addictive drug.
A pack is a day's supply of nicotine. If
we didn't have nicotine, we would go out of business. The market would collapse.
It's not in dispute. By the way, we put on
two eminently qualified witnesses,
Dr. Henningfield and Dr. Seidman, to explain
that our client was addicted. I didn't hear
them put on anybody to say that he wasn't even
though you know he had him examined by a doctor.
You heard a lot about that examination
transcript. They read from it a bunch during
the trial. But I don't think they're going to
get up and admit, You know what? We think he
was addicted. I don't think you'll hear that in
this closing.
However, I suggest to you that there was no
defense that he wasn't addicted all of the
evidence was that he was. That to me is a form
of a concession. You may consider it as such.
MR. FURR: Objection. It's counsel's
personal opinion.
MR. SCHLESINGER: It's not a personal
opinion, Judge. It's called closing argument.
THE COURT: I'll sustain the objection.
Please disregard the last comment by counsel
regarding personal opinion. It should be
completely disregarded by the jury. All right. Proceed.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Yes. In any event,
multiple statements making all kinds of
promises. Not injurious. And if there's any
harmful elements, we'll remove them. You heard
folks say that. These are all broken promises
that they made. And we want to be the
detectives as much as everybody else. We'll
cooperate in any way.
When they said, We're going to submit the
least useful information to the Surgeon General,
be vague and irksome. Everything they did
was -- I mean, there are two forms of like
complicit third-party strategy that Dr. Proctor
talked about. Get someone else to do the dirty
work. Two forms, the unwitting and the
complicit.
The complicit were the doctors, the
scientists, and what have you that they hired to
put out false statements to the contrary about
the truth of what they knew, which was tobacco
will kill you.
And unwitting was the Surgeon General
public health authority that would go along
with, well, maybe these filters are better. You ought to quit. But if you're going to smoke,
smoke with filters. They got the unwitting
complicity for years of the Surgeon General.
You talked about the warnings. You're not
going to see on the side of a pack of cigarettes
a warning about bladder cancer.
MR. FURR: Objection. Preemption.
THE COURT: Sustained. Please move on on
your argument.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I'm allowed to talk
about --
THE COURT: The jury is to disregard the
last comments.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I'm allowed to talk about
that.
MR. FURR: You've already warned him. You
can't be challenged, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: That's not true. I'm not
challenging him. I'm just commenting.
THE COURT: If you want to approach,
approach. Approach.
(Thereupon, the following bench conference
began.)
MR. SCHLESINGER: I'm allowed to say what
is not on the warning. MR. FURR: This is my objection. What he's
doing now is challenging the adequacy of the
warnings that squarely preempted. And it's
actually -- this is in conflict with the
instruction that the Court just gave the jury.
THE COURT: I think this is pretty clear
that we've indicated that once the warnings were
on there, that you can't make a claim.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I wasn't saying that the
warnings were wrong or inadequate. I was saying
what warnings were not on there. And the
evidence in this case is there is no warning for
COPD or bladder cancer or addiction. That's
already in evidence. That's already been
testified to in the case. This is perfectly
appropriate. It's perfectly appropriate.
MR. FURR: The highlighted sentence of your
instruction, we have no obligation to place any
additional warnings --
MR. SCHLESINGER: We already did that.
MR. FURR: Stop interrupting me, please.
-- including bladder cancer or COPD. Of
course, COPD is in the warnings, contrary to
what Mr. Schlesinger said. But that's not the
point. THE COURT: I'll sustain the objection.
And don't make any further comments on
that.
Thank you.
(Thereupon, the bench conference
concluded.)
THE COURT: All right. I've sustained the
objection. The jury should disregard the
comments regarding the warnings, and you should
completely put it out of your mind. It's not
for your consideration.
Move forward.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I'm going to start.
Thank you, Judge.
So despite relentless denial -- the only
corporate representative you've heard testify,
by they way, was the corporate representative
Figlar, who we presented his video testimony.
And even to this date, relentless denial. They
said -- their internal document from the '50s
said the individuals we met believe smoking
causes lung cancer, and their corporate
representative speaking on behalf of the
corporation, said that, oh, no, they didn't
think it caused lung cancer. How many documents do we have to show you to prove otherwise?
So we talked about how they marketed to Bob
Shulman. We've showed you the document in the
'80s when they said in the New York Times in a
full page ad we don't market to children. 1984.
That same year was the Diane Burrows document.
These are in evidence, RJR secret document, that
the younger adults -- remember, that secret
word, that fake word adults -- important as
replacement smokers. Starting by age 12.
Looking at that, the question's how many
replacement smokers has the defendants got from
Bob since he quit? He couldn't be a replacement
smoker because he was the first cohort. He was
the beginning of the epidemic. He was the
beginning of the boom of the business.
They talk about the base of the business is
the high school student. I'm going to skip
through a few of these because we're going to
quit in just a couple minutes, I'll come back to
whichever ones I need to deal with.
But all through here, it's all about kids.
This is the one where it says from time to time
we use young smokers, youth market, and in the
future use young adults. We caught the conspiracy within the conspiracy. We caught the
hiding within the secret documents of words that
they knew would not stand illumination, right?
They talk about the press, you know,
that -- the publicity of the press, the
illumination and dark corners is the great
antiseptic. So you all are seeing stuff that
now you know. You may have thought you knew,
but now you know. A lot of folks don't know
because you've got to dig deep to find documents
like this to show what they plotted and planned
and schemed and hatched to go after kids.
Look at this, on the second grade kids,
they're sending letters saying and we're going
to continue to support research until the truth
is known. In the '70s they're sending to a
second grade class that says, hey, tell us about
smoking and health. That was in '72.
Remember Farber said I sent them something
in '84 because my patients were confused, and
they didn't understand what was going on. Of
course, they were confused. That was the whole
idea. Doubt is our product. They were selling
as much doubt as they were cigarettes.
So when Teague said we deliberately played down the role of nicotine, and the non-smoker
has little or no knowledge of what satisfactions
it may offer him and no desire to try it,
instead we must convince with him with wholly
rational reasons that he must try smoking with
the hope that he will then for himself discover
the real satisfactions -- code word for
nicotine -- the real satisfactions attainable.
I call that document the chiller because
that's cold blooded. That is just a man who is
there at that -- the head of the department of
research at Reynolds, and he has got that hook
as sharp as it can be and he's setting it on
them young fish and they're getting hooked.
Everything they wanted to do is get our
share of the youth market, get that learner.
Make them think it's cool, and all of the words
that go along with it. And then they'll be
hooked.
I say a decent company, a humane company, a
responsible corporate company --
MR. FURR: I object to the use of counsel's
personal opinion.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I say it's a term of art. I argue --
THE COURT: Please avoid doing that.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The evidence shows --
THE COURT: Sustained. The "I" reference
should be disregarded by the jury.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The evidence shows that a
decent corporation with the rights and
responsibilities of a human, if you're going to
want to be treated like a person, act like a
person, you should be protecting children, not
addicting them. That should be what we should
do. That's the responsibility of a responsible
corporation.
Here is the Engle class. I told you it was
all Florida citizens who have gotten sick or
suffered from diseases or medical conditions
that manifested prior to November 21, '96.
Everything in Bob's record showed heart disease
in the '90s, COPD in '95, bladder cancer in '95.
It's all right there. It's spelled out
explicitly with the COPD, and maybe that's why
we had such a fuss about it. Because COPD is
not the big medical physical problem in his
life. When I ask you to consider --
THE COURT: Counsel, that's an hour, so go ahead and wrap up whatever you're arguing right
now.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I will.
When we ask you to consider what is an
appropriate measure of damages, when we say
measure the harm that Bob has suffered, show him
through your verdict you place great value on
his loss. The bulk of the damage he sustained,
the hurt, the suffering, the humiliation is from
the bladder cancer and what was taken from him
and from the coronary artery disease that
eventually he had a quadruple bypass procedure.
The cardiac disease is -- far outstrips the
actual suffering from the COPD. He had some
shortness of breath from the COPD, but he's got
the diagnosis of COPD, and it was an important
piece of evidence, COPD secondary to tobacco
use. A history of COPD in late 2000 -- I mean,
in late 1995 is class membership in a nutshell.
So it's such strong evidence that nicotine
addiction is a hook. Well, COPD from tobacco
use, that's a hook into class membership all by
itself. There are a bunch of ways in. We'll
talk more about the Engle class tomorrow. I
thank you for your attention at this late hour. We'll talk more about it tomorrow. Thank you.


CLOSING STATEMENT
MR. SCHLESINGER: Counsel, good morning
The way this is timed, I still get to go
THE COURT: All right. Please proceed.
MR. SCHLESINGER: May it please the
2 Yes, we are.
5 Court?
10 ladies and gentlemen of the jury.
12 and I have to assemble my electronics. I know
13 it's a little weird, we deprive you of your
14 electronics.
And when you go back to -- you do your
16 deliberation, it's not uncommon for the Court to
17 actually confiscate your phones while you're back
18 there.
And here we are, you know, depending on
20 this electronics right now. It used to just be a
21 legal pad. And I don't even have a legal pad here
22 in front of us, but I can't read my handwriting
23 more so.
I have more time. This is going to take
25 the day. The time -- between the time I get to go 1 and they get to go and I get to do what's called
2 rebuttal, it will pretty much take this day.
So it's going to be longer than Gone
4 With the Wind and, you know, not as necessarily
5 entertaining, but we're going to get through this.
6 There's a lot of material to cover.
The first thing I wanted to start with
8 was, I read to you from what I call the Chiller
9 document, Dr. Teague.
11 lot because he was such an important fellow at RJ
12 Reynolds, an employee of the corporation deep
13 during the years of the agreement to conceal the
14 information from the public.
And so, you know, there's a great quote
16 from Saul Bellow, a famous writer, that said: A
17 great deal of intelligence can be invested in
18 ignorance when the need for illusion is deep.
20 writing about tobacco but just the idea that a
21 great deal of intelligence can be invested in
22 ignorance when the need for illusion is deep. It
23 really does sum up the business plan of this
24 entity.
And what's interesting is another thing
We're going to return to Dr. Teague a
That's Saul Bellow, a writer, not In any event, right here -- and I
1 that Dr. Teague wrote in the secret documents,
2 okay, with regard to how to capture youth -- and
3 "capturing youth" is a word from Diane Burrows'
4 1984 document, which all of these are in evidence
5 for your use.
7 remember hearing so many things about what Bob was
8 like when he went to smoke with Ira Crookshank and
9 how it make him sick, but he wanted to stick with
10 it because he wanted to be part of the in crowd
11 and that was the way to adulthood and the pathway
12 and being defined: I'm a tough guy.
14 and about kids, and he said -- this is in the
15 '70s, you know, as they really came to understand
16 and target kids powerfully, where it says: The
17 sentiment discussed would cause the young to want
18 to be defiant and smoke. In this sense, the
19 warning label on the package may be a plus.
21 keep in mind, there was never a warning label
22 before 1970, right?
24 pack of cigarettes before 1970 didn't start until
25 1966, right? And Bob had been smoking more than
And we'll talk about warning labels, but
Look what Dr. Teague wrote about smoking
The only thing that ever existed on a It may; it may not be. It may be
So we talked about the Engle class. I
1 30 years by that time. Okay?
But in 1966, a caution -- this is '72,
3 talking about a caution on the side of the pack
4 that said: It may be hazardous to your health.
6 hazardous to your health, but here's a filter. So
7 there's a reason why you don't have to worry about
8 it.
And that's why sometimes a great deal of
10 intelligence can be invested in ignorance when the
11 need for illusion is deep.
13 reflected last night on -- as I was thinking about
14 this case, that one of the unique things about Bob
15 also, besides that fact that he is nearly a
16 century old, right, and that is way on the
17 outliers of our life expectancy, his wife is in
18 her late -- mid -- early '90s, and they've been
19 married for almost 75 years.
That -- that also is something that's
21 almost unique, and we brought her so you could
22 meet her.
24 meaningfully anymore. Who knows when the ravages
25 of Alzheimer's started to rob her memory.
You could -- she can't contribute A lot of folks know that when it comes
MR. FURR: There's no evidence about her
2 to Alzheimer's, a lot of times you lose --
MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- the person before
5 you lose the person.
7 medical condition.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Let -- I'm making an
9 argument of what I think the evidence has shown.
10 And Mr. Shulman testified that his wife has
11 Alzheimer's. That's in the record. I will pull
12 up the quote.
14 this.
THE COURT: Okay. Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: In any event, you've
17 heard about that, so -- but because of what is an
18 important thing, you know, it's something that
19 folks aspire to. It's something that folks think
20 of when they think of family, durability of
21 family, of the idea of a family.
23 mid-90s, you know, that have been married for
24 almost 75 years. That -- that is important
25 because it's part of the humanity of a situation.
The idea of a couple of folks in their
I don't think we should fight about That's why you-all are not computers
It's coming up on Thanksgiving. It's
We care about the health and well-being
2 making these decisions, you-all are people,
3 because the humanity of the situation is
4 critically relevant in evaluating what happens to
5 people.
7 of our people. We care about our culture. We
8 care about the ideals we hold, you know, true, and
9 this is just one of the important things.
11 family time. You know, it was touching to me and
12 this is part of it, is was touching.
14 where my client started to get a little misty
15 before you, a little choked up because his wife,
16 who he said has Alzheimer's, still managed to get
17 up in the morning and make him breakfast for his
18 big day in court, check his jacket and straighten
19 it out, and say: Baby, I love you. Look how good
20 you look, for his big day in court.
22 witness stand in front of you because of what his
23 wife, who he described as a beautiful, young
24 woman, right, a beautiful, young woman.
I think the evidence was, there one time
And he almost started crying on the
When you're with somebody like he was So talking about the humanity of the
It's even important because he admitted
1 since they were kids, that's the way she always
2 looks to him, like a beautiful -- that's the way
3 you grow old together, and he only sees what's
4 inside. He only sees what's good. He only sees
5 what he loves.
7 situation, talking about the kind of man Bob is,
8 the little bit of evidence you heard and saw about
9 how he feels about his wife is important.
11 to you: She was constantly bugging me about
12 smoking. The smell, she couldn't stand it. I
13 wanted to please her. It was not my intention to
14 keep smoking.
16 powerful addiction-producing nature of the drug,
17 which is what a cigarette is.
19 come back to that.
21 questions on the verdict form is not about fault.
22 It's only about dependence and disease.
24 you work through this, and you'll see this, you
25 will -- you will see that the first question has
You have to keep that in mind because as
All the words that go along with the
So we touch on that. The family. We'll
Class membership, that first set of He got hit with the big three. He got
1 to do with: Is -- is Mr. Shulman a class member?
2 The evidence clearly shows that he is.
You-all have to agree that he is and
4 check off that he is for any of the enumerated
5 diseases, bladder cancer, coronary artery disease,
6 or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. But
7 because all three, each one, each one reinforces
8 and corroborates the other.
10 bladder cancer. He got heart disease. He got
11 lung disease. He got three major hits from
12 tobacco which is the number one cause of those
13 three major diseases in this country.
So each one corroborates the other, but
15 any one of them gets him in the class. A unitary
16 theme, as Dr. Soloway testified to.
What is the unitary theme of everything
18 that happened to Bob, the one guy with all these
19 diseases, is that tobacco caused them all.
So it's important, as you think through
21 this, let's not conflate, do not confuse -- and it
22 will be tough because even the idea of nicotine
23 and smoke, smoke gives you cancer, right? Smoke
24 gives you emphysema or COPD.
The smoke and the nicotine can give you 1 the heart disease, but the nicotine gives you the
2 addiction. That can be a little bit confusing.
But I think we've taught you through
4 some of the evidence in this case to understand
5 that the nicotine keeps you smoking incessantly,
6 abnormally.
You know, puffing, puffing, puffing,
8 puffing, 200 puffs a day. You know, puffing,
9 puffing on cigarettes and sucking down packs of
10 these cigarettes full of drugs, but it's all the
11 poisons in the smoke that give you the disease.
Class membership is not about fault.
13 Class membership is only about dependence and
14 disease. Fault is another phase. Fault is
15 another set of questions.
17 relative degrees of fault. Remember the Engle
18 findings say not only are they intentionally at
19 fault, intentionally culpable for concealing,
20 conspiring of committing fraud, the Engle findings
21 also say that the tobacco industry and the named
22 defendants here are culpable for negligence.
23 They're at fault for themselves being negligent or
24 careless.
You can determine and weigh and measure
And you can decide how to relatively 1 distribute percentages of fault for them. You
2 will decide that, and you can also decide that for
3 Mr. Shulman. If you decide that he, too, was less
4 than careful about his health and overcoming his
5 addiction and he should have tried harder because
6 his human weaknesses were such that he should have
7 tried harder, you can assign a portion of blame to
8 him.
We're going to talk about that, but his
10 fault, if any, his blame, if any, as compared to
11 their blame is in the blame section of this case,
12 and it is not in the class membership section of
13 the case.
15 It's important not to get confused about this --
16 really you can make a mountain out of a molehill.
17 A lot of talk about mountains. The notion of
18 class membership is a relatively simple notion
19 here. You know, the records bear it out, just
20 that deed from 1983 shows he has entitlement to be
21 called a resident of Florida and just that note in
22 1995 that says COPD from tobacco abuse, all by
23 itself that's class membership, all by itself.
You know, in another form, in another
25 world with no argument, no debate, in two minutes
It's important not to conflate that. Class membership is not about fault,
It doesn't mean that he's lying or
And reliance on statements, you know, if
1 we can get to that point, but there's opposing
2 sides, so we're having to fuss.
4 whether smokers can -- you know, whether the
5 smoker shared some responsibility. We talked
6 about that, whether an addict loses total control
7 over the mind, whether addicts can quit, for
8 reliance on any particular statement from the
9 tobacco industry. That's what class membership is
10 about.
12 you're 95 years old and somebody interviews you
13 for days, testify -- asks you testimonial
14 questions for days, dozens of hours, maybe 20 --
15 15, 20 hours of interrogation, there's going to be
16 some natural variability in a 95-year-old man's
17 answers.
19 anything like that, but if you keep asking the
20 same question over and over again, you're going to
21 find some variety in the answers.
23 anybody, even a sharp cat in his 30s and say
24 let's: Put him under the microscope and grill him
25 for, you know, a dozen days and gather up 2,000
I suggest that you could do that with But as Dr. -- as Dr. Proctor said, there
It was an immersive experience. You
So when it comes to class membership
It was an all-pervasive effect, and so
1 pages of transcript testimony. You might find
2 some -- some variability in the answers.
4 was a wallpaper effect of what the tobacco
5 industries did.
7 couldn't get out of the way of tobacco advertising
8 in the '30s, '40s, '50s, '60s, '70s, '80s, '90s.
9 It was everywhere, every billboard, TV shows into
10 the '70s, every magazine. It was everywhere.
12 there was nothing personal about it. Right?
13 There was a population-based attempt to create a
14 culture, to influence an entire nation.
16 have Engle findings from the proofs that you-all
17 are allowed to use.
19 though, all these questions come on later
20 questions in the case. So you don't even get to
21 them.
23 words there. But it shows that -- it shows that
24 he needs to be addicted and that the addiction was
25 a legal cause of bladder cancer, coronary artery
And it worked very well, which is why we
And then there's this. There's a lot of These are greater weight of the
Let's go on to the next one because
1 disease, or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
2 and it was before November 21, '96, and he was a
3 Florida resident when the disease manifested
4 itself.
6 evidence, and I have the scales of justice in
7 front of you.
9 you've got that in the packet.
Okay. I go to the scales of justice
11 because we talk about it's not -- in a criminal
12 case, you know, you've heard that any and all
13 reasonable doubt, all doubt is in favor -- you
14 know, resolved in favor of the defendant.
16 evidence. It's what's more likely than not,
17 what's probable.
So if Bob, overall, if the big view is
19 that he's tipped the scales in his favor, right,
20 then he's proved his case I mean by the
21 preponderance of the evidence standard.
Now, you know, there's some space under
23 here, right? What is that? Well, that's doubt,
24 but the fact of the matter is doubt is resolved in
25 favor of Mr. Shulman. It doesn't matter if
And here, it's the greater weight of FURR: Objection. That's a
MR. FURR: No, I'd like that stricken.
THE COURT: I will sustain the
1 there's a little bit of doubt.
3 misstatement of the law. There was no such
4 instruction. It's an incorrect statement.
MR. SCHLESINGER: That's my
6 interpretation of what the law means.
9 objection. The jury should disregard the last
10 comments regarding doubt and should not consider
11 it in your deliberations.
Please proceed.
MR. SCHLESINGER: May it please the
14 Court?
16 of the evidence, what's more likely than not,
17 right?
19 Mr. Shulman when you confirm his presence in the
20 class. All these diseases are caused by
21 cigarettes. That's an absolute.
23 placed the cigarettes on the market that were
24 defective and unreasonably dangerous and were
25 negligent.
Nicotine is addictive. The defendants
So the point is, it's the greater weight
And all these findings apply to These are -- this is -- this is the law,
And then, of course, these are also
We know that, and we know defendants
2 can't be -- this is the law. This is the jury
3 finding. It's your finding. It's absolutely
4 applicable.
6 true. Okay? So we know that we have addiction.
7 We know we have disease. We know in Engle that
8 addiction leads to disease.
10 concealed material information not otherwise known
11 or available, knowing that the material was false
12 or misleading and failed to disclose material
13 facts concerning the health effects or addictive
14 nature of smoking cigarettes or both.
17 agreed, all the companies agreed to commit the
18 fraud together. It was a conspiracy to commit
19 fraud.
That's all intentional. Conspiracy is
21 not an accident. It's not negligence. It's on
22 purpose, right?
24 to comparative fault, is on purpose. Nothing
25 was -- if he was careless because he didn't take
And that is the fraud finding.
And then -- they got together and
Nothing that Mr. Shulman did, if you get Nobody chooses addiction, but they did.
They intended Bob Shulman and the public
1 better care of his health, that's carelessness.
2 It's not intent. He did not intend to become
3 sick. He did not intend to be an addict.
5 They chose to engage in a conspiracy to commit
6 fraud. They agreed to get together and conceal
7 this information, and they knew it. They intended
8 that smokers and the public -- put Bob Shulman in
9 there.
11 would rely on this statement to their detriment.
12 That's a conspiracy theory. That's a powerful
13 indictment of industry.
That is why the ball is already down the
15 field somewhat in this particular case. You guys
16 are taking that ball and deciding if you're going
17 to move it further down the field, but part of
18 this case has already been concluded.
That is what gave light to the Engle
20 findings. That Engle finding trial was back in
21 2000 from a case filed in '94 by Dr. Howard Engle,
22 who was a pediatrician in Miami.
24 There's no such --
MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: That was year-long FURR: Excuse me. Please don't
MR. FURR: You're not allowed to talk
THE COURT: Let me hear just one -- hang
There's no such evidence about who filed
1 trial.
3 speak through my objections.
5 the case or anything else.
THE COURT: All right.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Judge, we're allowed
8 to talk about the Engle case. This is a progeny
9 case.
11 about facts in evidence.
13 on a second.
Okay. Sustained. The jury should
15 disregard the last comments by the attorney.
16 They're stricken.
19 Judge.
So the point is, we're not -- we don't
21 have to retry the Engle case because we have the
22 synthesis and the result of the Engle case to hand
23 to you, and as an Engle progeny jury, you pick up
24 exactly where the Engle jury left off.
Please proceed.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I'm starting up again,
That's the law, and you guys have that when you're thinking about the parts
1 at your disposal. And when you work together back
2 there as a collaborative body -- it's very
3 interesting, six folks who don't know each other
4 making an important decision together, you can use
5 those instructions, and you can pull out the Engle
6 findings and keep them there.
8 of the case that you've got to answer, don't
9 forget how important those Engle findings are. We
10 wouldn't be here but for those Engle findings.
They're critically important in this
12 case. Even though we only talk about them in
13 opening and closing, you've got them with you.
14 Embrace them. Use them. Don't forget about them
15 when you're thinking about how to answer the
16 questions in the case. They're critical.
18 about these briefly. The point is there's regular
19 folks and you can decide their demeanor, their
20 frankness, the interest they have, the
21 reasonableness of the testimony, and use your
22 common sense.
24 them. You know, that's why we're all doing this
25 live, and it's nice to be able to do that.
Believability of witnesses, I talked
You look at them, you get a feel for But what's interesting is, I told you
2 the special exception for experts, you can accept
3 their opinion testimony, reject it or give it the
4 weight you think it's deserves. So that's another
5 law you have got.
What do we have? I told you yesterday,
7 we had highly-credentialed academics and practical
8 man in the trenches who is also an academic
9 working with addicted people all the time. There
10 was no -- nothing in rebuttal to it at all.
There was no counterevidence whatsoever
12 except for the fact that historically the tobacco
13 industry trivialized addiction, made addiction a
14 confusing, misunderstood thing, compared it to
15 things like chocolate or motorcycles.
You know, we live in a world where it is
17 a difficult term to conceptualize. However, there
18 is no medical census definition.
20 members that he was addicted because addiction, as
21 you understand it, as regular folks understand it,
22 as scientists understand it, every definition
23 applies to Mr. Shulman during the period of years
24 he smoked.
And you heard testimony from family
But we had -- we tried to honor this 1 process, right? We -- we tried to honor the
2 process by bringing you witnesses who duly and
3 truly had qualifications, that they knew what they
4 were talking about, that were justified in coming
5 to the conclusions that they did.
And they did it from a background of
7 experience that honors the process, right, that
8 takes the meaning of the word "expert" seriously.
And you're going to hear someone get up
10 and say from the defense: Well, you didn't say
11 Dr. Proctor has also made a lot of money
12 testifying. I call that the false equivalency.
14 multiple million dollars in earnings over the
15 years he's been doing these Engle cases, as a
16 suggestion that he's a partisan who is only saying
17 it to help the people that brought him here and
18 he's not worthy of belief as a counterbalance to
19 when we say perhaps Dr. McGregor's $300,000 in
20 earnings for two cases is the real motivating
21 force behind why she said what she said despite
22 it's lack of credibility, based on what anybody
23 with common sense would say that his hearing loss
24 caused him cancer, some -- something like that.
MR. FURR: Objection. Misstates the
They will try, by showing Dr. Proctor's BRENNER: Objection. Misstates the
THE COURT: Hang on a second.
MR. BRENNER: Can we get a ruling,
MR. SCHLESINGER: That's my opinion.
THE COURT: Let's not argue back and
MR. BRENNER: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Now I would say that
1 evidence.
4 --
6 evidence.
9 please?
12 forth with each other.
15 sidebar:)
17 Honor, and Mr. Gdanski tried this same trick
18 during his cross-examination.
20 argument.
MR. FURR: It should not be tolerated.
22 They claim that -- he's arguing that Dr. McGregor
23 said that hearing loss caused his cancer.
That's ridiculous. Dr. McGregor used an
25 audiogram to demonstrate that his hearing loss was
Can you guys approach?
(The following discussion was held
MR. FURR: Here's my objection, Your
MR. SCHLESINGER: This is closing They're ridiculing her unfairly. That's
1 consistent with exposure to solvents. And it was
2 the solvents that she said caused cancer.
4 not the evidence in any way, and it's not a
5 mistake. They tried the same thing during cross.
MR. BRENNER: In fact, I asked the exact
7 question in redirect because Mr. Gdanski tried to
8 suggest: Are you saying hearing loss caused his
9 bladder cancer?
12 argument, Judge. I may make fair and reasonable
13 inferences.
15 reasonable inference.
18 does not cause cancer.
20 true.
MR. SCHLESINGER: No, she said --
MR. FURR: Of course she did.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- the hearing loss is
24 evidence of cause of cancer from being a janitor,
25 and it's nonsense.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Sure, it is.
THE COURT: She said the hearing loss
She said: No.
MR. SCHLESINGER: This is closing
THE COURT: That is not a fair and
MR. GDANSKI: That's just -- that's not FURR: You can draw inferences. You
THE COURT: You have to stick with the
MR. GDANSKI: This is the inference in
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. FURR: Will you strike that, please?
THE COURT: Yes, I will.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded
2 can draw inferences.
4 evidence. All right?
6 the evidence.
11 court:)
THE COURT: Okay. The comments
13 regarding hearing loss causing cancer is stricken
14 from the record, and the jury should disregard it
15 and not take it into consideration. It's
16 stricken.
18 again, Judge?
21 please the Court?
23 nonsensical notion, the evidence will show, it's a
24 nonsensical notion to suggest that hearing loss
25 has anything to do with why this man has cancer
THE COURT: Yes.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Thank you. May it the
MR. SCHLESINGER: May I start my time
What I'm getting at is it's a Dr. Benedetto's note says: It's a
1 from his occupation as a janitor.
It's -- it's -- it's -- how can someone
3 say that because you have the right to reject it.
4 That's why I showed you that ruling.
What? Was he swimming in solvents that
6 were getting in his ear? Dr. Benedetto has a note
7 about exposure to solvents. We already know he
8 doesn't hear well.
10 family trait. And, by the way, if you're
11 interviewing the guy with history, as
12 Dr. Benedetto's note goes for five pages: You
13 were -- you were a heavy smoker and you were
14 exposed to solvents. What if he said: Hey, what
15 did you do for a living?
18 pallets of a degreaser were going back and forth
19 in the warehouse where he ran a business with a
20 thousand janitors running all over the place doing
21 work, cleaning up and mopping. I mean, is that an
22 exposure?
24 comparison is this: If you build a better
25 mousetrap, the world will beat a path to your
He said: Janitorial.
Okay? Maybe pallets of ammonia and
Anyway, I'm making a comparison. The Dr. Proctor built a better mousetrap,
The other way around is someone that has
1 door. You've heard that, right? Not the other
2 way around.
4 nothing on their record, nothing on their
5 credentials, no life scholastic or professional
6 dedication to the medical scourge of tobacco
7 writing about it, teaching it, taking care of it,
8 anything like that, and have them say they're an
9 expert, that's the same as Dr. Proctor.
11 right? He's a world's authority. He's been
12 invited all over the world. He's been to the
13 White House. He's written in the Surgeon
14 General's reports. He's been quoted by them.
15 He's been a governmental witness. I mean, this is
16 a giant in his field.
18 you. I wish we could put his testimony in a
19 stadium and do it in the Joe Robbie Stadium with
20 75,000 people to hear what he has to say because
21 it's enlightening, right?
23 mousetrap, the world will beat a path to your
24 door.
We were lucky to be able to bring him to
That's why I say: If you build a better
It's a false equivalency to compare some Now he was a no-show. Think about that.
1 like properties and the money he legitimately
2 generated because of his great expertise to the
3 money those folks are getting that I say is the
4 true motivation for their testimony.
6 That was the guy that did the CME. No show.
7 Think about that.
The residency, that's -- I mean, you
9 know, you don't -- there is a thing about a and
10 the. It's not the -- the residency. Was he a
11 resident? You'll see that a/the comparison a lot.
12 He was a resident of Florida. Okay?
14 evidence. You'll see the driver's license, the
15 voters registration. He owned the condo
16 continuously. We have both the deed when he owned
17 it, he bought it and when he sold it, from '83 to
18 '97. Then he bought a house instead of a condo.
And you saw the records saying he was
20 down here at least six months a year. That is
21 residency. And the evidence is overwhelming,
22 beyond a reasonable doubt, overwhelming that he's
23 a resident. And denying residency doesn't meet
24 with the bounds of credibility.
All these are proofs. They're in
Here's the diagnosis. You know very But this is a clinical diagnosis. It's
And this is Dr. Davis's record. There's
1 much about this, from the Maine Center for Cancer
2 in September of '95. And he said in his
3 testimony: It was around the time I was diagnosed
4 with bladder cancer I was first told that I had
5 COPD.
7 two Dr. Davises. We get a little confused, two
8 Dr. Davises that talked about COPD. There's the
9 Dr. Davis here, and the Dr. Davis in the 2015 PFT
10 test where it said: Obstructive lung defect.
11 That's the corroborative test.
13 perfectly appropriate for doctors, you saw the
14 GOLD standard, to make a clinical diagnosis.
15 Meaning a doctor says: You know, you look out of
16 breath. You smoked cigarettes for 40 years. You
17 got bladder cancer from smoking. I think you've
18 also got the COPD secondary to the tobacco abuse,
19 which is addiction.
What is it about addiction? You know,
21 they make it as easy as possible to start and as
22 hard as possible to quit, like the Florida lobster
23 traps. When you have the mini-season, those
24 wood -- those wood boxes, you see the way in, the
25 lobsters get in, but they can't get out. The kids, they make it as easy as
But smoke has always been a warning
Smoke it's an irritant to the lungs.
2 possible.
In nature, in nature, right, flame for
4 man. You think of Prometheus. He brought flame
5 to man, okay, that illuminated. It provided
6 warmth. It allowed the development of man. It
7 had many salutary benefits.
9 sign, a danger. If you smell smoke, what do the
10 animals in the forest do? They run.
12 You don't take a natural human being -- a natural
13 animal does not inhale smoke. Smoke is a warning
14 to get away.
16 made smoke sweet and changed the pH and added
17 ammonia so that you could get that smoke in and
18 menthol and things to make it easy to get down in
19 the lungs and they unleashed an epidemic of
20 addiction and unleashed an epidemic of lung
21 cancer.
Cigarette sales went up. Lung cancer
23 went up, an industrially-manufactured disease.
24 They make it. They engineer it. The ingenuity of
25 man, as difficult to quit as possible after making
But when they engineered smoke and they I'll come back to this. This is
Even Dr. Bernsley, his treating, right,
1 it as easy as possible to start.
3 Dr. Seidman, said he was addicted. Everybody else
4 said he was addicted. Nobody said he wasn't.
6 even the family members, they all said it. So
7 it's definitive. Severely addicted. This wasn't
8 a garden-variety, you know, a chipper, someone who
9 smoked a few cigarettes. Severely addicted.
He talked about it. Addiction is like
11 driving a car without brakes. It's a sensation.
12 You've don't feel in control of that experience.
That's the truth. That's the sadness.
14 That's the business of addiction. That's the
15 business model of addiction.
17 Morris in the '60s said that when these filters
18 were coming out and these light cigarettes were
19 coming out, we've got to make sure we don't let
20 the cigarette smoker get weaned off his addiction.
We have to determine what is the minimum
22 nicotine required to keep the normal smoker
23 hooked.
25 precisely control it to two decimal points,
And you know that Dr. Tamol from Philip
And Dr. Proctor explained to you they And, again, not only did Dr. Seidman
And they said: Without the compound,
1 standard. It's exact precision specification and
2 they're happy that it's habituating and unique,
3 and they call it the sine qua non, without which
4 there is nothing.
6 say: Folks won't smoke a cigarette without
7 nicotine in it, the documents, the internal
8 documents, you're going to see themselves,
9 admitted it internally.
11 the exit gates will open, and everything is going
12 to collapse. We'll be out of business overnight.
Even -- even -- even internally, they
14 knew this. They were afraid of it. They feared
15 it. Nicotine was their -- it was their -- you
16 know, it was the center of their universe. Be out
17 of business almost overnight.
19 Cullman -- no?
22 Kid." Dr. Dunn, the "Nicotine Kid." No, this is
23 where -- so Dr. Seidman said it, but internally in
24 the '70s, so did the "Nicotine Kid" say: No one
25 has ever become a cigarette smoker without smoking
MR. GDANSKI: Dunn.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Dunn, the "Nicotine
And then of course this is from I'm trying to break the illusion. You
The cigarette should not be conceived as
1 cigarettes and nicotine.
3 a product but the package. The product is
4 nicotine. The cigarette is one of many layers.
5 Think of the cigarette pack as a storage container
6 of a day's supply of nicotine.
8 are presented with evidence to try to break
9 that -- that brainwashing of a nation to make this
10 seem like it's a normal, ordinary consumer product
11 when it's nothing of the sort. It's nothing of
12 the sort.
14 you know: Daddy, what's this?
Oh, it's bad.
Well, it doesn't look bad. It looks
17 like a deck of cards. It looks like a little
18 bubble-wrapped toy. It looks like anything you
19 could buy at a Walgreens.
21 kid? How do you tell a kid this is bad when it
22 doesn't look bad?
24 that's another thing about reprehensibility, how
25 do you get away from the fact that what you're
How do you tell a kid, a six-year-old,
It doesn't look bad. How do you warn a
So everything about it says -- you know, They talk about the health of their
1 doing and might find a place as a corporate entity
2 and the humans that work there, how do they live
3 with themselves? Well, they start comparing their
4 customers to rats.
6 business, but they say: You put a hungry rat in a
7 cage. Put a lever in the cage. The rat will push
8 the lever. Smoking the cigarette is the lever
9 push.
That's how they learn to not consider
11 their customers as humans equal to them. They
12 dehumanize them. They call them a prop. They
13 call them a rat.
But they talk about the health of their
15 business and how their business has to give birth
16 to new smokers, like they're reproducing, and they
17 humanize a corporate entity while dehumanizing the
18 customer.
20 going to take this case into the next phase,
21 you'll say: Is that reprehensible? Is that
22 odious? Does that meet with the bounds of human
23 decency, because, if not, then you can say: Yep,
24 this is -- this is warranting a fine, a
25 punishment, a censure from an expression of moral
And when you come to the decision that's So they even have a sales chart where
They knew when the ascendancy, the
They even showed that they'd be way more
1 condemnation from a jury of their peers, you, the
2 jury of their peers, an expression of moral
3 condemnation for these kinds of activities.
5 sales is directly related to free nicotine in
6 smoke. Remember the secret soul of Marlboro was
7 ammoniation and free-basing the nicotine molecule?
9 meteoric rise and success of Marlboro with that
10 cowboy advertising and the new greatest nicotine
11 addictive kick ever.
13 profitable. Reynolds was trying to figure out,
14 why is Marlboro doing so great. The money, the
15 annual sale in business goes up as the free
16 nicotine in cigarette smoke goes up. Direct
17 correlation.
20 call themselves a pharmaceutical industry.
21 That's, again, Dr. Teague.
Even a Philip Morris pamphlet in 2003
23 talk about how easily and how quickly kids can
24 become smokers. They can appear in teens within
25 weeks or only days after they become occasional
Nicotine kick, because of ammonia.
That's a pharmaceutical industry, they What happened to Bob, right?
He kept smoking until he could get over
They're setting a trap for youngsters.
1 smokers.
4 that choke and then he said right away he was
5 addicted. He was stuck. He tried at 16 years of
6 age to get out of the trap, but he couldn't.
8 This is their own pamphlet. This is after, by
9 2000 when the website starts saying: Okay. You
10 got us. It's addictive. They put out a: Kids
11 couldn't smoke, and they admit right in here how
12 easy it is to become addicted. So if that's the
13 case, then why is this case make it seem like it's
14 such a high burden, such a high hurdle when it
15 isn't.
They even say: Ask your kid these
17 questions and if he answers yes to any of the
18 questions he may be addicted.
Try to quit, strong cravings, tried to
20 go without smoking but failed, every one of these
21 things applied to Bob. This is their own words.
25 the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is
Play this, please.
(Video clip played as follows:)
VOICE: We should also give priority to Now that science has come forward and we
So nicotine addiction is why people keep
(Video clip concluded.)
So that's the notice that Surgeon
1 killing more than 300,000 Americans each year.
4 General Koop -- about in the late '80s, 1988, so
5 folks were on notice. They're on notice that
6 tobacco addiction back then was killing 300,000
7 people a year.
9 understand there's 45 million smokers, we know
10 it's over 500,000 a year, but it's tobacco
11 addiction is killing folks. That's notice that
12 they had, another opportunity they had to come
13 clean, to be honest, to be truthful, to mend their
14 ways. But they did not.
16 smoking. In the testimony, this is why Bob kept
17 smoking. It sustains the chain of addiction.
18 Every cigarette contributes.
Dr. Henningfield explained addiction is
20 the interface, the driver between the product, the
21 cigarette, and the disease, and the addiction
22 drives the daily persistent smoking that is
23 relapsing that results in very high risk of
24 disease compared to any other drug.
This is a world's authority that but for the exposure of the
This is what it is. Right? This is not
1 contributed to the Surgeon General's report. You
2 saw, world's authority, the -- one of the top five
3 men in the world on nicotine addiction.
5 nicotine, would Bon have been chronically exposed
6 to poisonous chemicals? Dr. Seidman said no,
7 evidence in this case.
9 a pleasurable pursuit or a pastime. This is
10 compulsive, incessant, drug-reinforcing, drug
11 addiction.
Millions of lifetime exposures just if
13 you do a pack and a half for 40 years, the most
14 conservative estimate.
16 agree, most conservative estimate in these records
17 that he smoked so much of this, millions of hits
18 of nicotine to the brain, millions of toxic
19 exposures of beta naphthalene, cancer-causing
20 poisons through the kidneys into the bladder,
21 corroding the bladder to the point where he ended
22 up with cancer and a major amputation-like surgery
23 to re- -- to --
This is -- look, you know, America is
25 this industry's ashtray. They put out 540,000
Everybody agrees, and even the defense FURR: Objection, your Honor. This
MR. SCHLESINGER: The -- I'll move on.
MR. FURR: No, I would like it
1 butts a year.
3 is improper argument.
6 stricken.
THE COURT: All right. Sustained. The
8 jury should disregard that and not use it in their
9 deliberations. It's stricken. Thank you.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Here's a quick view of
11 choice being constrained by addiction, exposure to
12 cigarette toxins, and smoking-related diseases.
13 This is a little complex.
15 for you. It's the mouthful instruction the judge
16 read to you about legal cause.
18 everything -- it's not all or nothing. Everything
19 happens in combination. You've got this in your
20 pack. The point is that addiction can be a legal
21 cause even if it acts in combination with some
22 other cause, meaning even if Bob should have tried
23 harder to quit, his addiction is still a
24 contributing cause to his disease.
That's a conceptual matter. You've got
I'm going to try to work through this
Things can be combination. Not There's no word "choice" in there. That
1 to address it. It's important -- it's an
2 important legal cause in instruction. Read it.
3 Be careful with it and you'll get it. You've got
4 to read it a few times to get it. We lawyers read
5 it all the time and we still have to read it over
6 again, but you'll get that. But what's missing
7 from it is choice.
9 just doesn't come in. Okay. The choice is not
10 part of addiction-causing disease. We know it
11 does. Dr. Koop just put out the word in his
12 video: Tobacco addiction causing death. It does.
And here's what they say. This is their
14 confession. This is an admission internally, the
15 lawyers remind us. This is from the '80s, the
16 entire matter of addiction --
VIDEO TECHNICIAN: Hang on.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The entire matter of
19 addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting
20 attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case.
21 We can't defend continued smoking as "free choice"
22 if the person was "addicted."
25 what they called the presmoker, the learner, and
1980. This is the year 2015.
Dr. Teague again, figuring out about In the learner you've got the triple
But the smoker, negative, because you're
Dr. Teague, the crucial role of nicotine.
1 the smoker. Jon showed you this, about you start
2 out with a self-image enhancement, identify valued
3 people, daring, sophisticated, free to choose,
4 adult, right, in the presmoker? You got the
5 plus-plus. These are all of these things.
7 plus because they're all these things, you're free
8 to choose.
10 not free to choose. You're a confirmed,
11 habituated, addicted, satisfied smoker.
13 We talked the legal cause, contributes
14 substantially. Did addiction play an important
15 role?
If he was not addicted to nicotine, would
17 he have smoked one to two packs a day for at least
18 40 years?
In order to be regarded as a legal cause,
20 that it not be the only cause, it can operate in
21 combination with the act of another.
It's not all or nothing. That's why
23 we'll eventually get into the comparative fault
24 questions.
Now here's concurring cause. Concurring Cigarettes may be a legal cause of
In order to be regarded as a legal cause
1 cause has to do with things like the creation of
2 disease, and I made this pictograph to try to
3 simplify that complicated instruction.
5 of bladder cancer, remember that was from the
6 anatomical exhibit we used, cigarettes need not be
7 the only cause.
9 bladder cancer even though it operates in
10 combination with janitors, if such janitorial work
11 occurs at the same time as the cigarettes and the
12 cigarettes or addiction to cigarettes contributes
13 substantially to producing the bladder cancer.
That's the basic idea. And that's what
15 the experts testify to, and nobody said anything
16 different. It isn't one or the other. More than
17 one thing can combine to control a disease.
19 every single word in the naturally occurring
20 medical record that was done for purposes of
21 caring for Bob, every word.
23 even with solvents, even with janitorial work, it
24 doesn't negate the overwhelming effect of
25 cigarettes on bladder cancer.
We accept and are willing to stand by
Even the word about solvents because Were there some solvents, did that make
Bicycle built for two, real quick. The
2 it worse? Let's say there were. Assume there
3 were. It doesn't mean that cigarettes -- that
4 it's now from janitorial and not from cigarettes.
How does that work? The cigarettes were
6 no longer a risk, but the janitorial from even 20
7 years earlier was? Think about that.
9 idea that Bob is on the front of the bicycle
10 riding it but that nicotine addiction is in the
11 back, and it's peddling as hard as it can to drive
12 his smoking. So it's the idea, it takes two to
13 tango. A bicycle built for two. Concurring
14 cause. It's not all or nothing.
Addiction played an important role.
16 Dependence played a substantial role. Tobacco
17 abuse was an important reason why the smoking was
18 driving him to the point of getting a disease.
The testimony of Dr. Bernsley: Even if
20 there was a solvent, would that exclude smoking?
23 was not a substantial contributing cause?
No.
Is there any medical way to say smoking
No.
We showed you all these records about There's plenty of evidence otherwise,
However, it isn't necessary to what
1 the quit dates. We completely accept the quit
2 dates. We're willing to accept the quit dates.
3 It doesn't matter.
5 but that's not where the critical issue is, don't
6 want to debate it. The evidence -- the greater
7 weight of the evidence is probable that he did
8 smoke well afterwards.
10 we're talking about. Dr. Soloway said: '75, he
11 quits. '95, he gets bladder cancer. Yeah,
12 because he's twice as likely as a nonsmoker to get
13 bladder cancer even if his risk went down.
He started off as four and a half to
15 five times as likely. When it hits him, it's a
16 hundred percent that the bladder cancer was caused
17 by his smoking addiction, a hundred percent.
18 That's the only way to look at it.
And Dr. Soloway explained it. The sun
20 hits your forehead at the age of 20. And the at
21 age of 50, you're going to dermatologist. A great
22 business in South Florida. Exactly the same
23 scenario, different carcinogen, of course.
25 but it bears repeating.
And I know Dr. Soloway was a while ago, The causal relationship between his long
And Dr. Bernsley, completely
And then, of course, Dr. Soloway
2 history of cigarette smoking and development of
3 bladder cancer.
5 independent, organic, natural treater to the man:
6 He wouldn't have bladder cancer without smoking.
And as Dr. -- as Dr. Seidman explained,
8 tobacco abuse, nicotine dependence, and nicotine
9 withdrawal, same thing. They're synonymous terms.
10 So you understand it when you see it in the record
11 what it's meant, how you measure it.
13 confirmed, he got the COPD because he smoked
14 cigarettes for many, many years. You've seen this
15 record more than enough times.
Similarly, you have an actual PFT that
17 confirms it. Remember COPD never goes away. You
18 have an actual record that confirms it with an
19 interpretation of obstructive -- let me use the
20 laser.
22 defect. The proof is there.
Skip this.
All right. So you know the Engle class
25 period goes between here and here. You don't want
There is minimal obstructive lung But that's what Dr. tobacco witness
He tries to say: You did have COPD if
You decide the credibility of that. And
1 to have anybody try to bounce you out of the
2 period.
4 Farber does, repeatedly.
6 it was before 1990, but not if it's in between '90
7 and '96. That's his testimony.
And in what cases did he do it? Farber
9 finds a way. In all these cases, COPD, yes, but
10 it was before the critical cutoff date in May of
11 1990.
13 folks that try to prove they have COPD in the
14 critical time period, he bounces them out.
16 science of it or if that's just because that's
17 what he's -- he's doing to sing for his sum.
The defense witness made their denials,
19 but they had to rebut for records, that they never
20 examined, saw or treated him. And here's a
21 document I told you about yesterday I really
22 wanted to show you.
There are many -- this is another Teague
24 document, 1953, a lag time of more than ten years,
25 ten years or more between the cessation of smoking
You decide if that's because that's the They knew. They said it. That's in
We're going to come up with the filters,
Let's have the Elmo real quick.
VIDEO TECHNICIAN: Sure.
MR. SCHLESINGER: And then talking about
1 and the occurrence of clinical symptoms of cancer.
3 their secret internal documents. They knew what
4 the truth of the science was.
8 filters. All right.
Here, this is a document that's in
10 evidence. Again, these documents are all in
11 evidence. I sure hope you can find them. Okay?
But this was a disclosure of invention,
13 this guy, Teague, a genius, in 1953, back when
14 the -- when the fraud was going to get started,
15 what are we going to do about this? How are we
16 going to handle the fact that it causes cancer?
18 the fake, the gimmick. What are we going to do?
He says right in here, and it's signed
20 off by a bunch of people, he's, like, claiming
21 that he's entitled, you know: I have observed,
22 and believe it to be generally true, that the
23 cigarette smoking public attaches great
24 significance to the visual examination of the
25 filter material in filter cigarettes after smoking what is he -- so he's inventing
And he says: While the use of such
And because the smoking public attaches
1 the cigarettes.
3 significance to this visual inspection, the
4 possibility of incorporating chemicals into filter
5 tip materials that would darken or otherwise
6 change color on contact with smoke appears
7 attractive.
9 something to put in the filter that when you suck
10 on it, the chemicals will make it change from,
11 like, white to brown. And you'll look at it and
12 go: Oh, look, the bad stuff is being taken out.
14 color change materials would probably have little
15 or no effect on the actual efficacy -- efficiency
16 of the filter tip material, the advertising and
17 sales advantages are obvious.
And it was important enough to make it a
19 disclosure invention so you could get a patent and
20 everything else. It shows their intent. It shows
21 what filters -- back up, please -- were always
22 about.
24 magic trick, right? That's an intentional
25 deception to make sales, to keep people smoking,
And that is intentional. And that's a But in the '50s when the cancer scare
I did that one.
I talked about the shifting
1 because as Dr. Proctor said: We lost a lot of
2 smokers when folks started hearing it was bad,
3 like in the 1964 Surgeon General's report.
5 came out, they saved a lot of their customers from
6 making those exit gates with the false health
7 reassurance of filters.
10 justification. They have to reject -- the defense
11 experts have to reject the records that say -- say
12 it the way it is, the credible records. They have
13 to reject those records.
15 they want to supremely emphasize, like what
16 Dr. McGregor did with the reference to solvents
17 and being a janitor, then that's -- that, you
18 know, it's all that and a bag of chips. I mean,
19 that's the -- that's the cat's pajamas, that's it.
20 That one record.
Well, you know, pick and choose. I say
22 if you want to be consistent, accept the records
23 and explain them reasonably, what do they
24 reasonably mean, what is the reasonable
25 interpretation of the records?
But if they see something in a record I don't know if you ever saw it, but
So if you reject what these folks had to
2 say, you're empowered to do it. You can move them
3 out there. You do not have to accept what they
4 say if you decide they're not believable. That's
5 believability of witnesses.
And of course, you know, there's that
7 movie the Englishman that walked up a hill and
8 came down a mountain.
10 they had a -- it didn't qualify as a mountain, so
11 they went built a bunch of rocks on it to get it
12 ten feet higher so that they could get it
13 categorized as a mountain.
This business about Mount Snow, the ski
15 hill where he went to watch the bike race. And he
16 was walking up the hill.
In terms of credibility, why put a
18 witness on the stand and start with this note
19 which says: Hiking up mountain, when you know
20 that the rest of the notes from the same day or
21 the day before say, the dictator goes: Walking up
22 a hill by Mount Snow. Walking up the mountain at
23 Mount Snow to watch a bike race.
25 that -- is that -- you know, is that really the
Why do that? Is that credible? Is You know, images, illusions,
MR. FURR: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- than have lived to
MR. FURR: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- the tobacco
So, you know, it wasn't Mount Everest,
1 full picture? Is that really telling it the way
2 it is, you know?
4 right, the view from the Rongbuk Monastery in
5 Tibet looking at the north face of Everest.
6 That's the highest mountain in the world.
8 impressions. You can create all kinds of them,
9 right?
But, I mean, the fact of the matter is,
11 you know, there are more people who have climbed
12 that mountain --
15 face --
18 industry.
25 sidebar:)
MR. FURR: Objection.
MR. BRENNER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Will you hold my time?
MR. FURR: Do you need to approach?
THE COURT: Yes, I do.
(The following discussion was held So I object to it, and I move to strike.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Judge, perfectly
2 through on the transcript, but as he does every
3 case and as the objection is sustained in every
4 case, Mr. Schlesinger just argued to the jury that
5 more people have walked up Mount Everest than have
6 filed an Engle -- litigated an Engle tobacco case.
No such basis for the evidence in the
8 record. He gets stopped every time. That's why
9 he kept doing it over my objection.
12 appropriate argument. We made it several times.
13 No reason to object. No reason to interrupt.
15 just move along and we wouldn't have to have
16 interruptions because it messes up keeping my
17 time.
19 doing anything wild or crazy. This is a perfectly
20 appropriate thing to say.
It's closing argument. You're allowed
22 to be a little bit rhetorical, a little poetic.
23 You're just allowed to do that. That's -- that's
24 the whole fun of being a lawyer.
These are very simple, easy -- I'm not
I was hoping maybe some of these could
MR. FURR: I don't know what came
MR. FURR: There is no evidence about COURT: All right. Sustain the
MR. FURR: Move to strike.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded
1 the number of cases tried. There is no evidence
2 about the people that have climbed Mount
3 Everest.
5 objection.
8 court:)
THE COURT: All right. I sustained the
10 objection. I'm going to strike the reference to
11 the Mount Everest reference completely, and it
12 should be stricken and not considered by the jury
13 in your deliberations.
16 court:)
18 start -- anyway, so that's Mount Everest.
20 Dr. Farber, and that was hard to do, but
21 sponsorship theory tells us if somebody actually
22 does give up a point who's adverse to your
23 position, you're supposed to emphasize it, so
24 that's what I'm doing.
Please proceed.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded
MR. SCHLESINGER: Anyway -- I'm going to
So we did get a nice concession from
And he did -- he did say: Well, if you And, by the way, do you remember
Did you hear Dr. Dan talk about
The only evidence you heard from the
1 have COPD, it was caused by cigarettes. He
2 admitted that. So I thought that was an important
3 point to emphasize. I wanted to remind you.
5 Dr. Dan? Dr. Dan, the heart doc, right? What
6 about the Tenormin as a heart disease medicine?
8 Tenormin? They could have asked him any question
9 they wanted. Tenormin is a heart disease
10 medicine.
12 defense side in this case was from the lung
13 doctor, because people -- doctors treat the whole
14 man. Lung doctors know about heart, heart doctors
15 know about lung, that's the way it is.
But none of their doctors know about
17 addiction, right? The heart doctor whose main
18 business is from heart disease from addiction to
19 cigarettes? The lung doctor whose main life's
20 work is emphysema, COPD, and lung cancer from
21 addiction doesn't know about addiction?
23 mention Tenormin, the drug that he's been on since
24 he got the coronary artery disease diagnosis in
25 late '90, '91, that he's been on Tenormin for his
And then their heart doctor doesn't What did Dr. Farber admit? And I
And it shows right in here that the
1 heart disease all those years, medical treatment.
3 remember him doing it. You may have noticed it,
4 he didn't want to admit it, but he did. And he
5 had slipped in something about Tenormin, but the
6 fact is, is it's used for coronary artery disease,
7 and you didn't hear a word about it from their
8 heart expert. Why was that?
10 patient was worked up for possible coronary artery
11 disease seven years ago. He had a stress test
12 which was mildly abnormal. There's the Tenormin.
There's several references in here to
14 the use of Tenormin for coronary artery disease
15 right in the class period.
17 after spending a lot of time with Farber on
18 whether or not he was treated for COPD, why didn't
19 they ask the heart doctor: Was he treated for
20 heart disease with Tenormin? Didn't hear a word
21 about that, right?
Limited coronary artery disease. Prior
23 cardiac testing, right? They have to adjust the
24 Tenormin because he's got bradycardia, slow heart
25 rate.
And when they brought the heart doctor The Tenormin can affect it. They can
It's not the fingernail doctor, the
Dr. Soloway who had worked with the guy,
2 adjust the Tenormin for the heart disease. Right
3 there, smoking cigarettes is a substantial
4 contributing cause of his heart disease.
That's testimony from Dr. Soloway who
6 treats the whole man, who knows about lungs, who
7 knows about hearts, who has to be able to do
8 surgery on urological patients.
10 toenail doctor, the earlobe doctor. Doctors treat
11 patients, they consult, they work together.
13 a colleague like Benedetto at the University of
14 Miami.
16 common denominator he has in his history?
17 Cigarette smoking. Boom. To me that's critically
18 important. Each individual disease corroborates
19 the other. We talked about that.
Oh, that's a lot. We may not do too
21 much about that, but it's a way of -- we'll do
22 this in rebuttal, talking about he wasn't a
23 resident. If he was a resident, he wasn't
24 addicted. If he was addicted, he still should
25 have chosen to quit. Even if he was addicted and
So what was the unitary explanation, the Smoking didn't cause his bladder cancer.
His heart disease didn't manifest before
1 it caused his disease, the defendants are zero
2 percent at fault. Even if he was addicted and it
3 led to the diseases, he was a hundred percent at
4 fault.
6 His bladder cancer was caused by being a janitor
7 that couldn't hear well.
Bob doesn't have COPD. Smoking didn't
9 cause his CAD. Bob's CAD was caused by something
10 else. A, B, Cs, anything but cigarettes. That's
11 the defense.
13 November 21, '96. He had his heart surgery in
14 2003. And even if he had a disease, all our fraud
15 and concealment, all that advertising, all that
16 filter reassurance, that didn't influence Bob.
So, you know, we'll talk about that in
18 rebuttal. I'll tell you the goat story, if I can
19 remember to, in rebuttal.
21 factors other than smoking. The most important
22 type of story is one that casts doubt on the cause
23 and effect theory of the disease of smoking.
25 misdirection. Let's look at anything but tobacco,
Anything but cigarettes, some factor or
So he talks about distraction or All right. He smoked all the cigarette
1 ignore the cigarette causes. Dr. Proctor
2 testified about that.
Lucky Strike, all these things. Even
4 the name of the pack, Lucky, it's not Lucky, it
5 wasn't Lucky for Bob to smoke those cigarettes.
6 Even the name of the pack suggests something good,
7 it's going to be Lucky.
9 brands of the -- of all three -- of all three
10 defendants who are here, and some of have them
11 bought each other out, but they're all responsible
12 for the prior companies. And it's explained as a
13 cumulative effect. The addiction substantially
14 contributed to his bladder cancer and each
15 cigarette contributes. Dr. Bernsley explained it.
Every cigarette causes damages. All
17 three of these witnesses explained it. It's a
18 cumulative effect. Each cigarette -- the
19 addiction is cigarette to cigarette. The damage
20 is cigarette to cigarette.
And Dr. Soloway said it elegantly --
22 doctors, you know, physicians, when they write
23 reports and they comment on each other, they'll
24 use words like "an elegant study," you know,
25 "elegant analysis." sometimes a man of stature like
2 Dr. Soloway, he really, in a word, can sort of put
3 the patina of it that we lawyers, voluble and
4 verbose, don't necessarily -- they say brevity is
5 the soul of wit.
There's nothing brief about this, and I
7 know that, but Dr. Soloway said: Simply speaking,
8 sir, the more one smokes, the more likely they are
9 to have the altered effect, the DNA damage. It's
10 that simple. It's not complicated.
It's an elegant statement by a man
12 eminently qualified to make that statement.
14 it a legal cause? You already know the answer
15 that we hope -- our side of the story is the most
16 credible.
It's met with the preponderance of
18 evidence, and you'll check off that all three
19 indeed were caused, contributed to be caused
20 substantially by cigarettes. That's on the
21 verdict form.
And then of course they all happened in
23 the critical time period, between '90 and '96, and
24 while he qualified as a resident, even if part
25 time, but a resident, nonetheless, of Florida. He
So was he addicted to cigarettes? Was So -- and of course the cigarettes all
And what Dr. Proctor says is this middle
1 was a resident and citizen of Florida, all
2 residents and citizens.
4 contributed. Even though he smoked a lot more
5 than others, the fact is, is they all
6 substantially contribute so there's multiple
7 questions, but we hope you will check yes on all
8 those boxes because you will find objectively the
9 evidence supports doing so.
11 quote, because some of the other stuff I've
12 already hit you with: Millions of people started
13 quitting in the '50s, but millions of those who
14 did not quit shifted over to filters believing
15 they would be safer, which unfortunately they were
16 not.
18 Bob fell.
We talked about complicit or unwilling.
20 The Surgeon General was unwitting. That should be
21 unwitting. I apologize.
23 lawyers that ran that conspiracy inside the halls
24 of these tobacco companies, they were complicit,
25 and the Surgeon General was unwitting, unwitting.
So that is exactly the trap into which
And the doctors, the scientists, the So we talked about the third-party
And it would look like the scientist was
And then I put this up real quick. It's
2 strategy, using -- the industry would get other
3 folks to do their dirty work for them.
5 disputing that it caused harm when really they
6 were being paid as shields.
Dr. Proctor talked about that. Those
8 three entities were all part of that conspiracy.
9 They were the lobbying arm, the defensive front,
10 the holding strategy, you know, the best insurance
11 tobacco could buy to defend their position.
13 an old painting, and there's an old story about
14 the monkey and the cat's paw, and I learned this
15 from my dad, those who -- pulling your chestnuts
16 out of the fire.
So the cat in this case is the Surgeon
18 General, and the monkey is the tobacco industry
19 that uses the paw of the Surgeon General to pull
20 the chestnuts out of the fire so the cat's paw
21 gets burned, not the monkey, the idea that an
22 unwitting accomplice, a third-party -- the
23 third-party strategy: Use someone else to do your
24 dirty work.
That's the point of this whole painting. He talked about leakage, how sometimes
1 It's an old story. It's been around forever.
2 There's wood cuts going back to the 15th, 16th
3 century on it.
We talked about how they celebrated it,
5 brilliantly conceived, but it was always a holding
6 strategy, creating doubt about the health charge
7 without actually denying it. These conspiratory
8 groups were set up as an industry shield and a
9 front.
11 the truth slipped out of all the faults of all the
12 research they were paying for, but when there was
13 something where some harm was found by smoking,
14 the industry that was supposedly searching for the
15 truth would just cut off their funding.
17 figure out a way to block that nicotine we'd be
18 digging our own grave. All right. Half a million
19 people a year graves being dug, but the tobacco
20 industry humanizing themselves is worried about
21 their own grave, even though they're not alive,
22 they don't have a heartbeat.
24 contracts, the right to control publications which
25 could be detrimental to industry, carefully
And they talked about if somebody could
Okay. So the CTR should work with Lies cost lives. That is the simp- --
1 planned not to be able to harm the industry, avoid
2 any subjects to relate human disease to smoking.
This is all in evidence, folks. These
4 documents are all in evidence. You saw some of
5 them, but it's important to remind you because we
6 talked so much about other things. I want to
7 remind you.
9 hopefully the elegant way, the simple way to state
10 why it matters if you concealed the truth from
11 people who have a right to know the truth and not
12 to have it concealed.
And if you give them alternatives like
14 filters and things like that to confuse them and
15 give them doubt, lying hurts people. It does cost
16 lives. It has a real effect. It connects up to
17 Bob. It connects up to the country.
19 this is an internal document from the '60s: Our
20 basic position in the cigarette controversy,
21 right, the manufactured controversy, is subject to
22 the charge and may be subject to the finding that
23 we are making false or misleading statements to
24 promote the sale of cigarettes.
And what did they say: Our basic --
Right, what are they saying? I'm not Kids don't know. And this is in the
1 going to repeat that. But, again, the FTC report,
2 notice of what was going on in the '60s about kids
3 being lured into the habit, and once they stop,
4 they may never be able to start [sic].
6 '60s. Kids don't know. This would be an
7 acceptable, socially desirable activity, and it's
8 never brought home to them in a meaningful way
9 when teenagers take up the smoking habit, even in
10 the '60s.
12 product. Cast doubt. The key word is
13 "confusion," and what did Harvey say about his
14 dad?
16 Okay. We'll put filters on the cigarettes and now
17 they're okay for you, and the Surgeon General was
18 saying cigarette smoking was bad. It was very
19 confusing having to decipher what to do. When you
20 had these conversations with your dad about it
21 with filters, what would he say? Harvey detected
22 his father was confused. He was the perfect
23 customer. He did everything they wanted him to
24 do. They wanted him as a customer. They didn't
25 want to him to quit. They gave him the filter to
Confusion was key. Doubt is our
The tobacco companies were saying: Psychological crutch, illusion of
Now we know, filters -- now we know, the
1 keep him smoking and that helped do it.
3 filtration, if there's anything bad, we'll remove
4 it. It's a gimmick all along. Like a seat belt
5 made of spaghetti, it's not going to do a darn
6 thing.
8 new science is filters make cigarettes more
9 deadly, more dangerous with deeper inhalation,
10 deeper cancers, adenocarcinomas, deep in the
11 little alveoli of the lung as opposed to the old
12 squamous cell carcinomas. They've changed the
13 kind of cancer to a worse kind of cancer because
14 of a marketing tool; it created the illusion.
16 documents say? From Philip Morris, the filter
17 tips purely a merchandising and sales proposition,
18 making use of therapeutic claims.
20 merchandising and sales proposition.
22 said: The statements were reassuring. I wanted
23 to smoke. They said it was okay. I was
24 ambivalent about the whole thing way back. I
25 didn't know what to believe. I didn't know to
And what did their own internal
Internal documents admitting purely a
So the essence of the case is what Bob Who did you believe?
Myself. It wasn't a belief. It was a
1 believe them or not.
4 hope, a psychological crutch, that it was. I
5 hoped it was true, but it proved it was different.
What is that song by -- The Boxer?
MR. HAMMER: Simon & Garfunkel.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Simon & Garfunkel,
9 right? A man hears what he wants to hear and
10 disregards the rest, right?
It's -- it's the nature of man. If you
12 give him a reassurance of something, if you dilute
13 the message of harm.
15 you're giving the addict a place in which he can
16 live within himself in that world of denial, in
17 that hope that maybe it won't we bad for him. In
18 that hope that that filter will help.
And Seidman explained it --
MR. GDANSKI: That's from Bob.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Oh, that's from Bob?
MR. GDANSKI: Yeah. You already did
23 Dr. Seidman's testimony.
25 deposition: There was doubt in my mind. The
And he's an addict, by the way, that
MR. SCHLESINGER: This was from Bob's That's what complicated the situation
And Dr. Henningfield said folks were
1 tobacco companies kept on telling me the magic
2 filters. Filters would take this out of
3 cigarettes. They convinced me that I could be all
4 right to smoke if I had filtered cigarettes.
That was the publicity from the tobacco
6 companies themselves. That's why they put filters
7 on the cigarettes because they could take a lot of
8 the harmful ingredients and so forth.
10 more. That's what made it harder to quit.
12 uninformed because they didn't get the information
13 in the '60s, '70s, and '80s. That was from the
14 videotape.
16 be afraid to admit that you might have made a
17 different choice had you understood then what you
18 know now. That's 2003.
20 pamphlet existed and the whole world knew and Bob
21 knew and everybody knew, and they made good on
22 their promise to stop making them or do something
23 different to make them safer, not let them be
24 addictive, not them let be inhalable, make it more
25 like a pipe or a mouth puffing cigar or something,
And what does Philip Morris say: Don't
Now imagine 50 years earlier if this Bob would have made a different choice
So then on the verdict form, when it
1 that is what we contend is applicable to Bob.
3 had he have known what he should have known.
And this is how you teach your kids.
5 The idea being -- if you're telling your kids:
6 Don't smoke, and you're a smoker, that's from this
7 pamphlet, it's in evidence, you can look at it.
How can do you tell your kids not to
9 smoke if you're a smoker? Don't be afraid to
10 admit basically that you're addicted and you might
11 have made a different choice if you understood
12 now -- if you understood then what you understand
13 now.
15 your honesty. That applies to Bob.
17 think I did this. Doctor -- didn't I already do
18 this?
20 comes to these intentional torts: Was there fraud
21 an effect on Bob? And we suggest you answer the
22 question yes.
24 suggest you answer the question yes.
I'll come back to that. But, again -- I
Your child will respect your dishon- --
Was the fraud an effect on Bob? We
Did it influence him, whether there was similarly that they all conspired
1 reliance? Remember reliance goes both ways.
2 Reliance worked great. They had to rely on the
3 reliance of their customers or they wouldn't have
4 kept selling these cigarettes.
They had to rely on the misunderstanding
6 of addiction, on holding out hope and beliefs that
7 filters wouldn't hurt you. So we hope you answer
8 these questions yes. We think the evidence
9 suggests that you should.
11 together, the same thing. It was -- they -- they
12 expected folks to rely --
THE COURT: Counselor, you're at an
14 hour. Did you want to reserve the rest of the
15 time or --
17 minutes, Judge. I'll take off the back.
19 conspiracy, was it reasonable for Bob, just like
20 so many like him? Sure, it was.
22 questions. Hopefully you'll answer them yes.
24 I had a verdict form. Do you know where the
25 verdict form is? I have it.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I'll go for a few more
In any event, in furtherance of the
So these are the intentional tort
Talking about choice, intent, control -- Talking about intent, choice, and
The messages, the marketing, how they
And every step along the way, they were
2 control, the defendants had control over
3 everything, everything.
5 manufactured the cigarette, the way they
6 manipulate the nicotine, how they market to kids.
7 So talking about control, they had a lot of
8 control.
10 aware they had great opportunities to tell the
11 truth, and they chose not to tell the truth in
12 places along the way that would have impacted
13 folks like Bob. All these different places along
14 the way.
They controlled the business choices and
16 what were their motivations? Profits. Now that's
17 a warning.
19 anybody going to get up on that? Why? That
20 rattlesnake tail, when it rattles it's: Don't
21 come here. I'm going to bite you with a
22 poisonous, venomous poison.
That's fear. That's -- that stokes
24 avoidance, right, if you really want to make a
25 message. We talked about, I think with
Is anybody going to get near that? Is It used to be smoke made people run from
1 Dr. Seidman, talking about what makes a person
2 afraid.
4 it because it could be danger. Now smoke was
5 inhaled in the lungs, an illusion of safety, an
6 addiction that folks didn't know about for years.
That is something to be afraid of. Is
8 that really how cigarettes were portrayed in the
9 '40s, '50s, or '60s to Bob? Is that really how?
10 No.
And here are the warnings, the only
12 warnings there ever were, and I'm not going to
13 fall into the trap.
15 "warning" when it says "caution." That's all it
16 says is "caution."
18 the first time that that ever sat on a pack of
19 cigarettes. Thirty-four years before they were
20 forced to put that on the pack of cigarettes, 38
21 years.
Fifty-three years, 1985, hasn't been
23 changed since. Thirty years later, those are
24 still the warnings. All right?
So Bob had been smoking for 34 years by
They've trained me to use this word
What do you think? what do we have on notice in the
Do you want to play that? No, I don't
If a kid is getting ready to go off of a
2 '60s of the efficacy of the warnings and the
3 Federal Trade Commission? There's virtually no
4 evidence that the warning statement on cigarettes
5 has had any significant effect.
7 want to play it. I don't want to play it.
9 diving board into an empty pool and there's a no
10 diving sign there and you see him going past the
11 no diving sign and you're like: Okay. Okay. Go
12 ahead. Go ahead. You've been warned.
14 to stop him: Hey, kid! And you run after him and
15 try to grab him. Think about efficacy warnings
16 for Bob who smoked for 34 years before a caution
17 saying it may be hazardous to your health or it
18 may not have been.
20 And they should have quit lying. Bob should have
21 quit smoking. Okay. They should have quit lying.
No evidence the warnings had any
23 significant effect. The warning is easy to
24 explain. It never changes. Nobody pays any
25 attention to it.
Or do you do everything you can to try
Bob should have quit smoking. Yeah. This is the FTC: The warning has no
And take a look there, the top left-hand
We talked about truth in advertising.
They spent more in a day than the public
2 effect. And that's after 1966 when it was a
3 caution that said: It may be hazardous.
6 health authority spent in a year. That's the
7 social solvent I talked about, diluting the
8 message.
10 corner, see what it says with Bob: More doctors
11 smoke Camels than any other cigarette.
13 remember that ad with the three doctors?
15 next Tuesday.
18 images, you know. That has a powerful influence.
We'll skip him. We'll come back to him.
Skip that.
So let me get the Elmo and I'll put this
22 up.
24 you see it our way and you get past a lot of those
25 first preliminary questions and things like that
Skip that.
Marlboro Country, those are some nice
Three doctors. Remember he said: I
Ninety-five next Tuesday. Ninety-five
Here is -- when you get past the -- if However, we are willing, for purposes of
1 and you get to percentages of fault, all right.
In my -- in my argument to you, I say
3 the evidence would support a percentage as low as
4 you want to go to zero and make him a complete
5 innocent.
7 this question, to accept our fair share of the
8 blame if you think he should have tried harder and
9 he heard and he knew and he should have stopped
10 sooner or he should have overcome the addiction
11 before there was such things as nicotine gum or
12 therapy like Dr. Daniel Seidman offered, but still
13 Reynolds should get 35 percent, Philip Morris
14 should get 20 percent. If you want to give Bob
15 Shulman 10 percent, you can do it.
19 Did I get it right?
22 down. So I wouldn't have to worry about it.
Anyway, take a look. That's how we
24 suggest you fill it out. But here's the good
25 news. This is your burden. We're going to be on
Not only can you do that --
MR. GDANSKI: You misspoke.
MR. SCHLESINGER: 35, 35, 20, 10, no?
MR. GDANSKI: You got it right.
MR. SCHLESINGER: That's why I wrote it There is about $400,000 worth of medical
1 your time. You can fill it out any way you want.
You can adjust those numbers any which
3 way you want and put more or less, however you
4 want. And it will be your decision, right?
But because of the distribution of
6 smoking, this is how -- this is how we recommend
7 you cover it.
Now this is what we recommend for
9 damages, pain and suffering, $8 million and
10 450,000 for past medicals and future medicals.
12 bills in evidence. I'm pretty sure the bulk of
13 those are related to the diseases he got from
14 smoking. You'll see from evidence --
16 Objection, Your Honor. Misstating what's in
17 evidence per our discussions this morning about
18 past medical bills.
20 don't want to choke on a gnat, Judge. Can I just
21 move on? I won't talk about that anymore.
THE COURT: All right. I'll just
23 sustain the objection and strike that from the
24 record. The jury should disregard the it.
MR. BRENNER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: In any event -- I
Move on. SCHLESINGER: So it's past medical
It's restoration damages, and I played
2 bills, future medical bills. You'll have, I
3 think, medical bills in evidence. You make that
4 decision.
But how do I get to 8 million. It's a
6 big number. Right? A lot of money. He's an old
7 man. How do you get to that number? It's -- it's
8 restoration damages, compensation damages.
10 with it in my head and I figured that --
12 opinion, Your Honor.
14 disregard the personal opinion of counsel.
17 record.
19 pain and suffering damages, compensation,
20 restoration damages, as trying to make up for the
21 harm, to make up for the loss.
23 newspaper for a job and the job was to suffer from
24 heart disease and to have to change an appliance
25 and a bag with a reconstructed human nonbladder
MR. SCHLESINGER: Yes. So --
THE COURT: It's stricken from the
MR. SCHLESINGER: You can think about
MR. FURR: Objection as to Counsel's
THE COURT: Okay. Sustained. Please
If there was an advertisement in a FURR: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. BRENNER: That's a golden rule.
MR. FURR: That's a golden rule
1 out of your intestines and never urinate again,
2 never have sex again and -- okay. He's 75. They
3 sell a lot of Viagra, so there's always hope and
4 even at 75 you took away his manhood, that means
5 something.
It's a significant, serious injury, but
7 if somebody advertised for that job, to have that
8 job, right, and they would pay 50 bucks an hour,
9 right, a thousand bucks a day, would anybody take
10 that job?
14 violation. I have a motion.
17 sidebar:)
19 asked the jurors to put themselves in the spot of
20 the plaintiff and asked how much money it would
21 take for them to be willing to undergo the
22 injuries that he's incurred.
That's a strict violation of the golden
24 rule. I move to strike it, and I'll have a motion
25 as soon as you rule.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Hold my time, please.
(The following discussion was held
MR. FURR: Your Honor, counsel just SCHLESINGER: I'm waiting for the
Golden rule, Judge, if I say: Would
2 judge to rule.
4 you, jurors, take that job? Would you jurors --
5 how much would you want for your injury?, that's
6 golden rule.
I know what golden rule is. I've been
8 giving closing arguments 30 years. That's not a
9 golden rule argument, not even close, not even
10 close.
And I've heard the tobacco defendants
12 try to create golden rule out of nongolden rule
13 many, many, many times.
15 exists in Florida is if you tell the jury: How
16 much would you want if it was you? How much would
17 be fair if it was you? How much would you want?
20 that job?
22 yes, sir. Of course.
24 as a juror, take that job?
It's not golden rule.
THE COURT: He said: Would anybody take
THE COURT: He didn't say: Would you,
MR. SCHLESINGER: Exactly. Perfect --
The only golden rule argument that
MR. FURR: But of course that's COURT: I am going to strike the
MR. SCHLESINGER: Right. It's
THE COURT: Well, I'm going to strike it
1 implicit. He's asking the jurors: Would you
2 accept that amount of money? Your Honor, it's
3 rhetoric.
5 reference to it, but I don't view it as a golden
6 rule violation because, if it was, he would have
7 to say "would you" as opposed to "would anybody."
8 "Anybody" is part of argument.
10 appropriate argument, so don't strike it, Judge,
11 because it --
13 just to be on the cautious side, but I don't --
16 a golden rule violation. Okay?
18 court:)
20 strike the reference to: Would anybody take that
21 job? That's stricken from the record, and the
22 jury should disregard it.
Thank you.
Please proceed.
MR. SCHLESINGER: A thousand dollars a
MR. SCHLESINGER: Yes, sir.
THE COURT: -- I don't think that it is
(The sidebar discussion was concluded
THE COURT: All right. I'm going to It also includes his future life
1 day, $50 an hour for that job that he was given by
2 the tobacco companies at the end result when
3 others became the replacement smokers for him is
4 about $365,000 a year, give or take $400,000 a
5 year for the 20 years, that's about $8 million.
7 expectancy. If you want to extend it out you can
8 go to $9 million.
I'm afraid to ask you for 10 or more,
10 but I've got to tell you, you're allowed to give
11 them as much as you want. You can give them 10,
12 you can give them 12 and a half, you can give them
13 15, you can give them a million bucks, you can
14 give them 500,000. It's not my final decision.
15 It's your final decision to decide how to measure
16 the harm and if you have seen the case our way,
17 tell Bob and his family through your verdict you
18 place great value on the magnitude of his loss.
And he had terrible depression. He was
20 clinically depressed, and what did Harvey say, he
21 sat in a chair for two years and didn't talk.
23 that was free, an aviator, flying in the air.
24 Right?
Is that clear enough? So this is a man
He was a flyer all his life, and now he So this was clinical depression,
However, if you think some of it, that's
1 was grounded, emotionally grounded, mentally
2 grounded as a man changed permanently, you know,
3 at a point in his life that he was still a
4 relatively young man.
Look at the gift of longevity he got but
6 for being marred by the ravages of smoking through
7 no fault of his own really.
9 the percentage.
11 medical. His son saw him and felt for him, and he
12 said he was a "macho" guy and the word afterwards
13 was "meek." He would sit in his chair, and it
14 changed from one extreme to the other.
16 saying this about his dad, right?
18 either -- are either trying to live up to their
19 dad's expectations or make up for their dad's
20 insufficiencies.
And we know what Harvey was doing as a
22 Delta Intercontinental 777 pilot for a lifetime.
23 We know what he was doing, living up to his dad's
24 expectations.
That's Harvey Shulman. That's Harvey
And you know they say that sons are
And what did -- let's talk about The height of embarrassment, what does
So this is why I say a substantial
1 humiliation, a man who has to be like a baby in
2 diapers. The diapers get wet, embarrassing,
3 happened all the time. That's why he doesn't go
4 out to restaurants.
6 he say: When it happens, you feel like you're two
7 inches tall.
9 verdict on the order of $8 million is a
10 reasonable -- fair and reasonable amount to
11 consider as compensation to him with the -- with
12 the -- with the fervent prayer and understanding
13 that it's to you and only to your decision to
14 determine this intangible element.
And you can adjust it in any direction
16 and we'll accept the verdict that you determine.
17 You know that these are substantial amounts of
18 money and it's a human decision-making process.
20 point where you expect it and you have to adapt to
21 it. The pain is a constant including right now,
22 but after all these years, I can't handle it.
24 living with it now it's been tough, extremely.
I even found in the record -- I want to
You're a pretty tough guy, used to be,
The pain never stops. It gets to a Because we talked about that with
I think he has the courage. I think
So I told you how much to put in there.
1 show you -- when they were considering cancer, a
2 reference where he talked about having the
3 courage.
5 Harvey, and this was -- I mean we talked about
6 this about Bob and that, I think, applies.
8 clinically he can tolerate it, talking about
9 whether he would undergo the chemo.
11 The additional money I recommended $450,000 for
12 future medicals.
14 doctor visits. He's got urology visits. He gets
15 irritation around the stoma. If any complications
16 occur, he could be hospitalized.
It's a small amount over and above this
18 amount. $450,000 is a round number to provide for
19 him in the future on medical matters related to
20 all the things that go along with his bladder
21 cancer. I think -- I think that's it.
I'll have another chance to address you
23 after the defense counsel has a chance to address
24 you, and I'll reflect on some of the things that
25 they propose, and I can't thank you enough for
He's got those appliances. He's got The only question on the verdict form is
If there's any evidence to discuss,
MR. GDANSKI: Scott.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Oh, yeah, we talked
1 your attention.
4 about that at the beginning. I started with that,
5 but now I'm showing you how to answer it. That's
6 Phase II. Bring it to the future in Phase II.
8 how much with regard to punitive damages, that's
9 the punishment, the fine, and we'll talk about
10 that.
12 sometimes it has to do with what's called
13 mitigation.
The defense is permitted to provide
15 evidence of mitigation of conduct, how have we
16 changed, how are we different, and that would be
17 Phase II evidence and we'll debate that point if
18 and when the time comes.
20 through all those questions, get to Question
21 Number 8 and find by clear and convincing
22 evidence. We'll talk about that.
There's no doubt about the doubt, and
24 there's no confusion about the illusion. You'll
25 see that it was -- I think, I hope that the
But to get us there, you've got to work Thanks, folks.


MR. SCHLESINGER: May it please the
So a lot of times with such a long trial
The plaintiff's last licks, last at bat.
3 Court, counsel again, ladies and gentlemen of the
4 jury, home stretch.
6 During all the other parts of the trial, the
7 defendants went last, like the opening statement.
8 Here, because we do have the burden of proof,
9 we're entitled to sort of mop up and rebut some of
10 what defense said and see if we -- this is our
11 last chance to talk.
13 and, you know, remember, the law is not going to
14 say it's someone's fault or not for how long the
15 trial took. I don't think the defense meant to
16 suggest that to you, and the -- we talked early
17 on. The trial took what it took. That's what it
18 was.
20 We looked at the transcript. You can look at your
21 notes. I know you took great notes, but he was on
22 the witness stand on direct for a total of seven
23 and a half hours, cross-examination was six hours.
So fair is fair. They told you a lot of
25 the evidence they put in they put in on
Things like Dr. Proctor took too long. This is how this case went. This system
Were that that were only true, then
1 cross-examination.
I only mention it because that's just
3 not the basis of making a decision about how the
4 case should come out.
6 is far too important, and I -- I -- I -- I hope
7 and know that you guys are totally dedicated as
8 jurors, and so it shouldn't be -- it shouldn't be
9 an issue.
Were they were only true, were they were
11 only true, that what this -- what this thing does
12 to human beings just magically goes away when you
13 stop using it.
15 millions of people that died years, tens of years,
16 twenties of years, millions of folks that died
17 despite quitting --
21 the record, Your Honor. There is no such
22 evidence --
25 smoking and quitting of other people, and I move
MR. FURR: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- would be alive.
MR. FURR: There's no such evidence in
MR. SCHLESINGER: There is evidence.
MR. FURR: -- as to the patterns of MR. FURR: There's no evidence in the
MR. SCHLESINGER: This -- this --
THE COURT: All right. Approach.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: Okay. The reference to the
13 quitting aspect of the argument is sustained for
14 the present time. The jury should disregard it.
16 Your Honor?
THE COURT: Yes.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I wish it were true
19 that when folks quit that meant time passes --
MR. FURR: Your Honor, I'm sorry. I
21 object to Counsel expressing personal opinions.
23 references.
25 to the lawyer putting -- you know, referencing
MR. SCHLESINGER: May I begin again,
THE COURT: Sustained. Please avoid "I"
The jury should disregard the reference It should be -- it's stricken from the
1 himself in the -- in his argument and giving his
2 opinion.
4 record, just like the last one, and you should
5 disregard it. Thank you.
Proceed.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Thank you.
Were they were only true in the science
9 and the evidence of what these products do to the
10 humanity that makes up just the United States, 20
11 million deaths, over half a million deaths a year,
12 were they were only true that quitting meant no
13 dying.
This is the cessation-of-use line. This
15 is the death-by-lung-cancer line. Dr. Teague, in
16 1953, the cancer doesn't show up for more than ten
17 years.
19 really what these were, they were just a temporary
20 problem and when folks smoked, there was no
21 meaningful consequence down the road and decades
22 later and people who quit didn't wonder in fear
23 when they had a cold or some breathing or
24 something that something had cropped up from
25 smoking. Wouldn't that be wonderful?
Wouldn't it be wonderful if that's It is a -- it is a testimony to the
But this is the most deadly artifact in
2 the history of human civilization. That's what
3 Dr. Proctor told you.
5 awesome ingenuity of man. That's what Dr. Dunn,
6 the "Nicholas Kid" -- the "Nicotine Kid" told you.
And it is a terrible scourge on this
8 nation, and if the harm to others, which is the
9 part of the punitive damage instruction that
10 Mr. Brenner didn't show you. You've got the
11 instructions. Look at them.
If it had nothing to do with this case,
13 then His Honor, who labored so mightily to decide
14 what was relevant and appropriate for you to see
15 in here, would not have let it into evidence and
16 yet he did and Dr. Teague said, ten years or more,
17 from quitting to death.
And we know there were 20 million
19 deaths, right, 20 million deaths since 1964.
20 Mr. Furr said there was 13 million quitters in
21 those first several years, right, and 60 million
22 people quit and nevertheless, 20 million died
23 because, as Dr. Soloway said, an unrebutted
24 expert -- where is their urologist, right? Where
25 is their urologist? I didn't need to bring a But when you talk about the scourge of
1 cardiologist or a pulmonologist because my records
2 say he had COPD, my records say he had coronary
3 artery disease, but they didn't bring a urologist,
4 right, they brought a punchline in Dr. McGregor,
5 and you can reject her and I'm going to show you
6 something she said.
8 these and it is the shame of these things like the
9 sunburn on the forehead, the genetic damage of our
10 cellular structures remains with us for life and
11 when you get the cancer, that's what it's from,
12 right?
I'll show you. I'm going to show you.
14 I'm going to go to this and play it. Okay? What
15 do we got? Are you ready? Okay.
They want to ask these questions, right?
17 This is what Mr. Furr started out with. What did
18 he know, when did he know it, and what did he do
19 with that information, talking about Bob --
20 talking about Robert Shulman, Mr. Shulman, my
21 client, right?
23 question to them. What about these questions:
24 What did they know? Right? When did they know
25 it? Right? And what did they do with that
Let's turn, look in the mirror, turn the I'll show you some filter ads that
Now Ms. Ruiz, who spoke last, you know,
1 information?
3 did a good job for her client, the limited role
4 she played, but she also said look at all these
5 things we said, but then they joined the
6 conspiracy. Why didn't they break the news in the
7 '50s? Why didn't they tell the world they joined
8 the conspiracy which was to conceal. Part of the
9 conspiracy was: We're not going to claim filters
10 are safer, we're just going to imply it.
12 show that, but this is how we look at this and
13 this is why this is a case, it's about Bob Shulman
14 and so much more. It's a bigger case than just
15 Bob or you wouldn't hear about the full effect of
16 smoking.
18 is right -- cut right out of their secret
19 documents. They are a manufacturer of doubt.
20 That's the business they're in.
22 That's what they do.
And so when you see this, it's the means
24 of establishing a controversy exists in the minds
25 of the general public. He was part of the mind of
This is the business they're in. This
They sell cigarettes. They sell doubt. Whoever would ever qualify? In other
1 the general public. He's one of them.
Advertising is meant to affect a broad
3 audience. The filter fraud was meant to affect a
4 broad audience.
6 words, every defense argument they made, couldn't
7 every single one of those be equivalently assigned
8 to anybody that ever came into any one of these
9 courtrooms and said: Hey, this is what happened.
I mean think about that. It's a -- it's
11 a one-size-fit-all defense. Talk about generic
12 Dr. Proctor. It's generic defense, right?
And Dr. Proctor is -- Dr. Proctor
14 doesn't talk about the individual smokers because
15 he's a historian of the broad conspiracy, the
16 fraud, the devastation. He wrote a thousand-page
17 book on it.
And there is no counternarrative. There
19 is no other story. We named all those books that
20 are part of telling the story for those who want
21 to know it of what happened in the world of the
22 Cigarette Century and the cigarette papers and the
23 question of intent and all those books that are
24 part of the knowledge base from which Dr. Proctor
25 now goes further. what do they say: If I have seen
And that's what Dr. Proctor did with the
And his book is as recent as 2012 and he
2 further, it is because I've stood on the shoulders
3 of giants.
5 base of knowledge since the late '90s when the
6 documents came out. He stands on the shoulder of
7 giants and he sees further.
9 was invited to the White House. He was there
10 because he was in the Surgeon General's report.
11 The major body of knowledge on these things.
Now if, in fact, his testimony is
13 generic, that he doesn't talk about the individual
14 smokers, can you imagine how much more time he
15 would have been spending discussing Bob Shulman.
16 Like it would have been three questions. Did this
17 all apply to Bob. Yeah. Boom, there would have
18 been thousands of additional pages of testimony.
Why is it, as he testified, they've
20 taken his deposition a hundred times? If he
21 doesn't talk about the smoker and it's generic and
22 he says the same thing every single time, then why
23 does the defense take his deposition over and over
24 and over and over again? Why do they do that?
25 Ask yourself that question. Nobody, nobody has done a better job of
He -- Dr. Proctor is a public health
2 manufacturing doubt. When you decide to render
3 punishment, it will be for the purposes of
4 deterring others.
What other corporations, what other
6 industries manufacture doubt or do things that
7 harm the public health?
9 advocate. He advocates against and for the
10 abolishment of cigarettes. Do you know why?
11 Because they should be abolished.
13 whatsoever to cigarettes. That's no longer an
14 excuse. They're nice, they're fun, they're
15 satisfying. No, they are machines -- they are
16 just machines of disease and suffering and pain.
And what do they say about Mr. Shulman
18 started smoking in defiance. I showed you this.
20 Their word. He started smoking in defiance. It
21 was frowned upon.
23 they didn't want you to do it. What are they
24 saying? He fit the model. They describe him
25 every which way in their papers. They sought to
In the 1930s, it was a dirty habit or
There is no discernible benefit
What did Dr. Teague say? To be defiant. -- and the other thing about this
You know what the condo commandos do,
The evidence supports in multiplicity of
1 get the kids to be defiant. It was a right of
2 passage for adulthood. This is their word.
4 Yvonne business, when did he quit. Look, I told
5 you, I think -- no, not what I think.
7 ways that Bob continued to smoke or relapsed and
8 smoked again into the '80s, even into the '90s.
9 There was plenty of examples of it. He even
10 testified about living down in Lighthouse Point,
11 Florida and getting hassled.
13 they hassle you because he was smoking downstairs
14 and a second floor neighbor started screaming at
15 him at the end -- in front of the condo when he
16 got fined. Remember he said: You can ask the
17 condo board.
19 busted out with that, 95 years old. They say he's
20 losing his memory. That document they pointed to
21 was recent memory. And sure, he's 95. None of us
22 are going to remember as well as we did when we
23 were 55 or 35, but he remembered that, and that
24 was -- that was a story that came right out of his
25 mouth unprompted. You know what? That had the
I mean, where does that come from? He He smoked. He was addicted. He was
1 ring of truth. It seemed to make sense. It's --
You can -- you can suggest that, but the
3 reason we stuck with the '70s for Dr. Soloway and
4 Dr. Bernsley was that's all, it was good enough.
5 It's not -- it's not the defining issue
6 whatsoever, not what -- not at all.
8 deceived. He got sick in a multiplicity of ways
9 from three similarly tobacco-caused diseases.
And they start playing games around it,
11 but the -- Yvonne's dad, that was the progenitor
12 of these discussions died in the mid '90s, and it
13 was around that time -- and Harvey said: My dad
14 smoked at my 50th birthday party. There's lots of
15 evidence of it, but I -- I mean, we do have
16 limited time.
18 take one second, a little personal aside.
20 night for the plaintiffs to get up and give
21 rebuttal, you bring a pitchfork. Okay?
23 many nights, you guys are sharp, and I'm like: I
24 can actually make a rebuttal argument and they're
25 not going to kill me, because you guys are trained
Normally, you guys come in at 6:00 at
But here's one neat thing, I'll just
But because we worked so late for so But the bailiff tells me pizza is
1 now to pay attention late.
And it's like that's the exercise or
3 practice, so fortunately, I'm -- I'm able to do
4 this, and it just -- it makes me feel good because
5 I -- I know what it's like.
And we've all done it, to give that
7 late-night rebuttal to the crowd of folks that
8 hasn't -- hasn't been here late. But you have,
9 and so you're hopefully bright-eyed and
10 bushy-tailed.
12 coming, and that's about how long I've got because
13 when you start smelling that pizza, I better move
14 on. So I'll try to get through this.
In any event, there's some evidence,
16 and, you know, this is from the book as well,
17 Dr. -- my Dr. Dan -- I'm going to call him
18 Dr. Dan.
He just wants to help people. He tells
20 people in the current time: Yeah, you can do it.
21 That cigarette doesn't have any magic power over
22 you. Come on, man. You can do it.
24 You have to give addicts a red hot, nonstop,
25 clear, concise message that isn't confusing. If
What else are you going to tell them? The one thing he wasn't control of was
Dr. Seidman, another quote from his book
This was a man of safety. He controlled
1 you give addicts an alternative, psychological
2 crutch, they're going to be going to there belief
3 system. A man hears what he wants to hear and
4 disregards the rest.
6 everything in his live. She checked those
7 ailerons. He checked the -- the gauges. He
8 checked the fuel, the oil. He was a -- he was a
9 safety-conscious man, and he was in control.
11 smoking, and he didn't like it. It was
12 embittering to him. But he tried. He certainly
13 did try. He gave it his all.
15 is: It's a monster. There are many ways this
16 monster will grab ahold of you, and you've got to
17 learn how to outsmart it. How do you stay --
18 because he's trying to teach folks how to quit.
20 sound byte out of whole -- you know, the -- look,
21 this was a long swindle by tobacco. Right? It's
22 hard to tell in a sound byte.
That's why it's taken us so long. It's
24 a history that goes back 50 years, but this is the
25 kind of thing he says.
You know, you can't take one -- one While willpower plays a role in
Let's look at this problem in another
Let's play that, please.
(Video clip played as follows:)
MR. SEIDMAN: For many, willpower means
4 being stronger than the cigarette. They
5 experience quitting as a boxing match between
6 smoking and not smoking.
8 self-control, success in quitting is not simply
9 about being a weak or a strong person.
After all, many strong, disciplined
11 people have been defeated in their efforts to
12 quit. Yul Brynner, John Wayne tried to quit many
13 times. So quitting can't just be about being
14 strong or trying harder.
16 way. Can you imagine telling someone who doesn't
17 know how to swim to just jump in the water and be
18 strong or try harder, or someone who doesn't play
19 the piano or read music to just be strong and
20 perform what, to them, are incomprehensible notes
21 on a page?
How you approach the problem of quitting
23 smoking makes all the difference. If you rely on
24 willpower alone, you may end up feeling even more
25 powerless than when you started. The harder you try to bide time by
The overall reliance on willpower and
2 stalling and delaying taking a smoke, the more you
3 start to feel like a stripped gear that can't get
4 traction.
6 being strong can actually backfire. Many smokers
7 who use ineffective methods to quit eventually
8 give up.
They may avoid any talk of quitting and
10 take on a bunker mentality. Many suffer a loss of
11 confidence, begin to feel helpless, and start to
12 believe they are just not strong enough to quit.
14 one of the greatest obstacles to trying new
15 approaches to quit successfully.
(Video clip concluded.)
That's the cutting edge in 2010, and he
18 said it described Bob Shulman to a tee.
20 there are -- there are different kinds of people
21 in the world of statistics, right?
23 splitters, and I think you've seen in this case
24 that the defense has been the splitters.
Strangely enough, this myth then becomes
One of the things they tried to do with
So, you know, what did -- you know,
We call them the lumpers and the 1 my 94-year-old client, God bless him, he's going
2 to be 95 years old next Tuesday, married on --
3 going into his 75th year -- year of marriage, was
4 talking about what his wife knew or didn't know.
5 And remember, they took their depositions in 2014.
And what -- what Bob told you was: You
7 know, she has Alzheimer's. Okay. And so that was
8 a poignant and touching moment because she got up
9 and she cooked breakfast for him, and then that is
10 part of the reason why we didn't put her on the
11 stand a long, long time to talk because she's got
12 Alzheimer's. You know, they're gone before
13 they're gone. It just --
21 choked up because of this morning.
24 years old, and she has Alzheimer's. And she got
25 up and made a breakfast for me.
So -- and then what --
MR. HAMMER: Do you want to play it?
MR. SCHLESINGER: What?
MR. HAMMER: Play it?
MR. SCHLESINGER: Sure, play it.
(Video clip played as follows:)
A. I'm sorry that I'm choked up, but I'm
Q. Why is that?
A. I got up to come here -- and she's 93 He's not hurdling. Right? The law
They'd like every percentage point of
(Video clip concluded.)
Now something else we heard about with
3 the splitters and the hurdles, Mr. Furr's hurdles.
4 Really, the hurdles?
You got the -- you got the -- you got
6 the law. He's not going to be -- he's not doing
7 hurdles. His hurdling days are over. I'm 56. My
8 hurdling days are over.
10 doesn't say anything about hurdles. They'd like
11 them to be hurdles.
13 fault that you assign to them to be another
14 hurdle.
16 hurdles each for Reynolds and 35 hurdles for --
17 and every dollar should be another hurdle, an
18 endless series of hurdles for a 95-year-old man.
That's not fair. That's not what the
20 jury instructions say. That's not what the
21 verdict form says.
You've got it. You'll read it. You've
23 got the evidence. But putting hurdles in front of
24 him, no, that's not what -- that's not the law.
That would be -- that would be 35
So let's play this. (Video clip played as follows:)
Q. You do not have any evidence that RJ
A. That's right. They knew the truth.
(Video clip concluded.)
You see, they didn't -- they didn't --
3 Reynolds has ever had any information establishing
4 that smoking causes bladder cancer that was not
5 already known to the public health community,
6 correct?
8 They knew that it did cause bladder cancer, and
9 they concealed that.
12 they didn't -- they didn't show that to you.
And the bladder cancer line that didn't
14 go up that Dr. Proctor testified about -- I have
15 the clip.
17 going to say it. If I have time, I'll come back
18 and play it.
20 explained that's because they came up with cures
21 for bladder cancer.
23 transurethral resection that they tried on Bob, to
24 scrape the inside of the bladder and take the
25 cancer out.
The bladder cancer line, Dr. Proctor
I'm not going to play it. I'm just
There is that TURP procedure, the But they couldn't do it because the
Thank God they got it, but they had
2 cancer was invasive into his muscle wall because
3 he was sick with cancer that was invading to the
4 point where it was a T2 lesion. That's in the
5 records.
That's right on the verge -- they didn't
7 have lymph nodes -- of spreading out of body where
8 it would kill you.
10 not -- he couldn't get away with the scraping. He
11 had to have his whole bladder and his prostate
12 removed. That's a big surgery.
14 cured most bladder cancers when they're caught in
15 time, right, even with a much less severe
16 procedure than he went through.
18 board. This is lung cancer deaths. This is
19 not -- and lung cancer is -- lung cancer -- and
20 Dr. Proctor testified to this, lung cancer is a
21 death sentence. In many, many, many, it's 90
22 percent lethal.
24 cancer, and that's why he's here 20 years later.
25 So you have to understand that Dr. Proctor
The point being that modern medicine
So, therefore, this board is a death
It's not the same disease as bladder Do you want to play it? We'll play it.
A. That's right, yeah, because bladder
Q. Sir, in fact, based upon your review of
1 explained that.
3 Baron says I've got to play it. Play it.
(Video clip played as follows:)
6 the historical record, isn't it true that the
7 age-adjusted bladder cancer mortality rate in the
8 United States did not go up substantially between
9 1950 and 1977, right?
11 cancer becomes more and more curable, unlike lung
12 cancer where, essentially, every diagnosis ends in
13 death. That's one of the reasons you have to be
14 careful about whether you're talking about
15 mortality or morbidity, which are quite
16 different.
(Video clip concluded.)
So this is a little more of the whole
19 story. We've been doing point, counterpoint in
20 front for weeks in front of y'all. We could do
21 this for another week or two.
23 notes. You -- some of y'all were diligent
24 notetakers, and it helps refresh recollections and
25 put things in perspective.
But that's why you all have got your Hired scientists, misled the Surgeon
Knew that half of smokers would die.
You know, what was concealed from Bob?
2 What was he entitled to rely that they wouldn't
3 conceal [sic]? All these things. We talked about
4 them before, but, you know, all these things.
5 They purposely misled the public on all these
6 things.
8 General, sneered and belittled the public health
9 authorities, studied nicotine and knew it was
10 highly addictive, targeted children. 90 percent
11 start as teenagers.
13 Knew that smoking cigarettes was killing hundreds
14 of thousands of Americans a year, and manipulating
15 the levels of nicotine. 70 cancer-causing agents,
16 arsenic, cyanide, radioactive polonium.
And there was a toxic exposure, and I
18 think it came from Dr. McGregor. We're going to
19 talk about her too.
21 were giving up an illusion of filtration. They
22 were purposely misleading the public on the safety
23 of filters.
Where do you think those Engle findings
25 came from? From no evidence? They just magically
Filtered cigarettes no safer. And they Let's play this, please.
(Video clip played as follows:)
Q. Does advertising play a role in a
A. We hope so. When we advertise, we do
1 appeared out of the air? There was a jury trial.
2 That was approved by the United States Supreme
3 Court, the Florida Supreme Court.
These are -- these are -- these are --
5 this is a -- it's a beautiful legacy that you-all
6 have at your disposal. Take them out. Look at
7 them. Embrace them. Read them. Study them and
8 understand them in the context of why we are here.
9 They are why we are here.
13 person's selection of a cigarette?
15 make the effort, and I think it's fair to assume
16 that the expenditure of large funds for
17 advertising does give status to a brand.
Q. Throughout your tenure with American, it
19 was not only American's position but your position
20 that cigarettes weren't injurious to health; is
21 that accurate?
A. Through my tenure?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes, that is so.
Q. That's something American Tobacco wanted Q. As far as you're concerned, a person is
A. Yes.
Q. Okay.
(Video clip concluded.)
So -- so he says: Advertising matters.
A. Yes.
Q. It's a statement that American Tobacco
A. We issued that statement, yes.
Q. And as far as --
A. Of course we wanted them to believe
1 the public to believe; is that correct?
4 placed great reliance on?
8 it.
10 justified in relying on that statement?
15 We expect folks to rely on advertising.
Of course they did, and they showed you
17 the -- a couple of ads. There's a whole composite
18 exhibit of ads. You can get them all day long.
19 You can get them on eBay. That's why I have those
20 magazines.
22 the glamorous cigarettes, but they also show a lot
23 of advertisements for cigarettes, multiple pages
24 of advertisements for cigarettes.
These magazines, not only do they show
Pretty much any one you pick up, right, 1 there's a cigarette advertisement, right? Any one
2 you pick up, there's a cigarette advertisement on
3 the back, and several throughout.And this was the
4 world that Bob grew up and lived in. It's toasted
5 and all this -- all this stuff.
And so, look at this. This is all about
7 filters. Look at this one here. More scientists
8 and educators smoke Kent with the Micronite
9 filter. Right? 20,000 filter traps.
You know, they -- they -- they agreed
11 never to say it's safer explicitly, except right
12 at the beginning of Kent a little bit, but they
13 certainly implied it. You know, the new improved
14 filter, and then they would say it's the filter
15 taste.
What? The filter taste? They did use
17 titanium dioxide to make the filters white, and
18 the filters would burn brown when you sucked that
19 thing out of it, and you'd say, yeah, something's
20 coming out of there. But it was all about
21 filters. It makes good sense to smoke Kent. Kent
22 filter is the bests. There's millions of these.
23 Millions of them.
And here's what the 1981 FTC report put
25 out as notice to everybody. It talks about -- and That begs the question: What chance did
Talk about honest science and the kind
A valley of snow holds a log farmhouse
1 Jon did this with Dr. Proctor long ago. He talks
2 about the imagery and the -- the words tell it
3 all.
5 under a blanket of white. Smoke rises in the
6 still air from the chimney. A loan cowboy rides
7 his horse through untouched virgin snow, dragging
8 a Christmas tree by a rope. It's hard to imagine
9 a more evocative American image, even though the
10 white-boxed cancer warning in the right-hand
11 corner has stained the snow yellow.
The reflective pleasure of tobacco
13 pervades the ad. It unifies the desire for a
14 perfect Christmas with the experience of smoking.
15 The Surgeon General has no chance against this.
17 Robert Shulman have?
19 of things they said. This is from their own
20 internal documents. Okay?
Our medical and scientific witnesses
22 will say whatever we want them to. They lack
23 credibility and integrity.
This is their own admission.
Another admission that they're liars -- Now this is -- this is important. This
It creates a real confusing sort of
1 this is also in evidence -- where they say that
2 the funds were administered through the CTR.
3 Joint industry funds were used to purchase
4 favorable judicial or legislative testimony,
5 thereby perpetrating a fraud on the public.
7 is significant to take into consideration when
8 you're -- the enormity of the reprehensible
9 elements to this wrongdoing. It's a big
10 historical wrong, and you've seen a lot of it.
Okay. This is from Dr. McGregor. It
12 was an answer that came out late at night. It was
13 an important question and answer.
I wanted to reflect on it with you for a
15 minute because it does create -- and I'll see if I
16 can nail this in a way that makes sense.
18 issue, right, with the way in which McGregor came
19 off with her opinions that are just so
20 fundamentally flawed, right?
22 bladder cancer, but we don't know why. She said
23 that solvents have not been linked to bladder
24 cancer, right?
She said in there that janitors get more
So now they took Benedetto's notes about Now that's a very telling explanation of
Now think about that.
You know, it doesn't even matter because
1 solvents and they turned it into something about a
2 janitor, and the mere fact of being a janitor
3 that, we don't know why, but it's not from
4 solvents.
7 solvents have not been linked to show bladder
8 cancer, and they don't know why.
10 where she was coming from and how flawed her
11 analysis is. What is it? You know, come on, what
12 is it? Where is the science? She's not a bladder
13 cancer urologist.
She doesn't know anything about it. She
15 just came in here and said what she said. It's --
16 that's just -- that's just not credible.
18 business about solvents, solvents, solvents, and
19 she said: Solvents have not been shown to link to
20 bladder cancer.
22 Bernsley explained way back when, aniline dyes,
23 now banned, sometimes used by hairdressers,
24 contained beta naphthalene, and that's a potent
25 bladder cancer carcinogen.
That's just not accurate. All this
Our experts testified, Soloway. Cigarettes are full of beta naphthalene,
I'll come back to this.
Anything but cigarettes. Remember we
2 a potent bladder cancer carcinogen. They would
3 have you believe that the mere fact of being a
4 janitor for an unknown reason, that you should
5 accept that's a scientific connection that that
6 causes bladder cancer, and since he was a janitor,
7 he had bladder cancer because of that.
10 showed you the newspaper ad that that March birth
11 is linked to lung cancer.
They cite 28 reasons for doubting the
13 cigarette-cancer link. Occupational tie in lung
14 and gastric cancer. Half of the cancer, people
15 are nonsmokers.
17 talking about them putting out all those years.
And with Dr. Dan, the cardiologist, we
19 say right there based on the increased risk of
20 developing coronary artery 20 years after you quit
21 smoking, isn't it true Mr. Shulman's coronary
22 artery disease would be caused by smoking
23 cigarettes?
25 hypotheticals that smoking would have been a
This was that fraud that Dr. Proctor was
I would agree with this set of MR. SCHLESINGER: That was in evidence,
THE COURT: Okay. No comments. Come
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. SCHLESINGER: May I start again,
THE COURT: Yes. That's stricken from
MR. FURR: How about the heading also,
MR. SCHLESINGER: Can I just put this THE COURT: Again, the jury should
MR. FURR: No, same issue. Take it
MR. SCHLESINGER: Doctor, is it true --
1 up?
3 disregard what was up on the screen.
5 down.
THE COURT: You know what, we're not
7 using it. We're not using the demonstrative.
8 Move on. Okay. I've given you an opportunity.
9 Let's go.
11 if the research you've seen is true which
12 demonstrates -- this is testimony in the case.
14 demonstrates you have an increased risk of
15 developing coronary artery disease up to 20 years
16 after you've quit smoking, then, sir, isn't it
17 true that Mr. Shulman's coronary artery disease
18 would be caused by smoking cigarettes?
20 hypotheticals that cigarette smoking would have
21 been a contributing risk factor.
23 exclusion of other information, but you do see the
24 cover page of the big book that I handed you is
25 the 2014 Surgeon General's report?
ANSWER: I would agree with this set of
The research you've seen is true which
Yes, sir. Right. I didn't say the Yes, sir.
Is that right?
ANSWER: Yes.
Okay. It says: In comparison with
5 current -- I'm sorry. It says: In comparison
6 with never-smokers, former smokers had a relative
7 risk of coronary heart disease mortality of 1.9,
8 10 to 19 years after quitting among both men and
9 women.
Do you see that it says that there, sir?
ANSWER: Yes.
We cross-examined that time late at
13 night, and he agreed under that scenario Bob
14 Shulman had smoking as a cause of his cancer.
16 the record, testimony in the record.
19 Dr. McGregor described history? Remember how
20 Dr. McGregor said history is what you get from the
21 patient. She said that just the other night.
Remember how -- what a fuss we had to
23 have with Dr. Farber about: What does it mean
24 when the record says "history"? This is a couple
25 of months after. At the time of his bladder
Let's go put up my next slide, please.
Okay. All right. And then remember how
That's a concession from their expert in That's in September of '95. Two months
1 cancer, he was told by Dr. Davis that he had
2 addiction-caused COPD. Remember that? COPD
3 secondary to tobacco abuse.
5 later, he's with Dr. Rymer, right, and he has a
6 history of COPD in Rymer's notes when Rymer takes
7 his history. The history is, you ask the patient:
8 What do you got?
10 testimony, which said: Yeah, I got diagnosed with
11 COPD around the time I got diagnosed with bladder
12 cancer.
Doesn't it stand to reason that's how it
14 happens? When you get hit and you take those one,
15 two, three punches from cigarette smoking,
16 everything comes together.
18 this. What slide number is this?
VIDEO TECHNICIAN: 22.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Okay. So let's talk
21 about something.
Remember Dr. Farber finds a way -- I
23 told you about bouncing folks out of the class
24 depending on the dates and playing around with the
25 dates. So here's that record that talks about
And that's why we put on Bob Shulman's
So here is something. Let's talk about It isn't Bob's major medical problem.
MR. FURR: Objection. I take offense to
1 COPD secondary to cigarette abuse. That is a hook
2 that they cannot get off. It's a class membership
3 hook all by itself.
5 It isn't why we're asking for $8 million
6 plus/minus in your good judgment -- which, by the
7 way, what did they suggest would be fair? Is it
8 really -- are they that confident and cock sure
9 that you're just going to stiff-arm Bob Shulman
10 and negate everything --
12 that.
14 and walk out of here with --
16 personal attack on counsel.
18 disregard the last argument that counsel just
19 made. It's stricken from the record. Move on.
21 topic, but the point is: What did they suggest
22 would be fair? These are human elements of
23 damages. They're humans. They could have
24 suggested an amount. They didn't.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- we've proven to you
MR. FURR: Your Honor, I object to the
THE COURT: Sustained. The jury should
MR. SCHLESINGER: I was getting off
I tried to tell you based on this I said you can go up or down from
Imagine with Dr. Farber on the witness
It's not a medical bill that you add up.
1 thousand-dollar-a-day analogy I came up with,
2 that's a range.
4 that range as high or as low as you want because I
5 respect the function of the jury.
7 It's humanity. It's what humans do. Some folks
8 may think: These amounts are too high. Some may
9 think: It doesn't even begin to measure what
10 happened to a man like this.
That's up to you. There's six of you to
12 make this decision. So we respect your role, but
13 I want to just see one thing.
15 stand, every single thing else in this record,
16 which we accept and I continue to accept this
17 record because it still supports our position.
18 Everything else is the same. I'm going to change
19 one thing in this record, one thing in this
20 record.
22 pretend, assume hypothetically that September
23 20th, '85 is the only difference in this entire
24 chart. What does Dr. Farber say? Like Schlenther
25 and all those other cases: Oh, he had COPD. He's
Now what does Dr. Farber say? They can If you think that that's what Dr. Farber
Here's what they say. Why did they lie?
1 out. That's before the magic cutoff of May 5th,
2 1990.
4 would have done but for that one change in the
5 record, then you know what you can do with
6 Dr. Farber's testimony.
8 Lest some lawyer be looking over our shoulder, I
9 do not concede that even one person dies of a
10 chronic disease that is caused by smoking
11 cigarettes. Sauce for the goose is sauce for the
12 gander. That's all I'm saying.
We'll call that the Thanksgiving -- the
14 Thanksgiving document when you guys are trying to
15 remember that document, where they said in 1987 in
16 their internal secret documents from the
17 company -- Ernie Pepples, the company that
18 Mr. Furr's client bought: I do not concede that
19 one person dies of chronic disease that is caused
20 by smoking, lest some lawyer is looking over my
21 shoulder.
24 something about stupid, foolhardy, bad stuff that
25 we said that we did.
Okay. The Thanksgiving document.
And then Mr. Furr got up and said When it's a man who binds the
He can say what he wants to argue and
Well, remember what us lawyers are?
2 We're not witnesses. We're not evidence. Okay.
3 And when we have the guy who is a witness, a
4 corporate witness, he denies that there was ever
5 making up of misleading statements.
7 corporation, they deny to this day. Mr. Furr is
8 saying it in this courtroom that: I'm sorry for
9 what those guys said. I'm not here to defend
10 that. That's not evidence. That's not testimony.
12 try to persuade you, but his own corporate
13 representative, Dr. Figlar from RJR, who has
14 testified many times in these cases, and you saw
15 his testimony, he denies everything.
17 page of one of their documents was in the least
18 bit wrong-headed, stupid, bad, or anything like
19 that. That's the sworn testimony, his relentless
20 denial.
22 to say on the packs: I came. I saw. I
23 conquered. Not here in this courtroom.
Now where is the rest of it?
So talking about Mr. Brenner and saying:
That's what the -- that's what they used
He won't admit to one word on one single But here, right here, it says right
1 Oh, it doesn't have more kick. Dr. Proctor told
2 you the ammonia makes the cigarettes more
3 addictive. Too much ammonia makes them
4 uninhalable, unsmokeable, nasty. That's all that
5 Mr. Brenner showed you.
7 here: More instantaneous nicotine kick, more free
8 nicotine, and they correlate the sales, more
9 increased pH and nicotine kick from the ammonia
10 compounds.
12 free-base the nicotine. They make these -- the
13 hook as sharp as possible. They make these things
14 as -- as addictive as possible.
16 Extractable nicotine contributes to impact in the
17 cigarette smoke. Right? The soul of Marlboro,
18 remember the secret soul of Marlboro? Remember
19 the code word satisfaction for addiction?
21 They use a lot more ammonia than Bob Shulman's
22 janitorial company ever did, and they put it in
23 cigarettes, right?
25 Dr. Proctor actually say about ammonia? Does it
Come on. They put that stuff in there.
So what is he talking about. They
Okay. Ammonia is an impact booster.
They -- and what did -- what did Yes, it increases its potency, its
Does it augment a cigarette's nicotine
1 make a more powerful impact of nicotine on the
2 brain?
4 strength.
6 kick?
It does. It's more potent. More toxic.
8 More powerful biological effect. It's weakened in
9 the salt state but strengthened when it's been
10 treated with ammonia.
I mean, you know, I don't know we didn't
12 take leave of our senses here. There was a lot of
13 testimony. A lot of late nights. You have notes,
14 you check and see.
16 video of the diammonium phosphate. That's one of
17 their secret ingredients. That's a chemical.
18 That's not natural. That's the ingenuity of it.
21 it. Okay?
23 residency. I'm going to mock -- I had no
24 intention of mocking what Mr. Brenner said until
25 he made a mockery of this issue, because when you
What's next?
Yeah, I'll skip this. I'll come back to
Residency. Residency. Oh, my goodness,
Ammonia -- and we even showed you a 1 read your instructions, you will see it's not
2 "the" residence. It's "a" residence.
And without debate, the man has a
4 residence. He was a resident, a part-time
5 resident, a half-year resident.
Some people may hate living in Florida.
7 It's hot as hell. The snowbirds are clogging up
8 I-95 and the Turnpike.
10 decision on prejudice, that he's a snowbird and
11 they're making too much traffic. That's not what
12 it's about.
14 People have dual residences, but it wasn't
15 something it has to be the residence. It's all
16 residents and citizens.
18 citizen of Florida. How do you know that? He had
19 a driver's license in Florida. He had a voter's
20 registration card in Florida.
When he was almost on death's door from
22 bladder cancer, Mr. Brenner finds an excerpt from
23 the record that says he hates being in Florida.
He hated everything during that period
25 of time. When his son got up and said: Does this
You can have more than one residence.
But you're not allowed to make your
He was a resident of Florida and a You're going to pull something out he
Mr. Hammer is very hip on this residency
So here the warranty deed says -- this
That's a figure of speech that describes
1 explain it? He sat in a chair for two years and
2 wouldn't talk.
4 the son's pain at the love of his father of what
5 is missing from it.
7 rode a bicycle? What does that got to do with it?
8 It's the humanity of it.
10 stuffy, residency stuff, so I must touch on it.
11 He digs -- he's all about the residency.
13 is when they sold the house in Maine, the cabin in
14 Maine, the mansion in Maine, the McMansion in
15 Maine, the cond- -- the high-rise in Maine, okay.
16 When they sold the cabin, house, McMansion in
17 Maine, the warranty deed says: We Shulmans,
18 right, both of 3150 North house -- Northeast 48th
19 Court, apartment, Lighthouse Point, Florida.
Talk about splitters, talk about
21 hurdles. This is really a hurdle in this
22 courtroom? Really? Really? I mean they even say
23 in the deed.
Let's see the next one.
No? What are you guys doing to me. What did the people that put the
Okay. Now dig for a minute. 2.9 acres.
1 Here we go. Here, let me click. I've got the --
2 we're almost done. We really are.
4 Right? You heard of a scraper? You heard of
5 somebody doing a teardown and a rebuild? What did
6 he sell it for? 350K, 350 grand.
8 5700-square-foot house on it that Mr. Brenner
9 showed you a picture of?
How is that -- how does that picture in
11 any way tend to prove or disprove anything in this
12 case?
How much was it worth after the 2002
14 teardown and rebuild? 2.1 million bucks. Hm,
15 that's interesting.
A land value with a cabin on it, about
17 350 grand, right? Now somebody does -- he shows
18 you a big house that's 5700 square feet that was
19 done five years after Mr. Shulman sold the house?
My goodness, that just -- that stretches
21 the bounds of credulity.
23 lawyer and a very smart man, he wouldn't touch
24 this residency with a ten-foot pole.
You notice Mr. Furr, who is a very good
MR. BRENNER: Objection, Your Honor. please move on to your next
Okay. And what else did they say?
MR. SCHLESINGER: I'll leave that part
But when you listen to the argument in
THE COURT: Sustained. Sustained. The
MR. SCHLESINGER: Yes.
MR. FURR: Can we leave the smart part
1 Improper argument.
3 jury should disregard it completely.
5 argument.
8 in?
10 in. Okay. I'll leave the smart part in.
12 this case, Mr. Furr didn't make that argument. He
13 left it for someone else to do. He didn't go
14 there. Okay.
And that 5700-square-foot house that was
16 built, it's got nothing to do with Bob Shulman. I
17 mean talk about something that's got nothing to do
18 with Bob Shulman.
20 These are all their internal documents. We've got
21 the goods on them. We've got the goods on them.
22 That's why we're here.
This is -- were it only true that you
24 could quit smoking and not get sick years later,
25 were that only true. It's not true. The overriding admonition is that
Philip Morris wants to re-evaluate its
2 historic position on smoking and health in three
3 different venues. Public statements which its
4 executives and spokesmen make and litigation.
6 nothing said can adversely affect our litigation
7 position.
This is what they said -- this is what
9 Philip Morris said as recently as the '90s as to
10 what is a tobacco company. It's a law firm that
11 sells cigarettes. That's what a tobacco company
12 is.
Creating a better atmosphere for product
14 liability litigation, no matter what they do, and
15 what's the effect of that? For purposes of
16 litigation, the industry is not willing to concede
17 anything.
And in the litigation venue, we will
19 require the plaintiffs to prove causation both
20 legally and scientifically.
22 relations sham. Our position continues to mislead
23 the public with a wink.
25 George Orwell in 1984 that was made into a film
There is a -- there's a book written by
This is the industry's ultimate public Richard Burton represented Big
And in the movie, the quote from the
1 involving Richard Burton and John Hurt.
3 Brother, the all-powerful government entity, and
4 Richard Hurt had defied the government, the Big
5 Brother, and he was being corrected, and he was
6 being tortured.
And in the movie -- and I mean I'm a
8 movie guy, so I hadn't read the book, but I saw
9 this scene in the movie, and I remember it from
10 years and years ago.
12 book, as Richard Burton -- you know, he was Liz's
13 husband. Remember Liz on the front page of the
14 magazine here?
Talk about a movie star, right? A
16 glamorous movie star. Remember her? Richard
17 Burton was married to her when she was -- when she
18 was it. She was the most beautiful woman in the
19 country. She won an Academy Award. She's there
20 smoking her cigarette.
22 He's there. He was a Shakespearean actor. He was
23 unbelievable.
25 leaning over Hurt, also a spectacular actor. He
Richard Burton won an Academy Award.
And he was the bad guy, and he was 1 was the guy that the lizard jumped out of his
2 chest in the movie Alien. Remember when he
3 like -- when they woke up and the alien jumped out
4 of his chest?
But this movie, he's leaning over, and I
6 remember this, and he says to Winston, that's the
7 character John Hurt: And above all, we do allow
8 the dead to rise up against us. You must stop
9 imagining that posterity will vindicate you,
10 Winston. Posterity will never hear of you. You
11 will be lifted clean out from the stream of
12 history. We shall turn you into a gas and pour
13 you into the --
15 minutes remaining.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Thank you.
We will turn you -- you will be lifted
18 clean out from the stream of history. We shall
19 turn you into a gas and pour you into the
20 stratosphere.
22 in a register, not a memory in a living brain.
23 You will have been annihilated in the past as well
24 as in the future. You will never have existed.
So I -- I hope that when you take this
Nothing will remain of you, not a name
THE CLERK: Counsel, you have five perhaps there's a reason why he's
And I've been carrying this around in my
1 awesome, sacred responsibility as seriously as we
2 know you will in these late-night hours that we
3 have been putting into this case, that you will
4 think about whether that man dutifully belongs in
5 a class that he is indisputably a part of, and you
6 will inscribe him in that class because it will
7 stand as a testament of time.
9 here for so long. Perhaps he's here for a reason,
10 to close that circle and help protect future
11 generations.
13 pocket because -- and I've got a feeling -- I've
14 got a good feeling we're going to be seeing you
15 next week, and he's going to celebrate a birthday,
16 right, next week, on Tuesday, 95 years.
And by that time, you can't put the
18 candles -- that many candles on a cake, but he
19 deserves 95 candles on the cake. And do you know
20 what else? What do we put on the cake? One more
21 candle, the 96th candle.
Your verdict, if you see this our way,
23 will be that 96th candle, and that's what we ask
24 you to consider and that's what we ask you to do,
25 and I can't thank you enough for the effort so 