MR. SHIELDS: Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
JURORS: Good morning.
MR. SHIELDS: This case is about addiction. As the 2010 Surgeon General's Report states, "Nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason individuals persist in using tobacco products, and it is this persistent tobacco use that contributes to the diseases caused by cigarette smoking." In other words, the reason people continue to smoke is because of addiction.
This case is also about R.J. Reynolds and the tobacco industry knowingly targeting teenagers to get them to be the next generation of smokers.
So it was for Jimmie Sikes. Jimmie Sikes was just 12 years old when he first started to smoke. Almost all smokers, then and now, start as teenagers, and probably for the same reasons: peer pressure; they want to appear to be like an adult; they want to be cool. Those reasons were as true in 1959 and 1960 as they are at later times.
But back then it was a different time and a different culture than we're used to today. Smoking was everywhere in the 1960s. Almost half of the people in the country smoked. Advertising for cigarettes was everywhere. It was like wallpaper, using celebrities, athletes, even doctors, to endorse smoking.
Virtually all of the television programs on prime time on the only three networks at the time were sponsored by tobacco companies, with the characters from I Love Lucy to The Flintstones to whatever promoting smoking on the show itself.
By the time Jimmie Sikes joined the Navy in 1965 at age 17, he was a regular, daily smoker.
He'd been smoking at home in front of his parents for a year or two and continued to smoke in the Navy and after he got out and commenced his career in the Merchant Marines.
He was addicted, struggling to quit smoking for over 20 years until he ultimately succeeded in 2007 using a new drug, Chantix, which for him became an antidote for his addiction.
He was diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, emphysema, in 1994, disabled by it in 2001, and died a painful death from it after
more than 50 hospitalizations just before his 63rd birthday in 2011, leaving Janice Sikes as his widow.
John and I are pleased to represent Janice Sikes in this action to recover for Jimmie's death.
We thank you for your attention throughout the trial, and most of you longer than you expected when you first came in in response to the summons to be a juror. But the system doesn't work unless good people like you are coming in in response and willing to serve on juries.
This closing argument is our last opportunity to explain to you what we think the evidence is, how it fits together and how it relates to what must be proved to recover in this case.
Of course, it's up to you to decide. The Court has instructed you that what the lawyers say is not evidence. I remind you about that. I'm going to do my best to summarize the evidence as I think it came in, but it's your collective memory as jurors and your ability to determine what the facts are that is important.
This case, as I told you in the very beginning, grows out of a class action of injured Florida smokers against the tobacco companies called the Engle class action. That case was tried to a jury
for over a year in 1999, with the jury making specific factual findings that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and the other tobacco companies engaged in a civil conspiracy to commit fraud; committed fraud by concealment of material information about smoking; manufactured and sold unreasonably dangerous, defective products; and were negligent.
As the Court has told you and will instruct you again, these findings are applicable in this Engle progeny case if you find that James Sikes was a member of the class, and we think the evidence is compelling that he was a member of the class.
As I told you in the opening statement, there are basically four remaining issues to be decided in this Engle progeny case.
The first issue is class membership. And it is the fundamental issue. Class membership is the question of whether Jimmie Sikes was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, as a -did smoking, because of his addiction, cause his death. The Court will instruct you on the precise language to be used. But that's the issue.
We think the evidence is overwhelming that he was a member of the class, and as a member of the class he's entitled to and you are bound by the
findings of that prior jury.
The second issue is specific causation.
Specific causation is the question of whether R.J. Reynolds' misconduct was a legal cause of Mr. Sikes' COPD and death. It doesn't have to be the only cause. It is sufficient if their misconduct was a substantial contributing factor, as the Court will instruct you in more detail at the conclusion of closing arguments.
The third issue is comparative fault.
Comparative fault in Florida is a matter of it is not an all-or-nothing proposition. Now, what do I mean by that? What I mean by that is that the defendant doesn't have to be solely responsible for the damages and injury. That's what comparative fault is. You can compare any fault of the defendant with any fault you think the plaintiff has and allocate between the two.
The fourth and final issue is damages. You need to decide two questions on damages. One is the amount of compensatory damages, which we'll discuss in a great deal more detail later, and secondly, the question of entitlement to punitive damages.
So those are the four issues. It occurred to me that the best way to talk about the extensive
amount of evidence that you have seen would be to walk you through each of those four issues and let's talk about how the evidence applies to those four issues.
All right. Let's start with class membership.
As I said, class membership is the fundamental issue in the case. All the discussion you have heard about addiction from the beginning of the case through now is all about the question of class membership. Its only relevance is the question of class membership.
And the importance of class membership is that is the fundamental determination of whether Janice Sikes can even recover at all. To pursue her claims in this Engle progeny case, you must first find that her husband was a member of the Engle class. It will be the first question you are asked on the verdict form, which I will go over with you in more detail.
And the Court will instruct you on what is required to be a member of the class. The Court specifically is going to instruct you in detail that to prove that James Sikes was a member of the Engle class, plaintiff must prove by the greater weight of the evidence that James Sikes was addicted to
cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, that cigarette smoking because of that addiction was a legal cause of James Sikes' COPD. That will be the specific instruction on what is required for class membership.
And essentially that comes down to there are three issues. And you saw those when we were talking to some extent with Dr. Werner about what her testimony was going to be.
The first issue is whether Jimmie Sikes was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. The second issue was whether smoking was a legal cause of his death. And then the third element of the class membership is whether he smoked because of his addiction.
There really is no dispute about the first two.
There is no dispute that Mr. Sikes -MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. There's a dispute over legal cause of death.
THE COURT: It's argument. It's overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: There's no dispute that Mr. Sikes was addicted to nicotine, was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. There is no dispute that smoking was the cause of his death. And I'm going to talk in a moment about what "legal cause" means
and what the Court will instruct you about legal cause.
There is a dispute on whether he smoked because of his addiction. And that's essentially the only real issue in connection with class membership.
The factual evidence supporting addiction is quite compelling. He started smoking at 12 years of age. His brother Fletcher described his smoking.
His brother Fletcher testified that he thought he smoked primarily Winston and some Marlboros; he probably smoked Winstons because his mother smoked them.
Jimmie Sikes, in his affidavit, which you will have in evidence -- that is, he testified under oath while he was still alive, in writing, and you will have that testimony out with you -- specifically described what brands of cigarettes he smoked over the years. In addition to Winstons he smoked some Pall Mall, Kool and Camel. All of those brands are manufactured by the defendant, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
He became a regular smoker by his early teens, smoking in front of his parents, according to Fletcher, by the time he was 16. He joined the Navy and was stationed on a ship in Vietnam during the
Vietnamese war at a time, as Dr. Proctor told you, almost all servicemen smoked. That was part of the culture of being in the armed services. It was so much a part of the culture that, as Dr. Proctor told you, the government gave cigarettes to soldiers and sailors as part of their rations.
And so when he spent those years in Vietnam from '65 to '69, he continued to smoke. When he came home on leave, his brother Fletcher described him as smoking. And when he returned, after his service, to Pensacola, he was a smoker as well. His first wife described him smoking, although she could not remember after all these years, some 40 years, what brand he smoked.
After his divorce from his first wife he met and started dating a woman named Carla Slicker. She described his smoking. You saw the videotaped deposition of her testimony.
She described him as smoking all the time, getting up in the middle of the night to smoke, smoking the first thing in the morning when his feet hit the floor and smoking literally one after another to the point that his fingernails and beard were yellow from the nicotine.
She also described how he tried to quit during
those years when she asked him to quit and that he was unable to do it and the symptoms and problems he had in trying to quit.
Janice met Jim in 1993 and first started dating him in 1994. She also described the smoking. And like the others you have heard from, she described him as smoking constantly, as getting up in the middle of the night to smoke, as smoking a cigarette literally the moment he stepped out of bed in the morning and smoking one cigarette after another.
He first tried to quit after she knew him when he had a heart attack in July of 1994 and succeeded for a month or so before he relapsed.
Janice described the fact that every year thereafter he tried to quit two or three times a year and then would relapse, sometimes after a day or two, sometimes after a week or two, or sometimes after extended periods of time.
He tried everything to quit smoking -hypnosis, nicotine gum, patches, aversion therapy, prescription medications -- all of which were unsuccessful until that new drug, Chantix, came out, and it operated as an antidote to his addiction.
The medical records confirm all of his attempts to quit. And understand that the medical records
are only going to show attempts to quit while he is seeing the doctor as opposed to all the times that Janice and the others described him as quitting.
You saw this demonstrative -- this was prepared from the medical records -- that shows all of the attempts reflected in the medical records themselves from August of 1994 until September of 2007 when he was able to succeed. I'm going to talk about those quit attempts in a lot more detail a little later.
Dr. Tonia Werner, our expert witness on addiction from the University of Florida, testified about addiction to nicotine. She explained the process of addiction to nicotine.
The starting point for it is nicotine is a very powerful, addictive drug. It impacts the dopamine reward system of the brain and causes brain changes. She described how it got to the brain and what changes it caused in the brain.
What happens is, if you smoke a cigarette and you inhale it, unlike a cigar you would not inhale, it gets in the lining of your lungs and it will hit your brain within ten seconds of hitting the lining of your lungs, causing very powerful effects in the dopamine receptor system in the lung and changing the brain itself. The brain literally lights up
with the effects of nicotine.
And you saw the PET scan that Dr. Werner showed you in which you saw the progression from nonsmoker to the first puff to the first cigarette and literally how the brain's receptors light up with that nicotine hitting the brain in that short period of time. As a result, it is a powerfully addictive substance.
Dr. Werner also described how doctors diagnose nicotine addiction. She said they primarily used a book called the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders from the American Psychiatric Association. We refer to it as DSM-IV-TR, which is the current version of it. It has a category of all kinds of diseases, and one of them is for nicotine abuse and nicotine dependence or addiction. And she told you that the DSM set out the criteria for nicotine addiction.
And we showed you the slide of what the manual provides you need to meet in order to be described as addicted to nicotine. The manual says you need to meet three of those seven requirements in order to be diagnosed as addicted to nicotine. Jimmie Sikes met at least six of the requirements.
The evidence was -- and Dr. Werner went through
it -- that he had tolerance to nicotine, as evidenced by the fact that he went from a nonsmoker to ultimately smoking four packs of cigarettes a day without it being toxic to him.
Secondly, she described what the withdrawal symptoms were, and you heard the testimony of various witnesses about what withdrawal symptoms he had. He had depressed mood, irritability, anxiety, restlessness, sleep disturbance and weight gain. At one point in time the medical records reflect that he gained 30 pounds when he quit smoking, and when he went back to smoking he lost that weight and got down -- back down to his normal 200 pounds on his 6-foot-3 frame.
Everyone described those symptoms. Carla Slicker described them. Janice Sikes described them. Janice's daughter Ashley described them. And Mr. Meadows, his friend you may recall from the ship, La Cruise, testified about Mr. Sikes and how he was when he tried to quit smoking.
And he said he was miserable. He tried real hard to quit. And he became frustrated when he was unable to quit. He just wasn't himself, he got so anxious, frustrated and upset, and he was disappointed and embarrassed that he was unable to
quit. That's the testimony about the withdrawal symptoms. There's no doubt that he met that requirement.
He also used cigarettes in larger and larger quantities. There clearly was a persistent desire to quit and numerous unsuccessful attempts to quit.
And, most importantly, the final requirement, he continued despite knowledge of its harm to him.
In 1994 when he had the heart attack and was told to quit smoking, he knew at that point in time, despite whatever he thought going up to that point in time, that he was having harm as a result of it, and he still couldn't quit.
The best evidence of that comes in two additional pieces of evidence. One was that he continued to smoke when he was on oxygen. He just was unable to quit. And, secondly, when he was told by a Mayo Clinic evaluation that if he wanted to live, he had to have a lung transplant, but he couldn't qualify for a lung transplant unless he went six months without smoking, he was unable to last the six months.
Now, you were told in opening statement that in fact he quit more than six months because there's an entry in the record at that point that says, "Quit
six months." That entry is an error. It's clearly an error when you look at the records that show in August of 2003 he was still smoking. December 10th of 2003 he had quit. That's four months. But by December 30th, less than five months, he was back to smoking again. He was unable to make the six weeks [sic].
And there's a later entry by the Mayo Clinic when he was evaluated again in 2006 that says that he was evaluated in 2003 and was unable to quit for six months to be able to qualify.
By the time he quit smoking, it was too late.
It was no longer possible to do a lung transplant because of the extensive damage to the lungs and because of all of the other problems he was having by that point in time. He simply was too debilitated by then to get a lung transplant.
So there simply is no doubt that he met all of the requirements.
Now, R.J. Reynolds brings in an expert named Bernstein. You saw him yesterday. He doesn't dispute that Mr. Sikes was addicted. He told you about DSM, but he didn't talk about any of the evidence to extensively support that Mr. Sikes met those requirements.
So there's no question that he was addicted.
We also suggest there's no question that smoking was the legal cause of his death.
Now, the Court's going to instruct you on what "smoking" and "legal cause" means. Specifically what the Court's going to instruct you on that smoking and legal cause is that smoking R.J. Reynolds cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of James Sikes' COPD and death if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing James Sikes' death so that it can reasonably be said that but for that smoking his death would not have occurred.
Now, there's a second sentence that applies to operating in combination with other matters.
There's no application of that here because there is absolutely no doubt and no evidence to the contrary that Mr. Sikes' smoking directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or substantially contributed to causing his death. He died from complications of COPD. His death certificate indicates that he died as a result of his complications of COPD and that smoking was the cause.
Dr. Schoonover came in and testified to you that the process was that as he became more and more debilitated from his COPD, he then began to get infections, go in and have constant hospitalizations; those infections lead to sepsis throughout his system; and as a result, as in most cases of COPD that get to that point, he died from the complications of his COPD. There is no question, then, that under the Court's instruction about smoking being the legal cause that the evidence unequivocally, without any dispute, establishes that it is.
So the remaining issue is whether he smoked because of his addiction.
Now, the starting point in understanding whether he smoked because of an addiction is to understand what addiction does to smokers. The evidence comes from the most recent Surgeon General's report to discuss the issue, "How Tobacco Smoke Causes Disease," the 2010 Surgeon General's Report. You will have portions of the report out with you in evidence. I didn't think you probably wanted to read all 700 pages of the document, so we are not sending out the entire 700 pages with you, but we are sending out the relevant chapters. And
the most relevant chapter is Chapter 4, which is the chapter that deals with addiction.
Now, let's talk for a moment about what this document is. As the document indicates, and as you will read, under an act of Congress, the Surgeon General is required periodically to prepare a report on what the current consensus of scientific evidence is about smoking and health. And in order to prepare that report, the Surgeon General asks the experts in the field, the acknowledged experts, to work together as a panel that writes the report, reviews all of the evidence, gets together and discusses it, and consequently prepares this report that goes through this elaborate peer review process.
And if you want a complete description of that process, you can look in one of the portions of the document we're sending out on the development of the report and how it's put together. And you can also look at the acknowledgments in the beginning of it in which there's page after page listing experts that contributed to this report. And they are the experts from around the country that are acknowledged as the experts in the field.
What they wrote in the 2010 Surgeon General's
Report in Chapter 4 was that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products.
Now, that's what this case is all about: Did Mr. Sikes smoke because of addiction. The Surgeon General's report answers that for you. Nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason -MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. The Surgeon General's report doesn't speak for Mr. Sikes.
THE COURT: I understand. Sustained.
MR. SHIELDS: The Surgeon General's report indicates that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason people continue to smoke. Chapter 4 not only reaches that conclusion, but it indicates in addition that sustained use and long-term exposures to tobacco smoke are due to the powerfully addicting effects of tobacco products.
Now, that's the process. That's what happens from cigarette smoking, the fact that -- that is the acknowledged scientific consensus as set out in the 2010 Surgeon General's Report.
It also references an earlier report of the Surgeon General in 1988 in which the addiction issue was the entire report; not just a chapter, but the entire report. And in that prior report they had
concluded that cigarette and other forms of tobacco are addicting; that nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction; and that the processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those for addiction to cocaine and heroin.
Now, you saw evidence from when I took the deposition of James Figlar that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company doesn't really disagree with that. Their website tells their customers to rely on the reports of the Surgeon General, and it specifically references one of the reports to rely on is the 2010 report of the Surgeon General.
R.J. Reynolds also knows the fundamental reason that people continue to smoke from the simple fact that every time they have tried to sell a cigarette without nicotine in it, nobody would buy it. Nobody would smoke a cigarette without nicotine. That is the fundamental answer to the issue. If people won't smoke without nicotine, then it is the addiction to nicotine that makes people continue to smoke. You take it out, and they won't continue to smoke. And R.J. Reynolds has known that for decades. They've known that from their experiments; they've known that from trying to sell cigarettes that did not have nicotine.
Dr. Werner specifically told you that the reason Mr. Sikes continued to smoke was because of his addiction.
Now, Dr. Bernstein, the expert employed by the defendant, disagrees. But it's interesting. His disagreement is nothing more than a word game. He had to admit when he was shown the Surgeon General's report that one of the reasons people continued to smoke -- whether it's fundamental or not, one of the reasons people continue to smoke is addiction.
And then I specifically asked him -- and I read that to him yesterday -- and he agreed that one of the reasons Mr. Sikes continued to smoke was because of addiction.
Now, this clause, "smoking because of addiction," doesn't say "smoking only because of addiction." It doesn't say that the only reason you smoke is because of addiction. It doesn't say -MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Misstates the instructions on "cause."
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: It doesn't say that it has to be the exclusive reason. It just says "because." The admission that it is one of the reasons that Mr. Sikes continued to smoke is an admission that he
was smoking because of his addiction.
MR. BOYCE: Same objection to -THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BOYCE: -- your "cause" instruction.
MR. SHIELDS: Now, Dr. Bernstein, in playing his word game, says all he -MR. BOYCE: Objection to the phrase "word game," Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled. It's argument.
MR. SHIELDS: Dr. Bernstein, in making his argument, says that the reason he didn't smoke because of addiction is because he could have quit.
Think about that for a moment. It's a fundamental tenet of addiction medicine, as both he and Dr. Werner said, that ultimately people can quit. You wouldn't have all these cessation programs. You wouldn't have Chantix. You wouldn't have Wellbutrin. You wouldn't have nicotine gum and nicotine patches if it was impossible to quit.
The fact that it's possible to quit doesn't mean you weren't addicted. And it doesn't mean you didn't continue to smoke because you were addicted. All the class membership question is, is whether that's the reason he continued to smoke. It is not a question of whether it was possible to quit
smoking.
But in evaluating Dr. Bernstein's testimony and Dr. Werner's testimony, you need to compare the two. The Court will instruct you about the credibility of witnesses and the kinds of things that you consider regarding the credibility of witnesses. And so think about this: You have the Surgeon General's report of the acknowledged experts in the field from around the country, and Dr. Bernstein disagrees with it. He's never done any research. He's never published anything on nicotine addiction. He's never taught nicotine addiction. But he disagrees with all the experts, including Dr. Werner.
Maybe he disagrees because he's in the business of testifying. That's what it amounts to. He spends up to 40 percent of his time testifying in lawsuits. I showed you the list of the number of cases he's testified in since 2007. They're not tobacco cases. Sixteen of them are. But they're everything. He'll testify about anything if you will hire him and pay him $500 an hour or $8500 a day to come to court. He'll testify about autism; he'll testify about pornography addiction; he'll testify about computers. He'll testify, according to one of the ads he had, to over 140 different
kinds of subjects.
And do you really think he's an expert on 140 different kinds of subjects? No. He's in the business of providing testimony. That's how he makes his living. And you need to think about that when you decide whether you will believe what he has to say.
In this case alone, his fees are approaching $90,000 at this point in time. In the cases he has testified in on behalf of tobacco, he's charged them $1.3 million.
Now, he's not like a Dr. Burns or a Dr. Proctor that spent their life learning about tobacco and writing books and writing articles before they were ever employed. They were employed because they we experts. This man had no expertise at all, was hired by them, and then testifies in their cases to support their evidence.
MR. BOYCE: Objection. Misstates his qualifications.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: Contrast that lack of expertise, contrast the fact that he's in the business of testifying, contrast the amount of money he has been paid by them to testify, with Dr. Werner, who
doesn't get paid to testify. She said, "University of Florida gets paid for whatever I do. I don't even know what it is. I just -- I'm on salary. I don't even bill for it. They take my time and bill for it and the University of Florida gets paid." It could not have any possible impact on her views or opinions as to what she is paid by the University of Florida, in contrast to Dr. Bernstein making his living testifying in cases.
But beyond that, Dr. Bernstein's testimony simply is not supported by the evidence. The evidence is not, as he claimed, that Mr. Sikes simply wanted to smoke. Now, you heard that in opening statement. You heard that from Dr. Bernstein, that Mr. Sikes simply wanted to smoke. The evidence is totally to the contrary.
Every witness that testified -- Janice, Carla Slicker, Fletcher Sikes, Mr. Meadows -- they all said Mr. Sikes wanted to quit, he did not like smoking, he did not want to smoke, but he was hoc and he could not get over it.
Now, you were told in opening statement that not only did he smoke because he just wanted to, that he really didn't try and quit, and that evidence turned out to be totally untrue as well.
All of the witnesses described how disappointed, frustrated, embarrassed he was that he was unable to quit.
Remember the testimony of Ashley, that because of his whole demeanor, he was defeated; he was embarrassed; he was frustrated that he was unable to quit. You don't act like that if you're smoking because you want to. You don't act like that if it's just your choice and it's not as a result of addiction. You act like that when you want to quit and you're trying your best and you simply can't overcome the addiction.
You were also told in opening statement that he was a risk-taker. Remember all those statements Mr. Boyce gave you in opening statement about him being a risk-taker, and that theme was picked up by Dr. Bernstein yesterday? There is not one iota of evidence in this case that he was a risk-taker. To the contrary, the evidence is the reverse.
Remember that story that said, "Here's the best example that he's a risk-taker. He would smoke in violation of Coast Guard regulations while they were refueling the ship and just about blow it up"?
Of course, the problem is that's not true.
Mr. Meadows came in and told you that the bridge is
well beyond any area prohibited by the Coast Guard regulations for smoking during refueling. You saw the ship. He showed you where the refueling was; he showed you where the bridge was; and he told you Mr. Sikes would go to the bridge to smoke, which was well beyond any prohibition, was not in violation of Coast Guard regulations, and hardly indicates taking any risk at all.
There was also the story you heard in opening statement by Mr. Boyce that he went and took his ship out in dangerous fog; that's how he got hired by La Cruise in the first place. Is there any evidence of that? Did they call the owner of the boat? Did they offer any evidence to support that claim?
Not one iota of evidence. Instead we asked Mr. Meadows about it. And Mr. Meadows said, "Whoa, wait a minute" -MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Mr. Meadows didn't work on that boat when Captain Sikes was hired.
THE COURT: Sustained. Mr. Meadows testified about things related to that.
Or, excuse me, overruled. He testified about things related to that.
MR. SHIELDS: Mr. Meadows testified that it was the Coast Guard that determined whether it was safe to go out or not. The Coast Guard, through its port pilot, would not let you take a vessel out in fog or otherwise if there was any safety risk at all.
Mr. Sikes didn't get to make that determination. It was the port pilot, the Coast Guard, that would make that determination. And as Mr. Meadows specifically said, Mr. Sikes was not a risk-taker, he was a -totally emphasized safety, and he would fire any crew member that took any risk.
There's simply no evidence to support this assertion that he was somehow a risk-taker.
You were also told in opening statement that he had no concern for his health. The only basis for that argument during this case is one reference in
18,000	pages of medical records that he had not complied with diet restrictions since the last time he had been there. That was in 1997.
What happened in all the years after that?
There's nothing in the records to indicate any diet problem, up until a nutritional consultation during his last hospitalization when he is debilitated and wasting from his disease. That's what the nutritional is about, not any diet problems.
As Dr. Schoonover told you, the medical records indicate his heart problems were under control for years before the COPD reached the point that it took his life. That was not what took his life.
What has happened, ladies and gentlemen, is you have these boxes and boxes of medical records,
18,000	pages, and they pored over every bit of it looking for anything they could find to assert that he didn't have concern about his health or he wasn't complying or whatnot. And what did they come up with out of the 18,000 pages? Two or three references. I think that says more about the defense of R.J. Reynolds than about Mr. Sikes.
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Move to strike the statement with respect to Reynolds defense. Those medical records -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BOYCE: -- speak for themselves.
THE COURT: It's sustained on the objection.
Don't give me speaking objections anymore, either of you, okay? Both of you are warned. Don't do it again.
Go ahead, Mr. Shields.
MR. SHIELDS: Thank you, Your Honor.
Let's be fair. What is fair from the evidence
you've heard is that he did not want to smoke and he struggled for over 20 years to quit; that he was concerned about his health; that he did all he could to try and quit smoking. He was not simply doing this because he wanted to. And it's supported by the extensive medical records of his quit attempts.
Let's bring that slide of his quit attempts up again.
The first medical record of his quit attempt is in 1994 when he quit smoking following his hospitalization from his heart attack. And you will see these kinds of records throughout the medical records that support each of the quit attempts. I'm not going to walk you through each of them, but I would like to go back to the quit attempt slide as a way of showing you generally what occurred.
And that is that he first stopped smoking after Janice knew him -- and it's reflected in the medical records -- following the heart attack for a month or so in August of 1994. He went back to smoking. Janice described that the problem was he went back to work. He went back to work where everybody smoked. He went back to work where he would pull two eight -hour shifts one after another, and everybody smoked. And they not only smoked on the
bridge and they not only smoked around the ship, but this was a gambling vessel in which the patrons were smoking extensively. And he just was unable to refrain from smoking under those circumstances.
Then in 1998 there is a hospitalization, and he quit again as a result of that hospitalization and remained quit for a month or so. The evidence is not entirely clear. The medical records don't say that. Janice thinks it was four to six weeks before he relapsed at that point in time.
And then in 2001 is when he had his extensive heart problems. He had bypass surgery in April of 2001 and quit smoking during the hospitalization and remained quit smoking after he got out of the hospital.
A month later, probably as a result of the trauma of that surgery, he had an aortic dissection that required emergency repair and he went back into the hospital for that repair. And the documents reflect that he remained quit for almost a year and a half. And then he relapsed.
And Janice explained that what was going on at that time was financial problems, extreme amount of stress. He had been unable to go back to work as a ship captain. He was a port captain at the time.
There was a real question about whether he could keep his job. It was that stress, financial circumstances. That's the best explanation about the stressors that resulted in relapse. And Dr. Werner discussed with you the stressors that result in people going back to smoking.
Now, you're going to hear a lot about, well, the nicotine was out of his system in 20 hours. Of course it was. That's what causes withdrawal symptoms. You know, an alcoholic doesn't become no longer an alcoholic simply because they quit drinking for a day. All the alcohol is out of their system, but they're still an alcoholic. The same is true for someone addicted to nicotine. Those withdrawal symptoms can go on, as the Surgeon General's report says, and as I asked Dr. Bernstein yesterday, for months and months and months.
But it is the other aspect of it, the psychological addiction and cues, that are the danger following that time period. There are so many things in someone's life that are associated with cigarettes if they've been a former smoker, from drinking coffee, to driving, to conversations with people. All of those things are psychological cues. And you add those cues to the time period in
which you're around other smokers, the cravings kick in, despite the fact that it's out of your system, and consequently people relapse.
And in fact most smokers relapse. The evidence was that about 85 percent of smokers who try to quit relapse. The statistics are indicative of this.
90 percent of people say they want to quit smoking.
40 percent try each year. And of those 40 percent, about 3 percent succeed that year. It doesn't mean they don't ultimately quit, but it takes years and it takes multiple attempts. Dr. Werner told you on average it takes about seven attempts for someone to be able to succeed in quitting smoking.
And so following 2001 he went back to smoking.
In 2003 there's an entry that he had quit again for 45 days, but then there are entries after that that he had started smoking again.
In August of 2003 it says he was still smoking until this admission, claims that he wants to quit for good, made several attempts in the past which were unsuccessful.
And then we go up to this 12/10/2003. This is the example where you were told in opening statemen that he quit for more than six months. Now, it's true that record says, "Quit for more than six
months." The only problem is four months earlier there's a record that says he was smoking. So obviously that record in December is in error. It wasn't six months. And there's a December 30th record that says he started smoking again; he didn't make it the six months.
And then you have records in 2006 where he's hospitalized and stopped smoking again, and then finally you have his use of Chantix in 2007. Even using Chantix, it took four months before he was able to succeed in quitting.
A couple of other things to keep in mind when you're evaluating his quit attempts. One is that, as Dr. Werner told you, if you start smoking as a young teenager, the effect of nicotine on the developing brain is that it can cause permanent damage and permanent changes to the brain that you would not see in an adult smoker.
And, secondly -- you've seen this not only from expert testimony -- Dr. Bernstein admitted it yesterday -- but you've seen it from documents as well -- whether you smoke or not is genetic.
Dr. Bernstein said there are studies that say up to 85 percent of smoking is thought to be genetic in some studies. The Surgeon General's report in 2010
has an entire chapter on the genetic basis for smoking.
Think about that and think about Jimmie Sikes.
His mother smoked. His father smoked at one time.
All of his brothers and his sisters smoked. There is some strong circumstantial evidence that Jimmie Sikes was one of those people, because of his genetic basis, that was predisposed to smoking and predisposed to it being very hard for him to quit.
You're going to hear a lot in this case by the defendants about choice versus addiction. And that's why we had Dr. Werner describe the addiction cycle and the impact on choice.
You recall her description of the slide. And this slide is not something she developed. This is from the National Institute on Drug Abuse, the agency of the United States Government on the war on drugs that deals with addiction.
And what the slide indicates is that there is this addiction cycle of daily use and physical dependence, and as you use nicotine or another drug and reach that addiction cycle, your choice, your loss of control, gets less and less until there's the last free choice. And part of the addiction cycle is the likelihood of relapse if you quit, with
increasing dependence.
And that is why, ladies and gentlemen, as the Surgeon General's report notes, there is a direct correlation between how much you smoke and whether you can quit. There's a direct correlation between how early you start to smoke and whether or not you quit, all of which indicate the lack of choice.
But the defendants know that. We saw a document early in this case -MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Objection to the reference to defendants.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BOYCE: Thank you.
MR. SHIELDS: We saw a document early in this case, Exhibit 363, in which there was a discussion of addiction. And what the document indicated was that the National Institute of Drug Addiction in 1980 was about to call nicotine an addiction like heroin and cocaine. And there was a discussion in that document about the impact on the tobacco companies if it was called an addictive drug. And what was written is, "We can't defend continued smoking as 'free choice' if the person was addicted."
That's the ultimate point. They can't argue
that Jimmie Sikes had a free choice -MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. There's no -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BOYCE: There's no "they."
MR. SHIELDS: R.J. Reynolds can't argue that Jimmie Sikes had a free choice if he was addicted, as that document acknowledges.
So I think it's absolutely clear he meets the class definition. What's the implication of that? Engle findings apply and you, as the jury, according to the Court's instructions, are bound by that.
And to remind you what those findings were, those findings specifically were that smoking cigarettes causes chronic pulmonary disease, heart disease and other diseases; that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive; that the defendant placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous, what's been called a strict liability finding; that the defendant concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known o available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact covering [sic] the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both; that the
defendant agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature; and, finally, that the defendant was negligent.
If you find he was a member of the class, which we think you must under this evidence, you are bound by those determinations, and they provide the basis for liability here.
So let's turn, then, to the second issue, the issue of specific causation. That is the relationship between their misconduct and his smoking.
In order to analyze that, we have to look at what the evidence of their misconduct was. That's not only important -MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor, to "their misconduct." Again, there's only one defendant here.
THE COURT: Well, when he says "their," he means you, or Reynolds. So I think everybody's got that. Overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: There's also a finding here of conspiracy.
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. There's no finding of conspiracy.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: So that you've seen a lot of evidence that relates not just to R.J. Reynolds but to their agreement with the other tobacco companies to pursue a decades-long campaign of denial, concealment.
So let's talk about that, because it's important for causation. It's important for comparing fault.
Let's begin when the conspiracy began. It began in the 1950s, when Jimmie Sikes was a young child. The evidence from Dr. Proctor and Dr. Burns was that there was a growing recognition in the early '50s that there was a direct relationship between cigarette smoking and the epidemic of lung cancer.
Dr. Burns showed you this chart, which was the basis for the scientists' concern at the time, in which you saw that there was a direct relationship with the lag time that it takes to get the disease between the growth in the consumption of cigarettes and the growth in the epidemic of lung cancer.
Before cigarettes were widely sold and used, lung cancer was unheard of. You heard the story of Dr. Ochsner being called out of bed to go to an
autopsy because here was a lung cancer case and "You'll probably never see another one of those in your career." Today it is the biggest disease, killing more people than all others combined.
Now, the evidence is that because of that clear indication of relationship, scientists started to do more studies in the late '40s and '50s. And four major studies came out in 1950. The Wynder Graham study; Doll and Hill, the British researcher study; and a couple other studies all came out during that crucial time period. And all found that there appeared to be an important relationship between smoking cigarettes and lung cancer. It was followed shortly thereafter by an animal study that was able to reproduce cancer on the skin of mice by applying the tar of cigarettes.
Now, R.J. Reynolds was well aware of those studies. James Figlar, whom I deposed and you saw the videotape of the deposition, admitted that they were well aware of the studies. In fact, we saw a document from Dr. Claude Teague in which he discussed those studies, among other studies.
And if you'll turn to Dr. Teague's review,
Slide 35.
Dr. Teague was a young scientist at
R.J. Reynolds when they formed the research and development group in the early '50s. And Dr. Teague in February of 1953 went through all the available evidence, analyzed it, and rendered an opinion to his superiors about what it showed. And what he concluded was that studies of clinical data tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and the incidence of cancer of the lung. He analyzed the constituents of smoke, he pointed out the carcinogens in it, in reaching his conclusion.
Now, why is this document important? Because it shows they knew what was going on in the scientific community, and it is in direct contradiction to what they said less than a year later publicly and what they continued to say for the next 45 years.
Now, despite their knowledge, they continued to do their advertising and promotion of tobacco, in fact having doctors claim that they recommended cigarettes. We showed you not only ads like "More Doctors Smoke Camels," but you remember the commercial that was shown on television with a doctor going out to his car and so forth. This was a whole campaign during this time done with print
ads and commercials on television about doctors and smoking, asserting the health benefits and a lack of concern about smoking.
The presidents of the major tobacco companies, when that animal study came out in 1953, got together at The Plaza Hotel for what has now become known as the beginning of the conspiracy. And at that meeting at The Plaza Hotel, they decided that rather than deal with the issue as a medical problem, rather than try and conduct their own epidemiological studies and see if what was being seen was in fact true, they were going to engage in a public relations event. It was the feeling of those present that the industry could most effectively face the problem by jointly engaging public relations counsel. They engaged the most prominent public relations firm in New York, Hill & Knowlton, to undertake their campaign of denial.
And one of the most interesting documents that we showed you was a document from their early meetings, that is, Hill & Knowlton's early meetings, with the research directors and other executives at the tobacco companies. And this document became significant, ladies and gentlemen, because it indicates an outline, basically, of what they did
thereafter and what they knew early on.
First is the indication of their knowledge about addiction, in which they're quoted as saying, "It's fortunate for us it's a habit they can't break."
Second, it's their understanding that it did in fact cause cancer by the comment, "Wouldn't it be wonderful if we could produce a cancer-free cigarette." Now, you don't need to produce a cancer-free cigarette unless you recognize that it is causing cancer despite what you're saying publicly.
Despite those comments, Hill & Knowlton proceeded with a public relations campaign, and they followed that campaign for the next 45 years, composed of three primary elements.
First, doubt. And by that I mean they initially denied that cigarettes caused cancer, and they kept denying that for decades. As the evidence piled up and piled up, they then changed it slightly. Instead of saying absolutely it wasn't true, they'd say there is scientific controversy, there is doubt about whether cigarettes cause cancer, and you shouldn't condemn them because of that doubt.
The second part of their campaign was the campaign of reassurance. That is a campaign aimed primarily at smokers, to reassure them that it's okay to continue smoking. And it principally took the effect of them saying over and over again -- and we've shown you documents and videotapes of them saying it -- in which they say, "There's nothing harmful in cigarettes, but if there is, we'll find it and we'll take it out," the implication being,
"You don't have anything to worry about about a disease, because if there's anything in it, we'll find it and take it out before you get the disease."
That in fact is the direct recommendation of Hill & Knowlton in that early memo, to reassure smokers by telling them they should continue smoking in the interim while they research it and determine if there's anything harmful and then take it out.
And third and finally, the campaign included reassurance and reinforcement, reinforcement by ads that psychologically worked on the reasons that teenagers would want to smoke and reinforced those reasons to get them to be the next generation of smokers.
The problem, of course, was that the campaign they were engaging in simply was not true. There
was overwhelming scientific evidence that cigarettes caused cancer and emphysema and other diseases, and they knew it.
They already knew what was harmful in cigarettes. That early Teague memo identified what was harmful in cigarettes. And they knew it couldn't be removed because it was the very nature of the smoke itself. There's no way you could take it out, and they knew it, despite saying over and over again, "If there's anything harmful, we'll take it out."
And their advertising was as much a misrepresentation and concealment as their blatant assertions of the health effects. The truth behind all of those millions and millions of ads, some $200 billion in ads and marketing from 1963 to 2008, was that behind all those athletic, good-looking, physically active people was the fact that 45 to 50 percent of all regular smokers will die from smoking-related disease, 440,000 Americans a year.
What a difference it would have made if instead of reassuring people, instead of telling people, "If there's anything harmful, we'll take it out," if what had been said was, "We can't take it out. It's part of smoking. And our customers, almost half of
you, are going to die from it." Had that been said in the 1950s, what a difference it would have made in the decades that followed.
But instead what they did is first issued the Frank Statement. And you've seen a copy of the Frank Statement in which they claimed there was no proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes.
They knew that was untrue. They may have disagreed with it, but they knew there was proof. They asserted that they were going to undertake a program to research the issue and find the answers that had eluded everybody, and that they took the position that the health of their customers was the most important of their concerns.
Now, as a result of that they created two front organizations, one called the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, an industry that by their own internal documents they acknowledged to be a front for their assertions instead of the independent research agency that they claimed.
But, more importantly, its research over the years that followed was a true smokescreen.
Dr. Proctor told you it was research that was never intended to find an answer to the question. It was research that intended to look at everything but the
ultimate issue so that they could say that they had spent billions of dollars and millions of dollars researching the issue and couldn't find any proof that cigarettes caused cancer.
And that's exactly what they did. They hired doctors from Harvard and Stanford and Yale and had them research specific things that weren't directed at the ultimate issue. And then they would go out and say, "Look at all the money we spent. Look at all the articles we published. And none of it proves that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer."
Well, it didn't prove it because it didn't attempt to prove it. It didn't look at the real issue.
The real issue, which they never addressed, was what was seen in the epidemiology, study after study showing the elevated risks of cancer and other diseases in smokers. And during their entire existence TIRC never once undertook an epidemiological study to test whether those studies were true or not.
Now, one of the fundamental tenets of science, as Dr. Proctor said, is being able to replicate what somebody else has done. If work is done, it says this work shows there's a potential problem. What
science does is then have others do the same research to replicate it, because it is the replication that proves it.
If they were truly interested in the question, they would have done those studies. And during their entire operation, they never once undertook one of those studies. Because it wasn't the point.
The point was for them to say, "We have no proof," and to become a front for the industry itself.
There's also The Tobacco Institute, which later became the lobbying arm of the industries and would challenge the Surgeon General whenever reports were issued, would issue press releases and go out and give videotaped interviews on various programs.
And so they successfully pursued this program over the years through these two front organizations.
But by the late '50s, the early '60s, the scientific evidence was just overwhelming.
Dr. Proctor showed you a slide of the development of the scientific evidence, of the kinds of evidence that would be used over that time period and, as the studies came in, how it developed. But, more importantly, there were also all of these public agencies, things like surgeon generals and public
health organizations from around the world, not just the United States, looking at it. And you can see the reports that they begin to issue during this time period all concluded that cigarette smoking caused disease and caused cancer.
And so the scientific consensus was there probably by the mid to late '50s, but clearly by the early '60s. And they knew it. We showed you the documents from R.J. Reynolds that indicated that they knew the scientific consensus was there, despite what they said publicly.
There was, first, the Teague document we've already shown you. Secondly, another scientist named Rodgman in 1966, as part of a research development project, wrote an extensive memo for his bosses on the components of smoke which laid out the carcinogens in them and concluded that cigarette smoking was a major causative factor in the present high and increasing incidence of cancer of the respiratory system in humans.
That internal memo admitted the truth at the same time they were issuing press releases -- and we showed those to you -- and making public statements saying there's no proof that cigarettes cause disease or cause cancer.
And then there's the visit by the British American Tobacco Company in 1958 in which a team scientists visits American tobacco companies and the people employed by them and discuss the issue of whether internally they acknowledged the truth, that cigarettes caused cancer.
And what they wrote was, "With one exception, the individuals with whom we met believed that smoking causes lung cancer." And as for that one individual, they went on to note that no one thought his reasoning was sound.
That's what they internally admitted to each other.
And then there's the 1962 Rodgman document which also says what they internally knew and described the evidence as overwhelming. Yet they took the position with the Surgeon General and the Surgeon General's report that the evidence was insufficient.
You will see a document that the defendant themselves put in in which they said, "Look, we showed the Surgeon General the components of cigarette smoke." Look at that document. It does not tell the Surgeon General that any of the components in fact cause cancer. To the contrary,
the letter that sent the document asserts that cigarette smoking does not cause cancer and disease and that any evidence of that is insufficient.
So we're up to about 1960. That's when Jimmie Sikes started smoking. We've talked a lot about how it being a different time and a different culture.
It doesn't mean kids weren't told not to smoke at the time, just like Jimmie's father told him not to smoke. But kids smoked as a result of all of those ads and celebrities and athletes, and rebellious and being cool. That's what the ads are all about. And they're all about that because from the very beginning R.J. Reynolds has knowingly targeted kids as their next generation of smokers.
The culture of cigarette smoking in this country during that time period wasn't just by chance. It was the result of massive advertising and marketing campaigns by the cigarette company. Dr. Krugman told you they spent $200 billion between 1963 and 2008. That's billion, with a "b." And the result of that was to create a culture of acceptance of smoking, normalization of smoking, that targeted underage teenagers.
Now, the industry and R.J. Reynolds has denied that it ever targeted underage teenagers. The
evidence to the contrary is just massive. And we just showed you a little bit.
We started by showing you the documents between R.J. Reynolds and its advertising company in 1959 -that's when Jimmie Sikes is considering smoking; that's when he's about to start -- in which they are studying high school students.
Why do you study high school students and their smoking if you're not interested in having them smoke?
And then the next document showed you the results of that study, how many high school students smoked in the studies that they did. They denied that they ever studied high school students or teenagers. The documents are massive to the contrary.
They not only studied them. They studied their attitudes for the purpose of trying to determine why they started to smoke so that they could engage in advertising and marketing that would work on that.
And we showed you the document that dealt with their looking at and analyzing why teenagers buy their products.
They recognized the importance of teenaged smoking in their planning. You saw a document,
Plaintiff's Exhibit 387, Slide 42, in which they admitted in this strategic research project that the success of every brand over the last 50 years was the result of teenaged smoking.
You know what was happening at this time? Marlboro was their major competition. The Philip Morris company had gone from being the seventh largest cigarette company to the number-one company on the strength of Marlboro suddenly becoming the number-one brand. And Marlboro became the number-one brand because it was the favorite cigarette of 15- to 19-year-olds. It became the brand of teenagers, and that drove the company to become the number one.
R.J. Reynolds Company, with its competitive Winston product, was panicked about what Philip Morris was able to do and what Marlboro was able to do. And so they had all these documents, which we showed you, in which they studied, "Why was Marlboro successful with 15-year-olds, and what can we do to combat the success of the Marlboro company with our Winstons?" In other words, "What can we do to get 15-year-olds to buy Winston cigarettes?"
And perhaps the most interesting document is a presentation to the board of directors -- this is
Exhibit 316 -- of the 1975 marketing plans. The board of directors of the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company got together at Hilton Head Island in September of 1974 to put together their marketing plans for the next year. And the presentation said that the most important thing they could do was increase their young adult franchise.
Now, don't be confused by the use of the term "adult." They do that throughout the documents. They'll say "young adult," and then the rest of the document will talk about that means 14- to 20-year-olds. Most of us don't think of a 14-year-old as an adult, but this document has 14-to 20-year-olds in it six, eight times as the description of what they meant by increasing the young adult franchise.
Dr. Krugman showed you the kinds of ads that they have done over the years that clearly were directed at targeting teenagers and getting teenagers to smoke. And it wasn't just the ads themselves; it was where they put them. You know, you put an ad of Joe Camel with his hat turned backward with a cigarette in his mouth playing pool in the Rolling Stone magazine in 1973. Are you addressing that --
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Same objection. This is after Mr. Sikes turned 21.
THE COURT: It's overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: All of these documents show placement of ads that are clearly designed to target young teenagers in magazines that they know are read by young teenagers.
The ultimate answer to the question of whether they targeted young people is found in the consensus documents. We talked about the Surgeon General's reports. There were other reports as well. The Federal Trade Commission looked at this issue in 1967 when it reported to Congress, as required by the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act.
And what they reported to Congress was the pervasive effect of advertising -- "So pervasive is cigarette advertising that it is virtually impossible for Americans almost of any age to avoid cigarette advertising."
And the document then looks at the number of ads seen by teenagers for smoking in the average week on television. It looks at the ads in newspapers, it looks at ads in radio stations, in talking about teenaged marketing.
The Federal Trade Commission looked at the
issue again in 1981. And in 1981 it indicated in its report, once again under the auspices of the Act, that little had changed since its earlier report. "The Commission's Statement of Basis and Purpose for the 1964 Cigarette Rule noted two themes predominated cigarette advertising: portrayals of the desirability of smoking and assurances about the safety of cigarettes or the relative safety of various brands."
That's targeted to teenagers. That's targeted to existing smokers to keep them smoking.
And then the 1994 Surgeon General's Report, Exhibit 414, specifically addressed the issue of targeting teenagers to smoke. And in that document, among the conclusions set out -- we'll take a look at the beginning of the document -- was that, "Among addictive behaviors, cigarette smoking is the one most likely to become established during adolescence. People who begin to smoke at an early age are more likely to develop severe levels of nicotine addiction than those who start later."
Jimmie Sikes started to smoke at an early age and consequently was more likely to develop severe addiction.
They also wrote that, "Tobacco use primarily
begins in early adolescence, typically by age 16. Almost all first use occurs by the time of graduation."
You'll have the document, and you can see how it discusses how they targeted teenagers. It walks you through their sponsorship of sports, the ads targeting young people, use of radio, advertised --R.J. Reynolds Company advertised, according to the Surgeon General's report, on teenage radio after school. They're doing that because it must be an adult market?
And then the issue is addressed again in the National Cancer Institute 2008 report that also addresses the specific question of targeting. And let me direct you to one of the major conclusions. This is a very important document.
The National Cancer Institute, agency of the U.S. Government responsible for looking at these issues along with the Surgeon General, has at the beginning of it a list of its major conclusions.
And we'll bring that up. They're based upon the scientific evidence and evaluation provided in the monograph. And then it goes into detail, the evidence that they have.
And then I'd like you to look at Number 2, in
which they also noted that cigarettes are one of the most heavily marketed products in the United States. At that point in time they listed $250 billion on cigarette advertising and promotion.
And then if we go to the next page, they describe the depiction of cigarette smoking as being pervasive in movies, occurring in more than three-quarters of contemporary box-office hits.
And finally, and most importantly, if you'll look at the bottom of the prior page going on to this page -- and this is the whole point -- "The total weight of the evidence from multiple types of studies conducted by" -- and we'll go to the next page -- "investigators from different disciplines and using data from many countries demonstrates a causal relationship between tobacco advertising and promotion and increased tobacco use."
That's exactly what Dr. Krugman told you. Advertising works. These extensive, massive, pervasive advertising programs got people to smoke and it kept them smoking.
We were working our way up. We're now to about 1964, when the Surgeon General's report came out. I told you in the opening statement and Dr. Proctor confirmed that that report was the result of a
question asked President Kennedy at a press conference in 1962 about smoking in which the President of the United States, who was a smoker, did not know of the relationship between smoking and cancer. He formed a committee for the Surgeon General to look into the issue. They studied it for a couple of years and issued this report that smoking caused lung cancer and emphysema.
And it was at that point in time that R.J. Reynolds had the opportunity to do something right. It could have gone along with the evidence.
It could have admitted the evidence. It could have worked with the government to do what's right. But instead what it chose to do was continue to deny that cigarette smoking was harmful and to continue its assertion that if anything harmful in cigarettes was found, they would take it out.
It also understood at that point in time that nicotine was addictive, and it designed its cigarettes to create and sustain addiction.
Dr. Proctor talked about that. Dr. Proctor said, you know, we may think that cigarettes are just tobacco rolled in paper. That's not true. They are a highly engineered product. There are numerous parameters to them. They are designed so that they
make people addicted.
What did Dr. Proctor say they did to make them addictive? First of all, you don't become addicted to nicotine unless you get it to your brain. You get it to your brain by inhaling it, where it's absorbed by the lining of the lung and goes to the brain. So you first have to make sure they're inhalable.
And they do that by adding all kinds of compounds. They do that by how it is cured. They do that by how it is blended so that what would otherwise be too harsh to be inhaled, like a cigar, now becomes inhalable and thus addictive.
They secondly do it by determining the levels of nicotine to make sure that they're sufficient to be addictive. You know, the tobacco plant naturally has nicotine, but it doesn't naturally have the exact level of nicotine that's found in their cigarettes. You can pick up a Winston and it will have an exact level of nicotine whether you buy that pack today, tomorrow or a year from now, because that's designed into the product. They have determined the exact level of nicotine that they want. They do that by blending; they do that by reconstituted tobacco; they do that by taking out
and adding nicotine; and they do that by adding ammonia and other compounds that make it more addictive because it causes freebasing by raising the pH.
Now, that was the evidence from Dr. Proctor. Where is there any contrary evidence? Where is the witness from R.J. Reynolds that says, "Oh, no, we don't -- we don't design cigarettes to create and sustain addiction"? No such testimony in contradiction to what Dr. Proctor said.
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SHIELDS: The undisputed evidence -MR. BOYCE: Misstates Dr. Figlar's testimony.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: The undisputed evidence is that they designed their cigarettes to create and sustain addiction.
Now, they continued this campaign of doubt following the Surgeon General's report for the next three decades. We've given you and you'll have in evidence press releases, other publications and statements and video presentations. Just to remind you of a couple, let me show you again the statement by the president of the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company in 1984 on television.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer. Yes or no?
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. It has not been causally established.
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Cigarette smoking -- no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Despite all the research to date, there has been no causal link established.
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: No causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease?
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: No. As a matter of fact, there are studies that -- while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over ten years that would say again that science is still puzzled over these forces.
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Does it stain your teeth?
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: There are people who say it does. I guess depending on the human being's own, let's say, physical makeup, it may well stain
your teeth.
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: All right."
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. SHIELDS: He won't even admit it stains your teeth.
This is 20 years after the Surgeon General's report in 1964. It is 30 years after their own internal scientists like Dr. Teague acknowledged that the evidence established that it caused cancer in 1964.
I'll show you another example of that from a representative of The Tobacco Institute, that group that's paid for entirely by tobacco companies like R.J. Reynolds and on which R.J. Reynolds sat on its executive directors.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: This is a CBS News Extra on smoking and health."
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. SHIELDS: Wrong one.
THE COURT: Do you want a minute, Mr. Shields? Might we -- you want a minute, maybe take a five-minute break -MR. SHIELDS: That will be fine.
THE COURT: -- to get that cued up?
MR. SHIELDS: Yes.
THE COURT: Why don't we do that, ladies and gentlemen, take a five-minute break, and then we'll be back at 11:36.
(The jury retired to the jury room.)
(Recess taken.)
THE COURT: You gentlemen ready?
MR. BOYCE: Ready, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Good job, Mr. Carter.
MR. CARTER: Thank you.
THE COURT: These look good.
MR. KALIL: Your Honor, did he give you the verdict form as well?
THE COURT: He already gave me that.
MR. KALIL: I believe this morning we had some spacing issues on Page 3, when they converted it. We have some of ours that didn't have the spacing issues on Page 3, on the other six -THE COURT: On their Page 3 -MR. KALIL: On 3, 7, 1, 2 and 3, does yours have a spacing issue on some lettering?
THE COURT: Yes.
MR. KALIL: Here's a corrected one that does
not.
THE COURT: Okay. Are we ready to resume, then?
MR. SHIELDS: Yes, Your Honor.
THE COURT: All right. Bring the jurors on in.
(The jury resumed its place in the jury box and the following proceedings were held:)
THE COURT: All right. Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. You can resume your seats and we'll continue.
Mr. Shields.
MR. SHIELDS: Thank you, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. SHIELDS: We were about to show you anoth example of the kinds of things that they were saying on television.
If we could bring that up, please.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: We are also very concerned about the charges leveled against our product, and we're very anxious to do whatever we can to clear the air on this matter. We happen to be optimistic about the future, and we happen to feel that this is a great industry and that this industry can face the future with confidence because
when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient."
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. SHIELDS: That's been repeated, that statement, to reassure smokers that it's okay to smoke, "If and when we ever find anything harmful in cigarettes, we're confident we can take it out," as if, "Go ahead and continue smoking because we'll solve the problem."
Do you have the second clip?
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: We -- we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that."
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. SHIELDS: Now, these aren't outliers.
These aren't where we've cherry-picked something to see what they were saying. This is what they said from 1954 with the Frank Statement ultimately until they finally admitted the truth in 2000. This entire campaign, what they called internally their
campaign of doubt, was designed to reassure smokers to keep them smoking.
Now, I say "campaign of doubt" because the documents show that's exactly what they called it.
One of the documents you will have is Exhibit 305.
And the document describes the approach that they have taken for over 20 years as creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it. And you see that in their statements over and over again, whether it's on Face the Nation, whether it's on Nightline, whether it's on the ads that they send out. That was part of their campaign.
Their campaign also included failing to admit the truth about what they knew about addiction and ultimately denying that cigarettes were addictive despite the fact that they knew they were. And for evidence that they knew they were addictive, let's take a look at Exhibit 238, another document that you will have.
This document came out right before the Surgeon General's report. It was sent to R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. It is a document that describes some studies that they were doing in Europe that had some implications about the addictive nature of cigarette smoking and which were not provided to the
Surgeon General.
And what the document indicates is the conclusion, "Moreover, nicotine is addictive. We are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the release of stress mechanisms.
"But cigarettes -- we will assume the Surgeon General's committee to say -- despite the beneficent effect of nicotine, have certain unattractive side effects." The unattractive side effects include that they cause or predispose to lung cancer, they contribute to certain cardiovascular diseases, they may well be truly causative in emphysema.
Despite those internal admissions shown by their secret internal documents that nicotine was addictive, when the Surgeon General issued his first major report on in it 1988, they ridiculed him. We showed you that videotape of Dwyer where he personally attacked the Secretary of Health, Joseph Califano, when the report was issued, but they did it in writing as well. They did it with a press release.
And one of the documents you will have in evidence is their press release in which they said, "Claims that cigarettes are addictive are
irresponsible and scare tactics." And that document was picked up by newspapers and carried around the country, their assertion that they're irresponsible scare tactics, despite the fact that their internal documents admitted that cigarettes were addictive.
As late as 1994, the president of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, along with the presidents of all of the other tobacco companies, went before Congress, raised their right hands and swore to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, and swore that cigarettes were not addictive, despite their internal documents saying they understood they were addictive, despite the fact -MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Misstates Mr. Johnson's testimony.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: -- despite the fact that they're designing cigarettes to create and sustain addiction, despite the fact that Dr. Teague and others had written about using addiction to get a greater share of the market. That's the evidence you'll have.
Now, how does this relate to the question of specific causation, specific causation's connection between such misconduct and Jimmie Sikes? Let's
take an example of it in terms of what is called the strict liability claim.
The Engle finding was that cigarettes were defective and unreasonably dangerous. The Court will instruct you on that finding. Causation is the relationship between that defect and injury.
The defect is clear from the evidence. The evidence is that the cigarettes were defective because they contained toxic chemicals that caused lung disease such as emphysema and nicotine in sufficient quantities to addict cigarette smokers to keep them smoking cigarettes so that they would suffer from such lung disease. That's the defect.
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Nobody knows what the defect the Engle jury referenced.
THE COURT: Overruled. It's argument.
MR. SHIELDS: That's the defect, ladies and gentlemen. And the connection to Jimmie Sikes is absolutely clear, because that's exactly what he suffered from, emphysema. And the Court's instruction on the defect is that's exactly all that is required.
Similarly, look at fraudulent concealment.
What was fraudulently concealed? There's a massive amount of fraudulent concealment, but let me just
tell you a little of what the evidence says about -MR. BOYCE: Object, Your Honor. Move to strike the word "massive" as a reference to things not in evidence.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: Your Honor, I must request that these constant interruptions -THE COURT: I tell you what. Gentlemen, step over here for a second.
(A sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:)
THE COURT: This is the last time I'm going to say it. I'm going to start hitting everybody for money, because that's what -- that's the only thing I think I can do. I could put somebody in jail, but I'd never go that far.
If you want to make an objection and say "improper argument" or something like that -MR. BOYCE: Okay.
THE COURT: -- no problem. I'm good with that. The next time this happens from you, Mr. Boyce, it's going to cost you some money -MR. BOYCE: Yeah.
THE COURT: -- okay? And, unfortunately, I guess -- and I -- well, I shouldn't -- I'm not going
to -- well, I'll say it. I don't think -- I'm hoping now that Mr. Shields knows that you're on the verge of losing some money he's not going to do the same. I guess to be fair I'd have to give him a couple before I got in your wallet, but I really don't want to do that either.
MR. BOYCE: If I could have an objection "improper argument," that's okay, and if I have to explain, ask to approach.
THE COURT: Then, yeah.
MR. BOYCE: Okay.
THE COURT: Uh-huh.
MR. BOYCE: Thank you.
THE COURT: Sure.
(The sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held:)
THE COURT: I'm sorry, Mr. Shields. Go right ahead. I forgot where you were.
MR. SHIELDS: Thank you.
We were talking about what it was that was fraudulently concealed. And as I indicated, there's a massive amount of evidence that all kinds of -MR. BOYCE: Objection. Improper argument.
THE COURT: It was already overruled.
So go right ahead, Mr. Shields.
MR. SHIELDS: There's a massive amount of evidence about what was improper -- what was fraudulently concealed. Let's just look at a little of it.
Among other things, what is concealed is that they knew that cigarettes caused disease and were addictive. Now, it's not concealment that they were. Because other people were saying that. What was being concealed was that they knew that that was true while they denied it. What was being concealed was their claim that there was doubt when they knew the exact reverse was true.
Secondly, that filters did not reduce the risk.
They implied through their ads, they implied through the names they put on the products, and they affirmatively represented that filters and low tar and so forth reduced the risk of any injury, knowing that wasn't true. And the evidence now establishes beyond doubt, as pointed out in the most recent report of the Surgeon General, the 2012 report, that there is no evidence that filters, low tar, lights or others, have any reduction in the risk of catastrophic disease or illness.
They also fraudulently concealed that there really wasn't any scientific controversy; this whole
assertion that there was a scientific controversy is made up. The only controversy was that they disputed it, not that any legitimate, independent scientist disputed it.
They also concealed that they already knew what was harmful in cigarettes by affirmatively asserting that, "If we ever find anything in it, we'll take it out." Implicit in that is the concealment that they already knew what was harmful and knew that it was impossible to take out.
So these are among the things that were concealed. How does that impact Jimmie Sikes?
Well, I submit to you that it impacted everybody in America and that you can look at what was happening generally and conclude that it impacted Jimmie Sikes. But above and beyond that, you know what he told Janice Sikes when she first asked him about why he smoked before he had his first heart attack.
He repeated the very arguments that they had been making over the years as to why it was okay to smoke. One, "I'm healthy. Must not be hurting me." That kind of argument comes only from the tobacco company. It comes only from R.J. Reynolds, as to why they tried to encourage people to smoke.
Two, he said, "Nonsmokers don't get cancer" -or "Nonsmokers do get cancer; therefore cigarettes must not cause cancer." That argument was presented only by the tobacco company, and it continued to be the way they asserted the evidence is insufficient.
He has repeated exactly what they are misrepresenting.
Three, he said, "Most smokers don't get lung cancer," as in, "Consequently, there's no serious risk." The truth of the matter was, as we have said, that almost 50 percent of smokers will die from a smoking-related disease.
And, finally, he said, "I smoke filters," as in, "That will reduce my risk." And we know that simply is not true.
But in addition to what he told Janice, which shows back at the time that he was believing what they were saying and was relying on it, we have his affidavit, an affidavit in which he sets out under oath not only his smoking history, the fact that he had used hypnosis, Zyban, nicotine patch, nicotine gum, shock therapy and ear stapling to try and quit, that he had experienced great difficulty in quitting, and that he thought he was addicted to cigarettes. It also describes what commercials he
saw, his being a NASCAR fan and seeing the NASCAR sponsorship, and the fact that he switched to Winston Lights and Winston Ultralights because he thought it would reduce risk. And, finally, that all of their advertising implied the safety of the product in those earlier years. He believed and relied on that advertising.
Let's turn, then, from causation to comparative fault.
Comparative fault is where you as the jury get to say, "Let's see who we think are at fault and I will compare them to the other." You have to look at both, because under Florida law it's not just simply is the negligence solely that of the defendant, but you can also look at the plaintiff.
Now, I said in the beginning we understand how you as a jury can look at this and criticize Mr. Sikes for not quitting sooner. And I'm going to talk about that in a moment. But given his attempts and given his failures and given how he reacted to them, we suggest to you if you think that amounts to fault, it is minor in comparison to what they did over the years. But you could make the determination that you think it is his and do an allocation.
Their misconduct includes targeting people like Jimmie Sikes as a kid, creating a culture of acceptance and normalization of smoking through their pervasive advertising and marketing, designing cigarettes so that they created and sustained addiction, and their decades-long campaign of denial and concealment of the real risks of smoking.
But I want you to think about something else when you're looking at the question of comparative fault. Let's think about the time period from 1994 afterwards.
Nobody is going to say to you that Jimmie Sikes, after he had his heart attack, did not recognize that cigarettes were harmful to him. His doctor told him they were. He tried to quit because he obviously thought it was harmful to him.
But think about what happened in all those quit attempts thereafter. The evidence is that had he been able to quit in the years following that, the COPD would not have continued to progress to the point that it killed him. Now, he still would have had COPD, but it wouldn't have progressed to the point that his lung function was so bad that it resulted in his death at age 63.
And what does that mean in terms of comparing
fault? What's happening during that time period?
He's trying to quit to save his life and he can't because he's addicted. And compare that to the fact that he's addicted because their product is designed to create and sustain addiction. Compare that to the fact that they continued to say throughout that period of time that there was nothing harmful in their product.
You have to make that determination. You have to determine whether you think you should allocate and what the allocation should be, which brings us to the final issue, damages and punitive damages.
There are two types of damages, compensatory damages and there's punitive damages. One of the things you'll be asked to determine in this phase, the first phase, is compensatory damages. I'm going to talk to you about what they are. But you're also going to be asked whether you want to award punitive damages, whether the plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages.
Let's talk about the first, compensatory damages. Now, you're going to be shown a verdict form that sets out the kinds of damages that can be awarded. The verdict form, as I told you earlier, what you will take out with you, has as the first
question the question of class membership. And as you work your way through the verdict form, you will be answering the various questions on the issues that we talked about until you get to the question of the amount of damages in Question Number 7.
And the Court will provide instructions to you about what damages can be awarded, but this verdict form literally follows what instructions he'll give you about what kinds of damages can be awarded.
They fall into two categories. First they're the damages of Janice Sikes as his surviving spouse. And you will be asked to determine an amount of damages for her mental pain and suffering as a result of her husband's injury and death. You'll be asked to determine an amount for the loss of her husband's protection and companionship. You'll be asked to determine an amount for the loss of her husband's past services, and, finally, an amount for the loss of future services.
In considering those items, you need to think about their life together as she described it. And you're going to have not only testimony, but you're going to have some documents. We went through a series of photographs that walked you through their life. And let's take a look at a few of them,
because they tell us something about how to answer these questions.
One of the photographs was in 1993, when she first met him. He's the captain of the La Cruise.
This is a meeting with Coast Guard people while they're in port.
And the next document she described for you is one of his tasks included the task of performing a wedding on board the ship. And this is a picture of him doing that just before he had his heart attack in July of 1993, looking fit, trim, healthy.
The next picture is a picture of him with his friend. This picture ultimately was cropped to use it on -- in his funeral, to just show him.
The next picture takes you forward in time to when they were married, shortly after they were married, 2000, and it's the funeral of Jim's father in which he is there with his brothers and his sister, and she identified them for you.
And then we showed you pictures from their wedding on board the La Cruise, and after they were married, a picture of him on board the La Cruise as the captain.
And then, finally, a picture that Ashley identified of him at her wedding. And by this point
in time then you're beginning to see the injury.
See behind him the oxygen tank that was described by Ashley and how they tried to hide it at the wedding because of his embarrassment of it and him not wanting to have that show up in her wedding pictures, and how he was beginning to look at this point in time. The process of deterioration from COPD is occurring, his chest is expanding as a result of the process, and he is dramatically looking different than he did only a few years earlier from the process of the disease.
Ultimately to the point where, as depicted in this photograph, with more than 50 hospitalizations in the last few years before he died, hospitalizations in which he was intubated, he was on a ventilator.
Janice described the process and how she felt; but, more importantly, her daughter Ashley gave you the true picture of it. Her daughter Ashley described how devastated her mother was, how devote she was to him, to the point that she would have to work and then drive to where he was at the hospital; and when they wouldn't let her stay in the hospital, how she would sleep in her car overnight outside the hospital to be close to him in the event something
happened.
Her daughter Ashley described how she cried literally every day during those extensive hospitalizations, how devastating it was to her to face the prospect that she was going to lose him. And her daughter Ashley described how lost she has been since his death, how morose and depressed, unable to do things and totally lost because of his absence.
It was a very special relationship between the two of them. I think you picked it up from the testimony of Ashley and Janice and others. And that's part of evaluating how you're going to award damages.
If we can go back to this verdict form.
You're going to have to determine what you, as jurors, collectively believe would be an appropriate amount to award for her pain and suffering as a result of her husband's injury and death. You're going to have to determine what you think is a reasonable value for the loss of his companionship, what you think is a reasonable value for the loss of his past services and a reasonable value for his future services.
I'm going to suggest to you -- it's a
suggestion that I think is reasonable and appropriate, but it's ultimately your determination.
I suggest that you should award an amount not less than $2 million in each of those categories. Given Janice's age and given what losses she has faced and what the future holds for her, $2 million in each of those categories is more than reasonable.
The second category of damages is damages to the estate. And that includes any lost earnings of James Sikes from the date of injury to the date of death. And you had a determination of that. Recall when Dr. Spruance testified, when John was putting on the board what Dr. Spruance was testifying to.
And he gave you two figures. One, the lost earnings of $589,000. He gave you loss of services of 165,000. And you were also told that the medical expenses were approximately $1.3 million. That's to be included in Item Number 2. And then finally you will have a document from the funeral expenses, the bill from the funeral expenses, which is slightly over $5,000.
In addition to awarding those damages, you will be asked whether you should award punitive damages. Now, punitive damages is a separate phase. The question you're going to answer on this first phase
is merely whether you think there's an entitlement to punitive damages, and the Court will instruct you on what the standard is.
I suggest to you, given the extensive evidence in this case of gross misconduct, of purposeful, knowing concealment, of targeting teenagers and kids to smoke, of designing cigarettes to create and sustain addiction despite the fact that you know that hundreds of thousands of people die as a result, if ever there was a case for punitive damages, this is it.
Now, there's been some implication that they have changed. You heard questions about, well, these doctors you saw on these exhibits still don't work at the company. Of course they don't work at the company, because the conspiracy went almost 50 years, so that by natural attrition they're no longer there.
But that doesn't mean that the basis doesn't continue. They continue to attack and denigrate those who they believe are in opposition. They continue to justify their wrongful conduct by claiming they've changed when they use the same tactics.
They never do anything that the government
hasn't forced them to do. They blame their customers by using such terms as "choice" and "responsibility" instead of acknowledging what choices they made or acknowledging what responsibility they should have.
They continue to design their cigarettes to create and sustain addiction, while denying, as you saw in this case, that people really continue to smoke because of addiction. They still don't undertake any studies at all to determine how to make cigarettes less addictive. And they continue to focus their marketing and advertising agents on teenagers for one simple fact. And you saw this -MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Improper argument on entitlement.
THE COURT: Sustained on the last part.
MR. SHIELDS: Ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to sit down now and let Mr. Boyce talk for a while.
I'll have a chance after he talks to come back and respond to what he has to say, and I look forward to doing that.
Thank you.



THE COURT: Thank you, Mr. Boyce.
Ladies and gentlemen, we'll take a 15-minute break until ten minutes after three and then we'll resume. Don't discuss the case among yourselves, don't let anybody discuss it in your presence, don't form any fixed opinions. See you back in 15 minutes.
(Short break.)
CLOSING ARGUMENT.
MR. SHIELDS: It's getting late. I will do my best to be as concise as I can and avoid taking all of the available time I'm going to have left and just address some issues with you. As a beginning point, let me make a few observations about the closing argument we just heard.
Seems to me one, what you heard totally glosses over their own misconduct. Just almost doesn't discuss it at all. Just ignores the evidence of Dr. Proctor and Dr. Burns and Dr. Krugman. But
nonetheless, they still try, after all these years, to justify what they did during that 50-year campaign. I want to talk to you more about that.
Secondly, they continue the same old tactics that they have from the very beginning.
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Improper argument with "they".
THE COURT: Okay. If you can zero in on Reynolds then, Mr. Shields. I think we know that's what you're talking about, but -MR. SHIELDS: Yes, Your Honor, when I say "they" I'm referring to the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and their lawyers in this case.
MR. BOYCE: Objection. It's improper to bring the lawyers into the argument.
THE COURT: Go ahead, Mr. Shields.
MR. SHIELDS: And what I want to suggest to you because you have seen it and how R.J. Reynolds defended this case, that they continue to personally attack those who they regard as against them. They have attempted to totally trash Jim Sikes from the beginning. Looked through 18,000 pages of medical records to see if they could find anything that they could twist into some way of making him look bad. They've done the same with the testimony.
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Can we approach, please?
THE COURT: Sure.
(A sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:)
MR. BOYCE: Your Honor, this violates your pretrial ruling. They're not allowed to disparage defense counsel. They're not allowed to refer to "tobacco" or "big tobacco" or "them" or "they". There's one Defendant in this case. It's R.J. Reynolds. If he wants to talk about evidence, that's fine. But the rest of this is already improper and off to a bad start. We have a ruling on this already.
THE COURT: I understand. And I think he's clarified when he says "they" he's talking about R.J. Reynolds which is what I've taken it to be, quite frankly.
MR. BOYCE: It doesn't make it right. Theirs is a pretrial ruling that they're not allowed to use these glorified pronouns and suggest that the tobacco industry is on trial here. It's not proper.
THE COURT: I understand it. And, quite frankly, my impression of it and the way I've gleaned it, that's not what was intended. Having
said that, let's just try -- I know it's hard to do.
MR. SHIELDS: I can say "they" instead of "it" but I mean the same thing.
THE COURT: I understand it's hard to do.
Maybe you can just say Reynolds, Reynolds, Reynolds.
MR. BOYCE: That would be consistent with your ruling and the law.
THE COURT: Okay.
MR. SHIELDS: I do request -- I was not constantly objecting -THE COURT: Let me -MR. SHIELDS: This is distracting here.
THE COURT: I know there is. I agree. Let me say that, because quit frankly, in my opinion,
Mr. Shields could have gotten up and objected on several different occasions and he was gracious enough not to do it.
So unless it's just something that's going to get us into a mistrial, I appreciate you not doing it.
MR. BOYCE: Okay, I'll do that now. I will make that motion right now, Your Honor, that these references to defense counsel, the tobacco industry, the use of the pronouns "they", that start off this is the same thing they've always done, it's already
too late, I'd like a continuing objection on it. I will move for a mistrial now so the record will be preserved.
THE COURT: Okay. Yeah, it's denied. You're killing me, man. We're three now.
MR. BOYCE: Got to make this record. You know how it goes. And as long as I have a continuing objection, we'll let it go from there.
THE COURT: Well, good. Then maybe I will still hold the record because I'm starting to become crushed. It's -- you know, I'm getting sad about it. But -- and I think the record's clear, to this point, I don't think that's what's happened. But your objection is noted. It will be a continuing one, and so we hopefully won't have to do that again.
MR. BOYCE: Thank you, Judge. Appreciate it.
THE COURT: Uh-huh.
(The sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court in the presence of the jury:)
MR. SHIELDS: Not only has Reynolds attacked Jim Sikes, but they've attacked the other witnesses as well. We've heard that Dr. Schoonover somehow wasn't telling the truth when he said that there
were other occasions when they discussed smoking a quitting smoking because of some reference in the records to a hamster. I'm sorry, I didn't quite follow that. But I do believe that Dr. Schoonover was a credible, competent witness, a man who told you, among other things, his following description for Jim Sikes.
Here's what he testified to. Here's a man who's had two basically heart operations, life threatening and has very, very severe COPD. This is a guy that really liked to be active and really wanted to live. And yet despite all of that he knew smoking was bad but he just couldn't stop. And that, to my eye, is severely addicted.
I understand why they wanted to attack Dr. Schoonover because he, like all the other witnesses, made it absolutely clear that Jim Sikes' smoking was as a result of his addiction to cigarettes.
Now they also even attacked the Surgeon General's Reports by suggesting that something that was wrong by not listing the author of each chapter of the Surgeon General's Report. The Surgeon General's Report, as Dr. Burns pointed out at the very beginning, is a consensus report of all of the
scientists. It is not that a chapter as written by a given scientist. It's by each and every one of them in totality that -- ascribing to what is being set out.
Third, so much of what has been said is not based on any evidence whatsoever. Mr. Boyce's closing argument for the most part wasn't referring to any testimony of any witness or any evidence in the form of documents but it was Mr. Boyce making assertions about Mr. Sikes and what Mr. Sikes did or didn't do.
This case has to be decided on the evidence and on the fundamental issue of whether Jim Sikes continued to smoke because of his addiction. You have the testimony of Dr. Tonya Werner that he did. You have the admission of Dr. Bernstein that one of the reasons he continued to smoke was because of his addiction. You have all the lay testimony that he did not want to continue to smoking, that he disliked it, that he thought it was dirty, that he tried to stop, and he just couldn't do it. That is smoking because of an addiction.
And all the assertions of Mr. Boyce to the contrary doesn't change the fundamental evidence in the case.
Finally, one final observation is that so much of what you heard was totally misleading and misstated what the evidence was in this case, and so I want to go back over that.
MR. BOYCE: Objection. Improper argument.
Move to strike.
THE COURT: It's overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: I want to go back over that evidence in a little bit of detail to remind you about what it really was. First of all, let's talk about what they had to say about their own misconduct over that 50-year period.
The evidence in this case was from Dr. Krugman that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company knowingly targeted teenagers as the primary source of their new business for the last 50 years. He showed you documents from the time that Jim Sikes was considering his teenage years when he first started to smoke.
We showed you documents that ran from the '50s, '60s, '70s, to the '80s, into the '90s of that continuing campaign of the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company to target teenagers as the next generation of smokers and we went back to the 1920s and showed you even as far back as 1927 they were sending memos
out to say, go to the local school and try and tell -- sell cigarettes, put up ads and put up things next to the stores that are closest to the school, go select the student leaders and have them advocate your product.
They have knowingly targeted teenagers for their entire existence. It's in their DNA. And why? Because teenagers don't sit down and decide, I'm going to smoke because I want to take the risk or I don't want to smoke because of the way -teenagers make decisions on a feel basis, on the basis of wanting to be like other teenagers.
As Dr. Krugman says, it's down in this category. It's not a thought process. It's a process of "what are my friends doing, somebody hands me a cigarette, I start smoking, I want to be cool, I want to look like the guy on television or in the movies, I want to be like my peers."
And the point of it is, from the standpoint of R.J. Reynolds, when they target that child to do that, is when the child starts to smoke he is more likely to become severely addicted as a result of starting at that early age than someone starting as an adult. And that is why there is such a high likelihood of continued smoking for decades and
decades the earlier you start to smoke, and that is well-known to the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company anc to the other tobacco companies.
And why do they do that? Because that's the only source of replacement smokers. There's almost no switching of brands in the adult market.
Dr. Krugman told you that. He said you cannot explain spending $200 billion based on brand switching because only about eight to ten percent of adults ever switch brands. You take what revenue would exist from switching from one brand to the other, it doesn't even come close to how much money they spend in advertising and promoting the products.
Well, why are they doing that? It's not to get adults to switch brands. It's to get kids to start smoking because they lose about 5,000 smokers a day who either quit or die. If they're not going to go out of business they got to replace them with someone.
As the testimony came in, the only source of replacement smokers are teenagers, and so they continue to target them and they have for the last 50 years.
Now, instead of talking about that, instead of
talking about all they did to create a campaign of doubt, instead of talking about how they continued to try and reassure smokers to continue to smoke by saying "if there's anything in this product that's harmful, we'll take it out so that you won't be harmed", instead of addressing all of the misrepresentations and misstatements and concealment, all they do is attack Dr. Burns and attack Dr. Proctor.
Now, both of them have been studying tobacco and what the tobacco industry has done for most of their life. Dr. Burns, for all practical purposes, is the most knowledgeable expert in the country, perhaps in the world of tobacco, having spent his entire career dealing with this issue. And he's on almost every panel that deals with the issue and has been involved in writing the Surgeon General's Reports for the last 35 to 40 years.
Now, he didn't come in here and talk specifically about Mr. Sikes because that wasn't the point of his testimony. The point of his testimony was to talk about their misconduct. And instead of dealing with that, they attack him.
The point of Dr. Proctor's testimony was not to come in and talk about Jim Sikes. The point was for
him to say here's what the tobacco industry did in the '50s, the '60s, the '70s, the '80s and the '90s. Here's where they represented all these facts, but if you look at their internal documents they acknowledged the truth, but publicly they say just the reverse.
Instead of dealing with any of those statements, instead of dealing with the facts set out in all those records, they attack Dr. Proctor.
That is their MO for trying to defend themselves.
So they gloss over the case against them. They won't accept any responsibility after all these years. After the findings of the Engle Court and the fact that the Court's going to instruct you that if you find he's a member of the class, you're bound by those findings, they do nothing to accept any responsibility except to attack Jim Sikes.
So let's turn then from their failure to what kinds of misleading statements they have made about the evidence in this case. Let me begin by saying you would have thought from the closing argument that you heard in this case that the issue in this case was whether it's possible to quit smoking.
That is not the issue. The issue is not whether it's possible to quit. After all, Jim Sikes did
quit in a fundamental tenement of addiction medicine is that people can quit. Whether you're talking about heroin or cocaine or nicotine or alcohol, people quit who are addicts. It doesn't mean they weren't addicts because they quit.
The issue in the case is whether he continued to smoke because of his addiction. We showed you the slide.
Bring up slide five again.
The Court's instruction to you on this issue very clearly is to prove by the greater weight of the evidence that Jim Sikes was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine -- that is admitted -- and that smoking, because of the addiction, was the cause of his death.
It is not that smoking was only because of the addiction or addiction was the exclusive reason he smoked or that there were no other reasons that he smoked.
It was been admitted that one of the reasons he continued to smoke by their own expert was because he was addicted. That meets the class definition.
MR. BOYCE: Objection. Improper argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: The issue is also not whether
addiction was the legal cause. The legal cause question is a question of whether smoking was the legal cause.
MR. BOYCE: Objection.
MR. SHIELDS: Take a look at slide 10.
MR. BOYCE: Objection. Improper argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: This is the instruction the Court is going to give you on the legal cause issue.
Contrary to what you heard by Mr. Boyce, it is not whether addition is the legal cause. It's smoking is a legal cause. That's the issue you're going to have to deal with and it's whether smoking containing nicotine is a legal cause if it directly and in the natural and continuous sequence produces or contributed substantially to producing James Sikes' death.
Is there any doubt about that? There's no evidence to the contrary. The totality of the evidence is that smoking caused his death. Smoking was directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced his death. That's the issue of legal cause. The issue of addiction is simply the question of class membership of whether he continued to smoke, in part, because of his addiction. Don't
be misled by the attempt to restate the issue in something it isn't to try and avoid the conclusion that is inescapable here, that Mr. Sikes was a member of the Engle class. If anybody was a member of the Engle class, this man was.
Not only do you have those misleading statements about what the nature of the issue was, throughout it you had misleading statements about some of the evidence. You were told, for example, that 60 million smokers have quit. Wait a minute.
Dr. Werner responded to him when he asked that question and she said, "Well, that's a little misleading. It includes ever smokers", meaning if you ever picked up a cigarette in your life, and you didn't smoke after that, then you're regarded in that 60 million figure as someone who's quit. So it's not regular smokers. It's not addicted smokers. The 60 million figure is anyone who has ever picked up a cigarette in his life and it's totally meaningless.
If you look at the number of regular smokers who have quit, you get a much lower figure. And the statistical data, which they can't do anything about because it keeps being repeated in the Surgeon General's Report, and DSM, and by the expert
witnesses is, 90 percent of smokers want to quit.
40 percent try each year. Less than 3 percent succeed. That's how addicted this subject it.
Doesn't mean people can't quit in the long run but it takes multiple tries, it takes years for people to succeed.
Another misleading statement, the discussion of when nicotine is out of your body. The whole point of that is to suggest to you if nicotine is out of your body then you can't be addicted. The exact opposite is the truth. Dr. Werner told you it is the fact that nicotine is out of your body that is one of the elements of proof of addiction because it's the lack of the presence of nicotine which causes the withdrawal effects, which causes the cravings, which causes the problems that result in relapse.
But they suggest in a misleading fashion as well that the symptoms only occur over a period of time so it's out of your body and you no longer got the symptoms, you're no longer addicted. You, in fact, heard him say that there were nine times over the years when he was no longer addicted but went back to smoking.
Is there any evidence to support that
whatsoever other than Mr. Boyce standing up and saying it? The evidence came from Dr. Werner and she flatly disagreed with him when he tried to get her to say that. She said, no, DSM doesn't say you're not addicted. It says you are in remission.
And if you look at the DSM it talks about people who have quit as being in remission. And the reason they are regarded as being in remission is because 85 percent of them will relapse. And they will relapse months later, weeks later, often years later because of a psychological cues and the behavioral process that when you pick up that cigarette again, like having that drink for an alcoholic, you relapse into smoking as you were before.
But the issue, ladies and gentlemen, is simply in terms of whether you're a member of the class, whether addiction was one of the reasons he continued to smoke. How can anyone conclude that it was not one of the reasons he continued to smoke? You take the nicotine out of the cigarettes, people don't smoke. Surgeon General says it's the fundamental reason people continue to smoke.
All the scientists say it's the fundamental reason people continue to smoke. Here's a man who
did not want to smoke. Here's a man who wanted to quit smoking, as Dr. Schoonover said. Here's a man who knew his life was on the line if he didn't quit smoking. Here's a man who in order to get a lung transplant and live would have to quit smoking, and he still couldn't quit smoking.
Is that choice? Is he choosing to die? No, what it is is he's addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. That's the reality. And all of the misleading statements and misstatements of the evidence from defense doesn't change that fundamental fact.
You've heard a lot about the affidavit of Mr. Sikes and that was a pretty amazing discussion. Here's an affidavit from a man who sets out what cigarettes he smoked, what brands he smoked, who says I tried on numerous occasions to quit and I couldn't, and who says I was addicted and that's the reason I couldn't.
And yet we hear there's not a bit of evidence about why he relapsed. He told you why, because he was addicted. He talks about what commercials he saw. And this is truly interesting as an example of how it is all misstated.
He took the affidavit that dealt with the
commercials in which Mr. Sikes said, I watched the television programs, Gunsmoke, I Love Lucy, saw the Marlboro man, and then he makes an argument in which he sticks into the sentence "only" and says,
Mr. Sikes said he only saw the Marlboro man, yet he's not even suing Marlboro.
There's no 'only' in that sentence. Just adding, just made up for the purpose of creating an argument that wasn't there.
MR. BOYCE: Objection. Improper argument. Affidavit speaks for itself.
MR. SHIELDS: It does. And what it says -THE COURT: Overruled. It does. Go ahead.
MR. SHIELDS: And what it says is I specifically remember Gunsmoke, I Love Lucy, and advertisements with the Marlboro man. You see any "only" in that? I was a fan of Winston Cup racing and their products were one I used often. I started smoking Winston cigarettes in 1969. I later switched to Winston Lights and then finally to Winston Ultralights. The whole point of smoking Lights and Ultralights was that they supposedly were safer that, they reduced the risk.
And he also identifies the other brands he smoked.
The whole argument that you heard at length about that affidavit is based on totally misstating what it says. You'll have the affidavit in evidence. Read it. See if it says anything like what Mr. Boyce contended when he was making that argument.
There was a discussion of labeling. You heard a great deal about labels. You saw some charts that said here's the label in '69, here's the label in '85. Several comments that I think you should keep in mind.
First, when Jim Sikes started smoking at 12 years of age in 1960 there weren't any labels on cigarettes warning anybody about them being harmful. He started smoking before any of that was on there.
So that warning label is not something he is seeing when, as a 12-year old, he's picking it up and first becoming addicted.
Secondly, the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and the industry opposed putting any labels on their products, and claimed that the labels were wrong.
You saw the testimony from Mr. Hyman, the former president of their company. Mr. Hyman testified and you saw it in the videotape that not only did they oppose the labels, but they believed they were wrong
because they asserted cigarettes were not hazardous to anybody. And they made that assertion loud and clear in the press and on television, in ads, in sending out bogus scientific journals to doctors and the scientists, in making the claim over and over again in massive numbers of expenditures that said that nothing was harmful in cigarettes despite the warning.
Next, recall the discussion of whether the warnings actually were effective in warning people. Federal Trade Commission in 1967 issued a report, Exhibit 269 -- you'll have a chance to look at it -the major conclusion of that report is that the warning labels are totally ineffective. Take a look at that report. You only have to look at the first chapter and it's literally the first thing in the report, that the warning labels are totally ineffective.
In 1981 they looked at the issue again and concluded that the warning labels were still ineffective based upon three polls and three surveys that they did.
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Federal preemption.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: The surveys that they did and that are set out in the 1981 report is where they ask smokers what they knew about the risks of smoking and had them compare them to other risks. It's a really interesting document because it gives an example of what people thought, smokers like Jim Sikes during that time period.
And while the general question of if you said, are smokers -- are cigarettes bad for you, would get high levels of answers, but the Gallup Poll they talked about. When it became more are specific, it was really amazing. Most of the smokers didn't understand that smoking caused heart disease. Most smokers did not understand that it was a major cause of lung cancer. Most smokers did not understand that it caused problems with birth defects and premature birth. It was just a total lack of understanding. This is in the early '80s of what smoking did.
And perhaps most interestingly of all, if you look at that document, is that two-thirds of the smokers, when they had to rate the severity of any risk of smoking, rated it less than falling in a bathtub. That's what people thought back then. It was a different time. It was a different culture.
Their campaign of doubt had succeeded in confusing people about what the real risks of smoking were. You'll have that document. It's a government document based upon extensive surveys and see what they had to say about the effectiveness of the warnings.
Finally, there was testimony of Dr. Krugman.
Dr. Krugman has studied warnings and the effectiveness of them particularly on kids for years and years and years. You recall his description of the eye tracking studies in which you do a study and you see whether they see it, how long they spend on it. You test them afterwards as to its contents.
He's published a series of peer-reviewed publications in the journals to indicate that warnings were simply ineffective, particularly with children.
On the other hand, in contrast to the warnings, was the massive advertising expenditures that they made. $200 billion. And one of the reports that you will have here will discuss in detail the marketing that they did on television, radio, magazine and how pervasive it was and what impact that pervasive advertising had, advertising that was designed to do two things.
One, normalize smoking so that people thought there was an acceptable behavior and that everybody did it; and secondly, to allay the fears that people would have that there was something harmful in smoking. That's what the ads have always been about.
What discussion there was of their misconduct was limited and attempted to justify the kinds of statements in the document. You were told first off about Dr. Figlar, that Dr. Figlar had discussed reconstituted tobacco and all of the other things they had done to make cigarette smoking safer.
Now, that's not exactly right. You recall examination of Dr. Figlar on Redirect where we discussed reconstituted tobacco, and you will have this document in evidence for you. Reconstituted tobacco had nothing to do with trying to make cigarettes safer, contrary to their assertion and contrary to the claims you've heard here. Reconstituted tobacco was about saving money. It was about taking the stems and the product that you couldn't use from tobacco, grinding it all up, making it into a slurry like paper, taking the nicotine off of it, drying it out like a sheet of paper, and then spraying on the exact amount of
nicotine that you wanted to create and sustain addiction and then chopping it all up to make it look exactly like tobacco and rolling it up in a cigarette. 25 percent of cigarettes today are reconstituted tobacco. Had nothing to do with trying to make them safer.
Mr. -- Dr. Figlar had to acknowledge that on Redirect and the assertion that somehow that was a safer product and a rationale thing to do and showed what good conduct they had is totally untrue.
Secondly, they talked about Dr. Rodgman and the fact that he had these papers and had studied the carcinogens and went out and reported it. You know, that was the entire point. It's amazing how they just turn everything on its head. The entire point was they studied all this, they knew it and they may have reported it to their fellow scientists, they may have even published it in articles that scientists would read, but they'd turn around and tell the American public just the reverse.
So the published articles about what carcinogens there were in cigarettes and then they turned around and went on television, as you saw, and said there's nothing harmful in cigarettes and if, when, and when we ever find anything harmful,
we'll take it out.
That's the whole point, ladies and gentlemen.
They knew it and purposely told the American public just the reverse, knowing that that's what was going to be heard, that that was what as going to be public narrative, not what they said at some obscure scientific medical meeting or scientific meeting which they admitted the truth.
And they admitted the truth among themselves. You saw the report from BAT when they came over an visited them and everybody agreed except one person that cigarettes caused cancer, and yet they turn around and issue press release after press release and interview after interview, and white paper after white paper, and phony medical journal after medical journal in which they claim it didn't cause any harm, didn't cause cancer. The evidence was insufficient. There was a scientific controversy.
All of the process they went through to try and convince smokers to keep smoking their cigarettes. And yet they turn around and say it's a personal choice and you're responsible for making that choice.
What about their choices? What about their responsibility? If you're going to say that there
is some responsibility for Jim Sikes, despite all of his efforts to quit, despite how hard he tried to quit, what about them? What about their choices over 50 years? What about their total refusal to accept any responsibility even today?
Now, I think the ultimate conclusion on responsibility and personal choice is it has to work both ways. If you want to assign some blame to Jim Sikes because he didn't try hard enough, or he didn't quit soon enough, then you need to assign a lot of responsibility for what they did that kept him from quitting, from creating and sustaining an addiction to the pervasive advertising, to all of their misstatements and concealment and misrepresentation that continues right up and to this trial.
I could talk a lot about all the details of the evidence. You've heard it. You've heard it over the last three weeks. I've taken up enough of your time. I just want to conclude by saying this case comes down to the very simple proposition: Did Jim Sikes continue to smoke, at least in part, as a result of his addiction to cigarettes? If he did, and the evidence is unequivocal that he did, then he's a member of the Engle class.
MR. BOYCE: Objection. Improper argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: If he is a member of the Engle class, as the evidence clearly indicates, then all those findings about their misconduct are binding on you and all of their attempts to justify that conduct or to gloss over have to be disregarded by you.
That is, you have to conclude, one, they were negligent; two, that their product was defective and unreasonably dangerous; three, that they entered into a conspiracy to defraud; four, that they concealed evidence by fraudulent concealment which are the claims asserted in this lawsuit.
Now, finally, how does that relate to Jim Sikes? They would like you to believe that he doesn't have a claim unless he can remember a specific ad or he can remember the Frank Statement or he can remember a specific misrepresentation. Of course he's not here to testify about what he remembers.
All we can do is say, well, like Dr. Krugman did, that this affects what everybody believed. It creates the overall environment. It creates this cycle of how beliefs are incurred, not just directly
to you but to family and community and friends and acquaintances, all of that creates the environment in which the story, the narrative that they wanted became viable.
But the easy answer to all of this is to look at the product defect claim. The Court will instruct you that what's required, and all that's required, for product defects is that the defect in the product caused the injury.
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Improper argument. Misstates the findings.
THE COURT: Well, he hasn't made it yet but it's argument, so it's overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: The defect in the finding under the evidence in this case is that the product, cigarette, manufactured by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company contained carcinogens was created and designed to sustain and create addiction, and with addiction over time resulted in the disease that occurred here.
And the evidence from Dr. Schoonover undisputed here is that but for his continuing to smoke because, as Dr. Schoonover said, he was severely addicted, he could have quit in time that the COPD no longer progressed to the point where it caused
his death, contrary to what you were told, you don't go back to being the same as someone who never smoked just by quitting smoking. You're still going to have COPD. You're still going to have loss of lung function but it's not going to be such a dramatic drop.
And you saw the chart that Dr. Schoonover showed you for that. You're still not going to have a dramatic drop such that it would result in his death at the early age of 63.
So ultimately, ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is going to support the claims. You're going to have to decide then what compensatory damages to award, and we are not going to discuss that any further, but I do want to conclude by saying it's extremely important that you answer that question regarding punitive damages yes. Evidence is just overwhelmingly here.
The last thing you should do as jurors is say, gee, I've been here for a couple of weeks.
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Improper argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: The last thing you should be able to say, I just want to get this over with and so I
don't want to stay around for anything further. The Court's going to instruct you that if you answer the question to entitlement to punitive damages you will go into the next phase, a very short phase, probably less than a day's worth of evidence to decide the remaining issues on punitive damages. And I know based upon your attention and your service and how you've approached the case so far, you're not going to decide not to go forward simply because you don't want to spend more time. You've all spent this much time. We need to deal with the issues ultimately and deal with them regardless of the time spent.
So once again, I thank you for your attention.
I thank you for your service. We appreciate it, and we look forward to your verdict.
