MR. BOYCE: Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the Court.
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. BOYCE: Members of the jury, good afternoon. It's nice to see all of you again.
This is the last time I'll get to speak with you at all, and so I want to take this opportunity to pick up where I left off on Wednesday, and that's by thanking you for your time and your service. You're obviously a very attentive jury. You take your job seriously. That's something everybody here appreciates and something that everybody here agrees on.
I'm not going to stand here and tell you I'm not disappointed with your verdict. I understand it. I respect it. I'm not going to relitigate it in this phase.
As Mr. Shields told you, this is a different phase. This is the phase where we determine what amount of punitive damages, if any, are warranted.
It's one of the things he didn't tell you. There's a few limitations on this phase, but one of the first things you need to know is you do not have to award punitive damages. Nothing from your Phase I
verdict requires that you award additional money to Mrs. Sikes.
And that's the second point. Any amount of punitive damages that you do award will go exclusive to Mrs. Sikes. She's the only person that can collect any additional money that you may award in this case. And it would be on top of what you already awarded her to fully compensate her for what happened to Mr. Sikes.
There's one other limitation I want to mention right at the outset. Your comparative fault finding will not apply to any punitive damages award.
One of the reasons I do not believe any amount of punitive damages is warranted in this case is your message has already been received by Reynolds. You found that Reynolds caused more of the harm to Mr. Sikes than Mr. Sikes did. You found that Reynolds is responsible for more of Mr. Sikes' smoking than Mr. Sikes was.
That message got through to Reynolds.
Dr. Figlar gets it. The men and women at Winston-Salem get it. I get it. Your finding that Reynolds was responsible for more of this has already gotten through. That's an important message. It's one that's been received. But more
importantly, that reduction will not apply to any additional money that you may consider awarding to Mrs. Sikes in this case.
There are some additional limitations. First, in this phase the only evidence that you can consider is evidence that has a direct connection to Mr. Sikes. And this is where I'm in a bit of an awkward spot, because I don't know what was behind your finding to Question Number 5. You answered yes to Question Number 5 with respect to the agreement to conceal. I don't know what that evidence is. If I did, I might be able to respond to it, suggest that it's not connected to Mr. Sikes. Only you know what stood behind it. But that's the only claim on the verdict form that could give rise to an award of punitive damages.
MR. SHIELDS: Objection, Your Honor. That's contrary to the law.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BOYCE: You cannot award punitive damages on strict liability or negligence claims in Florida.
MR. SHIELDS: Objection. That's contrary to the law.
THE COURT: Mr. Boyce, I thought we talked about that.
MR. BOYCE: Your Honor, I must have a completely different understanding of Florida law.
THE COURT: That's your argument. Just move along.
MR. BOYCE: We'll move along.
In order to respond to your interrogatory answer on Number 5, I would need to know what it was. But Mr. Shields mentioned that some of the things you need to consider are mitigating evidence. And so whatever that statement was, whatever you thought was concealed from Mr. Sikes, first you have to go back and make sure that there's a connection.
The reason evidence about harm to other people besides Mr. Sikes comes in in the first phase is it's relevant to the entitlement issue. And that's why they get to talk about youth marketing when Mr. Sikes is in his thirties and forties and fifties, and that's why they get to talk about brands that Mr. Sikes never smoked. That's why they get to talk about the Frank Statement and other press releases that were issued before he ever smoked, before he could read in a lot of spots.
That's why that evidence comes in. It goes to the issue of entitlement.
When it comes to the issue of amount, there has
to be a connection. The judge will explain this to you in a moment, but the instruction you're going to hear is that in deciding an amount of punitive damages, if any, the award should be no greater than the amount you find necessary to punish Reynolds for harm caused to James Sikes. It has to be harm connected specifically to Mr. Sikes.
But as you think back over what was behind your answer to Question Number 5 and how it may or may not relate to Mr. Sikes and whether it's appropriate at all to award punitive damages here, I would ask you to consider the following mitigating evidence.
The first is the warning labels. The warning labels went on in 1966. Whatever statement Mr. Sikes may have seen or heard after 1966 came with a warning label. And the mitigating part of it is if he sees a statement in a press release or somewhere else, the only way he can be harmed by that is if he picks up a cigarette. And after 1966, if he went to pick up a cigarette, he would have gotten a warning. He would have gotten a warning every single time that he picked up a pack. And remember that as you consider mitigating evidence.
Now, Mr. Shields mentioned that the purposes of punitive damages are to punish and deter. I don't
think either one of those purposes is appropriate in this case, and let me tell you why.
First, you've already compensated Mrs. Sikes completely. Nothing about your decision in this case will change what you did in Phase I.
Number two, Mrs. Sikes is the only person that can receive additional money in this phase.
Number 3, all of the people involved in the conduct that we spent so much time looking at in Phase I are gone, long gone from the company. Not gone because of attrition, not gone because of the passage of time; gone because the company has changed. All of the entities involved in it are gone. The Tobacco Institute is gone. The Council for Tobacco Research is gone. The Tobacco Industry Research Committee is gone. They're long gone.
You heard how part of the reason they're gone is master settlement agreements and how Reynolds pays over $2 billion a year in perpetuity because of what happened with TI and CTR. It's not connected to Mr. Sikes, and the MSA dealt with it. Those agencies are gone, and more importantly, in perpetuity Reynolds pays $2 billion a year because of that.
That's number one. There is no one left to
punish. These agencies are gone. All that's left is the Reynolds of today.
With respect to the Reynolds of today, there is no conduct to deter. This is what Dr. Figlar explained.
For starters with Eclipse, Eclipse was made in the '90s as a follow-up to Premier. Every witness you heard about said that the bad stuff in cigarette smoke comes from burning tobacco. Reynolds thought, "If we can heat tobacco, perhaps we can reduce the risks." And the studies reflect that. That's why Eclipse is on the market. It's a legitimate effort to address one of the criticisms of the conventional product.
And don't forget, the conventional cigarette is legal. It's legal to make it. It's legal to advertise it. It's legal to sell it. So in a legal industry, what Reynolds has done is they've offered products like Now and Carlton that have so little nicotine in them you can't even measure it on a machine. They've offered heating cigarettes, and offered the traditional blend as well, all of the other cigarettes that are on the market as well.
Then Reynolds offers smoke-free cigarettes, smoke-free products like Snus and Dissolvables; then
they offer electronic cigarettes, and, finally, now they offer nicotine replacement to anybody.
Anyone interested in tobacco or quitting or health, if they ask Reynolds what to do, Reynolds tells them to quit. If they ask for help, Reynolds offers it to them. Reynolds has encouraged them to go to the Surgeon General, to quit if they're interested in their health, and if they need help in quitting, Reynolds helps them find that quit -- that assistance. Reynolds also sells the nicotine gum and will shortly be selling nicotine lozenges and inhalers to help smokers quit.
That's the whole point of migration. And that's what Mr. Ratner didn't tell you. That's what the stock market is responding to. The stock market is not responding to continued conduct. This all changed in 2000.
Another thing that's mitigating in this case is that Mr. Sikes smoked after 2000. If all of the stuff from Phase I really mattered to him, after 2000 that changed. If he had looked to Reynolds, he could have gotten help in quitting. If he would have looked to Reynolds, he would have heard the positions on nicotine being addictive and smoking causing disease. That's mitigating evidence that
you should keep in mind as you deliberate your Phase II verdict.
But more importantly, you have to focus on the Reynolds of today. They operate a legal business and they do so in a legal manner. But what they offer to smokers is a wide range of products, including ones that help them stop using tobacco if they're so interested.
I want to talk a little bit about Mr. Ratner and Reynolds' financial resources.
First off, I don't know why they talk about market capitalization at all. That has nothing to do with what Reynolds has available to them. Market capitalization, if you take every single person who owns a share of Reynolds stock and buy it from them, you would come up with somewhere around $23 billion. Nothing to do with the company, nothing to do with the company's financial statements, nothing to do with the value of the company.
But Mr. Ratner said something quickly, and I want to make sure you understand what it was. He said, "Well, most of these shareholders are institutions." What that means is these are pension funds. These are 401(k)s. These are men and women. Reynolds does not own all of its shares. They're
owned by pension funds and 401(k)s.
And the reason those institutions -MR. SHIELDS: Objection. Improper argument.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BOYCE: When Mr. Ratner is talking about institutions buying them, what he explained to you is the reason -MR. SHIELDS: I thought you sustained the argument -- the objection.
MR. BOYCE: I'm moving on. It's Mr. Ratner's testimony.
THE COURT: Pardon?
MR. BOYCE: It's Mr. Ratner's testimony.
THE COURT: I understand, but you're talking about stocks being owned by an institution.
MR. BOYCE: No, I'll move on.
THE COURT: Okay.
MR. BOYCE: What Mr. Ratner told you was the attractive part of Reynolds stock is the dividend payment. When they suggest that Reynolds has a billion dollars laying around, Reynolds does not have a billion dollars laying around.
Remember who the shareholders are. They own that stock because of the dividend. It's paid out to shareholders. It's not profit. It's not money
that Reynolds keeps around or has laying around in a pile of money to satisfy judgments in Florida. It's money that goes to the shareholders, the men and women and institutions who own the stock. That's what a dividend payment is.
That's the money that Mr. Ratner and Mr. Shields want you to think is laying around to satisfy judgments. It's not accurate. It is earmarked either for MSA payments of about $2 billion a year or it goes to dividends.
And the dividend is another big part of the reason that Reynolds stocks does the way it does.
The market has endorsed the migration strategy and come to expect a dividend from the company. That's what's going on, and that's what Mr. Ratner is talking about.
The last point I want to make is -- I know Mr. Shields mentioned an award of nine times the original amount. That's approximately $36 million. They're asking you to give Mrs. Sikes an additional $36 million in this case.
Remember, your fault allocation will not apply to this amount. It's going to go exclusively to Mrs. Sikes and it will not be reduced.
But more importantly, it's on top of what
you've already awarded to compensate her for her loss. She's been fully compensated. This is a different phase.
The purposes of punitive damages are not met here. There is no one left to punish. All of the activity that we talked about in Phase I is largely unconnected to Mr. Sikes, but more importantly, it has stopped. Reynolds is a different company with different guiding principles, different decision-makers and different products.
I do not think an award of punitive damages is appropriate in this case for those reasons; but if you're inclined to award anything, I would like to suggest a number to you.
You heard throughout this case that Mr. Sikes smoked about two packs a day. And if you go back and you go through 46 years of smoking, which is about right, and if you go two packs a day and if you go $6 a pack -- I know that price is much more recent than his smoking -- if you were to give him back all of that money, $6 a pack, two packs a day for 46 years, you come up with a figure of $201,480.
If you were to award that amount in punitive damages, you would not only have sent an additional message to Reynolds, but what you would have done is
ensured that Reynolds didn't get a penny from Mr. Sikes' smoking. All of the money that Reynolds got from Mr. Sikes buying his brands would be given back. It would be an additional message in addition to the message you've already sent that Reynolds is more responsible for what happened to Mr. Sikes than Mr. Sikes is.
But that is a number that I would encourage you to keep in mind, two packs a day for 46 years, $6 a pack, and it's $201,480.
I want to conclude -- this is truly the last time I get to speak to you. You've heard me say that a couple times, but this time I really mean it.
I want to conclude by thanking you again for your time.
It's not just the time. It's not just fighting through traffic. It's not just being here when it's hot, cold or rainy. That's not it at all. What's really important is that you keep being fair and impartial, that you focus on the evidence. And here you have to focus only on evidence that plaintiffs connected to Mr. Sikes.
Again, if I knew what it was, I might be able to respond in more detail, but I'm in the dark a little bit. And so I'd just encourage you to
remember that if there was evidence that you thought led to entitlement that was connected to Mr. Sikes, here you have to set it aside. And if you set it aside and there's no basis to award punitive damages, that's perfectly appropriate. There is nothing about your finding in Phase I that mandates or requires an additional award of damages to Mrs. Sikes.
Thank you again, ladies and gentlemen. On behalf of myself and my team, we truly appreciate it. I hope you've enjoyed your time as jurors.
Thank you.