And Mr. Smith and Counsel, and ladies
MS. PARKER:
You may proceed.
and gentlemen, good morning.
I want to start the same way I started yesterday
when I spoke to you.
And I want to thank you again for the
time you took yesterday considering what your verdict would 20 25
You know, one of the blessings of being here in America
be.
is that when people have a dispute, they can come to court
and have a jury just like y'all decide what the issue is,
and then it's decided.
You know, we accept your verdict.
I have to say, of course, you know, we wish that
it were not what it had been, but it is what it is, and we
accept that.
client has heard it.
hear on the news and a country on the other side of the
world where people, you know, are in the street fighting and
won't accept decisions of law.
That's just not how it works
The way it works here is exactly what's happening in
here.
this courtroom.
This is not like, you know, what you
Our
We have heard it.
Our team has heard it.
Y'all are the ones who had the job to go back and
And
And we thank you for your service in that
consider the evidence and to come up with your verdict.
you've done that.
part of the case.
We've gotten your
And now we've heard that.
We know -- our client knows that you have decided
message.
to compensate Mr. Smith and his son and that you -- we've
gotten the message that you found that punitive damages
should be entitled.
So this part of the case this morning is for us to
move forward and talk about the next job that y'all have,
which is -- is to discuss -- for your -- to consider how to 21
answer the question on this part of the verdict form.
But thank you again for all the time that y'all
took yesterday considering our arguments.
Now, I've got several different things I want to
go over with you today.
And all of these are new issues
that we have not discussed previously, except for one --
except for one that I'm going to get to.
I want to start by telling you, though, you know,
everything that you heard in the trial so far in Phase I was
about Reynolds and tobacco companies from the old days.
Okay?
That's not who you're being asked to punish today.
The company that will write the check, if you decide there's
going to be one -- the company that writes that check is the
new Reynolds.
people.
bit more detail in a minute.
And so I want to talk to you about that in a little
It's a new company with new management, new
You're going to get jury instructions from
Judge Huck, just like you did yesterday.
clerk stood back there and had them on the screen and you
took them back there with you?
going to be a much shorter set.
want to go over -- if we could pull that up.
This time, though, it's
But one of the things I
Remember when the
In the punitive damages phase, where we are, one
of the instructions that you'll hear from Judge Huck is that 25 22
you may not award punitive damages for any harm that may
have been suffered by persons or parties other than James
Smith, Sr., and Brian Smith.
So what does that mean?
It means that you should
not consider anything other than the harms -- just as it
says here on the screen -- the harms that have been suffered
by them.
Any money you award, if you decide to do that,
That's the only person it goes to.
So keep that in mind as you're considering what to do
goes to Mr. Smith.
Okay?
here.
Now, all of the documents that you were shown
before and the video clips and all you were shown before, I
want to go over those real briefly just to explain to you
that those people aren't here at the company anymore.
You were shown documents written by Dr. Rodgman.
He's not there
And by Dr. Teague.
He's not there anymore.
anymore.
You were shown the video clip from Congress, you
Those CEOs, Jim
know, where they all raised their hands.
Johnston, the one you saw, he's not there anymore.
a -- there's a completely new group of people in the
company.
There's
And so please keep that in mind as you're deciding
You can't punish the
what to do in this phase of the case. 25 23
people who did what you --
THE COURT:
I think that's the ongoing problem
we're having with the system.
MS. PARKER:
Those people have moved on.
You can't punish the people who did
what you saw in Phase I, because they aren't there anymore.
Okay?
Some of them -- as you
heard at trial, some of them have passed away.
So please
keep in mind the company that's going to write this check is
a new company.
I also want to talk to you for a minute about the
company documents.
You know, some of the ones that you were
shown at trial had a stamp on it that said "secret" and all.
That's not how the situation is anymore.
Right now, you heard Dr. Cummings say there's
They're on the Internet.
16 -- 16 million documents, and those are publicly
available.
but when you finish your service as a juror and you're
excused by Judge Huck and you leave here, you can go on the
Internet yourself and look up those documents.
You can't do it now,
MS. BARNETT:
Your Honor, I object to argument of
things that are not in evidence.
Overruled.
The same thing with the company's
THE COURT:
MS. PARKER:
current position on smoking and health and addiction.
I stood up and gave my opening statement last Tuesday, to
When 25 24 25
begin with, one of the first things I said -- and I said it
intentionally -- one of the first things I said was, you
know, today we don't dispute that cigarette smoking causes
lung cancer and we don't dispute that cigarettes are
addictive.
y'all saw on the documents and clips previously.
That's a different situation than what
Okay?
Again, there's -- the people who are making those
current decisions and the current company -- setting forth
the current company positions, they're not the people you
heard about in Phase I.
Same thing about additives -- I know you heard
things in the trial about additives and adding nicotine and
all such as that.
Well, that information is also publicly
available now.
If anybody wants to know about additives or
nicotine or anything like that, it's publicly available.
This is a transparent, open company.
That's where we are
There is no need to punish or deter a company that
today.
has already changed.
And one of the main ways that the company has
changed you heard about from Dr. Gentry.
if you remember him, but he was the Reynolds company
executive who testified by deposition.
It was Friday
afternoon.
afternoon.
The last thing that y'all heard Friday
Now, he was on the screen.
Now, I don't know 25
One thing he talked about that y'all heard in
Phase I is, today, Reynolds is subject to federal government
FDA regulation.
all during the time that Mrs. Smith smoked.
That's something that was not in place at
So that's another reason why there's no need for
you to punish or deter Reynolds, because Reynolds is already
subject to that very stringent FDA regulation.
Same thing with CTR and TIRC.
You know, we heard
a lot about that.
longer in existence.
of those.
because it's no longer with us.
Those companies have gone.
They're no
There's no such thing anymore as any
Again, there's nothing to punish about that
Now, I don't know -- Ms. Barnett will get to talk
And so she, obviously, saved her time to talk
I don't know what amount of money she's
after me.
after I finish.
going to ask you to award.
want to say with respect to dollars.
But I have a couple of things I
One is, you just heard Mr. Wilner read the numbers
Well, just remember as you're considering
about net worth.
that, the net worth of a company -- or the sales of a
company are part of its profits.
And Reynolds -- what
The profits are coming
Reynolds is doing is legal.
from a legal business, which is manufacturing and selling
cigarettes.
considering that net worth number.
So please keep that in mind as you're
Okay? 25 26
What the people who work for Reynolds do is legal.
And, remember, the -- the company that you're being asked to
award additional damages against is not -- you're going to
hear this and you have heard this in the instructions you've
got already.
out there.
know.
men and women who work in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, and
other places.
It's not just, you know, something fake, you
You know, it's not just an artificial entity
They're men and women who work there.
They're many
MS. BARNETT:
Your Honor, objection.
Violation of
a pretrial ruling.
Let's go to sidebar.
THE COURT:
(Sidebar conference.)
THE COURT:
You know, I've given you some leeway,
but you're talking about a lot of things we haven't heard in
this courtroom to try to -- I've given you some leeway, but
I think you're -- what's your problem?
MS. BARNETT:
There was a ruling about them not
talking about we represent the many men and women of
Reynolds, and I didn't dream they would violate it.
I'm getting a copy of that order.
But it was
It's not fair -- first of all, she
absolutely granted.
represents, if anything, the shareholders of Reynolds, not
the people on the --
THE COURT:
Is there such an order? 25 27 25
MS. PARKER:
MS. BARNETT:
THE COURT:
MR. WILNER:
THE COURT:
I don't know of one.
There is.
All right.
Also, there's no evidence --
I already commented about that.
It's coming.
We'll get it right now.
We're
going to move on from that.
MS. BARNETT:
THE COURT:
MR. MONDE:
THE COURT:
Sorry, Judge, I just didn't...
You got the order?
Yes, sir.
And that's what it says?
Let's see
what it says.
MS. PARKER:
in part, Your Honor.
THE COURT:
Apparently it's No. 37.
It's granted
Well, I'm not sure what that means,
but let's move on from that subject, then.
about how this impacts on the corporate, people will lose
their jobs, et cetera.
No more talking
And, also, my earlier comment, we should move on
also from those things that weren't in evidence.
you some leeway, but I think you've gone beyond it to a
point.
I've given
(The following proceedings occurred in open court,
in the presence of the jury:)
MS. PARKER:
Again, the profits and the net worth
number that you heard Mr. Wilner talk about are from the 28
legal sale of cigarettes, and that is just one example of
something called "mitigating factors."
Judge Huck is going to tell you when he goes over
the instructions to you, that one thing that you should take
into account is something called mitigating factors.
Mitigating factors include some of those things
like, you know, it's a legal product and there were warnings
on all these packages of cigarettes.
There are warnings on
the packages today.
So please keep that in
mind as you're considering what you're going to do with a
verdict form here.
All of that.
Now, there is absolutely no doubt that some of
But we know that.
We have heard you loud and clear.
those things you heard about in Phase I were misguided and
just flat wrong.
We have heard what you
Our
said about that.
The company today,
client has heard that loud and clear.
though, is not the same company that wrote those documents
or said those things that you saw on the clips.
Now, I have a couple of suggestions for you to
I'd like to respectfully suggest -- again,
consider.
Ms. Barnett goes after me, and I don't know what she's going
to ask for.
I don't know what she's going to say.
But two things for you to consider:
One is you've
already compensated Mr. Smith and his son.
That is
really as a matter of law, because you've already entered
Okay? 25 29
your verdict on that.
So what you're considering in this part of the
It's not something additional to compensate
This is money on
You've already done that.
Okay?
case is extra.
him for.
top of that.
All right?
So please keep that in mind.
Also, you're going to hear from Judge Huck that,
at this point in the case, even though you have found that
we would move forward to this phase by answering that last
question yes about punitive damages, the verdict form itself
is going to say that you can award zero damages in
punitives.
Okay?
That is something you absolutely have the right to
do.
And we'd like to ask you to respectfully consider that
given that you have already compensated Mr. Smith, we have a
new company, new people, new rules, new everything that
we're operating under.
But if -- I have a second suggestion.
If you are
thinking about awarding an amount, I'd like to respectfully
It shouldn't be, you
throw out an idea for you to consider.
know, something that comes out of thin air.
It shouldn't be
a windfall.
It shouldn't be, you know, anything that's not
rational and based on something.
And so we've gone back last night and we really
thought -- you know, I have a copy of the verdict form that
y'all filled out.
And we really thought, like, what have 25 30 25
y'all done?
decisions did you make?
You know, what message did you send?
What
And so I want to suggest a number based on what
You awarded 600 -- $600,000, which is, you
you-all did.
know, obviously a very large amount, over half a million
dollars -- a large amount right there, but you divided it
between 55 percent and 45 percent, you remember.
So what I'd like to respectfully suggest as a
rational -- you know, based on what you have done --
suggestion on what to do with punitives, if you decide
you're going to award something, is to give them that
additional 45 percent.
You know, that way they are being compensated for
their loss; but on top of that, they're being compensated
for the part that you said was Mrs. Smith's fault.
That way, they're being -- totally being made
whole in every sense of the word.
It's not something that's not connected to the decisions
that you have already made in this case.
It's not a crazy number.
So I'm just sending that out there to you as a
suggestion if any of you do want to award an amount.
But,
again, we would respectfully ask that you consider an award
of zero given the circumstances of this case where you have
a company that has heard your message, has changed, it's
changed as a matter of law, and is now in a different 31
situation than where they were previously.
It just -- we're at a stage of the case where, you
know, it just should not be a -- a windfall to the
plaintiffs.
have done previously.
There should be some connection to what y'all
So I want to end by, again, thanking you so much
I hope that you-all have
I hope that you will look back
for your service as jurors.
enjoyed your service here.
on this as something that's important in your lives and will
remember the important contribution that you have made to
our justice system on all the time that you've spent with us
last week and this week.
So this is the last time I'm going to have a
chance to talk to you, and, again, on behalf of our whole
time and on behalf of our client, I just want to say thank
you one more time and thank you for your attention.
Your Honor, that concludes my remarks.
